chapter 1 the collision of cultures different groups performed different tasks for the benefit of the society as a whole.
some were fisher folk others were farmers hunters artists cooks and mothers.
like the adena the hopewell also developed an extensive trading network from the gulf of mexico to canada exchanging exquisite carvings metalwork pearls seashells copper ornaments and jewelry.
by the sixth century however the hopewell culture disappeared giving way to a new phase of native american development east of the mississippi river the mississippian culture which flourished from 800 to 1500 c e.
the mississippians centered in the southern mississippi valley were also mound building and corn growing peoples led by chieftains.
they grew corn beans squash and sunflowers and they built substantial towns around central plazas and temples.
the mississippian peoples the most powerful of which were the natchez developed a far flung trading network that extended to the rocky mountains.
their ability to grow large amounts of corn each year in the fertile flood plains of rivers spurred rapid population growth around regional centers.
cahokia the largest of these advanced regional centers called chiefdoms was cahokia 1050 1250 c e.
in southwest illinois just a few miles across the mississippi river from what is now st louis missouri.
there the mississippians constructed an intricately planned farming settlement with monumental public buildings spacious ceremonial plazas and more than 100 flat topped earthen pyramids with t hatch roofed temples on top.
over the years the cahokians cut whole forests to create their huge village and to protect it with a two mile long stockade built of 15 000 oak and hickory logs t wenty one feet tall.
at the height of its influence prosperous cahokia hosted 15 000 people on some 3 200 acres making it the largest city north of mexico.
outlying towns and farming settlements ranged up to fifty miles in all directions.
cahokia however vanished after 1250 and its people dispersed.
what caused its collapse remains a mystery but environmental changes are the most likely reason.
the overcutting of trees may have set in motion ecological changes that doomed the community when a massive earthquake struck around 1200 c e.
the loss of trees led to widespread flooding and the erosion of topsoil that finally forced people to seek better lands.
as cahokia disappeared however its former residents carried with them its cultural traditions and spread its advanced ways of life to other areas across the midwest and into what is now the american south.
early cultures in america 17 eastern woodlands peoples after the collapse of cahokia the eastern woodlands peoples rose to dominance along the atlantic seaboard from maine to florida and along the gulf coast to louisiana.
they included three regional groups distinguished by their different languages the algonquian the iroquoian and the muskogean.
these were the societies the europeans would first encounter when they arrived in north america.
the algonquians the algonquian speaking peoples stret ched from the new england seaboard to lands along the great lakes and into the upper midwest and south to new jersey virginia and the carolinas.
they constructed no great mounds or temple topped pyramids.
most algonquians lived in small round shelters called wigwams or multifamily longhouses.
their villages typically ranged in size from 500 to 2 000 people but they often moved their villages with the seasons.
the algonquians along the atlantic coast were skilled at fishing and gathering shellfish the inland algonquians excelled at hunting deer moose elk bears bobcats and mountain lions.
they often traveled the regions waterways using canoes made of h ollowed out tree trunks dugouts or birch bark.
all of the algonquians foraged for wild food nuts berries and fruits and practiced agriculture to some extent regularly burning dense forests to improve soil fertility and provide grazing room for deer.
to prepare their vegetable gardens women broke up the ground with hoes tipped with clam shells or the shoulder blades from algonquian in war paint from the deer.
in the spring they planted corn notebook of english settler john white this sketch depicts a native american beans and squash in mounds.
as the chieftain.
cornstalks rose the tendrils from the 18 chapter 1 the collision of cultures the english raids on spanish ships continued for some twenty years before open war erupted between the two nations.
determined to conquer england philip ii the king of spain who was queen elizabeths brother in law and fiercest opponent assembled the massive spanish armada 132 warships 8 000 sailors and 18 000 soldiers.
it was the greatest invasion fleet in history.
on may 28 1588 the armada began sailing for england.
the english navy was waiting for them.
as the two fleets positioned themselves for the battle queen elizabeth donned a silver breastplate and told the english forces i know i have the body of a weak and feeble woman but i have the heart and stomach of a king and a king of england too as the battle unfolded the heavy spanish galleons could not compete with the speed and agility of the english warships.
the english fleet chased the spanish ships through the english channel.
caught up in a powerful protestant wind from the south the spanish fleet was swept into the north sea.
the decimated armada limped home finally scattering wreckage on the shores of scotland and ireland.
the stunning defeat of spains fearsome armada greatly strengthened the protestant cause across europe.
the ferocious storm that smashed the spanish ships seemed to be a sign that god favored the english.
queen elizabeth commissioned a special medallion to commemorate the successful defense of england.
the citation read god blew and they were dispersed spains king philip seemed to agree.
upon learning of the catastrophic defeat he sighed i sent the armada against men not gods winds and waves the defeat of the spanish armada confirmed englands naval supremacy cleared the way for its colonization of america and established queen elizabeths stature as a great ruler.
although she had many suitors eager to marry her she refused to divide her power.
she would have but one mistress england and no master eager to live and die a virgin she married herself to the fate of england.
by the end of the sixteenth century elizabethan england had begun an epic transformation from a poor humiliated and isolated nation into a mighty global empire.
english exploration of america english efforts to colonize america began a few years before the great battle with the spanish armada.
they were driven by a desire to weaken spains control over the americas.
in 1578 queen elizabeth had given sir humphrey gilbert permission to establish a colony in the remote heathen and barbarous lands of america.
english exploration of america 49 gilberts group set out in 1583 intending to settle near narragansett bay in present day rhode island.
they instead landed in fogbound newfoundland canada.
with winter approaching and his largest vessels lost gilbert and the colonists returned home.
while in transit however his ship vanished and he was never seen again.
the next year queen elizabeth asked sir walter raleigh gilberts much younger half brother to organize a colonizing mission.
raleighs expedition discovered the outer banks of north carolina and landed at roanoke island.
one of the colonists reported that the soile is the most plentifull sweete fruitfull and wholesome of all the worlde in fact however the sandy soil of the outer banks was not good for farming.
raleigh named the area virginia in honor of childless queen elizabeth the presumably virgin queen as she once described herself.
after several false starts raleigh in 1587 sponsored another expedition of about 100 colonists including 26 women and children led by governor john white.
white spent a month on roanoke island and then returned to england for supplies leaving behind his daughter elinor and his granddaughter virginia dare the first english child born in the new world.
the english in virginia the arrival of english explorers on the outer banks with roanoke island at left.
50 chapter 3 colonial ways of life indentured servants or slaves.
during the eighteenth century england would transport some 50 000 convicts to the north american colonies to relieve overcrowded jails and provide needed workers.
once in america many of the newcomers kept moving within and across colonies in search of better lands or new business opportunities such as trading with the native peoples who controlled the profitable fur trade.
this extraordinary mosaic of adventurous people created americas enduring institutions and values as well as its distinctive spirit and restless energy.
the shape of early america life in early america was hard and often short.
many in the first wave of american colonists died of disease or starvation others were killed by native americans.
the average death rate in the first years of settlement was 50 percent.
once colonial life became more settled and secure however the colonies grew rapidly.
on average the american population doubled every twenty five years during the colonial period.
by 1750 the number of colonists had passed 1 million by 1775 it approached 2 5 million.
by comparison the combined population of england scotland and ireland in 1750 was 6 5 million.
population growth benjamin franklin a keen observer of life in the new country said that the extraordinary growth in the colonial population came about because land was plentiful and cheap and laborers were scarce and expensive.
the opposite conditions prevailed in europe.
it suffered from overpopulation and expensive farmland.
from this reversal of conditions flowed many of the changes that european culture underwent during the colonization of america not the least being that more land and good fortune lured enterprising immigrants and led settlers to replenish the earth with large families.
once in the colonies settlers tended to have large families in part because farm children could lend a hand in the fields.
colonists tended to marry and start families at an earlier age than in europe.
in england the average age at marriage for women was twenty five or twenty six in america it dropped to twenty.
men in the colonies also married at a younger age.
the birth rate rose accordingly since women who married earlier had time for about two additional pregnancies during their childbearing years.
on average a married woman had a child every two to three years before menopause.
some women had as many as 20 pregnancies over their lifetime making for large families.
benjamin franklin for example had sixteen brothers and sisters.
the shape of early america 111 birthing children however was also dangerous since most babies were delivered at home in often unsanitary conditions and harsh weather.
miscarriages were common.
between 25 and 50 percent of women died during birthing or soon thereafter and almost a quarter of all babies did not survive infancy especially during the early stages of a colonial settlement.
each year more deaths occurred among young children than any other age group.
disease and epidemics were rampant in colonial america.
in 1713 boston minister cotton mather lost three of his children and his wife to a measles epidemic.
mather lost eight of fifteen children in their first year of life.
martha custis the virginia widow who married george washington had four children during her first marriage all of whom died young at ages two three sixteen and seventeen.
overall however mortality rates in the colonies were lower than in europe.
because fertile land was plentiful famine seldom occurred after the early years of settlement and although the winters were more severe than in england firewood was abundant.
the average age in the new nation in 1790 was sixteen years because the colonial population was younger on the colonial farm this plan of a newly cleared farm shows how trees were cut whole americans as a group were less down and the stumps left to rot.
susceptible to disease than were europeans.
colonists longevity reflected the different living conditions in america.
the majority of colonists lived in sparsely populated settlements and were less likely to be exposed to infectious diseases.
that began to change of course as colonial cities grew larger and more congested and trade and travel increased.
by the mid eighteenth century the colonies were beginning to see levels of contagion much like those in the cities of europe.
women in the colonies in contrast to the colonies of new spain and new france english america had far more women which largely explains the difference in population growth rates among the european empires competing in the americas.
more 112 chapter 4 from colonies to states the french in north america hudson bay newfoundland james bay n e w montreal france superior green bay e ke la french a c a d i a english port royal boston albany plymouth new york philadelphia r mo i o atlantic ocean jamestown ap missi ppi river ssi ansas rive r pa la french english ch ia n oh louisbourg u n ta no i l li vincennes a i a n st louis kaskaskia io tar rie r cahokia on ins lake michigan n uro is ke la eh so mi s i s l o uuri r a rk l ak wisconsin r fort michilimackinac fox river quebec t connecticu n r dso rive hu er riv l st.
l french english ake cape breton island aw r riv ence er hudson bay company tennessee river spanish english mobile biloxi neworleans gulf of mexico charleston savannah st augustine florida spanish english possessions french possessions spanish possessions disputed territory marquette and jolliets route 1673 la salles route 1682 where were the largest french settlements in north america.
from the spanish and english colonies.
26593 04map 01 describe the french colonization of the louisiana territory.
wwn64 america how were they 10e different first proof 500 miles 500 kilometers competing neighbors 151 of mexico the first european to do so.
la salle who learned seven different indian languages hoped to create a string of fur trading posts along the entire length of the river.
near what is today venice mississippi he buried an engraved plate and erected a cross claiming for france the vast ohio and mississippi valleys all the way to the rocky mountains.
he named the entire region louisiana after king louis xiv.
settlement of the louisiana territory finally began in 1699 when the french established a colony near biloxi mississippi.
the main settlement then moved to mobile bay and in 1710 to the present site of mobile alabama.
for nearly fifty years the driving force in louisiana was j ean baptiste le moyne sieur de bienville.
sometimes called the father of louisiana he served periodically as governor and in 1718 he founded new orleans which shortly thereafter became the capi jesuits in new france founded in 1539 tal of the sprawling louisiana colony the jesuits sought to convert indians to encompassing much of the interior of catholicism in part to make them more reliable trading partners and military the entire north american continent.
new france had one important advantage over its british rival access to the great inland rivers that led to the heartland of the continent and the pelts of fur bearing animals beaver otter and mink.
in the illinois region french settlers began farming the fertile soil while jesuits established missions to convert the indians at places such as terre haute high land in what is now indiana and des moines of the monks in p resent day i owa the name probably shortened from rivire des moines or river of the monks.
the british colonial system the diverse british colonies in north america were quite different from those of new france.
the colonial governments typically were headed by a royal 152 chapter 4 from colonies to states forty miles from the fort.
the next day the virginians ambushed a french scouting party killing ten soldiers including the c ommander the first fatalities in what would become the french and indian war.
washington and his troops reinforced by more virginians and british soldiers dispatched from south carolina hastily constructed a tiny circular stockade at great meadows in western pennsylvania.
they called it fort necessity.
washington remarked that the valley provided a charming field for an encounter but there was nothing charming about the battle that erupted when a large french force attacked in a rainstorm on july 3 1754 after the d ay long lopsided battle of great meadows washington surrendered having seen a third of his 300 men killed or wounded.
the french and their indian allies lost only three men.
the french commander then forced washington to surrender his french prisoners and admit that he had assassi major campaigns of the french and indian war wo lfe c a n a d 1 cape breton island a quebec fort louisbourg ri r ve nova scotia montreal hu r on fort niagara fort ticonderoga t a r i o fort george l ak e on mo ha new york river wk fort le boeuf r iv er fort duquesne sus pennsylvania qu e oh fort necessity md braddock 1755 washington 1754 amherst 1759 nh ma boston ct new york nj de potomac river virginia port royal maine mass.
lake champlain io philadelphia hud s on river albany e ha n na r war ela e r.
ri e e e d lak c ren l connecticut river aw la k e.
st chesapeake bay atlantic providence ocean ri 200 miles 200 kilometers battle site what was the significance of the siege of fort necessity.
whatamerica was the10e albany plan of union.
wwn64 what led to the british victory over france in north america in 1759.
26593 04map 02 first proof warfare in the colonies 159 nated the group of french soldiers at the earlier encounter.
on july 4 1754 washington and the defeated virginians began trudging home.
most of them he noted are almost naked and scarcely a man has either shoes stockings or hat france was now in undisputed control of the ohio country.
washingtons bungled expedition not only had failed to oust the french it had triggered a massive world war.
as a british politician exclaimed the volley fired by a young virginian in the backwoods of america set the world on fire the albany plan british officials worried about war with the french and their indian allies urgently called a meeting of the northern colonies as far south as maryland.
twenty one representatives from seven colonies gathered in albany new york.
it was the first time that a large group of colonial delegates had met to take joint action.
at the urging of pennsylvanias benjamin franklin the albany congress june 19 july 11 1754 approved the albany plan of union.
it called for eleven colonies to band together headed by a president appointed by the king.
each colonial assembly would send two to seven delegates to a grand council the first american political cartoon benjamin franklins plea to the colonies to unite against the french in 1754 would become popular again twenty years later when the colonies faced a different threat.
160 chapter 4 from colonies to states to the rest of the colonies.
we are now to establish our authority over the colonies north said or give it up entirely the coercive acts in 1774 lord north convinced parliament to punish rebellious boston by enacting a cluster of harsh laws called the coercive acts americans renamed them the intolerable acts.
the boston port act closed the boston harbor until the city paid for the lost tea.
a new quartering act ordered colonists to provide lodging for british soldiers.
the impartial administration of justice act said that any royal official accused of a major crime would be tried back in great britain rather than in the colony.
finally the massachusetts government act gave the royal governor the authority to appoint the colonys legislative council which until then had been elected by the people as well as judges and sheriffs.
it also ordered that no town meeting could be held without the royal governors consent.
in may lieutenant general thomas gage commander in chief of british forces in north america was named governor of massachusetts and assumed command of the british soldiers who had returned to boston.
the intolerable acts shocked colonists.
no one had expected such a severe reaction to the boston tea party.
many towns held meetings in violation of the able doctor or america swallowing the bitter draught this 1774 engraving shows lord north the boston port act in his pocket pouring tea down americas throat and america spitting it back.
the crisis grows 179 the new laws and voters elected their own unauthorized provincial legislative assembly which ordered town governments to quit paying taxes to the royal governor.
by august 1774 patriots across massachusetts had essentially taken control of local governments.
they also began stockpiling weapons and gunpowder in anticipation of an eventual clash with british troops.
elsewhere colonists rallied to help boston raising money sending supplies and boycotting as well as burning or dumping british tea.
in williamsburg when the virginia assembly met in may a member of the committee of correspondence thomas jefferson suggested that june 1 the effective date of the boston port act become an official day of fasting and prayer in virginia.
the royal governor responded by dissolving the assembly whose members then retired to the raleigh tavern where they decided to form a continental congress to represent all the colonies more effectively in the confrontation with britain.
as samuel savage a connecticut colonist wrote may 1774 the conflict had come down to a single question whether we shall or shall not be governed by a british parliament the first continental congress on september 5 1774 the fifty five delegates making up the first continental congress assembled in philadelphia.
it was the first time that all of the colonies had met to coordinate policies.
over seven weeks the congress endorsed the suffolk resolves which urged massachusetts to resist british tyranny with force.
the congress then adopted a declaration of american rights which proclaimed once again the rights of americans as british citizens and denied parliaments authority to regulate internal colonial affairs.
we demand no new rights said the congress.
we ask only for peace liberty and security finally the congress adopted the continental association of 1774 which recommended that every colony organize committees to enforce a new and complete boycott of all imported british goods a dramatic step that would be followed by a refusal to send american goods exports to britain.
if the ideal of republican virtue meant anything it meant the sacrificing of self interest for the public good.
the association was designed to show that americans could deny themselves the baubles of britain in order to demonstrate their commitment to colonial liberties and constitutional rights.
the county and city committees forming the continental association became the organizational network for the resistance movement.
seven thousand men across the colonies served on the local committees and many more women helped put the boycotts into practice.
the committees required 180 chapter 4 from colonies to states the more memorable date however became july 4 1776 when the congress formally adopted the declaration of independence.
a few delegates refused to sign the momentous document others said john adams signed with regret.
and with many doubts most however signed wholeheartedly knowing full well that by doing so they were likely to be hanged if captured by british troops.
benjamin franklin acknowledged how high the stakes were well gentlemen he told the congress we must now hang together or we shall most assuredly hang separately the declaration of independence the declaration in its most frequently reproduced form an 1823 engraving by william j stone.
independence 189 jeffersons declaration in philadelphia in june 1776 t hirty t hree year old thomas jefferson a brilliant virginia attorney and planter serving in the continental congress drafted a statement of independence that john adams and benjamin franklin then edited followed by the members of congress themselves.
the declaration of independence was crucially important not simply because it marked the creation of a new nation but because of the ideals it expressed and the grievances it listed.
it insisted that certain truths were self evident that all men are created equal and independent and have the right to create governments of their own choosing.
governments in thomas jeffersons words derive their just powers from the consent of the people who are entitled to alter or abolish those governments when rulers deny citizens their unalienable rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness because king george iii was trying to impose an absolute tyranny over these states the representatives of the united states of america declared the thirteen united colonies to be free and independent states the contradictions of freedom once the continental congress chose independence the members set about revising thomas jeffersons draft declaration before sending it to london.
southern representatives insisted on deleting the slave owning jeffersons section criticizing george iii for perpetuating the african slave trade.
in doing so they revealed the major contradiction at work in the movement for independence the rhetoric of freedom that animated the revolution did not apply to americas original sin the widespread system of slavery that fueled the southern economy.
slavery was the absence of liberty yet few americans confronted the inconsistency of their protests in defense of freedom for whites.
in 1764 a group of slaves in charleston watching a demonstration against british tyranny by white sons of liberty got caught up in the energies of the moment and began chanting freedom freedom freedom but that was not at all what southern planters wanted for african americans.
in 1774 when a group of slaves killed four whites in a desperate attempt to gain their own freedom from tyranny georgia planters responded by capturing the rebels and burning them alive.
the harvard educated lawyer james otis was one of the few whigs who demanded freedom for blacks and women.
in 1764 he had argued in a widely circulated pamphlet that the colonists black and white born here are free british subjects and entitled to all the essential civil rights of such he even went so far as to suggest that slavery itself should be ended since all men.
white or black were by the law of nature freeborn 190 chapter 4 from colonies to states otis also asked are not women born as free as men.
would it not be infamous to assert that the ladies are all slaves by nature his sister mercy otis warren became a tireless advocate of american resistance to british tyranny through her poems pamphlets and plays.
in a letter to a friend she noted that british officials needed to realize that americas daughters are politicians and patriots and will aid the good work of resistance with their female efforts in 1765 john adams had snarled that he and other colonists angered by british actions would not be their slaves actual slaves insisted on independence too.
in 1773 a group of enslaved african americans in boston appealed to the royal governor of massachusetts to free them just as white americans were defending their freedoms against british tyranny.
in many respects the slaves argued they had a more compelling case for liberty we have no property we have no wives.
no children.
no country a few months later a group of four boston slaves addressed a public letter to the town government in which they referred to the hypocrisy of slaveholders who protested against british regulations and taxes.
we expect great things from men who have made such a noble stand against the designs of their fellow men to enslave them they noted.
but freedom in 1776 was a celebration to which slaves were not invited.
in 1775 the prominent south carolinian william henry drayton expressed his horror that impertinent slaves were claiming that the present contest with great britain was for obliging us to give them liberty george washington himself acknowledged the contradictory aspects of the revolutionary movement when he warned that the alternative to declaring independence was to become tame and abject slaves as the blacks we rule over with such arbitrary sway absolute power washphillis wheatley an autographed ington and other slaveholders at the portrait of americas first african head of the revolutionary movement american poet.
such as thomas jefferson were in part independence 191 so resistant to british tyranny because they witnessed every day what actual slavery was like for the blacks under their control.
a morally perplexed jefferson admitted the hypocrisy of slave owning revolutionaries.
southerners he wrote to a french friend are jealous of their own liberties but trampling on those of others such inconsistency was not lost on others.
phillis wheatley the first african american writer to see her poetry published in america highlighted the absurdity of white colonists claiming their freedom while continuing to exercise oppressive power over enslaved africans.
we always had governed ourselves historians still debate the causes of the american revolution.
americans in 1775 1776 were not desperately poor overall they probably enjoyed a higher standard of living than most other societies and lived under the freest institutions in the world.
their diet was better than that of europeans as was their average life span.
in addition the percentage of free property owners in the thirteen american colonies was higher than in britain or europe.
as the wealthy charlestonian charles pinckney remarked a few years later americans by which he meant white americans were more equal in their circumstances than the people of any other country at the same time the new taxes forced on americans after 1763 were not as great as those imposed on the british people.
it is also important to remember that many american colonists perhaps as many as half were indifferent hesitant or actively opposed to rebellion.
so why did the americans revolt at all.
historians have highlighted many factors the clumsy british efforts to tighten their regulation of colonial trade the restrictions on colonists eager to acquire western lands the growing tax burden the mounting debts to british merchants the lack of american representation in parliament and the role of radicals such as samuel adams and patrick henry in stirring up anti british feelings.
yet colonists sought liberty from british tyranny for reasons that were not so selfless or noble.
many of the new englanders and new yorkers most critical of tighter british regulations were smugglers.
boston merchant john hancock for example embraced the patriot cause in part because he was a wealthy smuggler.
paying more british taxes would have cost him a fortune.
likewise south carolinas henry laurens and virginias landon carter both prosperous planters worried that the british might abolish slavery.
overall however what americans most feared and resented were the british efforts to constrict their civil liberties thereby denying their rights as british citizens.
as hugh williamson a pennsylvania physician explained the 192 chapter 4 from colonies to states revolution resulted not from trifling or imaginary injustices but from gross and palpable violations of american rights that had thrown the miserable colonists into the pit of despotism yet how did the american colonies the most diverse society in the world divided by nationality and class develop such a unified resistance.
although most were of english heritage there were many other peoples represented scots irish scots irish welsh germans dutch swedes finns swiss french and jews as well as growing numbers of africans and diminishing numbers of native americans.
in 1774 thomas hutchinson the royal governor of massachusetts assured british officials that a union of the colonies was utterly impracticable because the colonists were greatly divided among themselves in every colony he predicted that rebellious americans would ultimately submit and that they must and moreover would soon hutchinson was wrong of course.
what most a mericans regardless of their backgrounds had come to share by 1775 was a defiant attachment to the civil rights and legal processes guaranteed by the english constitutional tradition.
this new outlook rooted in the defense of sacred constitutional principles made the revolution conceivable armed resistance made it possible and independence ultimately made it achievable.
the outlook of the revolutionaries was founded on the shared political principle that all citizens were equal and independent and that all governmental authority had to be based on the consent of those governed and longstanding constitutional principles.
this republican ideal was the crucial force transforming a prolonged effort to preserve old rights and liberties enjoyed by british citizens into a movement to create an independent nation.
as john adams explained americans by 1776 had lost their affection for england because british officials were conspiring to strip them of their cherished liberties.
with their declaration of independence the r evolutionaries men and women farmers artisans mechanics sailors merchants tavern owners and shopkeepers had at last become determined to develop their own society.
most patriots still spoke the same language and worshipped the same god as the british but they no longer thought the same way.
americans wanted to trade freely with the world and to expand what jefferson called their empire of liberty westward across the appalachian mountains.
perhaps the last word on the complex causes of the revolution should belong to levi preston a minuteman from danvers massachusetts.
asked late in life about the british efforts to impose new taxes and regulations on the colonists preston responded by asking his young interviewer what were they.
oppressions.
i didnt feel them he was then asked what were you independence 193 not oppressed by the stamp act preston replied that he never saw one of those stamps.
i am certain i never paid a penny for one of them what about the tax on tea.
i never drank a drop of the stuff the boys threw it all overboard his interviewer finally asked why he decided to fight for independence.
young man preston explained what we meant in going for those redcoats was this we always had governed ourselves and we always meant to.
they didnt mean we should chapter 6 strengthening the new nation court justices from six to five in an effort to deprive the next president of appointing a new member.
before he left office adams appointed federalists to all the new positions.
the federalists quipped jefferson had retired into the judiciary as a stronghold they never again would exercise significant political power.
a new era the election of 1800 did not resolve the fundamental political tensions that had emerged between ardent nationalists like adams and hamilton and those like jefferson and madison who clung to ideals of states rights and an agriculture based economy.
in fact the 1800 election further divided the young republic into warring political factions and marked a major turning point in the nations history.
it was the first time that one political party had relinquished presidential power to the opposition party and it was the only election that pitted a sitting president adams against his own vice president jefferson.
jeffersons hard fought victory signaled the emergence of a new more democratic political culture dominated by bitterly divided parties and wider public the election of 1800 nh 6 vt 4 indiana terr.
electoral vote thomas jefferson republican aaron burr republican john adams federalist charles c pinckney federalist ma 16 terr.
nw of ohio r 64 pa va 73 73 ny 12 ky 4 tn 3 ga nc 8 4 sc ri 4 ct 9 nj 7 de 3 md r 5 f 5 one rhode island elector cast one of his ballots for john jay.
tie resolved by house of representatives jefferson elected.
why was the election of 1800 a key event in american history.
what voting patterns emerged in the election of 1800.
wwn64 howfigure did congress m6 6 break the tie between thomas jefferson and aaron burr.
first proof 31p0 x 18p6 the adams administration 299 participation.
before and immediately after independence people took a keen interest in public affairs but socially prominent families the rich the able and the wellborn still dominated political life.
however the raging political battles of the late 1790s culminating in 1800 with jeffersons election established the right of common men to play a more active role in governing the young republic.
with the gradual elimination of the requirement that citizens must own property to vote the electorate expanded enormously in the early nineteenth century.
jefferson called his election the revolution of 1800 for it marked the triumph of the republican party and the slaveholding south at the expense of the new england federalists.
three virginia republican slaveholders jefferson james madison and james m onroe would hold the presidency for the next t wenty four years.
a bitter john adams was so upset by his defeat as well as by the death of his alcoholic son charles that he refused to participate in jeffersons inauguration in the new federal capital in washington d c instead unnoticed and unappreciated adams boarded a stagecoach at 4 a m for the 500 mile trip to his home in massachusetts.
he and jefferson would not communicate for the next twelve years.
as adams returned to work on his massachusetts farm with his wife abigail he told his eldest son john quincy who would become the nations sixth president that anyone governing the united states has a hard laborious and unhappy life the victorious jefferson would soon feel the same way.
chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 or deciding whether acts of congress and the presidency are constitutional.
marshall established that the supreme court was the final authority in all constitutional interpretations.
president jefferson fumed over what he called marshalls irregular ruling.
giving judges the right to decide which laws are constitutional and what not he wrote abigail adams would make the judiciary a despotic branch jefferson however would lose that argument.
although the court did not declare another federal law unconstitutional for fi fty four years it has since struck down more than 150 acts of congress and more than 1 100 unconstitutional acts of state legislatures all in an effort to protect individual liberties and civil rights.
jeffersons economic policies although john marshall got the better of thomas jefferson in court the presidents first term did include a series of triumphs.
surprisingly he did not dismantle alexander hamiltons federalist economic program despite his harsh criticism of it and his ongoing feud with hamilton.
instead following the advice of treasury secretary albert gallatin jefferson learned to accept the national bank as essential to economic growth.
jefferson however did reject hamiltons argument that a federal debt was a national blessing if the debt were not eliminated jefferson told treasury secretary gallatin we shall be committed to the english career of debt corruption and rottenness closing with revolution to pay down the government debt jefferson slashed the federal budget.
in his first message to congress in 1801 he criticized the national government as being too complicated too expensive he fired all federal tax collectors and cut the military budget in half saying that state militias and small navy gunboats provided the nation with adequate protection against foreign enemies.
jeffersons was the first national government in history to reduce its own scope and power.
jefferson also repealed the whiskey tax that hamilton and george washington had implemented in 1791 in doing so he admitted that he had a peculiar affection for the men from the western side of the mountains grain farmers and backwoods distillers for whom whiskey was often the primary source of income.
the prosperous economy helped the federal budget absorb the loss of the whiskey taxes.
in addition revenues from federal tariffs on imports rose with rising european trade and the sale of g overnment owned western lands soared as americans streamed westward.
ohios admission to the union in 1803 increased the number of states to seventeen.
jeffersonian republicanism 311 burning of the frigate philadelphia lieutenant william decatur set fire to the captured philadelphia during the united states standoff with tripoli over the enslavement of american sailors in north africa.
ending the slave trade while shrinking the federal budget and reducing the national debt jefferson in 1807 signed a landmark bill that outlawed the importation of enslaved africans into the united states in part because southerners had come to believe that a frican born slaves were more prone to revolt.
the new law took effect on january 1 1808 the earliest date possible under the constitution.
at the time south carolina was the only state that still permitted the purchase of enslaved africans.
for years to come however illegal traffic in african slaves would continue as many as 300 000 were smuggled into the united states between 1808 and 1861 the barbary pirates upon assuming the presidency jefferson promised peace commerce and honest friendship with all nations but some nations preferred war.
on the barbary coast of north africa the islamic rulers of morocco algiers tunis and tripoli had for years engaged in piracy and extortion preying upon unarmed european and american merchant ships.
the u s government made numerous blackmail payments to these barbary pirates in exchange for captured american ships and crews.
312 chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 only thirteen americans had lost their lives.
a british naval officer wrote that there never was a more complete failure although the battle of new orleans occurred after the treaty of ghent had been signed it was still a vitally important psychological victory as the treaty had yet to be officially ratified by either the united states or great britain.
had the british won at new orleans they might have tried to revise the treaty in their favor.
jacksons lopsided victory ensured that both governments would act quickly to approve the treaty.
the unexpected american triumph at new orleans also generated a wave of patriotic nationalism.
as a washington d c newspaper crowed almost incredible victory such pride in the battle of new orleans would later help transform the heroic andrew jackson into a dynamic presidential candidate eager to move the nation into an even more democratic era in which the common man would be celebrated and empowered.
the rough hewn jackson wrote a southerner in april 1815 is everywhere hailed as the savior of the country.
he has been feasted caressed i may say idolised the hartford convention a few weeks before the battle of new orleans many new england federalists frustrated by the rising expense of a war they had opposed tried to take matters into their own hands at a meeting in hartford connecticut.
the hartford convention was the climax of new englands disgust with mr.
madisons war on december 15 1814 the hartford convention assembled with delegates from massachusetts rhode island connecticut vermont and new hampshire.
the convention proposed seven constitutional amendments designed to limit republican and southern influence.
the amendments included abolishing the counting of slaves in determining a states representation in congress requiring a t wo thirds supermajority rather than a simple majority vote to declare war or admit new states prohibiting trade embargoes lasting more than sixty days excluding immigrants from holding federal office limiting the president to one term and barring successive presidents from the same state a provision clearly directed at virginia.
delegates at the hartford convention also discussed the possibility that some of the new england states might secede from the united states if their demands were dismissed in washington.
yet the secessionist threat quickly evaporated.
in february 1815 when messengers from the hartford convention reached washington d c they found the battered and burned capital celebrating the good news from new orleans.
their position according to a french diplomat was awkward embarrassing and lent itself to cruel ridicule the aftermath of the war 341 ignored by congress and the president the hartford delegates turned tail for home.
the whole sorry episode proved fatal to the federalist party which never recovered from the shame of disloyalty stamped on it by the hartford convention.
the victory at new orleans and the arrival of the peace treaty from europe transformed the national mood.
almost overnight president madison went from being denounced and possibly impeached to being hailed a national hero.
the wars legacies there was no clear military victor in the war of 1812 nor much clarification about the issues that had ignited a war that cost 7 000 killed and wounded americans.
the treaty of ghent ended the fighting but failed to address the reasons why president madison had declared war in the first place the disputes about u s maritime rights and the british practice of impressment.
for all the clumsiness with which the war was managed however in the end it generated an intense patriotism across much of the nation and reaffirmed american independence.
the young republic was at last secure from british or european threats.
as james monroe said we have acquired a character and a rank among the other nations which we did not enjoy before forgetting their many military disasters americans soon decided that the war was a glorious triumph for republican values.
the people observed treasury secretary albert gallatin are more american they feel and act more as a nation and i hope that the permanency of the union is thereby better secured soon after the official copy of the treaty of ghent arrived in washington d c in mid february 1815 virginian william h cabell wrote his brother that the glorious peace for america.
has come exactly when we least expected but when we most wanted it another virginian colonel john taylor recognized the happy outcome as largely resulting from a succession of lucky accidents that enabled the administration to get the nation out of the war had the conflict dragged on he predicted the republican party and our form of government would have been blown up the war also propelled the united states toward economic independence as the wartime interruption of trade with europe forced america to expand its manufacturing sector and become more s elf sufficient.
the british blockade of the coast created a shortage of cotton cloth in the united states leading to the creation of the nations first cotton manufacturing industry in waltham massachusetts.
by the end of the war there were more than 100 cotton mills in new england and 64 more in pennsylvania.
even thomas jefferson admitted in 342 chapter 8 the emergence of a market economy 1815 1850 fabric bedding and clothing.
britain carefully guarded its h ard won industrial secrets forbidding the export of machines or the publication of descriptions of them even restricting the emigration of skilled mechanics.
but the secrets could not be kept forever.
in 1789 samuel slater arrived in america from england with a detailed plan in his head of a water powered spinning machine.
he contracted with an enterprising merchant manufacturer in rhode island to build a mill in pawtucket rhode island and in that little mill completed in 1790 nine children turned out a satisfactory cotton yarn which was then worked up by the putting out system whereby women would weave the yarn into cloth in their homes.
in 1800 the output of americas mills and factories amounted to only one sixth of great britains production and the growth rate was slow and faltering until thomas jeffersons embargo in 1807 stimulated the domestic production of cloth.
by 1815 hundreds of textile mills in new england new york and pennsylvania were producing thread cloth and clothing.
by 1860 the output of americas factories would be a third and by 1880 t wo thirds that of british industry.
after the war of 1812 however british textile companies blunted americas industrial growth by flooding the united states with cheap cotton cloth in an effort to regain their customers who had been shut off by the war.
such postwar dumping nearly killed the infant american textile industry.
a d elegation new england factory village ca.
1844 mills and factories gradually transformed the new england landscape in the early nineteenth century as seen here in the massachusetts villages of salisbury and amesbury.
industrial development 371 of new england mill owners traveled to washington d c to demand a federal tariff tax on imported british cloth to make american textile mills more competitive.
the efforts of the mill owners to gain political assistance created a culture of industrial lobbying for congressional tariff protection against imported products that continues to this day.
what the mill owners neglected to admit was that import tariffs hurt consumers by forcing them to pay higher prices.
over time as scotsman adam smith explained in his classic book on capitalism the wealth of nations 1776 consumers not only pay higher prices for foreign goods as a result of tariffs but they also pay higher prices for domestic goods since businesses invariably seize opportunities to raise the prices charged for their products.
tariffs helped protect american industries from foreign competition but competition is the engine of innovation and efficiency in a capitalist economy.
new england shipping companies opposed higher tariffs because they would reduce the amount of goods being carried in their vessels across the atlantic from britain and europe.
many southern planters opposed tariffs because of fears that britain and france would retaliate by imposing tariffs on american cotton and tobacco shipped to their ports.
in the end the new england mill owners won the tariff war.
congress passed the tariff bill of 1816 which placed a tax of twenty five cents on every yard of imported cloth.
such tariffs were a major factor in promoting industrialization.
by impeding foreign competition they enabled american manufacturers to dominate the national marketplace.
the union manufactories of maryland in patapsco falls baltimore county ca.
1815 a textile mill established during the embargo of 1807 the union manufactories would eventually employ more than 600 people.
372 chapter 10 the jacksonian era 1828 1840 many desperate southerners fled their debts altogether by moving to texas which was then a province of mexico.
even the federal government itself having put most of its gold and silver in state banks was verging on bankruptcy.
the national intelligencer newspaper in washington d c reported in may that the federal treasury has not a dollar of gold or silver in the world the poor as always were particularly hard hit.
by the fall of 1837 one third of the nations workers were jobless and those still fortunate enough to be employed had their wages cut by 30 to 50 percent within two years.
at the same time prices for food and clothing soared.
as the winter of 1837 approached a new york city journalist reported that 200 000 people were in utter and hopeless distress with no means of surviving the winter but those provided by charity the nation had a poverty struck feeling politics amid the depression the unprecedented economic calamity would last seven years and send shock waves through the political system.
critics among the whigs called the president martin van ruin because he did not believe that he nor the federal government had any responsibility to rescue hard pressed farmers bankers or businessmen or to provide relief for the jobless and homeless.
any efforts to help people in distress must come from the states not the national government.
he did call a special session of congress in 1837 which canceled the distribution of the federal surplus to the states because there was no surplus to distribute.
how best to deal with the unprecedented depression clearly divided democrats from whigs.
unlike van buren whig henry clay insisted that suffering people were entitled to the protecting care of a parental government to him an enlarged role for the federal government was the price of a maturing expanding republic in which elected officials had an obligation to promote the safety convenience and prosperity of the people.
van buren and the democrats believed that the government had no such obligations.
henry clay among others savaged the president for his cold and heartless attitude.
an independent treasury van buren believed that the federal government should stop risking its cash deposits in the insecure pet state banks that jackson had selected.
instead he wanted to establish an independent treasury system whereby the government would keep its funds in its own vaults and do business entirely in gold or silver not paper currency.
van buren wanted the federal government to regulate the nations supply of gold and silver and let the marketplace regulate the supply of paper currency.
it took van buren more than three years to convince congress to pass the independent treasury act on july 4 1840 although it lasted little more 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 456 24 10 15 1 52 pm war over the b u s.
457 than a year the whigs repealed it in 1841 it would be restored in 1846 van burens independent treasury was a political disaster.
not surprisingly the state banks that lost control of the federal funds howled in protest.
moreover it did nothing to end the widespread suffering caused by the deepening depression.
the 1840 campaign by 1840 an election year the van buren administration and the democrats were in deep trouble.
the continuing hot potato of texas produced considerable damage.
in 1837 van buren had decided not to annex the republic of texas claiming that there was no provision in the constitution for absorbing another nation and that doing so the election of 1840 nh 7 vt 7 oregon country iowa terr.
unorganized territory mo disputed area republic of texas ar la ny mi il in oh ky 15 tn 15 ms al pa va sc ga 11 me ma 14 ri 4 ct 8 nj 8 de 3 md 10 nc florida territory electoral vote popular vote william henry harrison whig 1 275 000 martin van buren democrat 1 128 000 why did van buren carry several western states but few others.
how did the whigs achieve a decisive electoral victory over the democrats.
how was the whig strategy in 1840 different from their campaign in 1836.
wwn64 figure m10 2 first proof 31p0 x 25p0 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 457 24 10 15 1 52 pm 458 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 as being built on an immoral economic system dependent on the exploitation of blacks and the displacement of native americans.
in this version of the southern myth the white planters were rarely natural aristocrats like thomas jefferson who were ambivalent about slavery.
more often the planters were viewed as ambitious s elf made men who had seized opportunities to become rich by planting and selling cotton and trading in slaves.
northern abolitionists such as harriet beecher stowe portrayed southern planters as cunning capitalists who raped enslaved women brutalized slaves and lorded over their communities with arrogant disdain.
they treated slaves like cattle broke up their families and sold slaves down the river to toil in the louisiana sugar mills and on rice plantations.
an english woman traveling in the south in 1830 noted that what slaves in virginia and maryland feared most was being sent to the south and sold.
the sugar plantations in louisiana and more than all the rice grounds of georgia and the carolinas are the terror of the american negroes many souths the contradictory elements of these conflicting myths continue to fight for supremacy in the south each pressing its claim to legitimacy in part because the extreme descriptions are both built upon half truths and fierce prejudices.
the south has long been defined by two souls two hearts two minds competing for dominance.
the paradoxes associated with this southern mythmaking provided much of the regions variety for the old south like the new south was not a single culture but a diverse section with multiple interests and perspectives and it was rapidly growing and changing.
the old south included three distinct subsections with different patterns of economic development and diverging degrees of commitment to slavery.
throughout the first half of the nineteenth century the seven states of the lower south south carolina georgia florida alabama mississippi louisiana and parts of texas grew increasingly dependent upon commercial cotton production supported by slave labor.
a traveler in mississippi observed in 1835 that ambitious whites wanted to sell cotton in order to buy n egroes to make more cotton to buy negroes by 1860 slaves represented nearly half the population of the lower south largely because they were the most efficient producers of cotton in the world.
the states of the upper south virginia north carolina tennessee and arkansas had m ore varied agricultural e conomies a mixture of large commercial plantations and small family farms or yeoman farms where crops were grown mostly for household use.
many southern states also had large areas without slavery especially in the mountains of virginia the western car the cotton kingdom 469 atop the cotton kingdom this photograph offers a glimpse of the staggering scale of cotton production.
these 500 pound cotton bales are so densely packed and plentiful that men are walking upon them at this galveston texas port.
olinas eastern tennessee and northern georgia where the soil and climate were not suited to cotton or tobacco.
in the border south delaware maryland kentucky and missouri slavery was slowly disappearing because cotton could not thrive there.
by 1860 approximately 90 percent of delawares black population and half of marylands were already free.
slave owners in the lower south however had a much larger investment in slavery.
they believed that only constant supervision intimidation and punishment would keep the f ast growing population of enslaved workers under control in part because the working and living conditions for the enslaved were so brutal.
id rather be dead said a white overseer in louisiana than a nigger in one of those big sugarcane plantations the cotton kingdom after the revolution as the w orn out tobacco fields in virginia and maryland lost their fertility tobacco farming spread into kentucky and as far west as missouri.
rice continued to be grown in the coastal areas low country of 470 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 the carolinas and georgia where fields could easily be flooded and drained by tidal rivers flowing into the ocean.
sugarcane like rice was also an expensive crop to produce requiring machinery to grind the cane to release the sugar syrup.
during the early nineteenth century only southern louisiana focused on sugar production.
in addition to such cash crops the south led the nation in the production of livestock hogs horses mules and cattle.
southerners both black and white fed themselves largely on pork.
it was the king of the table john s wilson a georgia doctor called the region the republic of porkdom southerners ate pork or bacon morning noon and night corn was on southern plates as often as pork.
during the early summer corn was boiled on the cob by late summer and fall it was ground into cornmeal a coarse flour.
cornbread and hominy as well as a mush or porridge made of whole grain corn mixed with milk were almost daily fare.
king cotton during the first half of the nineteenth century cotton surpassed rice as the most profitable cash crop in the south.
southern cotton called white gold drove much of the national economy and the industrial revolution feeding the mechanized textile mills in new england and great britain.
in fact cotton became one of the transforming forces in n ineteenth century history.
it shaped the lives of the enslaved who cultivated it the planters who grew rich by it the mill girls who sewed it the merchants who sold it the people who wore it and the politicians who warred over it.
cotton is king exclaimed the southern cultivator in 1859 and wields an astonishing influence over the worlds commerce in 1832 over eighty of americas largest companies were new england textile mills converting cotton into thread and cloth.
the cotton kingdom resulted largely from two crucial developments.
until the late eighteenth century cotton fabric was a rarity produced by women in india using hand looms.
then british inventors developed machinery to convert raw cotton into thread and cloth in textile mills.
the mechanical production of cotton made great britain the worlds first industrial nation and the number of british textile mills centered in lancashire grew so fast that owners could not get enough cotton fiber to meet their needs.
american eli whitney solved the problem by constructing the first cotton gin which mechanized the l abor intensive process of manually removing the sticky seeds from the bolls of what was called short staple cotton.
taken together these two breakthroughs helped create the worlds largest industry and transformed the south in the process.
by 1815 just months after andrew jacksons victory over british troops at new orleans some thirty the cotton kingdom 471 british ships were docked at the citys wharves because as an american merchant reported europe must and will have cotton for her manufacturers during that year alone more than 65 000 bales of cotton were shipped down the mississippi river to new orleans.
to be sure other nations joined the global c otton producing revolution india egypt brazil and china but the american south was the driving force of cotton capitalism.
the old southwest because of its warm climate and plentiful rainfall the lower south became the global leader in cotton production.
the regions cheap fertile land and the profits to be made in growing cotton generated a frenzied mobility in which people constantly searched for more opportunities and even better land.
henry watson a new englander who moved to alabama complained in 1836 that nobody seems to consider himself settled here they remain one two three or four years must move on to some other spot the cotton belt moved south and west during the first half of the nineteenth century and hundreds of thousands of l and hungry southerners moved with it.
as the oldest southern states virginia and the carolinas experienced soil exhaustion from the overplanting of tobacco and cotton restless farmers and many sons of planters moved westward to the old southwest western georgia alabama mississippi louisiana arkansas and eventually texas.
in 1820 the coastal states of virginia the carolinas and georgia had produced two thirds of the nations cotton.
by 1830 the old southwest states were producing two thirds of americas cotton.
an acre of land in south carolina produced about 300 pounds of cotton while one acre in alabama or in the mississippi delta a 200 mile wide strip of fertile soil between the yazoo and mississippi rivers could generate 800 pounds.
it was the most profitable farmland in the world.
such profits however required backbreaking labor most of it performed by enslaved blacks.
a white virginian noted in 1807 that there is a great aversion amongst our negroes to be carried to distant parts and particularly to our new countries in the old southwest in marshy areas near the gulf coast slaves were put to work removing trees and stumps from the swampy muck.
none but men as hard as a savage said one worker could survive such wearying conditions.
the formula for growing rich in the lower south was simple cheap land cotton seed and slaves.
a north carolinian reported that the alabama fever.
has carried off vast numbers of our citizens between 1810 and 1840 the combined population of georgia alabama and mississippi increased from about 300 000 252 000 of whom were in georgia to 1 657 799 annual 472 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 what hammond failed to acknowledge was that the southern economy had grown dangerously dependent on european demand for raw cotton.
by 1860 great britain was importing more than 80 percent of its cotton from the american south.
hammond and other southern leaders did not anticipate what they could least afford a sudden collapse in world demand for southern cotton.
in 1860 the expansion of the british textile industry peaked and the price paid for southern cotton began a steady decline.
by then however the lower south was committed to l arge scale cotton production for generations to come.
whites in the old south over time the culture of cotton and slavery shaped the souths social structure and provided much of its political power.
unlike in the north and midwest southern society was dominated by an elite group of planters and merchants.
white planters although there were only a few giant plantations in each southern state their owners exercised overwhelming influence.
as a virginian observed in the m id 1830s the old slaveholding families exerted a great deal of control.
and they affected the manner and prejudices of the slaveholding part of the state the large planters behaved like an aristocracy viewing their poor white neighbors with a contempt that was readily reciprocated.
they often spent their time hunting and fishing gambling and racing horses hosting elaborate parties and importing wines and furnishings.
in short they indulged expensive habits and tastes that they often could neither afford nor control.
living the storied life of a planter was the focus of their energies their honor and often their indebtedness.
as a plantation slave recalled his master on sundays liked to gamble run horses or fight g ame cocks discuss politics and drink whisky and brandy and water all day long the richest planters and merchants were determined to retain their control over southern society in part because of self interest and in part because they assumed they were the regions natural leaders.
inequality is the fundamental law of the universe declared one planter.
james henry hammond was even more blunt declaring that the south carolina planters are essentially what the nobility are in other countries.
they stand at the head of society and politics slavery he argued does indeed create an aristocracy an aristocracy of talents of virtue of generosity and courage whites in the old south 477 in addition to its size what distinguished a plantation from a farm was the use of a large number of slaves supervised by drivers and overseers.
planters themselves rarely engaged in manual labor.
they focused on managing the overseers and handling the marketing and sale of the cotton tobacco rice or sugar.
most planters had begun their careers as land traders investors cotton merchants called factors and farmers.
over time they made enough money to acquire a plantation worked by slaves.
frederick stanton a cotton broker near natchez mississippi became a planter with 444 slaves working 15 000 acres of cotton.
success required careful monitoring of the markets for cotton land and slaves as well as careful management of the workers and production.
if as historians have agreed one had to own at least twenty slaves to be called a planter only one out of thirty whites in the south in 1860 was a planter.
eleven planters among the wealthiest people in the nation owned 500 slaves each and one planter a south carolina rice grower owned 1 000 the 10 000 most powerful planters accounting for less than 3 percent of white men in the south held more than half the slaves.
the gap between the planters and the rest of southern society was wide.
two thirds of white southern families in 1830 owned no slaves.
over time planters and their wives referred to as mistresses grew accustomed to being waited on by slaves day and night.
a virginia planter told a british visitor that a slave girl slept in the master bedroom with him and his wife.
when his british guest asked why he replied good heaven.
if i wanted a glass of water during the night what would become of me from colonial times most southern white men embraced an unwritten social code centered on a prickly sense of personal honor in which they were expected to defend their reputations with words fists knives or guns.
duels to the death called affairs of honor were the ultimate expression of manly honor.
many prominent southern leaders congressmen senators governors editors and planters engaged in duels with pistols although dueling was technically illegal in many states.
the roster of participants included president andrew jackson of tennessee and senator henry clay of kentucky.
but men of all classes were ready to fight at the first sign of disrespect.
the plantation mistress the south like the north was a ale dominated society only more so because of the slave system.
a promm inent georgian christopher memminger explained that slavery heightened the need for a hierarchical social and family structure.
white wives 478 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 and grounds.
they usually were white farmers or skilled workers the sons of planters or simply poor whites eager to rise in stature.
some were themselves slaveholders.
the overseers moved often in search of better wages and cheaper land.
a mississippi planter described white overseers as a worthless set of vagabonds likewise frederick douglass a mulatto who escaped from slavery in maryland said his overseer was a miserable drunkard a profane swearer and a savage monster always armed with a b lood stained bullwhip and a club that he used so cruelly that he even enraged the plantation owner.
the overseer tolerated no excuses or explanations.
to be accused was to be convicted and to be convicted was to be punished douglass said.
usually the highest managerial position a slave could hope for on a plantation was that of driver a favored man whose job was to oversee a small group gang of slaves getting them up and organized each morning by sunrise and then directing their work and punishing them until dark.
over the years there were numerous examples of slaves murdering drivers for being too cruel.
there were a few black overseers.
francis frederic a slave in kentucky remembered that his grandmothers white master was a hard one he appointed her son a slave as the plantations overseer.
after the planter discovered that frederics grandmother had committed the crime of attending an outlawed prayer meeting he ordered her son to give her forty lashes with a thong of a raw cow s hide her master standing over her the whole time blaspheming and threatening what he would do if her son did not lay it on plain white folk about half of white southerners were small farmers plain white folk who were usually uneducated often illiterate and forced to scratch out hardscrabble lives of bare self sufficiency.
these small farmers yeomen typically lived with their families in simple two room cabins on fifty acres or less.
they raised a few pigs and chickens and grew enough corn and cotton to live on.
they traded with neighbors more than they bought from stores.
women on these small farms worked in the fields during harvest time but spent most of their days doing household chores while raising lots of children.
farm children grew up fast.
by age four they could carry a water bucket from the well to the house and collect eggs from the henhouse.
young boys could plant weed and harvest crops feed livestock and milk cows.
the average slaveholder was a small farmer working alongside five or six slaves.
such middling farmers usually lived in a log cabin rather than a columned mansion.
in the backcountry and mountainous regions of the south where slaves and plantations were scarce small farmers dominated the social structure.
southern farmers tended to be fiercely independent and suspicious of government authority and they overwhelmingly identified with the democratic black society in the south 481 party of andrew jackson.
although only a minority of middle class white farmers owned slaves most of them supported the slave system.
they feared that slaves if freed would compete with them for land and jobs and although not wealthy the farmers enjoyed the privileged social status that race based slavery afforded them.
as a white farmer told a northern traveler now suppose they slaves was free.
you see theyd all think themselves as good as we james henry hammond and other rich white planters frequently reminded their white neighbors who owned no slaves that in a slave country every freeman is an aristocrat because blacks are beneath them in the social order.
such racist sentiments pervaded the lower s outh and much of the rest of the n ation throughout the nineteenth century.
poor whites visitors to the old south often had trouble telling small farmers apart from the poor whites a category of desperately poor people who were relegated to the least desirable land and lived on the fringes of society.
the poor whites often derided as crackers hillbillies or trash were usually day laborers or squatters who owned neither land nor slaves.
some 40 percent of white southerners worked as tenants renting land from others or as farm laborers toiling for others.
they frequently took refuge in the pine barrens mountain hollows and swamps after having been pushed aside by the more enterprising and the more successful.
they usually lived in log cabins or shacks and often made their own clothing barely managing each year to keep their families clothed dry and fed.
black society in the south southern society was literally black and white.
whites had the power and enslaved blacks were often treated as property rather than people.
the system of slavery relied on overwhelming force and fear and was intentionally dehumanizing.
we believe the negro to belong to an inferior race one planter declared.
southern apologists for slavery often stressed that african americans were inferior beings incapable of living on their own.
thomas reade cobb proclaimed that they were better off in a state of bondage effective slave management therefore required teaching slaves to understand that they were supposed to be treated like animals.
as henry garner an escaped slave explained the aim of slaveholders was to make you as much like brutes as possible others justified slavery as a form of benevolent paternalism.
george fitzhugh said that the enslaved black was but a grown up child and must be governed as a child 482 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 such self serving paternalism had one ultimate purpose profits.
planters explained a southerner care for nothing but to buy negroes to raise cotton raise cotton to buy negroes in 1818 james steer in louisiana predicted that enslaved blacks would be the best investment that southerners could make.
eleven years later in 1829 the north carolina supreme court declared that slavery existed to increase the profit of the master the role of the slave was to toil while another the owners reap the fruits those in the business of buying and selling slaves reaped huge profits.
one of them reported in the 1850s that a nigger that wouldnt bring over 300 seven years ago will fetch 1000 cash quick this year thomas clemson of south carolina the s on in law of john c calhoun candidly explained that my object is to get the most i can for the property slaves.
i care but little to whom and how they are sold whether together as families or separated owning working and selling slaves was the quickest way to wealth and social status in the south.
the wife of a louisiana planter complained in 1829 that white people talked constantly about how the profits generated by growing cotton enabled them to buy plantations negrows in 1790 the united states had fewer than 700 000 enslaved african americans.
by 1830 it had more than 2 million and by 1860 almost 4 million virtually all of them in the south and border states.
the slave system as the enslaved population grew slaveholders developed an increasingly complex system of rules regulations and restrictions.
formal slave codes in each state regulated the treatment of slaves in order to deter runaways or rebellions.
slaves could not leave their owners land or household without permission or stay out after dark without an identification pass.
some codes made it a crime for slaves to learn to read and write for fear that they might pass notes to plan a revolt.
frederick douglass noted that slaveholders assumed that allowing slaves to learn to read and write would spoil the best nigger in the world slaves in most states could not testify in court legally marry own firearms or hit a white man even in self defense.
they could also be abused tortured and whipped.
despite such restrictions and brutalities however the enslaved managed to create their own communities and cultures within the confines of the slave system forging bonds of care solidarity recreation and religion.
free persons of color african americans who were not enslaved were called free persons of color.
they occupied an uncertain and black society in the south 483 often vulnerable social status between bondage and freedom.
many of them lived in constant fear of being kidnapped into slavery.
to be sure free blacks had more rights than slaves.
they could enter into contracts marry own property including slaves of their own and pass on their property to their children.
but they were not viewed or treated as equal to whites.
in most states they could not vote own weapons attend white church services or testify against whites in court.
in south carolina free people of color had to pay an annual tax and were not allowed to leave the state.
after 1823 yarrow mamout as an enslaved they were required to have a white african muslim mamout purchased his freedom acquired property guardian and an identity card.
and settled in present day some slaves were able to pur washington d c charles willson chase their freedom and others were peale painted this portrait in 1819 when freed manumitted by their owners.
mamout was over 100 years old.
by 1860 approximately 250 000 free blacks lived in the slave states most of them in coastal cities such as baltimore charleston savannah mobile and new orleans.
many were skilled workers.
some were tailors shoemakers or carpenters others were painters bricklayers butchers blacksmiths or barbers.
still others worked on the docks or on steamships.
free black women usually worked as seamstresses laundresses or house servants.
eople among the free black population were a large number of mulattoes p of mixed racial ancestry.
the census of 1860 reported 412 000 mulattoes in the united states or about 10 percent of the black p opulation probably a drastic undercount.
in cities such as charleston and especially new orleans colored society occupied a shifting status somewhere between that of blacks and that of whites.
although most free people of color were poor some mulattoes built substantial fortunes and even became slaveholders themselves.
william ellison was the richest freedman in the south.
liberated by his white father in 1816 he developed a thriving business in south carolina making cotton gins while managing his own 900 acre plantation worked by more than sixty slaves.
ellison 484 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 most of the pioneers who made their way west on the overland trails traveled in family groups.
by 1845 some 5 000 people were making the s ix month journey annually.
the discovery of gold in california in 1848 brought some 30 000 pioneers along the oregon trail in 1849 by 1850 the peak year of travel along the trail the annual count had risen to 55 000 plains indians more than 325 000 indians inhabited the southwest the great plains california and the pacific northwest in 1840 when the great migration of white settlers into the region began.
the native americans were divided into more than 200 nations each with its own language religion c ultural practices and system of governance.
plains indians included the arapaho blackfoot cheyenne kiowa and sioux.
some were primarily farmers others were nomadic following buffalo herds across the prairie grasslands.
in the arid southwest region that today includes arizona new mexico and southern utah the peaceful pueblo n ations acoma hopi laguna taos zia zuni were sophisticated farmers who lived in adobe villages along rivers that irrigated their crops of corn beans and squash.
their rivals were the apache and the navajo warlike hunters who roamed the countryside in small bands and preyed upon the pueblos.
they in turn were periodically harassed buffalo hunt chasing back 1860s this painting by george catlin shows a hunter outrunning a buffalo.
moving west 559 by their powerful enemies the comanche.
many indian nations were hostile to each other resulting in frequent wars and raids.
to the north in the great basin paiutes and gosiutes struggled to survive in the harsh arid region of what is today nevada utah and eastern california.
they traveled in family groups and subsisted on berries pine nuts insects and rodents.
along the california coast indians lived in small villages.
they gathered wild plants and acorns and were experts at fishing.
the native americans in the pacific n orthwest the nisqually spokane yakama chinook klamath and nez perce pierced nose enjoyed the most abundant natural resources and the most temperate climate.
the ocean and rivers provided whales seals salmon and crabs and lush inland forests harbored game berries and nuts.
majestic forests of fir redwood and cedar offered wood for cooking and shelter.
all these indian societies eventually felt the unrelenting pressure of white expansion and conquest and the influx of white settlers and hunters posed a direct threat to the indians cultural survival.
when federal officials could not coerce cajole or confuse indian leaders into selling the title to their tribal lands fighting ensued.
and after the discovery of gold in california in early 1848 the tidal wave of white expansion flowed all the way to the west coast violently engulfing native americans and mexicans in its wake.
mexico and the spanish west as american settlers trespassed across indian lands they also encountered spanish speaking peoples.
many whites were as prejudiced toward hispanics as they were toward indians.
senator lewis cass from michigan who would be the democratic candidate for president in 1848 expressed the common bias among white expansionists we do not want the people of mexico either as citizens or as subjects.
all we want is their.
territory the centuries old spanish efforts at colonization in the northernmost provinces of mexico had been less successful in arizona and texas than in new mexico and florida.
the yuma and apaches in arizona and the comanches and apaches in texas thwarted spanish efforts to establish catholic missions.
by 1790 the hispanic population in texas numbered only 2 510 while in new mexico it exceeded 20 000 in 1807 french forces led by napolon had occupied spain and imprisoned the king creating confusion throughout spains colonial possessions in the western hemisphere including mexico.
miguel hidalgo y costilla a creole priest born in mexico of european ancestry took advantage of the fluid situation to convince indians and hispanics to revolt against spanish rule in mexico.
but the poorly organized uprising failed miserably.
560 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 wyoming through south pass down to fort bridger abode of the celebrated mountain man jim bridger then down the meandering snake river through what is now idaho to the salmon filled columbia river.
from there they moved through the cascade mountains to their goal oregons fertile willamette valley.
life on the trail traveling in prairie schooners sturdy canvas covered wagons pulled by teams of tramping oxen sunburned settlers bumped and jostled their way across the rugged trails mountains and plains blackened by vast herds of buffaloes.
indians rarely attacked the wagon trains they allowed most settlers to pass through their tribal lands unmolested.
many wagon trains received generous aid from indians who served as guides advisers or traders.
the indians one female pioneer noted proved better than represented to be sure as the number of pioneers increased dramatically during the 1850s disputes with indians over land and water increased but never to the degree portrayed in novels films and television shows.
still the long journey west usually five to six months was extraordinarily difficult an exodus of grinding hardship during broiling summers fierce thunderstorms and bitterly cold winters reliable for their heavy snows.
wagons broke down oxen died and diseases like cholera and dysentery took their toll on pioneers.
the cowards never started a popular saying went and the weak died on the way women pioneers the diary of amelia knight who set out for oregon in 1853 with her husband and seven children reveals the mortal threats along the trail chatfield quite sick with scarlet fever.
a calf took sick and died before breakfast.
lost one of our oxen he dropped dead in the yoke.
i could hardly help shedding tears.
yesterday my eighth child was born cholera claimed many lives because of tainted water and contaminated food.
on average there was one grave every eighty yards along the trail.
each step of the slow plodding cattle wrote a woman emigrant carried us farther and farther from civilization into a desolate barbarous country initially the western pioneers adopted the same division of labor used back east.
women cooked washed sewed and monitored the children while men drove the wagons tended the horses and cattle and did the heavy labor.
but the unique demands of the western trails soon dissolved such neat distinctions.
women found themselves gathering buffalo dung for fuel driving wagons working to dislodge wagons mired in mud helping to construct makeshift bridges pitching tents or participating in a variety of other unladylike tasks.
elizabeth smith described a typical daily routine along the trail when she wrote in her diary men making rafts.
women cooking and washing.
chil moving west 563 gathering buffalo chips women on the overland trails not only cooked and washed and took care of their children but also gathered dried buffalo dung to use as fuel as their wagons crossed the treeless plains.
dren crying another noted that we have no time for sociability.
from the time we get up in the morning until we are on the road its hurry scurry southerner lavinia porter said that the trip along the california trail was so difficult that it was still a source of wonder to me how we women were able to endure it men on the plains she observed were not willing to wait upon women as they were in more civilized communities through her hardships she became convinced that the american woman was endowed with the courage of her brave pioneer ancestors and no matter what the environment she can adapt herself to all situations even the perilous trip across the western half of this great continent the hard labor of the trail understandably provoked tensions within families and powerful yearnings for home.
divorces soared in the west.
many a tired pioneer could identify with the following comment in a girls journal poor ma said only this morning oh i wish we had never started she looks so sorrowful and dejected another woman wondered what had possessed my husband anyway that he should have thought of bringing us away out through this god forsaken country some of the emigrants turned back but most continued on.
oh dear an iowa woman confided in her journal i do so want to get there.
it is now 564 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 new helvetia americans called it sutters fort completed in 1843 stood at the end of what became the california trail which forked southward off the oregon trail and crossed the sierra nevada a soaring mountain range running north south along eastern california.
by the start of 1846 there were perhaps 800 americans in california along with approximately 10 000 c alifornios.
the americans learned to speak spanish often embraced catholicism won mexican citizenship and spouses and participated in local politics.
the donner party the most tragic story of the efforts to get to california using the overland trails involved the party headed by george donner a prosperous s ixty two year old farmer from illinois who in some respects epitomized the restless mobility of nineteenth century americans.
born in north carolina he had moved first to kentucky then indiana and eventually illinois.
now he was determined to relocate to california.
in m id april 1846 donner led his family and a train of s eventy four other settlers and twenty three wagons to the oregon trail.
early on donners wife reported that the indians were friendly and the prairie beautiful beyond description her outlook was optimistic indeed if i do not experience something far worse than i have yet done i shall say that the trouble all is in getting started but the trouble soon appeared for the donner party made several fatal mistakes starting too late in the year overloading their wagons and taking a foolish shortcut to california across the wasatch mountains in the utah territory.
they had inadequate food water clothing and experience for the journey ahead.
in the wasatch range the donner party got lost taking a supposed shortcut and was forced to backtrack losing three precious weeks in the process.
an early september snow further slowed their progress.
they eventually found their way across the wasatch mountains and into the desert leading to the great salt lake but crossing the parched desert exacted a terrible toll.
they lost more than 100 oxen and were forced to abandon several wagons and their precious supplies.
most important they had lost valuable time as winter weather began to set in.
when the donner party reached truckee pass in eastern california the last mountain barrier before the sacramento valley a two week long blizzard trapped them in two separate camps.
by december the pioneers half of them children were marooned with only enough food to last through the end of the month.
seventeen of the strongest members calling themselves the forlorn hope decided to cross the pass on their own but they were trapped by more snow.
two of them turned back eight more died of exposure and starvation.
moving west 567 just before he died billy graves urged his daughters to eat his body.
the daughters were appalled at first but soon saw no other choice.
when two more died they too were eaten.
only seven lived to reach the sacramento valley.
back at the main camps the survivors had slaughtered and eaten the last of the livestock then boiled hides and bones.
they had also killed two indian guides and eaten them.
when a rescue party finally reached them two months later they discovered a grisly scene.
thirteen people had died and cannibalism had become commonplace one pioneer had noted casually in his diary mrs.
murphy said here yesterday that she thought she would commence on milt and eat him as the rescuers led the forty seven survivors over the pass george donner so weakened and distressed that he was unable to walk stayed behind to die.
his wife chose to remain with him.
the pathfinder john frmont despite the hardships and dangers of the overland crossing the far west proved an irresistible attraction for hundreds of thousands of pioneers.
the most enthusiastic champion of american settlement in mexican california and the far west was john charles frmont an impetuous junior army officer who during the 1840s became americas most famous celebrity and a notorious troublemaker.
born out of wedlock in savannah georgia and raised in the south frmont developed a robust love of the outdoors.
in 1838 after attending the college of charleston he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the u s topographical corps an organization whose mission was to explore and map new western territories.
frmont soon excelled at surveying mapmaking and woodcraft while becoming versed in geology botany ornithology and zoology.
in 1841 frmont courted and married seventeen year old jessie b enton the feisty daughter of thomas hart benton the powerful missouri s enator.
once bentons anger at his daughter subsided he became frmonts foremost booster and helped arrange the the pathfinder john charles frmont explorations that would bring frmont became a national hero as a result of his fame as the nations leading scientific explorations in the far west.
e xplorer adventurer.
568 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 in 1842 the fearless frmont who believed he was a man of destiny set out from present day kansas city with two dozen soldiers to map the eastern half of the oregon trail.
they spent five months collecting plant and animal specimens and drawing maps in uncharted territory.
with his wifes considerable help frmont published in newspapers across the nation excerpts from a rip roaring account of his explorations titled a report on an exploration of the country lying between the missouri river and the rocky mountains on the line of the kansas and great platte rivers.
in describing the great plains the frmonts wrote that the indians and buffalo were the poetry and life of the prairie and our camp was full of exhilaration the popular stories of frmonts adventures made him an instant national celebrity and earned him the nickname the pathfinder after reading about the expedition henry wadsworth longfellow the nations most popular poet announced that frmont has touched my imagination.
what a wild life and what a fresh kind of existence.
but ah the discomforts the success of frmonts first western explorations quickly led to another expedition this time intended to map the second and more difficult half of the oregon trail from the south pass a 20 mile gap in the rocky mountains in present day wyoming.
the expedition would then go down the snake river to the columbia river and into oregon eventually making its way south through the sierra nevada to sutters fort near what would become sacramento california before heading back.
frmonts group was the first to cross the snow and i ce covered sierra nevada in the winter a spectacular feat.
his report of his expedition and the maps it generated spurred massive migrations to utah oregon and california throughout the 1840s including the trek of the mormons from illinois to salt lake city utah.
rarely one to follow orders keep promises or admit mistakes the impulsive iron willed frmont surprised his superior officers when he launched a military expedition on his own.
in august 1845 frmont now a captain and sixty two heavily armed soldiers sailors scientists hunters and frontiersmen headed west from st louis on another mysterious expedition.
in december frmonts adventurers swept down the western slopes of the sierra nevada and headed southward through the central valley of mexican controlled california.
frmont told mexican authorities that his mission was strictly scientific and that his men were civilians.
in monterey in january 1846 frmont received secret instructions from president james k polk indicating that the united states intended to take control of california from mexico.
frmont was ordered to encourage a spontaneous uprising among the americans living there.
moving west 569 suspicious mexican officials ordered frmont to leave the province.
he did so leading his explorers into oregon attacking indian villages along the way.
but the americans soon returned.
to cover his efforts to spark a revolution among the english speaking californians most of whom were americans frmont officially submitted his resignation from the army so that he thereafter would be acting as a private citizen rather than as a member of the u s government.
then frmont and his band of soldiers and rough leather jacketed frontiersmen began stirring unrest.
on june 14 1846 american settlers captured sonoma in northern california and proclaimed the republic of california.
they hoisted a linen flag featuring a grizzly bear and star a version of which would later become the california state flag.
on june 25 frmont and his band marched into sonoma.
all of california was in american control when news arrived there of the outbreak of the mexican american war.
american settlements in texas the american passion for new western land focused largely on texas the closest of all the northern american pioneers this 1850 photograph captures some of the many pioneers who headed west for brighter futures.
570 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 mexican borderlands and an area of rich soil lush prairie grass plentiful timber abundant wildlife and numerous creeks and rivers.
during the 1820s the united states had twice offered to buy texas but the mexican government refused to sell.
mexicans were frightened and infuriated by the idea of yankees acquiring their sacred soil but that is what happened.
the leading promoter of american settlement in the coastal plain of texas was stephen fuller austin a visionary land developer empresario who convinced the mexican government that he could recruit 300 american families to settle between the colorado and brazos rivers along the gulf coast of texas and create a buffer on the northern frontier between the feared comanche indians and the mexican settlements to the south.
americans eagerly settled in austins anglo colony in east texas.
they each received 177 free acres and had access to thousands of acres of common pasture for ranching austin received 65 000 acres for his efforts.
most of the anglos were ranchers or farmers drawn to the fertile inexpensive lands in the river valleys.
a few of the settlers were wealthy planters who brought large numbers of slaves with them at a time when mexico was prohibiting the importation of slaves.
an american reported that eastern texas was literally alive with all kinds of game.
we have only to go out a few miles into a swamp.
to find as many wild cattle as one could wish there were as many buffalo in the area as cattle.
by 1830 coastal texas had far more americans living there than hispanics tejanos or i ndians about 20 000 white settlers called anglos or texians and 1 000 enslaved blacks brought to grow and harvest cotton.
by 1835 there were 35 000 texians 3 000 african american slaves and a booming cotton economy.
so many people in the carolinas georgia alabama tennessee and missouri had migrated to texas that the phrase gone to texas or its initials gtt were often carved into the doors of cabins left behind.
the flood of americans into texas led to numerous clashes with indians as well as mexican officials who began having second thoughts about their tolerated guests a mexican congressman issued an accurate warning in 1830 mexicans.
watch closely for you know all too well the anglo saxon greed for territory.
we have generously granted land to these nordics they have made their homes with us but their hearts are with their native land.
we are continually in civil wars and revolutions we are weak and know i t and they know it also.
they may conspire with the united states to take texas from us.
from this time be on your guard the texas war for independence mexican officials were so worried about the behavior and intentions of americans living in texas that moving west 571 in april 1830 they suddenly outlawed further immigration from the united states.
but americans who viewed the mexicans their army and their fractured and incompetent government with contempt kept coming.
by 1835 the texians and their enslaved blacks outnumbered the tejanos spanish speaking texans ten to one.
in a letter to his cousin in 1835 stephen austin left no doubt about his plans it is very evident that texas should be effectually and fully americanized that is settled by a population that will harmonize with their neighbors on the east in language political principles common origin sympathy and even interest.
texas must be a slave country.
it is no longer a matter of doubt a changing political situation in mexico aggravated the growing tensions.
in 1834 general antonio lpez de santa anna the mexican president suspended the national congress and became a dictator calling himself the napoleon of the west texans feared that santa anna planned to free our slaves and to make slaves of us when santa anna imprisoned austin in 1834 texans decided that the mexican ruler had to go.
upon his release from jail eighteen months later austin called for texans to revolt war is our only resource.
there is no other remedy.
we must defend our rights ourselves and our country by force of arms he urged that texas become fully american promote slavery and join the united states.
in the fall of 1835 texans followed austins lead and rebelled against santa annas despotism an infuriated santa anna ordered all americans expelled all texans disarmed and all rebels arrested and executed as pirates as sporadic fighting erupted hundreds of armed volunteers from southern states rushed to assist the 30 000 texians and tejanos fighting for their independence against a mexican nation of 7 million people.
the sword is drawn austin proclaimed.
the alamo at san antonio the provincial capital in southern texas general santa annas 3 000 man army assaulted a group of fewer than 200 texians tejanos and members of the texas volunteer army holed up in an abandoned catholic mission called the alamo.
the outnumbered and outgunned texas rebels were led by three colorful adventurers with checkered pasts james jim bowie william barret travis and david crockett.
they symbolized the role of texas as a haven for people wanting second chances.
the sandy haired bowie born in kentucky but raised in louisiana had become a ruthless slave trader and deceitful land speculator.
however he was most famous for the bowie knife he used to wound and kill men in n umerous 572 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 fall of mexico city general winfield scott formally enters mexico city upon its capture by american soldiers on september 14 1847 napolon at the battle of waterloo more than thirty years before predicted that scott is l ost he cannot capture the city and he cannot fall back upon his base yet the english hero could not have been more wrong.
after four brilliantly orchestrated battles in which they overwhelmed the mexican defenders u s forces arrived at the gates of mexico city in early september 1847 the duke of wellington now changed his tune calling general scott the worlds greatest living soldier ulysses s grant also applauded his commander pointing out that with only half as many troops as the mexicans scott had won every battle he captured the capital and conquered the government the saint patricks battalion general scotts triumphant assault on mexico city was not without problems however.
since the start of the war some 7 000 soldiers had deserted the highest of any foreign war.
several hundred of them mostly poor catholic irish and german immigrants who had recently arrived in new york city crossed over to form the saint patricks battalion in the mexican army which included many foreign fighters.
why the american soldiers called san patricios in spanish chose to switch sides remains in dispute but several factors were at work many of the catholic defectors resented the abuse harsh and cruel handling they received from native u s protestant officers and the atrocities they saw committed the mexican a merican war 593 against catholic americans.
some were also attracted by the higher wages land grants and promises of citizenship provided by the mexican government which claimed that it was the victim of americas barbarous aggression the mexican army circulated leaflets to american soldiers which urged the foreign born to switch sides and fight for their shared sacred imperiled religion.
if you are catholic the same as we if you follow the doctrines of our savior why are you murdering your brethren.
why are you antagonistic to those who defend their country and your own god whatever their motives the san patricios fought tenaciously against the americans.
during one of the battles for mexico city the americans captured seventy two defectors fighting in the st patricks battalion.
they were quickly tried and most of them were sentenced to death.
although military law at the time called for traitors to be shot by a firing squad general scott ordered that about fifty of the deserters be hanged.
the others were whipped and branded with a d on each cheek.
at dawn on september 13 1847 twenty nine of the captured san patricios their hands and feet bound were taken in wooden carts to stand in the hot sun under a gallows in sight of chapultepec the last mexican fortress protecting mexico city.
there they were forced to watch the battle unfold over four hours.
when the american troops finally scaled the walls of the fortress and raised the u s flag the san patricios were all hanged simultaneously.
st patricks battalion the men of st patricks battalion continue to be celebrated in mexico as martyrs with numerous cities schools and streets bearing the name san patricio.
594 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 gold miners chinese immigrants and white settlers mine for gold in the auburn ravine of california in 1856 the wild mining camps and shantytowns may have had colorful n ames hiskey flat lousy ravine petticoat slide piety hill but they were dirty laww less and dangerous places.
in calaveras county there were fourteen murders in a single week.
vigilante justice prevailed one newcomer reported that in the short space of t wenty four days we have had murders fearful a ccidents bloody deaths a mob whippings a hanging an attempt at suicide and a fatal duel within six months of arriving in california in 1849 one gold seeker in every five was dead.
the goldfields and mining towns were so dangerous that insurance companies refused to provide coverage.
suicides were common and disease was rampant.
women were as rare in the mining camps as liquor and guns were abundant.
in 1850 less than 8 percent of californias population was female.
the few women who dared to live in the camps could demand a premium for their work as cooks laundresses entertainers and prostitutes.
in the mining camps white miners often looked with disdain upon the hispanics and chinese who were most often employed as wage laborers to help in the panning process separating gold from sand and gravel.
but the whites focused their contempt on the indians it was not considered a crime to kill indians or work them to death.
the compromise of 1850 by late 1849 as confrontations over slavery mounted each national political party was dividing into factions along north south lines.
irate southern whigs abandoned their party and joined the pro slavery democrats.
some threatened that their states would leave the union if president taylor followed through on his proposal to bring california and new mexico directly into the union as free states skipping the territorial phase.
slavery in the territories 605 jefferson davis taylors s on in law dismissed the presidents plan as being anti southern.
taylor responded by criticizing intolerant and revolutionary southerners southerners ministers planters and politicians rushed to attack the president.
i avow before this house and country and in the presence of the living god shouted robert toombs a georgia congressman that if by your legislation you seek to drive us slaveholders from the territories of california and new mexico.
and to abolish slavery in this district of columbia.
i am for disunion as the controversy unfolded the spotlight fell on the senate where an all star cast of outsized personalities with swollen egos resolved to find a way to preserve the union.
the lions of the s enate henry clay john c calhoun and daniel webster all of whom would die within two years took center stage with william h seward stephen a douglas and jefferson davis in supporting roles.
together they staged one of the great dramas of american politics the compromise of 1850 a ten month long debate over a series of resolutions intended to reduce the crisis between north and south that had unhinged both political parties.
in search of compromise with southern extremists threatening secession congressional leaders again turned to an aging henry clay now seventy two years old and struggling with tuberculosis.
as abraham lincoln acknowledged clay was regarded by all as the man for the crisis no man had amassed a more distinguished political career.
clay had gained every position he had sought except the presidency senator congressman speaker of the house secretary of state.
now as his career was winding down clay hoped to save the union by presenting his own plan to end another sectional crisis.
on december 3 1849 as the thirty first congress assembled for what would become the longest session in its history clay strode into the senate to waves of applause.
he asked to be relieved of all committee responsibilities so that he could focus on the national crisis.
unless some compromise could be found the slaveholding clay warned a furious civil war would fracture the union.
the next day in his annual message to congress president taylor urged immediate statehood for california and the same as soon as possible for new mexico.
he then pleaded with congress to avoid injecting slavery into the issue.
it was too late however.
admitting california as a free state would tip the political balance against slavery with sixteen free states to fifteen slave states.
the slaveholding states would become a permanent minority.
as jefferson davis argued the south could not allow that to happen.
taylor hoped that his proposals would create confidence and kind feeling among the contending sections.
but his speech only aggravated the seething 606 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 the northern states.
stephen a douglas the most prominent midwestern democrat sided with anti slavery republicans because the majority of kansas voters had been denied the right to decide the issue.
douglas told a newspaper reporter that i made mr james buchanan and by god sir i will unmake him the rigged election in kansas went as predicted 6 226 for the constitution with slavery 569 for the constitution without slavery.
meanwhile a new acting governor had organized the anti slavery legislature which scheduled another election to decide the fate of the lecompton constitution.
most of the pro slavery settlers boycotted this election.
the result on january 4 1858 was decisive 10 226 voted against the lecompton constitution while only 138 voted for it.
in april 1858 congress ordered that kansans vote again.
on august 2 1858 they rejected the constitution 11 300 to 1 788 with that vote kansas cleared the way for its eventual admission as a free state.
douglas versus lincoln the controversy over slavery in kansas fractured the democratic party.
stephen a douglas one of the few remaining democrats with support in both the north and the south struggled to keep the party together.
but first he had to secure his home base in illinois where in 1858 he faced reelection to the senate.
to challenge douglas illinois republicans selected a respected lawyer from springfield abraham lincoln.
lincoln had served in the illinois legislature and in 1846 had won a seat in the u s congress.
after a single unremarkable term he returned to springfield.
in 1854 however the kansas nebraska act drew lincoln back into the political arena.
lincoln hated slavery but was no abolitionist.
he did not believe that the nation should force the south to end the monstrous injustice but did insist that slavery not be expanded into new western territories.
in 1856 lincoln joined the republican party and two years later he emerged as the obvious choice to oppose douglas.
lincoln sought to raise his profile by challenging douglas to a series of debates across the state.
the seven lincoln douglas debates took place from august 21 to october 15 1858 they attracted tens of thousands of spectators and transformed the illinois senate race into a battle for the very future of the republic.
the two men differed as much physically as they did politically.
lincoln was six feet four sinewy and craggy featured with a long neck big ears and deep set brooding gray eyes.
unassuming in manner and attire he lightened his demeanor with a refreshing sense of humor.
to sympathetic observers he conveyed an air of simplicity sincerity and common sense.
the emergence of the republican party 625 abraham lincoln and stephen a douglas debate at charleston illinois september 18 1858 this mural by midwestern impressionist robert marshall root painted to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the debates can still be seen hanging in the governors office in springfield illinois.
the short stocky douglas on the other hand was quite the dandy and wore only the finest custom tailored suits.
a man of considerable abilities and even greater ambition he strutted with the pugnacious air of a predestined champion.
douglas traveled to the debate sites in a private railroad car lincoln rode alone on his horse.
the basic dispute between the two candidates lincoln insisted lay in douglass indifference to the immorality of slavery.
douglas he said was preoccupied only with process popular sovereignty in contrast lincoln claimed to be focused on principle.
i have always hated slavery as much as any abolitionist he stressed.
the american government he predicted could not endure permanently half slave and half free.
it will become all one thing or all the other douglas disagreed asking what was to keep the united states from tolerating both slavery for blacks and freedom for whites.
douglas won the close election but lincolns energetic underdog campaign made him a national figure.
and across the northern states the republicans won so many congressional seats in 1858 that they seized control of the house of representatives.
an outnumbered south by the late 1850s national politics was undergoing profound changes.
in may 1858 the free state of minnesota entered the union in february 1859 another non slave territory oregon gained statehood.
the slave states of the south were quickly becoming a besieged minority and their insecurity even paranoia deepened.
626 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 mediocre graduate of the u s military academy at west point who had displayed courage and a knack for leadership in the mexican american war as well as a fondness for horses liquor and cigars rejoined the army in 1861 explaining that there are but two parties n ow traitors and patriots and i want hereafter to be ranked with the latter confederates were equally committed to their cause.
charleston wrote mary chesnut the literary wife of a prominent planter was crowded with soldiers who feared the war will be over before they get a sight of the fun tennessees twenty one year old sam watkins reported that everyone in his town was eager for the war the basic unit of the nineteenth century u s army was the regiment about 1 000 soldiers and during the civil war most regiments were made up of friends neighbors and relatives from the same local community.
ethnic groups also formed their own regiments.
a quarter of the union troops were foreign born.
the union army for example included a scandinavian regiment the 15th wisconsin infantry a french regiment the 55th new york infantry a polish legion the 58th new york infantry and a mixed regiment of poles hungarians germans spaniards and italians the 39th new york infantry.
many immigrant soldiers did not speak english.
immigrants were attracted to serve for many reasons a strong belief in the union cause cash bonuses regular pay or the need for a steady job.
whatever the reason the high proportion of immigrants in the union army gave it an ethnic diversity absent in the confederate ranks.
many of the first confederate army units chose flamboyant names the frontier guards rough and ready grays game cocks tigers cherokee lincoln killers tallapoosa thrashers and raccoon roughs.
because the confederacy had a smaller male population than the north jefferson davis was forced to enact a conscription law mandatory military draft.
on april 16 1862 all white males between eighteen and thirty five were required to serve in the army for three years.
from this time until the end of the war a tennessee soldier wrote a soldier was simply a machine a conscript.
all our pride and valor had gone and we were sick of war and cursed the southern confederacy the confederate conscription law included controversial loopholes.
a draftee might avoid service either by paying a substitute who was not of draft age or by paying 500 to the government.
elected officials and key civilian workers as well as planters with twenty or more slaves were exempted from military service.
many among the planter elite argued that if they left to fight their slaves would escape or riot.
equally galling to many confederate soldiers was the behavior of wealthy officers who brought their enslaved servants with them to army camps.
choosing sides 649 the u s army recruiting office in city hall park new york city the sign advertises the money offered to those willing to serve 677 to new recruits 777 to veteran soldiers and 15 to anyone who brought in a recruit.
the union waited nearly a year to force men into service.
in 1863 with the war going badly for the federal armies the government began to draft men.
as in the south northerners found ways to avoid military service.
exemptions were granted to selected federal and state officeholders and to others on medical or compassionate grounds or a draftee might pay 300 to avoid service.
such exemptions led to bitter complaints on both sides about the conflict being a rich mans war and a poor mans fight the civil war also divided families.
lincolns wife had four brothers who fought for the rebel side.
the son of lincolns attorney general edward bates fought for the confederacy.
in june 1862 two brothers alexander and james campbell fought against each other at the battle of secessionville on james island south carolina.
alexander joined union forces in assaulting a confederate fort one of whose defenders was his brother.
afterward james wrote his brother expressing astonishment that alexander had been among the union attackers.
doing my best to beat you but i hope that you and i will never again meet face to face but if they should he urged his brother to do your duty to your cause for i can assure you i will strive to discharge my duty to my country my cause the life of a soldier the average civil war soldier or sailor was twenty five years old stood five feet eight inches and weighed 143 pounds.
650 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 on may 22 1863 the u s war department created the bureau of colored troops to recruit free blacks and freed slaves.
more than 180 000 blacks enlisted.
some 80 percent of them were from southern states and 38 000 of them gave their lives.
in the navy african americans accounted for about a fourth of all enlistments of these more than 2 800 died.
initially blacks were not allowed in combat but the need to win the prolonged war changed that.
once in battle they fought tenaciously.
a white union army private reported in the late spring of 1863 that the black troops fight like the devil to be sure racism in the north influenced the status of african americans in the union military.
many people who opposed slavery did not support racial equality.
black soldiers and sailors were placed in all black units led by white officers.
they were also paid less than whites 7 per month versus 16 for white recruits and were ineligible for the enlistment bonus paid to whites.
still as frederick douglass declared this is no time for hesitation.
this is our chance and woe betide us if we fail to embrace it service in the union army or navy provided former slaves a unique opportunity to grow in confidence awareness and maturity.
a northern social worker in the south carolina sea islands was astonished at the positive effects of soldiering on e x slaves some who left here a month ago to join the army were cringing dumpish slow but now they are ready to look you in the eye are wide awake and active commenting on union victories at port hudson and millikens bend louisiblack union army sergeant wearing ana lincoln reported that some of our his uniform and sword he poses with commanders.
believe that.
the a copy of j t headleys the great use of colored troops constitutes the rebellion in his hand.
heaviest blow yet dealt to the rebels the war behind the lines 669 the war behind the lines feeding clothing and supplying the vast armies required tremendous sacrifices on both home fronts.
farms and villages were transformed into battlefields churches became makeshift hospitals civilian life was disrupted and families grieved for soldiers who would not be coming home.
women and the war while breaking the bonds of slavery the civil war also loosened traditional restraints on female activity.
no conflict in history a journalist wrote was such a womans war as the civil war women on both sides played prominent roles.
they worked in mills and factories sewed uniforms composed patriotic poems and songs and raised money and supplies.
in greenville south carolina when t g gower went off to fight his wife elizabeth took over the family business converting production in their carriage factory to military wagons and ambulances.
three thousand northern women worked as nurses with the u s sanitary commission a civilian agency that provided medical relief and other services for soldiers.
other women black and white supported the freedmens aid movement to help impoverished freed slaves.
in the north alone some 20 000 women served as nurses and health related volunteers.
the most famous nurses were clara barton and dorothea lynde dix.
barton explained that her place was anywhere between the bullet and the battlefield dix declared that nurses should be plain looking women between the ages of thirty five and fifty who could bear the presence of suffering and exercise entire self control barton who later founded the american red cross claimed that the war advanced by fifty years the progress of women in gaining social and economic equality.
in many southern towns and counties the home front became a world clara barton she oversaw the of white women and children and distribution of medicines to union troops and would later help found the african american slaves.
a resident american red cross.
of lexington virginia reported that 670 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction republicans.
the middling classes who own the soil and work it with their own hands explained radical leader thaddeus stevens are the main support of every free government the wade davis bill in 1864 with the war still raging the radical republicans tried to take charge of reconstruction by passing the w ade davis bill sponsored by senator benjamin franklin wade of ohio and representative henry winter davis of maryland.
unlike lincolns 10 percent plan the wade davis bill required that a majority of white males swear their allegiance to the union before a confederate state could be readmitted.
but the wade davis bill never became law lincoln vetoed it as being too harsh.
in retaliation republicans issued the wade davis manifesto which accused lincoln of exceeding his constitutional authority.
unfazed lincoln moved ahead with his efforts to restore the confederate states to the union.
he also acted boldly to provide assistance to the freed slaves in the south.
the freedmens bureau in early 1865 congress approved the thirteenth amendment to the constitution officially abolishing slavery in the united states.
the amendment and the war that enabled it liberated 4 million slaves.
yet what did freedom mean for the former slaves most of whom had no land no home no food no jobs and no education.
throughout the major northern cities people had formed freedmens aid societies to raise funds and recruit volunteers to help the african americans in the south.
many churches did the same.
but the needs far exceeded such grassroots efforts.
it soon fell to the federal government to address the desperate plight of the former slaves.
on march 3 1865 congress created the freedmens bureau within the war department to assist the freedmen and their wives and children it was the first federal experiment in providing assistance directly to people rather than to states.
in may 1865 general oliver o howard commissioner of the freedmens bureau declared that freed slaves must be free to choose their own employers and be paid for their labor he sent agents to the south to negotiate labor contracts between blacks and white landowners many of whom resisted.
the bureau also provided the former slaves with medical care and food and clothing and also helped set up schools.
by 1870 the bureau was supervising nearly 4 000 new schools serving almost 250 000 students many of whose teachers were initially women volunteers from the north.
the freedmens bureau also helped former slaves reconnect with family members.
marriages that had been prohibited during slavery were now made legal.
debates over political r econstruction 707 freedmens school in virginia throughout the former confederate states the freedmens bureau set up schools for former slaves such as this one.
freed slaves and land a few northerners argued that what the ex slaves needed most was their own land.
a new englander traveling in the postwar south noted that the sole ambition of the freedman was.
to become the owner of a little piece of land there to erect a humble home and to dwell in peace and security at his own free will and pleasure in coastal south carolina and in mississippi former slaves had been given land by union armies that had taken control of confederate areas during the war.
even northern abolitionists balked at radical proposals to confiscate white owned land and distribute it to the freed slaves however.
citizenship and legal rights were one thing wholesale confiscation of property and land redistribution quite another.
nonetheless the discussions fueled false rumors that freed slaves everywhere would get forty acres and a mule a slogan that swept across the south.
ulysses s grant still general in chief of the u s army reported that the mistaken belief among the freed slaves that they would receive their own farmland was seriously interfering with their willingness to sign labor contracts agreeing to work as farmhands for pay.
in july 1865 hundreds of freed slaves gathered near an old church on st helena island off the south carolina coast.
there v irginia born freeman 708 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction martin delaney the highest ranking officer in the u s colored troops addressed them.
before the civil war he had been a prominent abolitionist in the north.
now major delaney assured the gathering that slavery had indeed been absolutely abolished but abolition he stressed was less the result of abraham lincolns leadership than it was the outcome of former slaves and free blacks like him deciding to resist and undermine the confederacy.
slavery was dead and freedom was now in their hands.
yes yes yes his listeners shouted.
major martin delaney delaney urged delaney then noted that many of former slaves to achieve economic s elf sufficiency by accepting paying jobs the white planters in the area claimed from whites.
that the former slaves were lazy and have not the intelligence to get on for yourselves without being guided and driven to the work by white overseers delaney dismissed such assumptions as lies intended to restore a system of forced labor for blacks.
he then told the freed slaves that their best hope was to become s elf sustaining farmers get a community and get all the lands you can if you cannot get any singly then grow as much vegetables etc as you want for your families on the other part of land you cultivate rice and cotton they must find ways to become economically self reliant he stressed.
otherwise they would find themselves slaves again.
several white planters attended delaneys talk and an army officer at the scene reported that they listened with horror depicted in their faces when de laney urged the former slaves to become independent farmers.
the planters predicted that such speeches would incite open rebellion among southern blacks.
wage slavery the intensity of racial prejudice in the south often thwarted the efforts of freedmens bureau agents as well as federal troops to protect and assist the former slaves.
in late june 1865 for example a white planter in the lowcountry of south carolina near charleston signed a contract with s ixty five of his former slaves calling for them to attend cultivate his fields according to the usual system of planting rice provision lands and to conform to all reasonable rules regulations as may be prescribed by the debates over political r econstruction 709 white owner.
in exchange the workers would receive half of the crop raised after having deducted the seed of rice corn peas potatoes any workers who violated the terms of the contract could be evicted from the plantation leaving them jobless and homeless.
a federal army officer who witnessed the contract reported that he expected more trouble on this place than any other on the river another officer objected to the contracts provision that the owner could require workers to cut wood or dig ditches without compensation.
but most worrisome was that the contract essentially enslaved the workers because no matter how much they are abused they cannot leave without permission of the owner if they chose to leave they would forfeit any right to a portion of the crop.
across the former confederacy it was evident that the former white economic elite was determined to continue to control and constrain african americans.
death of a president the possibility of a lenient federal reconstruction of the confederacy would die with abraham lincoln.
the president offered his last view of reconstruction in the final speech of his life.
on april 11 1865 he rejected calls by radicals for a vengeful peace.
he wanted no persecution no bloody work no hangings of confederate leaders and no extreme efforts to restructure southern social and economic life.
three days later on april 14 abraham lincoln and his wife mary went to see a play at fords theatre in washington d c with his trusted bodyguard called away to richmond lincoln was defenseless as john wilkes booth a popular actor and a rabid confederate slipped into the unguarded presidential box and shot the president in the head.
lincoln booth claimed was the cause of all the nations troubles and god had directed him to kill the president.
as the mortally wounded lincoln slumped forward booth stabbed a military aide and jumped from the box to the stage breaking his leg in the process.
booth limped out a stage door mounted a waiting horse and fled the city.
lincoln died nine hours later.
at the same time that booth was shooting the president other confederate assassins were hunting vice president andrew johnson and secretary of state william h seward.
johnson escaped injury because his w ould be assassin got drunk in the bar of the vice presidents hotel.
seward and four others including his son however suffered severe knife wounds when attacked at home.
the nation extracted a full measure of vengeance from the conspirators.
after a desperate eleven day manhunt soldiers and deputies pursued booth into virginia.
he was starving and despairing he wrote in his diary nursing a broken leg while being hunted like a dog booths pursuers finally found 710 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction and killed him at sunrise in a burning barn.
three of his collaborators were convicted by a military court and hanged as was mary surratt who owned the washington boardinghouse where the assassinations had been planned.
some people celebrated lincolns death.
theyve shot abe lincoln a massachusetts democrat shouted.
hes dead and im glad hes dead a republican congressman from indiana reported that the presidents death is a god send to the radicals.
most felt otherwise however.
the outpouring of grief after lincolns death was overwhelming.
planned events celebrating victory were canceled.
even a richmond virginia newspaper called the assassination the heaviest blow which has fallen on the people of the south confederate president jefferson davis fleeing federal troops learned about lincolns murder in charlotte north carolina.
he too worried that the assassination would be disastrous for our people general ulysses s grant observed that the fallen president was incontestably the greatest man i ever knew lincolns body lay in state for several days in washington d c before being transported 1 600 miles by train on april 21 for burial in springfield illinois.
in philadelphia 300 000 mourners paid their last respects in new york city 500 000 people viewed lincolns body.
on may 4 lincoln was laid to rest for eternity.
johnsons paying respect the only photograph of lincoln in his coffin displayed here in new yorks city hall rotunda.
plan lincolns shocking death propelled into the white house andrew johnson of tennessee a pro union democrat who was the only senator from a seceding state to remain in washington.
he had been added to lincolns national union ticket in 1864 solely to help the president win reelection.
humorless and insecure combative and obstinate johnson nursed fierce prejudices he hated both the white southern elite and the idea of racial equality.
he also had a weakness for liquor.
at the inaugural ceremonies in early 1865 he had delivered his v ice presidential address in a state of slurring drunkenness.
like lincoln and his hero andrew jackson johnson was a self made man.
debates over political r econstruction 711 born in poverty in raleigh north carolina he never attended school.
at age thirteen he relocated to greeneville in the mountains of east tennessee where he was apprenticed to a tailor who helped him learn to read.
eventually as the self proclaimed friend of the common man he served as the mayor a state legislator governor congressional representative and u s senator.
johnsons supporters were primarily small farmers and the working poor.
he called himself a jacksonian democrat in the strictest meaning of the term.
i am for putting down the confederate rebellion because it is a war of wealthy plantation owners against democracy he had long disliked the planter elite whom he damned as a pampered bloated corrupted aristocracy johnson however hated african americans too.
he shared the racist attitudes of most southern whites rich and poor.
damn the negroes he exclaimed to a friend during the war.
i am fighting those traitorous aristocrats their masters johnson maintained that white men alone must manage the south as a states rights democrat he also strongly opposed republican economic policies designed to spur industrial development.
and he also insisted that the federal government should be as small and inactive as possible.
with congress in recess johnson was temporarily in control of what he called the restoration of the union.
he needed to put his plan in place over the next seven months before the new congress convened and the radical republicans would take charge.
in may 1865 johnson issued a new proclamation of amnesty that excluded not only those e x confederates whom lincoln had barred from a presidential pardon but also anyone with property worth more than 20 000.
johnson also wanted to prosecute robert e lee and other high ranking confederate officers for treason.
he finally backed down when ulysses s grant threatened to resign if the president persisted in his efforts to put lee and others on trial.
johnson was determined to keep the wealthiest southerners from regain ing political power.
surprisingly however he eventually pardoned most andrew johnson a pro union of the white aristocrats he claimed democrat from tennessee.
to despise.
what brought about this 712 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction change of heart.
johnson had decided that he could buy the political support of prominent southerners by pardoning them improving his chances of reelection.
johnsons restoration plan included the appointment of a unionist as provisional governor in each southern state a position with the authority to call a convention of men elected by loyal that is not confederate voters.
his plan required that each state convention ratify the thirteenth amendment ending slavery before the state could be readmitted to the union.
johnson also encouraged the conventions to give a few blacks voting rights especially those with some education or with military service so as to disarm the republican radicals who are wild upon giving all african americans the right to vote.
except for mississippi each state of the former confederacy held a convention that met johnsons requirements but ignored his suggestion about voting rights for blacks.
the radicals rebel johnsons initial assault on the southern planter elite won him the support of the radical republicans but not for long.
many radicals who wanted reconstruction to provide social and political equality for blacks were infuriated by johnsons efforts to bring the south back into the union as quickly as possible.
the iron willed thaddeus stevens viewed the confederate states as conquered provinces to be readmitted to the union by the u s congress not the president.
president johnson however balked at such an expansion of federal authority.
he was committed to the states rights to control their affairs.
white men alone must manage the south johnson told a visitor.
by the end of 1865 the radical republicans had gained a majority in congress and were warring with andrew johnson over the control of reconstruction.
on december 4 1865 the president announced that the south had been restored to the union.
the final step in reconstruction he added would be for congress to admit the newly elected southern representatives to the house and senate.
republicans however were not about to welcome back former confederate leaders who had been elected to congress.
georgia for example had elected alexander stephens former vice president of the confederacy.
across the south four confederate generals eight colonels six confederate cabinet members and several confederate legislators were also elected to congress.
outraged republicans denied seats to all such rebel officials and appointed a congressional committee to develop a new plan to reconstruct the south.
johnson versus the radicals president johnson started a war with congress over reconstruction when he vetoed a bill that renewed debates over political r econstruction 713 funding for the freedmens bureau and allowed the federal agency to begin providing homesteads and schools to former slaves in the south as well as the border states.
thaddeus stevens and other radicals realized that johnson and the democrats were trying to redefine the civil war as a conflict between states rights and federal power not a struggle over slavery.
in mid march 1866 the radical led congress passed the pathbreaking civil rights act which announced that all persons born in the united states except indians were citizens entitled to full and equal benefit of all laws the new legislation enraged johnson.
congress he fumed had no authority to grant citizenship to lazy former slaves who did not deserve it and he argued that the civil rights act discriminated against the white race so he vetoed both bills.
now it was the republicans turn to be infuriated.
in april 1866 congress overrode johnsons vetoes.
from that point on johnson a stubborn uncompromising loner steadily lost both public and political support.
soon thereafter in the spring and summer of 1866 rampaging white vig ilantes and policemen in the south many of them former confederate soldiers murdered and wounded hundreds of african americans during riots in memphis and new orleans.
we are going to shoot down all these god damned niggers a white policeman threatened.
a memphis newspaper glorified the killing of african americans the negroes now know to their sorrow that it is best not to arouse the fury of the white man northerners were incensed.
the massacres radical republicans argued resulted from andrew johnsons lenient policy toward white supremacists.
witness memphis witness new orleans.
slavery is dead.
1867 thomas nasts cartoon argues that massachusetts senator charles sumner southern blacks were still being treated cried.
who can doubt that the presi as slaves despite the passage of the dent is the author of these tragedies fourteenth amendment.
this detail the mob attacks helped motivate con illustrates a case in raleigh north gress to pass the fourteenth amend carolina a black man was whipped for a crime despite federal orders specifically ment that year extending federal civil prohibiting such forms of punishment.
rights protections to blacks.
714 chapter 17 business and labor in the industrial era 1860 1900 ones to walk through.
s o called sweatshops emerged in the major cities where large numbers of mostly young women often immigrants worked long hours in cramped stifling conditions.
thomas edison no american inventor was more influential or prolific than thomas alva edison.
as a boy in michigan he could not sit still he loved to make things and do things his mother h ome schooled him and allowed him to explore the outdoors and perform chemical experiments except when he mussed things up edison later said his mother was the making of me.
she understood me she let me follow my bent his bent was toward telegraphy and electricity.
he built his own telegraph set and dreamed of being a telegraph operator sending messages in morse code.
when edison was twelve he began working for the local railroad selling newspapers food and candy to passengers.
being poor he explained i already knew that money is a valuable thing one day he was late for the train and ran after it.
a conductor reached down and lifted him into the train by his ears.
edison felt something snap in his head and soon he was deaf.
despite losing his hearing however he said that his work as a trainboy was the happiest time of my life it was in 1862 early in the civil war that the deaf solitary edison fastened on his real passion being a telegraph operator first in cincinnati then in louisville then in boston since the clicking key enabled him to listen to others and tinker with the equipment.
despite having no formal scientific education the s elf taught edison developed an insatiable curiosity and mechanical genius.
in january 1869 at the age of t wenty one he announced that he would hereafter devote his full time to bringing out his inventions he moved to new york city to be closer to the center of americas financial district.
he developed dozens of new machines including a stock market ticker that would report the t ransactions on wall street in real time.
soon job offers and real money flooded his way.
edison however had a different goal he wanted to become a full time inventor an electrical engineer devoted to creating new products.
in 1876 he moved into his science village in menlo park new jersey twenty five miles southwest of new york city.
there edison became a mass production inventor promising to produce a minor invention every ten days and a big thing every six months or so in the nations first industrial research laboratory edison and his assistants created the first phonograph in 1877 and a l ong lasting electric lightbulb in 1879 he also improved upon the telephone.
by the ripe age of thirty edison was the nations foremost inventor.
altogether he created or perfected industrial and agricultural growth 755 hundreds of new devices and processes including the storage battery dictaphone mimeograph copier electric motor and motion picture camera and projector.
edison soon became world famous.
a magazine saluted him as the wizard of menlo park and called him one of the wonders of the world president rutherford b hayes invited him to the white house and congress honored him.
george westinghouse and electric power until the 1880s buildings and streets were lit mostly by kerosene or gas lamps.
in 1882 the edison electric illuminating company later renamed general electric supplied electrical current to e ighty five customers in new york city launching the electric utility industry.
several companies that made lightbulbs merged into the edison general electric company in 1888 the use of direct electrical current however limited edisons lighting system to a radius of about two miles.
to cover greater distances required an alternating current which could be transmitted at high voltage and then stepped down by transformers.
george westinghouse inventor of the railway air brake developed the first a lternating current electric system in 1886 and set up the westinghouse electric company to manufacture the equipment.
edison resisted the new method as too risky but the westinghouse system of transmitting electricity over long distances won the battle of the currents and the edison companies had to switch over to ac alternating current from dc direct current.
after the invention in 1887 of the a lternating current motor by a croatian immigrant named nikola tesla westinghouse improved upon it and the company began selling dynamos.
the invention of dynamos or electric motors dramatically increased the power speed and efficiency of machinery.
electricity enabled factories to be located wherever the owners wished factories and mills no longer had to cluster around waterfalls and coal deposits to have a ready supply of energy.
electricity also spurred urban growth by improving lighting facilitating the development of trolley and subway systems and stimulating the creation of elevators that enabled the construction of taller buildings.
the railroad revolution more than any other industry the railroads symbolized the impact of innovative technologies on industrial development and the maturation of a truly national economy.
no other form of transportation played so large a role in the development of the interconnected national marketplace.
756 chapter 17 business and labor in the industrial era 1860 1900 leaders of the craft unions feared that joining with unskilled laborers would mean a loss of their identity and bargaining power.
thus in 1886 delegates from twenty five craft unions organized the american federation of labor afl.
its structure differed from that of the knights of labor in that it was a federation of many separate national unions each of which was largely free to act on its own in dealing with business owners.
samuel gompers served as president of the afl from its founding until his death in 1924 with only one years interruption.
born in england gompers came to the united states as a teenager joined the cigar makers union in 1864 and became president of his new york city local union in 1877 unlike terence powderly and the knights of labor gompers focused on concrete economic g ains higher wages shorter hours and better working conditions.
the afl at first grew slowly but by the turn of the century it claimed 500 000 members in affiliated unions.
in 1914 on the eve of world war i it had 2 million and in 1920 it reached a peak of 4 million.
but even then the afl embraced less than 15 percent of the nations nonagricultural workers.
in fact all unions including the so called railroad brotherhoods unaffiliated with the afl accounted for little more than 18 percent of those workers.
organized labors strongholds were in transportation and the building trades.
most of the larger manufacturing industries including steel textiles tobacco and meatpacking remained almost untouched.
gompers never opposed industrial unions and several became important affiliates of the afl the united mine workers the international ladies garment workers and the amalgamated clothing workers.
but the afl had its greatest success in organizing skilled workers.
two incidents in the 1890s stalled the emerging industrial union movement the homestead steel strike of 1892 and the pullman strike of 1894 these violent labor conflicts were the climactic economic events of the gilded age and represented a test of strength for the organized labor movement.
they also served to reshape the political landscape.
the homestead steel strike the amalgamated association of iron and steel workers founded in 1876 was the nations largest craft union.
at the massive steel mill at homestead pennsylvania along the monongahela river near pittsburgh the union had enjoyed friendly relations with andrew carnegies company until henry clay frick became chief executive in 1889 a showdown was delayed until 1892 however when the union contract came up for renewal.
carnegie who had previously expressed sympathy for the dreadful chill of change 791 the unions went on a lengthy hunting trip in his native scotland intentionally leaving the rigid frick to handle the difficult negotiations.
carnegie knew what was in the works a cost cutting reduction in the number of highly paid skilled workers through the use of l abor saving machinery even though the corporation was enjoying high profits.
it was a deliberate attempt to smash the union.
am with you to the end carnegie wrote to frick after leaving for scotland.
william jones the mill manager disagreed with his bosses.
he opposed cutting wages because our men are working hard and faithfully.
now mark what i tell you.
our labor is the cheapest in the country joness protests did little good.
as negotiations dragged on the company announced on june 25 that it would stop negotiating with the 3 800 workers on june 29 unless an agreement was reached.
a s trike or more properly a lockout in which management closed down the mill to try to force the union to make c oncessions would begin on that date.
frick told journalists that he was determined to have absolute control of our plant and business frick ordered construction of a twelve foot high fence around the plant and equipped it with watchtowers searchlights barbed wire and high pressure water cannons.
he also hired a private army of 316 pinkerton agents to protect what was soon dubbed fort frick.
before dawn on july 6 1892 the pinkertons floated up the monongahela river on two barges pulled by a tugboat.
thousands of unionists and their supporters many of them armed were waiting on shore.
a f ourteen hour battle broke out in which seven workers and three pinkertons were killed and dozens wounded.
hundreds of women on shore shouted kill the pinkertons in the end the pinkertons surrendered having agreed to be tried for murder and were marched away to taunts from crowds lining the streets.
a week later the pennsylvania governor dispatched 4 000 state militiamen to homestead where they surrounded the steel mill and dispersed the picketing workers.
frick then hired strikebreakers to operate the mill.
he refused to resume negotiations i will never recognize the union never never the strike dragged on until november but by then the union was dead and its leaders had been charged with murder and treason.
the union cause was not helped when alexander berkman a lithuanian anarchist tried to assassinate frick on july 23 shooting him twice in the neck and stabbing him three times.
despite his wounds frick fought back fiercely and with the help of staff members subdued the would be assassin.
much of the local sympathy for the strikers evaporated.
as a union leader explained berkmans bullets went straight through the heart of the homestead 792 chapter 18 the new south and the new west 1865 1900 war he had been promoted to general at the age of twenty three reporters dubbed him the boy general and had played an important role in the union victory at gettysburg leading a gallant cavalry charge.
now he was in charge of an expedition to attack the wandering bands of sioux hunting parties even though he recognized that intruding american miners had caused the renewal of warfare.
as custer told newspaper reporters we are goading the indians to madness by invading their hallowed hunting grounds what became the great sioux war was the largest military campaign since the end of the civil war.
the war against the northern indians lasted fifteen months and entailed fifteen battles in present day wyoming montana south dakota and nebraska.
in june 1876 after several indecisive encounters custer found a large encampment of sioux and their northern cheyenne and arapaho allies on the little bighorn river in the southeast corner of the montana territory.
on june 25 custer ordered his exhausted men to attack the indian camp.
hurrah boys weve got them he shouted not realizing how vastly outnumbered they were.
within minutes they were surrounded by as many as 2 500 warriors led by the fierce crazy horse a good day to fight a good day to die.
after a half hour of desperate fighting custers 210 men their ammunition exhausted were all dead.
custer was said to laugh as he fired his last bullet for battle of little bighorn 1876 amos bad heart bull an oglala sioux artist and historian painted this scene from the battle of little bighorn.
the fate of western indians 837 he knew his fate.
among the dead were two of custers brothers a b rother in law and a nephew.
afterwards cheyenne women pierced custers eardrums with sewing needles because he had failed to listen to their warnings to stay out of their ancestral lands.
custers brave death echoed a line from his favorite shakespeare play julius caesar i shall have glory by this losing day the sioux had won their greatest battle but in doing so they helped ensure that they would lose the war.
upon learning of the battle of little bighorn custers last stand president grant and congress abandoned the peace policy and dispatched more supplies and troops custers avengers to the plains.
general sheridan now planned for total war against the sioux.
under sheridans aggressive leadership the army quickly regained the offensive and relentlessly pursued the sioux and cheyenne across montana.
warriors were slain villages destroyed and food supplies burned.
iron teeth a cheyenne woman recalled an attack by white soldiers in november 1876.
they killed our men women and children she ran away with her three daughters.
her husband and two sons remained to fight.
my husband she remembered was walking leading his horse and stopping at times to shoot.
suddenly i saw him fall.
i started to go back to him but my sons made me go on the last time she saw her husband he was dead in the snow.
from the hilltops we cheyennes saw our lodges and everything in them burning forced back onto reservations the remaining native americans soon found themselves struggling to survive.
many of them died of starvation or disease.
by the end of 1876 the chiefs living on the dakota reservation agreed to sell the black hills to the u s government.
in the spring of 1877 crazy horse and his people surrendered.
the great sioux war was over.
by 1880 most of the western indians were confined on reservations.
the demise of the buffalo over the long run the collapse of indian resistance in the face of white settlement on the great plains resulted as much from the decimation of the buffalo herds as from the actions of federal troops.
in 1750 there were an estimated 30 million buffalo on the plains the herds were so vast that one traveler said they changed the color of the landscape blackening the whole surface of the country by 1850 there were fewer than 10 million by 1900 only a few hundred were left.
what happened to them.
the conventional story focuses on intensive harvesting of buffalo by white commercial hunters after the civil war.
the construction of railroads through buffalo country brought hundreds of commercial hunters who shipped huge numbers of hides each year to cities in the east where consumers developed a voracious demand for buffalo robes buffalo leather and trophy heads.
the 838 chapter 18 the new south and the new west 1865 1900 average commercial hunter killed 100 of the shaggy beasts a day.
the buffalo reported an army officer melted away like snow before a summers sun the story is more complicated however.
the buffalo disappeared for a variety of health and environmental reasons notably a prolonged drought during the late 1880s into the 1890s that severely reduced the grasslands upon which the animals depended.
at the same time the buffalo had to compete for food with other grazing animals by the 1880s more than 2 million horses were roaming buffalo lands.
the plains indians themselves empowered by horses and rifles and spurred by the profits reaped from selling hides and meat to white traders accounted for much of the devastation of the buffalo herds after 1840 if there had been no white hunters the buffalo would probably have lasted only another thirty years because their numbers had been so greatly reduced by other factors.
whatever the reasons the disappearance of the buffalo gave the plains indians little choice but to settle on the government reservations.
the last resistance chief joseph leader of the nez perce he was widely recognized as a strong eloquent voice against the injustices suffered by the native americans.
in the rocky mountains and west to the pacific ocean the same story of courageous yet hopeless resistance to masses of white intruders was repeated again and again.
indians were the last obstacle to white western expansion and they suffered as a result.
the blackfeet and crows had to leave their homes in montana.
in a war along the c alifornia oregon boundary the modocs held out for six months in 1871 1872 before they were overwhelmed.
in 1879 the utes were forced to give up their vast territories in western colorado.
in idaho the peaceful nez perce bands refused to surrender land along the salmon river and prolonged fighting erupted there and in eastern oregon.
in 1877 joseph a nez perce chief led some 650 of his people on a 1 300 mile journey through montana the fate of western indians 839 in hopes of reaching safety in canada.
just before reaching the border they were caught by u s soldiers.
as he surrendered joseph delivered an eloquent speech that served as an epitaph to the indians efforts to withstand the march of the american empire i am tired of fighting.
our chiefs are killed.
the old men are all dead.
i want to have time to look for my children and see how many of them i can find.
hear me my chiefs.
i am tired.
my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will fight no more forever the nez perce requested that they be allowed to return to their ancestral lands in western idaho but they were forced to settle in the indian territory oklahoma where many died of malaria.
a generation of indian wars virtually ended in 1886 with the capture of geronimo a powerful chief of the chiricahua apaches who had outridden outwitted and outfought american forces in the southwest for fifteen years.
once the apaches captured a group of settlers tied them to their wagon wheels and roasted them alive.
u s army units routinely lynched captured apaches and treated women and children as combatants.
general nelson a miles the commander of the soldiers who captured geronimo called him one of the brightest most resolute determined looking men that i have ever encountered the ghost dance the last major clash between indians and american soldiers occurred near the end of the nineteenth century.
late in 1888 wovoka or jack wilson a paiute in western nevada fell ill in a delirium he imagined being in the spirit world where he learned of a deliverer coming to rescue the indians and restore their lands.
to hasten their deliverance he said the indians must perform a ceremonial dance that would make them bulletproof against white soldiers.
the ghost dance craze fed upon old legends of the dead reuniting with the living and bringing prosperity and peace.
the ghost dance movement spread rapidly.
in 1890 the western sioux adopted it with such passion that it alarmed white authorities.
they banned the ghost dance on lakota reservations but the indians defied the order and a crisis erupted.
on december 29 1890 a bloodbath occurred at wounded knee south dakota after nervous soldiers fired into a group of indians who had surrendered.
nearly 200 indians men women and children and 25 soldiers died in the battle of wounded knee.
the indian wars had ended with characteristic brutality and misunderstanding.
general philip sheridan commander of u s troops in these conflicts was acidly candid in summarizing how whites had treated the indians we took away their country and their means of support broke up their mode of living their habits of life introduced disease and 840 chapter 19 political s talemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 in 1907 congress appointed the bipartisan dillingham commission to examine the changes in immigration patterns.
in its f orty one volume report released in 1911 the commission concluded that the new immigrants were far less intelligent than the old approximately one third of all those over 14 years of age when admitted being illiterate.
racially they are for the most part essentially unlike the british german and other peoples who came during the prior period to 1880 and generally speaking they are actuated in coming by different ideals for the old immigration came to be a part of the country while the new in a large measure comes with the intention of profiting in a pecuniary way by the superior advantages of the new world and then returning to the old country.
immigrants were usually desperately poor and needed to find jobs quickly.
many were greeted at the docks by family and friends others were met by representatives of immigrant aid societies or by company agents offering low paying and often dangerous jobs in mines mills sweatshops and on railroads.
since most immigrants knew little if any english and nothing about american employment practices they were easy targets for exploitation.
many unwittingly lost a healthy percentage of their wages to unscrupulous hiring agents in exchange for a bit of whiskey and a job.
companies eager for workers gave immigrants train tickets to inland cities such as buffalo pittsburgh cleveland chicago milwaukee cincinnati and st louis.
as strangers in america most immigrants naturally wanted to live in neighborhoods populated by people from their homeland.
the largest cities had vibrant immigrant districts with names such as little italy little hungary and chinatown where immigrants practiced their native religions and customs and spoke and read newspapers in their native languages.
but they paid a price for such community solidarity.
when new immigrants moved into an area the previous residents often moved out taking with them whatever social prestige and political influence they had achieved.
living conditions often quickly deteriorated as housing and sanitation codes went unenforced.
the nativist response then as now many native born americans saw the newest immigrants as a threat to their jobs and way of life.
many nativists were racists who believed that anglo saxon americans people of british or germanic background were superior to the slavic italian greek and jewish newcomers.
a stanford university professor called immigrants from southern and eastern europe illiterate docile lacking in s elf reliance and initiative and not possessing the anglo teutonic conceptions of the new immigration 855 mulberry street 1900 this photograph captures the many italian immigrants who made mulberry street in downtown new york city their home at the turn of the century.
horse drawn carts weave through people shopping socializing and people gazing.
law order and government many were illiterate but others only appeared so because they could not speak or read english.
some resorted to crime to survive fueling suspicions that european nations were sending their criminals to america.
throughout american history congress has passed laws regulating immigration largely these statutes have been inconsistent in their goals and frequently motivated by racial and ethnic prejudice.
during the late nineteenth century such prejudice took an especially ugly turn against the chinese.
by 1880 some 75 000 chinese formed about a ninth of the population of california.
they were the first non european and non african group to migrate in large numbers to america.
chinese immigrants were easy targets for discrimination they were not white they were not christian and many could not read or write.
whites resented them for supposedly taking their jobs although in many instances the chinese were willing to do menial work that whites refused to do.
john jeong a young chinese immigrant arrived in san francisco and quickly encountered ethnic persecution.
as he and others made their way to the chinatown neighborhood in an open carriage some white boys came up and started throwing rocks at us another chinese newcomer experienced 856 chapter 19 political s talemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 president clevelands response was recklessly conservative he convinced congress to return the nations money supply to a gold standard by repealing the sherman silver purchase act of 1890 a move that made the depression worse.
the weak economy needed more money in circulation not less.
investors rushed to exchange their silver dollars for gold further constricting the money supply.
hard times triggered a wave of labor unrest.
in 1894 some 750 000 workers went on strike.
railroad construction workers laid off in the west began tramping east and talked of marching on washington d c one protest group called coxeys army was led by general jacob s coxey a wealthy ohio quarry owner turned populist who demanded that the federal government provide the national panic the new york stock exchange on the morning of friday unemployed with meaningful work.
may 5 1893 coxey his wife and their son legal tender coxey rode in a carriage ahead of some 400 protesters who marched hundreds of miles to washington d c where police arrested coxey for walking on the grass.
although his ragtag army dispersed peacefully the march as well as the growing strength of populism struck fear into the hearts of many conservatives.
republicans portrayed populists as tramps and hayseed socialists whose election would endanger the capitalist system.
the populists responded by charging that americans were divided into tramps and millionaires in this climate of class warfare and social anxiety the 1894 congressional elections devastated president cleveland and the democrats who were blamed for the economic crisis.
the republicans gained 118 seats in the house the largest increase ever.
only in the solid democratic south did the party retain its advantage.
the populists emerged with six senators and seven representatives and they expected the festering discontent in rural areas to carry them to national power in 1896 their hopes would be dashed however.
farmers and the money problem 887 silverites versus goldbugs clevelands decision to repeal the sherman silver purchase act created an irreparable division in his party.
one pro silver democrat labeled the president a traitor.
politicians from western states with large silver mines increased their demands for the unlimited coinage of silver presenting a strategic dilemma for populists should the party promote the long list of reforms it had originally advocated or should it try to ride the silver issue into power.
although flooding the economy with silver currency would probably not have provided the benefits its advocates claimed the free silver crusade had taken on powerful symbolic overtones.
over the protests of more radical members populist leaders decided to hold their 1896 nominating convention after the two major party conventions confident that the republicans and democrats would at best straddle the silver issue and enable the populists to lure away pro silver advocates from both.
the major parties however took opposite positions on the currency issue.
the republicans as expected nominated william mckinley a former congressman and governor of ohio on a platform committed to gold coins as the only form of currency.
a small but vocal group of silver republicans from western states led by senator henry teller of colorado were so upset that they stormed out of the convention.
after the convention a friend told mckinley that the money question would determine the election.
he was right.
the democratic convention held in chicago was one of the great turning points in political history.
the p ro silver largely rural delegates surprised the party leadership and the gold democrats or goldbugs by capturing control of the convention.
william jennings bryan thirty six year old william jennings bryan of nebraska gave the final speech before the balloting began.
a fiery evangelical moralist bryan was a two term congressman who had lost a race for the senate in 1894 when democrats by the dozens were swept out of office.
in the months before the convention he had traveled throughout the south and west speaking passionately for the unlimited coinage of silver attacking clevelands do nothing response to the depression and endorsing both democrats and populists who embraced the cause of free silver bryan was a compelling speaker a crusading preacher in the role of a populist politician.
in his carefully crafted and well rehearsed speech he claimed that two ideas about the role of government were competing for the american voter.
the republicans he said believed that if you just legislate to make the well to do prosperous that their prosperity will leak through on those below 888 chapter 20 seizing an american e mpire 1865 1913 in the law of civilization and decay 1895 historian brooks adams argued that for the united states to survive and prosper it had to keep pushing beyond its borders.
as historian frederick jackson turner had proclaimed in 1893 the continental frontier was gone so americans needed new frontiers in which to exercise their expansive character and to spread their democratic ideals capitalist investments and christian beliefs.
manifest destiny also took on racial meaning many americans agreed with future president theodore roosevelt that the united states needed to expand on behalf of the destiny of the anglo saxon race roosevelt and others believed that the americans and british were at the top of the racial pyramid superior to all others in intellect ambition and creativity.
political and business leaders argued that americas rapid industrial development required the nation to acquire foreign t erritories by conquest if necessary to gain easier access to vital raw materials such as rubber tin copper palm oil and various dyes.
at the same time manufacturers and c ommercial farmers had become increasingly dependent on international trade which required an expanded force of warships to protect the merchant vessels.
and a modern s team powered navy needed ocean bases in the caribbean and pacific where its ships could replenish their supplies of coal and water.
for these and other reasons america expanded its military presence and territorial possessions both within and beyond the western hemisphere.
during just a few months in 1898 as the result of a o ne sided war against spain the united states born in a revolution against british colonial rule would itself become an imperial ruler of colonies around the world.
motivated by a mixture of moral and religious idealism assumptions of anglo saxon racial superiority and naked greed the expansionist push also met with strong opposition.
but most americans sided with future president theodore roosevelt who in his 1896 book the winning of the west declared that the conquest of the backward peoples of the world like the defeat of the indians in the american west benefited civilization and the interests of mankind toward the new imperialism the united states was a latecomer to imperialism.
by the 1880s the british french belgians italians dutch spanish and germans had conquered most of africa and asia.
often competing with one another for territories they had established colonial governments to rule over the native populations and exploited the colonies economically.
each imperial nation dispatched toward the new imperialism 901 missionaries to convert conquered peoples to christianity.
by 1900 some 18 000 protestant and catholic missionaries were scattered around the world.
writing in 1902 the british economist j a hobson declared that imperialism was the most powerful factor in the current politics of the western world a small yet influential group of public officials aggressively encouraged the idea of expansion beyond north america.
in addition to theodore roosevelt they included naval captain alfred thayer mahan president of the u s naval war college and senators albert j beveridge of indiana and henry cabot lodge of massachusetts.
referring to european imperialism lodge said we must not be left behind in 1890 mahan published the influence of sea power upon history 1660 1783 in which he argued that national greatness flowed from naval power.
mahan insisted that industrial development required a powerful navy centered on huge battleships a strong merchant marine foreign commerce colonies to provide raw materials and new markets for american products and global naval bases.
mahan urged leaders to look outward beyond the continental united states.
he championed americas destiny to control the caribbean sea build a canal across central america to connect the atlantic and pacific oceans acquire hawaii and the philippine islands and spread american values and investments across the pacific.
his ideas were widely circulated and by 1896 the united states had built eleven new battleships making its navy the third most powerful in the world behind great britain and germany.
claims of racial superiority reinforced the new imperialist spirit.
many americans and europeans readily assumed that some races were dominant anglo saxons and some inferior indians africans.
such racist notions were given scientific authority by researchers at universities throughout europe and america.
prominent americans used the arguments of social darwinism to justify economic exploitation and territorial conquest abroad and racial segregation at home.
among nations as among individuals they claimed only the strongest survived.
john fiske a harvard historian proclaimed the superior character of anglo saxon institutions and peoples.
the english speaking race he argued was destined to dominate the globe and transform the institutions traditions language and even the blood of the worlds backward races.
such theories of racial superiority were often used to justify armed conquest.
theodore roosevelt for example insisted that all the great masterful races have been fighting races.
no triumph of peace is so great as the triumphs of war 902 chapter 20 seizing an american e mpire 1865 1913 dewey arrived in manila bay on april 30 with six modern warships which quickly destroyed or captured the outdated spanish vessels there.
almost 400 spaniards were killed or wounded.
one overweight american sailor died of the spanish american war in the pacific the war of 1898 china 200 miles formosa 200 kilometers hong kong de s o uth ch ina sea pacific we ys ocean fle et luzon manila bay manila philippine islands sulu sea mindanao cavite corregidor ey s fle t manila ew british north borneo manila bay e bataan peninsula d borneo why did theodore roosevelt order commodore dewey to take manila.
wwn64 what role did filipino nationalist leader emilio aguinaldo play.
figure m20 1 why were many americans opposed to the acquisition of the philippines.
first proof spanish fleet the spanish american war the war of 1898 909 heatstroke.
an english reporter called it a military execution rather than a real contest news of the battle set off wild celebrations in america.
dewey was now in possession of manila bay but had no soldiers to go onshore.
he and his warships stayed for several months waiting for reinforcements while german and british warships cruised offshore like watchful vultures ready to seize the philippines if the united states did not.
in the meantime emilio aguinaldo the leader of the filipino nationalist movement declared the philippines independent on june 12 1898 with aguinaldos help deweys forces entered manila on august 13 and accepted the surrender of the spanish troops who had feared revenge if they surrendered to the filipinos.
news of the american victory sent president mckinley in search of a map of asia to locate the islands now occupied by u s soldiers and sailors.
senator lodge was delighted with the news from the philippines we hold the other side of the pacific he announced.
we must on no account let the philippine islands go the cuban campaign at the start of the war the spanish army in cuba was five times as large as the entire u s army.
but mckinleys call for volunteers inspired nearly a million men to enlist.
the new recruits including some 10 000 african american soldiers mostly northerners eager to show our loyalty to our land had to be equipped and trained before they would be ready for battle.
in the jim crow south however blacks were less eager to enlist because as a richmond newspaper editor observed they suffered a system of oppression as barbarous as that which is alleged to exist in cuba in the meantime the u s navy blockaded the spanish fleet inside santiago harbor while some 17 000 american troops hastily assembled at tampa african american troops in cuba soldiers stand in formation wearing old wool uniforms unsuited to cubas tropical heat.
910 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 reform society both to help those in need and to keep them from becoming revolutionaries.
populism populism with its roots in the rural south and west was another thread in the fabric of progressivism.
the populist party platforms of 1892 and 1896 included reforms intended to give more power to the people such as the direct election of u s senators by voters rather than by state legislatures.
although william jennings bryans loss in the 1896 presidential campaign ended the populist party as a serious political force many reforms pushed by the populists were implemented by progressives.
honest government the mugwumps gentlemen reformers who had fought the patronage system and insisted that government jobs be awarded on the basis of merit supplied progressivism with another key goal the honest government ideal.
over the years the good government movement expanded beyond ending political corruption to addressing persistent urban issues such as crime access to electricity clean water and municipal sewers mass transit and garbage collection.
socialism another significant progressive force was the growing influence of socialist ideas.
the socialist party of america supported mostly by militant farmers and immigrant germans and jews served as the radical wing of progressivism.
unlike european socialists most american socialists did not call for the government to take ownership of large corporations.
they focused instead on improving working conditions and closing the widening income gap between rich and poor through progressive taxation.
most progressives were capitalist reformers not socialist radicals.
they rejected the extremes of both socialism and laissez faire individualism preferring a new regulated capitalism softened by humanitarianism.
muckraking journalism progressivism depended upon newspapers and magazines to inform the public about political corruption and social problems.
the so called muckrakers were americas first investigative journalists.
their aggressive reporting played a crucial role in educating the upper and middle classes about political and corporate wrongdoing and revealing how the other half lives the title of danish immigrant jacob riiss pioneering 1890 work of photojournalism about life in the sordid slums of new york city where some 1 2 million people mostly immigrants lived in poverty amid killing diseases.
the varied sources of progressivism 941 the muckrakers got their nickname from theodore roosevelt who said that crusading journalists were often indispensable to.
society but only if they know when to stop raking the muck by uncovering political corruption and writing about social ills in newspapers and popular monthly magazines such as mcclures munseys and cosmopolitan the muckrakers changed the face of journalism and gave it a new political role.
roosevelt both as governor of new york and as president frequently used muckrakers to drum up support for his policies he corresponded with them invited them to the white house and used their popularity to help shape public opinion.
the golden age of muckraking is sometimes dated from 1902 when samuel s mcclure the owner of mcclures recruited idealistic journalists to root out the corruption in politics and corporations.
mcclure was determined to make his magazine a power for good the vitality of democracy he insisted depended upon educating the public about complex questions mcclures and other muckraking magazines investigated corporate monopolies and crooked political machines while revealing the miserable conditions in which poor americans lived and worked.
ida tarbell one of the most dedicated muckrakers spent years doggedly investigating the illegal means by which john d rockefeller had built his gigantic standard oil trust.
at the end of her series of nineteen mcclures articles on the topic she asked readers and what are we going to do about it she stressed that it was the people of the united states and nobody else who must cure whatever is wrong in the industrial situation without the muckrakers progressivism would never have achieved widespread popular support.
during the early twentieth century investigative journalism became such a power cover of mcclures magazine 1902 this issue features ida tarbells ful force for change that one editor said muckraking series investigating the that americans now had government standard oil company.
by magazine 942 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 morgan could not believe the news.
the worlds most powerful capitalist and wealthiest man rushed from new york city to the white house and told the president if i have done anything wrong send your man to my man and they can fix it up but the attorney general who was also at the meeting told morgan we dont want to fix it up we want to stop it turning to roosevelt morgan then asked if the president planned to attack his other trusts such as u s steel and general electric.
certainly not roosevelt replied unless we find out that.
they have done something wrong after morgan left the president told the attorney general to file the anti trust paperwork.
in 1904 the supreme court would rule in a 5 4 decision that the northern securities company was indeed a monopoly and must be dismantled thereby opening the way for more aggressive enforcement of the sherman anti trust act.
roosevelt fully recognized the benefits of large scale capitalism and he thought that the rise of big business was the inevitable result of the industrial era.
he did not want to destroy the titans of industry and finance but he did insist that they be regulated for the public good.
altogether roosevelt approved about t wenty five anti trust suits against oversized corporations.
he also sought stronger regulation of the railroads.
by their very nature railroads often exercised a monopoly over the communities they served enabling them to charge customers whatever they wanted.
in 1903 congress passed the elkins act making it illegal for railroads to give secret rebates cash refunds on freight charges to high volume business customers.
that same year congress approved roosevelts request that a federal department of commerce and labor be formed within which a bureau of corporations would monitor the activities of big businesses.
the 1902 coal strike in everything he did roosevelt acted forcefully.
on may 12 1902 for example some 150 000 members of the united mine workers umw labor union walked off the job at coal mines in pennsylvania and west virginia.
the miners were seeking a wage increase a shorter work day and official recognition of the union by the mine owners who refused to negotiate.
instead the owners shut down the mines.
the miners many of whom were immigrants from eastern europe were in a bind.
one owner expressed the ethnic prejudices shared by many of his colleagues when he proclaimed the miners dont suffer why they cant even speak english by october the lengthy shutdown had caused the price of coal to soar and hospitals and schools reported empty coal bins as winter approached.
in many northern cities the poor had run out of coal for heating.
the country is on the verge of a vast public calamity warned walter rauschenbusch.
the progressivism under roosevelt and taft 959 reverend washington gladden led a petition drive urging roosevelt to step in to mediate the strike.
the president decided upon a bold move he invited leaders of both sides to a conference in washington d c where he appealed to their patriotism to the spirit that sinks personal considerations and makes individual sacrifices for the public good the mine owners in attendance however refused even to speak to the umw leaders.
roosevelt was so infuriated by what he called the extraordinary stupidity and temper of the wooden headed and arrogant owners that he wanted to grab their spokesman by the seat of his breeches and chuck him out a window.
instead he threatened to declare a national emergency so that he could take control of the mines and use soldiers to run them.
when a congressman questioned the constitutionality of such a move roosevelt roared to hell with the constitution when the people want coal the threat worked the strike ended on october 23 the miners won a n ine hour workday and a 10 percent wage increase.
roosevelt was the first president to use his authority to referee a dispute between management and labor.
roosevelts reelection roosevelts forceful leadership won him friends and enemies.
as he prepared to run for reelection in 1904 he acknowledged that the whole wall street crowd would do all they could to defeat him.
nevertheless he won the republican nomination.
the democrats having lost twice with william jennings bryan essentially gave the election to roosevelt and the republicans by nominating the virtually unknown alton b parker chief justice of the new york supreme court.
parker was the dullest and most forgettable presidential candidate in history.
one journalist dubbed him the enigma from new york the most interesting item in his official campaign biography was that he had trained pigs to come when called by name.
the democrats suffered their worst election defeat in thirty two years.
after winning the popular vote by 7 6 million to 5 1 million and the electoral vote 336 to 140 roosevelt told his son it was his greatest triumph having succeeded to the presidency after william mckinleys assassination he had now won election on his own and in his view had a popular mandate to do great things.
on the eve of his inauguration in march 1905 he announced tomorrow i shall come into office in my own right.
then watch out for me 960 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 powerful blow against these abuses was struck by upton sinclairs novel the jungle 1906 which told the story of a lithuanian immigrant working in a filthy chicago meatpacking plant it was too dark in these storage places to see well but a man could run his hand over these piles of meat and sweep off handfuls of the dried dung of rats.
these rats were nuisances and the packers would put poisoned bread out for them they would die and then rats bread and meat would go into the hoppers to be ground up together.
after reading the jungle roosevelt urged congress to pass the meat inspection act of 1906 it required the department of agriculture to inspect every hog and steer whose carcass crossed state lines both before and after slaughter.
the pure food and drug act 1906 enacted the same day required the makers of prepared food and medicines to host government inspectors too.
environmental conservation theodore roosevelt was the first president passionately committed to environmental conservation.
an avid outdoorsman and naturalist he feared that unregulated logging and mining companies were destroying the nations landscape by their reckless extermination of all useful and beautiful wild things roosevelt c hampioned efforts to p rotect wilderness areas and manage and preserve the nations natural resources for the benefit of future generations.
he created fifty federal wildlife refuges approved five new national parks and fifty one federal bird sanctuaries and designated eighteen national monuments including the grand canyon.
in 1898 roosevelt had endorsed the appointment of his friend gifford pinchot the nations first professionyosemite valley a couple playfully ally trained forest manager as head of poses atop glacier point rock in yosemite national park in 1902 the u s department of agricultures adventurous tourists flocked to national division of forestry.
pinchot like rooparks and monuments in the early sevelt believed in economic growth as twentieth century and still do today.
well as environmental preservation.
progressivism under roosevelt and taft 963 pinchot said that the conservation movement promoted the greatest good for the greatest number for the longest time roosevelt and pinchot used the forest reserve act 1891 to protect 172 million acres of federally owned forests from being logged.
lumber companies were furious but the president held firm declaring i hate a man who skins the land overall roosevelt set aside more than 234 million acres of federal land for conservation purposes and created f orty five national forests in eleven western states.
as pinchot recalled launching the conservation movement was the most significant achievement of the t r.
administration as he himself believed roosevelt and race roosevelts most significant failure as a progressive as it was for so many of his successors was his refusal to confront the movements major blind spot racism.
like populists progressives worked to empower the people for many of them however the people did not include african americans native americans or some immigrant groups.
most white progressives shared the prevailing racist attitudes of the time.
they ignored or even endorsed the passage of jim crow laws in the south that prevented blacks from voting and subjected them to rigid racial separation.
by 1901 nearly every southern state had prevented almost all african americans from voting or holding political office by disqualifying or terrorizing them.
hundreds of african americans were being lynched each year across the south where virtually no blacks were allowed to serve on juries or work as sheriffs or policemen.
a white candidate for governor in mississippi in 1903 announced that he believed in the divine right of the white man to rule to do all the voting and to hold all the offices both state and federal the south wrote w e b du bois then a young black sociologist at atlanta university is simply an armed camp for intimidating black folk at the same time few progressives raised objections to the many informal and private patterns of segregation and prejudice in the north and west.
the plain fact is muckraking journalist ray stannard baker admitted in 1909 most of us in the north do not believe in any real democracy between white and colored men roosevelt confided to a friend in 1906 his belief that as a race and in the mass african americans are altogether inferior to whites yet the president made a few exceptions.
on october 16 1901 roosevelt invited booker t washington the nations most prominent black leader to the white house to discuss presidential appointments in the south.
upon learning of the meeting white southerners exploded with fury.
the memphis scimitar screamed that inviting a nigger to dine in the white house was 964 chapter 22 america and the great war 1914 1920 over jobs and housing.
white unionized workers especially resented blacks who were hired as strikebreakers.
altogether twenty five race riots erupted in 1919 and eighty african americans were lynched including eleven war veterans.
the race riots of 1919 were a turning point for many african americans.
we made the supreme sacrifice a black veteran told poet journalist carl sandburg.
now we want to see our country live up to the constitution and the declaration of independence another ex soldier noted how much the war experience had changed the outlook of blacks we were determined not to take it anymore the red scare with so many people convinced that the strikes and riots were inspired by communists and anarchists two very different groups who shared a hatred for capitalism a new york journalist reported that americans were shivering in their boots over bolshevism and they are far more scared of lenin than they ever were of the german kaiser.
we seem to be the most frightened victors the world ever saw fears of revolution were fueled by the violent actions of a few militants.
in early 1919 the secret service discovered a plot by spanish anarchists to kill president wilson and other government officials.
in april 1919 postal workers intercepted nearly forty homemade mail bombs addressed to government officials.
one mail bomb however blew off the hands of a georgia senators maid.
in june another bomb damaged u s attorney general a mitchell palmers house.
palmer who had ambitions to succeed wilson as president concluded that a red menace a communist blaze of revolution was sweeping over every american institution of law and order that august palmer appointed a twenty four year old attorney named j edgar hoover to lead a new government division created to collect information on radicals.
hoover and others in the justice department worked with a network of 250 000 informers in 600 cities all of them members of the american protective league which had been founded during the war to root out traitors and labor radicals.
on november 7 1919 federal agents rounded up 450 alien radicals most of whom were law abiding russian immigrants.
all were deported to russia without a court hearing.
on january 2 1920 police in dozens of cities arrested 5 000 more suspects.
what came to be called the first red scare another would occur in the 1950s represented one of the largest violations of civil liberties in american history.
in 1919 novelist katharine fullerton gerould announced in harpers magazine that as a result of the government crackdown america is no longer a free country in the old sense panic about possible foreign terrorists erupted across the nation as vigilantes took matters into their own hands.
at a patriotic stumbling from war to peace 1025 pageant in washington d c a sailor shot a spectator who refused to rise for the star spangled banner the crowd cheered.
in hammond indiana a jury took only two minutes to acquit a man who had murdered an immigrant for yelling to hell with the u s in waterbury connecticut a salesman was sentenced to six months in jail for saying that vladimir lenin was one of the brainiest of the worlds leaders.
by the summer of 1920 the red scare had begun to subside.
although attorney general palmer kept predicting more foreign inspired terrorism it never came.
but the red scare left a lasting mark by strengthening the c onservative crusade for 100 percent americanism and new restrictions on immigration.
j edgar hoover fresh out of law school hoover joined the justice department and rose the ranks to become the first director of the fbi.
effects of the great war the extraordinary turbulence in 1919 and 1920 was an unmistakable indication of how the great war had changed the shape of modern history it was a turning point after which little was the same.
it had destroyed old europe not only many of its cities people economies and four grand empires but also its self image as the center of civilized western culture.
winston churchill the future british prime minister called postwar europe a crippled broken world peace did not bring stability.
most germans and austrians believed they were the victims of a harsh peace and many wanted revenge.
at the same time the war had hastened the already simmering bolshevik revolution that caused russia to exit the war abandon its western european allies and in 1922 reemerge as the union of soviet socialist republics ussr.
thereafter soviet communism would be one of the most powerful forces shaping the twentieth century.
postwar america was a much different story.
for the first time the united states had decisively intervened in a major european war.
the american economy had emerged from the war largely unscathed and bankers and business executives were eager to fill the vacuum created by the destruction of the major european economies.
the united states was now the worlds dominant power.
what came to be called the american century was at hand.
chapter 23 a clash of cultures 1920 1929 are actually tempting the boys more than the boys do the girls by their dress and conversation psychoanalysis whose purpose is to explain activities in the mind soon became the worlds most c elebrated and controversial technique for helping troubled people come to grips with the demons haunting them by using talk therapy getting patients to tell the story of their lives and inner frustrations and repressed fears and urges.
by 1916 there were some 500 psychoanalysts in new york city alone.
freuds emphasis on unruly sexual desires swirling about in the subconscious fascinated some people and scared others.
for many young americans freud seemed to provide scientific justification for rebelling against social conventions and indulging in sex.
some oversimplified his theories by claiming that sexual pleasure was essential for emotional health that all forms of sexual activity were good and that all inhibitions about sex were bad.
margaret sanger and birth control perhaps the most controversial womens issue of the jazz age was birth control.
christians both protestants and catholics opposed it as a violation of gods law.
other crusaders saw it differently.
margaret sanger a new york nurse and midwife in the working class tenements of manhattan saw many young mothers struggling to provide for their growing families.
born in 1883 one of eleven children born to irish immigrants she herself had experienced the poverty often faced by large immigrant families.
our childhood she remembered was one of longing for things that were always denied as a nurse and midwife sanger witnessed at firsthand the consequences of unwanted pregnancies tragic miscarriages and amateur abortions.
to her the problems had an obvious solution birth control a term she and friends coined in 1914 in 1912 sanger began to distribute b irth control information to working class women and resolved to spend the rest of her life helping women gain control of their bodies.
to do so she began publishing a magazine called woman rebel in which she promoted womans suffrage workers rights and contraception to frighten the capitalist class in 1916 she was arrested and charged with disseminating obscenity through the mail but months later the case was dropped.
she then opened the nations first birth control clinic in brooklyn.
in 1921 sanger organized the american birth control league which in 1942 changed its name to planned parenthood.
the birth control league distributed information to doctors social workers womens clubs and the scientific community as well as to thousands of women.
in the 1920s however sanger alienated supporters of birth control by endorsing sterilization the jazz age 1045 for the mentally incompetent and for people with certain hereditary conditions.
birth control she stressed was the most constructive and necessary of the means to racial health although sanger did not succeed in legalizing the distribution of contraceptives and contraceptive information through the mail she had laid the foundation for such efforts.
in 1936 a federal court ruled that physicians could prescribe contraceptives a vital step in sangers efforts to realize her slogan every child a wanted child the new women new clothing fashions reflected the rebellion against traditional female roles in an especially powerful way.
the emancipated new women of the twenties the new woman of the 1920s two seized the right to vote while eagerly risk taking flappers dance atop the hotel sherman in chicago 1926 discarding the confining wardrobe of their mothers g eneration pinched in corsets layers of petticoats and fl oor length dresses.
in 1919 skirts were typically six inches above the ground by 1927 they were at the knee.
the utah legislature in 1921 debated a bill that would have jailed women wearing skirts higher than three inches above the ankle the shortest skirts were worn by the so called flappers pleasure seeking young women w ho in defiance of proper prewar standards drove automobiles bobbed their hair cut it short requiring the invention of the bobby pin and wore minimal underclothing gauzy fabrics sheer stockings dangling necklaces and plenty of makeup especially rouge and lipstick.
they often joined young men in smoking cigarettes drinking gambling and dancing to jazz music.
flappers attracted so much attention in part because they were both defiantly independent and desperately seductive.
after interacting with flappers in new york city british novelist elinor glynn asked has the american girl no innate modesty no sub conscious self respect no reserve no dignity the flappers wanted more out of life than marriage and motherhood.
their carefree version of feminism was fun loving defiant self indulgent and often 1046 chapter 23 a clash of cultures 1920 1929 the term aframerican to designate americans with african ancestry and to emphasize that blacks were no longer divided by their heritage they were proud to be americans who happened to have an african ancestry.
aframericans he insisted were conscious collaborators in the creation of american society and culture.
the black sculptor augusta savage agreed.
she explained that african americans for three centuries had shared the same cultural background the same system the same standard of beauty as white americans.
it is impossible to go back to primitive african art for our models by 1930 harlem renaissance writaugusta savage the sculptor shown ers had produced dozens of novels with her statue realization 1938 found and volumes of poetry several broadsuccess in america and abroad despite way plays and a flood of short stories experiencing racial prejudice along the way.
essays and films.
a people capable of producing such great art and literature johnson declared should never again be looked upon as inferior garveyism the celebration of black culture found much different expression in what came to be called negro nationalism which promoted black separatism from mainstream american life.
its leading spokesman was marcus garvey who claimed to speak for all 400 million blacks worldwide.
in 1916 garvey brought to harlem the headquarters of the universal negro improvement association unia which he had started in his native jamaica two years before.
garvey insisted that blacks had nothing in common with whites.
in passionate speeches and in editorials in the unias popular newspaper the negro world garvey urged african americans to remove themselves from the surrounding white culture and to cultivate black solidarity and black power the unia quickly became the largest black political organization in the nation.
by 1923 garvey who often wore gaudy military uniforms and f eather plumed hats claimed the unia had as many as 4 million members served by the modernist revolt 1053 800 offices.
his goal was to build an all black empire in africa.
to that end he began calling himself the provisional president of africa raising funds to send americans to africa and expelling any unia member who married a white.
garveys message of black nationalism and racial solidarity appealed especially to poor blacks in northern cities but he also had supporters across the rural south.
garveyism however appalled some black leaders especially those leading the naacp.
w e b du bois labeled garvey the most dangerous enemy of the negro race.
he is either a lunatic or a traitor an african american newspaper pledged to help drive garvey and garveyism in all its sinister viciousness from the american marcus garvey the jamaican soil born founder of the universal negro garveys eccentric crusade col improvement association and leading lapsed in 1923 when he was convicted spokesman for negro nationalism in the 1920s.
of fraud for overselling shares of stock in a steamship corporation the black star line which he founded to transport american blacks to africa.
sentenced to a five year prison term he was pardoned in 1927 by president calvin coolidge on the condition that he be deported to jamaica where he received a heros welcome.
garvey died in obscurity in 1940 but the memory of his movement kept alive an undercurrent that would reemerge in the 1960s under the slogan black power the modernist revolt the dramatic changes in society and the economy during the twenties were spurred by transformations in science and the arts during the p revious two decades.
since the e ighteenth century enlightenment conventional wisdom had held that the universe was governed by basic underlying laws of time 1054 chapter 25 the great depression 1929 1939 in 1933 long arrived in washington as a supporter of roosevelt and the new deal but he quickly grew suspicious of the nras efforts to cooperate with big business.
having developed presidential aspirations he had also grown jealous of prince franklin roosevelts popularity.
to launch his own presidential candidacy long devised a simplistic plan for dealing with the great depression that he called the share the wealth society.
long wanted to raise taxes on the wealthiest americans and redistribute the money to the people giving every poor family 5 000 and every worker an annual income of 2 500 providing pensions to retirees reducing working hours paying bonuses to military veterans and enabling every qualified student to attend college.
it did not matter that his plan would have spent far more money than would have been raised by his proposed taxes.
as he told a group of iowa farmers maybe somebody says i dont understand it government finance.
well you dont have to.
just shut your damn eyes and believe it.
thats all by early 1935 long claimed to have enough support to unseat roosevelt.
i can take him he bragged.
hes a phony.
hes scared of me.
i can outpromise him and he knows it.
people will believe me and they wont believe him longs antics led the president to declare that the louisiana senator was one of the two most dangerous men in the country the other was general douglas macarthur.
the townsend plan another popular critic of roosevelt was a retired california doctor francis e townsend.
shocked by the sight of three elderly women digging through garbage cans for food scraps he began promoting the townsend recovery plan in 1934 townsend wanted the federal government to pay 200 a month to every american over sixty who agreed to quit working.
the recipients would have to spend the money each month.
townsend claimed that his plan would create jobs for young people by giving older people the means to retire and it would energize the economy by enabling retirees to buy more products.
but like huey longs share the wealth scheme the numbers in townsends plan did not add up although it would have served only 9 percent of the population it would have paid those retirees more than half the total national income.
townsend like long didnt care about the plans cost.
not surprisingly it attracted great support among americans sixty years of age and older.
thousands of townsend clubs sprang up across the nation and advocates flooded the white house with letters urging roosevelt to enact it.
father coughlin a third outspoken critic was father charles e coughlin a roman catholic radio priest in detroit michigan.
in fiery the new deal under fire 1135 weekly broadcasts that attracted as many as 40 million listeners he assailed roosevelt as anti god and claimed that the new deal was a communist conspiracy.
during the 1930s coughlin became increasingly a nti semitic claiming that roosevelt was a tool of international jewish bankers and relabeling the new deal the jew deal he praised adolf hitler and the nazis for killing jews because he believed that all jews were communists who must be hunted down.
during the 1940 presidential campaign the thuggish coughlin gave a nazi salute and bragged when we get through with the jews in america theyll think the treatment they received in germany was nothing of long townsend and coughlin long had the largest political following.
a 1935 poll showed that he could draw more than 5 million votes as a third party candidate for president perhaps enough to prevent roosevelts reelection.
roosevelt decided to steal the thunder from his most vocal critics by instituting an array of new programs.
im fighting communism huey longism coughlinism townsendism roosevelt told a reporter in early 1935 he needed to save our system the capitalist system from such crackpot ideas promoters of welfare capitalism dr francis e townsend rev.
gerald l k smith and rev.
charles e coughlin left to right attend the townsend recovery plan convention in cleveland ohio.
1136 chapter 25 the great depression 1929 1939 opposition from the court the opposition to the new deal came from all directions.
among the most powerful opponents was the u s supreme court.
by the m id 1930s businesses were filing lawsuits against various elements of the new deal and some of them made their way to the supreme court.
on may 27 1935 the u s supreme court killed the national industrial recovery act nira by a unanimous vote.
in schechter poultry corporation v united states the justices ruled that congress had given too much of its authority to the president when the nira created the national recovery administration nra giving it the power to bring business and labor leaders together to create codes of fair competition for their industries an activity that violated federal anti trust laws.
in a press conference soon after the court announced its decision roosevelt fumed we have been relegated to the horse and buggy definition of interstate commerce then on january 6 1936 in united states v butler the supreme court declared the agricultural adjustment acts tax on middle men the companies that processed food crops and commodities like cotton unconstitutional.
in response to the courts decision the roosevelt administration passed the agricultural adjustment act of 1938 which reestablished the earlier crop reduction payment programs but left out the tax on processors.
although the aaa helped boost the overall farm economy conservatives criticized its sweeping powers.
by the end of its 1936 term the supreme court had ruled against new deal programs in seven of nine major cases.
the same line of conservative judicial reasoning roosevelt warned might endanger other new deal programs if he did not act swiftly to prevent it.
the second new deal to rescue his legislative program from judicial and political challenges roosevelt in january 1935 launched the second more radical phase of the new deal explaining that social justice no longer a distant ideal has become a definite goal of his administration.
in his effort to steal huey longs thunder the president called on congress to pass a cluster of what he designated as must legislation that included a federal construction program to employ the jobless banking reforms increased taxes on the wealthy and social security programs to protect people during unemployment old age and illness.
roosevelts closest aide harry l hopkins told the cabinet boys this is our hour.
weve got to get everything we want a public works program social security wages and hours everything now or never the second new deal 1137 the wpa in the first three months of 1935 dubbed the second hundred days roosevelt convinced congress to pass most of the second new deals must legislation.
the results changed the face of american life.
the first major initiative was the 4 8 billion emergency relief appropriation act.
the largest peacetime spending bill in history to that point it included an array of federal job programs managed by a new agency the works progress administration wpa.
the wpa quickly became the nations largest employer hiring an average of 2 million people annually over four years.
wpa workers built new yorks laguardia airport restored the st louis riverfront and managed the bankrupt city of key west florida.
the wpa also employed a wide range of writers artists actors and musicians in new cultural programs the federal theatre project the federal art project the federal music project and the federal writers project.
the national youth administration nya also under the wpa provided part time employment to students and aided jobless youths.
two future presidents were among the beneficiaries t wenty seven year old lyndon b johnson federal art project a group of wpa artists at work on building the transcontinental railroad a mural celebrating the contributions of foreign newcomers that appears in the immigrants dining hall on ellis island outside of new york city.
1138 chapter 25 the great depression 1929 1939 illegal.
the standoff lasted more than a month.
then on february 11 1937 the company relented and signed a contract recognizing the united automobile workers uaw as a legitimate union.
roosevelts second term on june 27 1936 franklin delano roosevelt accepted the democratic partys nomination for a second term.
the republicans chose governor alfred m landon of kansas a progressive republican who had endorsed many new deal programs.
we cannot go back to the days before the depression he scolded conservative republicans.
we must go forward facing our new problems the republicans hoped that the followers of huey long charles e coughlin francis e townsend and other roosevelt critics would combine to draw enough democratic votes away from the president to give landon a winning margin.
but that possibility faded when an assassin the son in law of a louisiana judge whom long had sought to remove shot and killed the forty two year old senator in 1935 in the 1936 election roosevelt carried every state except campaigning for a second term roosevelt campaigning with labor leader john l lewis to the right of roosevelt in wilkes barre pennsylvania.
the second new deal 1143 maine and vermont with a popular vote of 27 7 million to landons 16 7 million the largest margin of victory to that point.
democrats would also dominate the new congress by 77 to 19 in the senate and 328 to 107 in the house.
in winning another landslide election roosevelt forged a new electoral coalition that would affect national politics for years to come.
while holding the support of most traditional democrats north and south he made strong gains in the west among beneficiaries of new deal agricultural programs.
in the northern cities he held on to the ethnic groups helped by new deal welfare policies.
many middle class voters whose property had been saved by new deal measures flocked to support roosevelt as did intellectuals stirred by the ferment of new ideas coming from the government.
the revived labor union movement also threw its support to roosevelt and in the most meaningful shift of all a majority of african americans voted for a democratic president.
my friends go home and turn lincolns picture to the wall a pittsburgh journalist told black voters.
that debt has been paid in full the court packing plan roosevelts landslide victory convinced him that he could do almost anything and the voters would support him.
he believed his reelection demonstrated that the nation wanted even more government action to revive the economy.
the t hree to one democratic majorities in congress ensured that he could pass new legislation.
but one major roadblock stood in the way the conservative supreme court made up of nine old men lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of the social security and wagner acts were pending before the court.
given the courts conservative bent and its earlier anti new deal rulings roosevelt feared that the second new deal was in danger of being nullified.
for that reason he hatched a clumsy plan to reform the court by enlarging it.
congress not the constitution determines the size of the supreme court which over the years had numbered between six and ten justices.
in 1937 the number was nine.
on february 5 1937 roosevelt without consulting congressional leaders or even his own advisers asked congress to name up to six new supreme court justices one for each of the current justices over seventy years old explaining that the aging members of the court were falling behind in their work and needed help.
but the court packing scheme as opponents labeled the plan backfired.
it was too manipulative and far too political and quickly became the most controversial proposal of roosevelts presidency.
the plan ignited a firestorm of opposition among conservative republicans and even aroused fears among democrats that the president was seeking dangerous new powers.
as it turned out several court decisions during the spring of 1937 surprisingly upheld disputed provisions of the wagner and social security acts.
in 1144 chapter 27 the cold war and the fair deal 1945 1952 birth of the dixiecrats alabama delegates stand to boo trumans call for civil rights before they walked out of the 1948 democratic national convention.
tion floor over civil rights and then by trumans endorsement of civil rights for african americans in his acceptance speech.
liberal democrats led by minnesotas hubert humphrey commended truman for his courageous stand on the issue of civil rights and declared that the time has arrived for the democratic party to get out of the shadow of civil rights white segregationist delegates from alabama and mississippi walked out in protest.
the solidly democratic south had fractured over race.
on july 17 a group of rebellious southern democrats met in birmingham alabama.
while waving confederate flags and singing dixie they nominated south carolinas segregationist governor strom thurmond on a states rights democratic party ticket quickly dubbed the dixiecrat party the dixiecrats denounced trumans infamous civil rights initiatives and championed states rights against federal efforts to change the tradition of white supremacy in the south.
a few days later on july 23 the left wing of the democratic party gathered in philadelphia to form a new progressive party and nominate for president henry a wallace roosevelts former secretary of agriculture and vice president whom truman had fired as secretary of commerce.
one democratic leader asked truman to withdraw from the race to help the partys chances.
he replied i was not brought up to run from a fight expanding the new deal 1239 the splits in the democratic ranks seemed to spell the final blow to truman but he refused to give in.
he was finally renominated long after midnight.
by the time he entered the auditorium it was 2 a m but he aroused the faithful by promising that i will win this election and make the republicans like it he pledged to bring congress into special session and demand that it confront the housing crisis and boost the minimum wage.
within days an invigorated truman set out on a 22 000 mile whistle stop train tour making ten speeches a day scolding the do nothing eightieth congress.
the p lain talking president attracted huge crowds.
the republicans the election of 1948 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co mn sd ia ne ks ok nm tx nh 4 vt 3 wi ny mi pa oh 25 wv va mo 8 11 ky 11 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga 9 11 la fl il in me ma 16 ri 4 ct 8 nj 16 de 3 md 8 electoral vote popular vote harry s truman democrat 24 200 000 thomas e dewey republican 22 000 000 j strom thurmond states rights democrat 1 200 000 henry a wallace progressive 1 160 000 why did the political experts predict a dewey victory.
why was civil rights such a divisive issue at the democratic convention.
how did the candidacies of strom thurmond and henry wallace end up wwn64 figurehelping m27 2 truman.
first proof 1240 chapter 27 the cold war and the fair deal 1945 1952 the korean conflict was the first military action authorized by the united nations and some twenty other nations participated.
the united states provided the largest contingent by far some 330 000 troops.
the american defense of south korea set a worrisome precedent war by order of a president rather than by a vote of congress which the u s constitution requires.
truman dodged the issue by officially calling the conflict a police action rather than a war.
critics labeled it mr.
trumans war turning the tables the korean war featured brutal combat in terrible conditions punctuated by heavy casualties and widespread destruction on both sides.
for the first three months the fighting in korea went badly for the republic of korea rok and the un forces.
by september 1950 the decimated south korean troops were barely hanging on at pusan at the southern tip of the korean peninsula.
then in a brilliant maneuver on september 15 general macarthur staged a surprise amphibious landing behind the north korean lines at inchn the port city for seoul some 150 miles north of pusan.
un troops drove a wedge through the north korean army only a quarter of whom some 25 000 soldiers managed to flee across the border.
days later south korean troops recaptured seoul.
at that point the vainglorious macarthur became overconfident and persuaded truman to allow u s troops to push across the 38th parallel into north korea.
containment of communism was no longer enough macarthur now sought to rid north korea of the red menace even if this meant expanding the war into china to prevent the chinese from resupplying their north korean allies.
the chinese intervene by october 1950 un forces were about to capture the north korean capital pyngyang.
president truman concerned that macarthurs move would provoke communist china to enter the war repeatedly asked the u s commander to meet with him in washington d c only to be rebuffed.
finally the president flew 7 000 miles to wake island to meet with macarthur who contemptuously refused to salute his commander in chief.
at the meeting on october 15 macarthur dismissed chinese threats to intervene even though they had massed troops on the korean border.
that same day the communist government in beijing announced that china cannot stand idly by as its north korean allies were humiliated.
on october 20 un forces entered the north korean capital and on october 26 advance units reached chosan on the yalu river north koreas border with china.
macarthur predicted total victory by christmas.
instead he blundered into a catastrophe.
on the night of november 25 some 300 000 chinese volunteers the cold war heats up 1247 the korean war 1950 and 1950 1953 china ussr r china manchuria ussr r ve farthest un advance nov 1950 north korea chosan.
1 ov n ck ta at chosan north korea north korean offensive june sept 1950 pyongyang sea of japan sea of japan pyongyang truce line july 27 1953 38 seoul panmunjom inchon inchon chorwon seoul south korea un position sept 1950 38 un retreat jan 1951 yellow sea mac a sept 1 rth u 5 19 r yellow sea y al ch in es e y al ur manchuria ive vladivostok 1950 1953 ur i vladivostok un forces south korea un position sept 1950 pusan it pusan 100 miles 100 kilometers t ai tr s ea japan kor kor ea st r a japan how did the surrender of the japanese in korea during 1945 set up the conflict between soviet influenced north korea and u s influenced south korea.
wwn64 what was general macarthurs strategyfigure for winning m27 3bthe korean conflict.
wwn64 firstmacarthur proof why did president truman remove general from command.
figure m27 3a first proof counterattacked sending u s forces into a desperate retreat.
we ran like antelopes said an american soldier.
at the chosin reservoir the first marine division was surrounded by seven chinese divisions.
their desperate situation was worsened by minus 40 degree cold nights.
when asked how the u s retreat was going marine general oliver p smith replied retreat hell.
were not retreating were just advancing in a different direction smith eventually directed an ingenious breakout by the marines that saved the division from total destruction.
still the un forces were in retreat.
by january 15 the communist chinese and north koreans had recaptured seoul.
what had started as a defensive war 1248 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 moderate republicanism dwight david eisenhower dominated the political landscape during the 1950s.
the military hero of the second world war was a model of moderation stability and optimism.
he was a soldier who hated war a politician who hated politics.
committed to what he called moderate republicanism eisenhower promised to restore the authority of state and local governments and restrain the federal government from engaging in political and social engineering in the process he sought to renew traditional virtues and inspire americans with a vision of a brighter future.
time for a change by 1952 the truman administration was the target of growing public criticism.
the conflict in korea had stalled the economy was sputtering and truman was put on the defensive by the disclosure that corrupt lobbyists had rigged military contracts.
the scandal led truman to fire nearly 250 employees of the inter nal revenue service but doubts lingered that he would ever finish the housecleaning.
critics charged that the slogan for his administration was plunder at home blunder abroad it was republicans claimed time for a change and public sentiment turned their way as the 1952 election ap proached.
beginning in the late 1940s both republican and democratic leaders including truman recruited eisenhower to be their presidential candidate.
the affable eisenhower known as ike had displayed remarkable organizational and diplomatic skill in coordinating the allied invasion of n azi controlled europe.
in 1952 after serving as president of columbia university he had moved to paris to become supreme commander dwight d eisenhower his many supporters wore i like ike hats pins of nato forces in europe.
his deciand even nylon stockings speaking to sion to run for president as a republican the powerful consumer cultures impact was wildly popular with voters.
bumper on politics.
stickers announced simply i like ike moderate republicanism 1261 eisenhower was nominated on the first ballot.
republican leaders then tried to reassure party conservatives by balancing the ticket with a youthful fiercely ambitious running mate richard m nixon a thirty nine year old california senator distinctive for his shrewd opportunism and combative temperament.
nixon was an aggressive a nti communist focused on exposing l eft wing subversives in the truman administration.
his dogged pursuit of the alger hiss spying case had brought him national prominence.
the republican platform declared that the democratic emphasis on containing communism was negative futile and misguided if elected eisenhower would roll back the communist threat by bringing genuine independence to the captive peoples of eastern europe.
the election of 1952 the presidential campaign featured contrasting personalities.
eisenhower was an international figure and a man of readily acknowledged decency and integrity.
his beaming smile and humble greatness won over the masses.
illinois governor adlai stevenson the democratic candidate was hardly known outside his home state.
eisenhower pledged to clean up the mess in washington then late in the campaign he promised to travel to korea to secure an early and honorable end to the prolonged conflict.
stevenson was outmatched.
although brilliant and witty he came across to most voters as more an intellectual than a leader republicans labeled him an egghead meant to suggest a balding professor with more intellect than common sense.
even truman grumbled that stevenson was too busy making up his mind whether he had to go to the bathroom or not on election night eisenhower triumphed in a landslide gathering nearly 34 million votes to stevensons 27 million.
the electoral vote was much more lopsided 442 to 89 stevenson even failed to win his home state of illinois.
more important by securing four southern states eisenhower had cracked the solidly democratic south.
yet voters liked eisenhower more than they liked other republican candidates.
in the 1952 election democrats kept control of most governorships lost control in the house by only eight seats and broke even in the senate.
throughout his second presidential term eisenhower would have to work with a democratic congress.
a middle way presidency eisenhower was the first professional soldier elected president since ulysses s grant in 1868 he promised to pursue a middle way between untrammeled freedom of the individual and the demands of the welfare of the whole nation he saw no need to dismantle all new deal and fair deal programs.
instead he wanted to end the excesses 1262 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 the election of 1952 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co sd ks ok nm wi mi me ma 16 ny ri 4 ct 8 nj 16 de 3 md 9 ia ne tx mn nh 4 vt 3 pa oh il in 25 wv va 27 13 mo 8 12 ky 10 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga 8 11 la fl electoral vote popular vote dwight d eisenhower republican 33 900 000 adlai e stevenson democrat 27 300 000 why was the contest between adlai stevenson and dwight d eisenhower so lopsided.
wwn64 why was eisenhowers victory in several southern states remarkable.
figure m28 1 first proof that had resulted from twenty years of democratic control of the white house.
he pledged to shrink the federal bureaucracy and make it more efficient while restoring the balance between the executive and legislative branches.
eisenhower also promised to reduce the national debt cut military expenses balance the federal budget and trim taxes.
at the same time however he insisted that workers had a right to form unions and bargain with management.
he added that employees needed to be paid enough to afford the comforts of a good life.
we a ll workers and farmers foremen and financiers technicians and b uilders all must produce produce more and produce yet more he said to make the american dream a reality and to ensure global stability.
peace would be maintained not by weapons of war but by wheat and cotton moderate republicanism 1263 by milk and wool by meat and by timber and by rice he hated the growing arms race because every gun that is made every warship launched every rocket fired signifies in the final sense a theft from those who hunger and are not fed those who are cold and are not clothed eisenhowers cautious personality and genial public face fit the prevailing mood of most voters.
he was a unifier not a divider he inspired trust sought consensus and avoided confrontation.
he also championed the nineteenth century view that congress should make policy and the president should carry it out.
dynamic conservatism at home eisenhower labeled his domestic program dynamic conservatism by which he meant being conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings he kept intact the basic structure of the new deal even convincing congress to establish a new federal department of health education and welfare and working with democrats in congress to extend social security benefits to millions of workers formerly excluded w hite collar professionals maids and sales clerks farmworkers and members of the armed forces.
eisenhower also approved increases in the minimum wage and additional public housing projects for low income occupants.
conservative republicans charged that he was being too liberal.
he told his brother edgar in 1954 that if the stupid right wing of the republican party tried to abolish social security and eliminate labor laws and farm programs you would not hear of that party again in our political history transportation improvements under eisenhower the federal government launched two huge construction projects the st lawrence seaway and the interstate highway system both of which resembled the huge public works projects constructed under the new deal during the 1930s.
the st lawrence seaway project in partnership with canada opened the great lakes to oceangoing ships.
the federal aid highway act 1956 created a national network of interstate highways to serve the needs of commerce and defense as well as the public.
the interstate highway system funded largely by federal gasoline taxes took twenty five years to construct and was the largest federal project in history.
it stretched for 47 000 miles and required 55 512 bridges.
highway construction generated what economists call multiplier effects it created jobs stimulated economic growth and spurred the tourism motor hotel motel billboard fast food and long haul trucking industries.
interstates transformed the way people traveled and where they lived and it 1264 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 postwar consumerism booming chain stores such as the super giant supermarket shown above began to dot the suburbs of 1950s america offering an outlet for the pent up consumerism of the postwar years.
the economy also benefited from the emergence of new technologies including the first generation of computers.
factories and industries became increasingly automated at the same time the oil boom in texas wyoming and oklahoma continued to provide low cost fuel to heat buildings and to power cars and trucks.
another reason for the r ecord breaking economic growth was the lack of foreign competition.
most of the other major industrial nations great britain france germany japan and the soviet u nion had been physically devastated during the second world war leaving american manufacturers with a virtual monopoly on international trade that lasted well into the 1950s.
the consumer culture the major catalyst for economic expansion after 1945 however was the unleashing of p ent up consumer demand from the depression and the war years.
what differentiated the postwar era from earlier periods of prosperity was the large number of people who shared in the rising standard of living.
between a people of plenty 1267 1947 and 1960 the average income for the working class increased by as much as it had in the previous fifty years.
more and more blue collar americans especially automotive and steel workers moved into the middle class.
george meany the leading union spokesman during the 1950s declared in 1955 that his members never had it so good americans had money to spend during the fifties and they did so with gusto becoming famous around the world for their carefree consumption.
in 1955 a marketing consultant stressed that the nation had come to view consumption a way of life the new economy required that we convert the buying and use of goods into religious rituals that we seek our spiritual satisfaction our ego satisfaction in consumption a buying spree innovations in financing made it easier to buy things.
the first credit card appeared in 1949 soon buying with plastic had become the new norm for millions of people.
personal indebtedness doubled in part because people were so confident about their economic future.
frugality became unpatriotic.
as television personality hugh downs remembered those were exciting days.
of hope and optimism.
when the sky was the limit what most americans wanted to buy after the second world war was a new house.
in 1945 only 40 percent of americans owned homes by 1960 the family modified the dynamics of american family life changed with the onslaught of new affordable products.
in this 1959 advertisement for tv dinners the family eats out of disposable containers in front of the television.
1268 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 tanned and confident.
he offered crisp answers that made him appear to be qualified for the nations highest office.
the morning after the debate his approval ratings skyrocketed.
kennedys political rise owed much to the public relations campaign engineered by his father joseph a self made tycoon with a genius for promotion.
in joseph kennedys view image was much more important than substance.
cant you get it into your head he told john that its not important what you really are.
the only important thing is what people think you are he assured family and friends that he would sell jack like soap flakes to j ump start his political career.
the elder kennedy hired talented writers to produce his sons two books paid a publisher to print them purchased tens of thousands of copies to make them best sellers and helped engineer his sons elections to the house and senate.
john kennedy was a relentless presidential campaigner traveling 65 000 miles visiting t wenty five states and making more than 350 speeches including an address to protestant ministers in texas in which he neutralized concerns about his being a roman catholic by stressing that the pope in rome would never tell the president should he be a catholic how to act in speech after speech kennedy said he was tired of waking up and reading about what soviet and cuban leaders were doing.
instead he wanted to read about what the u s president was doing to combat communism.
he wanted to develop a foreign policy that would break out of the confining assumptions of the cold war but as yet had no clear plan for doing so.
kennedy also worked to increase the registration of african american voters across the nation.
his response to the growing civil rights movement was ambivalent however.
like eisenhower kennedy believed racial unrest needed to be handled with caution rather than boldness.
to him racial justice was less an urgent moral crusade than a potential barrier to his election.
he understood the injustices of bigotry and segregation but he needed the votes of southern whites to win the presidency.
during the campaign kennedy won the hearts of many black voters by helping to get martin luther king jr out of a georgia jail after king had been unjustly convicted of trespassing in an a ll white restaurant.
ive got a suitcase of votes said kings appreciative father and im going to take them to mr kennedy and dump them in his lap on the sunday before election day a million leaflets describing kennedys effort to release king from prison were distributed in african american churches across the nation.
in november kennedy and his running mate powerful texas senator lyndon b johnson won one of the closest presidential elections in history.
their the new frontier 1313 the election of 1960 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co nm hi ak sd mn nh 4 vt 3 wi mi ia ny pa oh il in 25 wv 27 13 va ks mo 8 12 ky 10 nc tn 11 ok ar sc 7 1 al ga 8 ms 6 5 tx la fl ne me ma 16 ri 4 ct 8 nj 16 de 3 md 9 electoral vote popular vote john f kennedy democrat 34 200 000 richard m nixon republican 34 100 000 harry f byrd how did the election of 1960 represent a sea change in american presidential wwn64 figurepolitics.
m29 1 proof how did john f kennedy win the election in spite of winning fewer states first than richard m nixon.
margin was only 118 574 votes out of more than 68 million cast.
nixon won more states than kennedy but the democrat captured 70 percent of the black vote which proved decisive in at least three key states.
a vigorous new administration john f kennedy was the youngest person and first roman catholic elected president.
he had promised to get america moving again and he was eager to begin that effort.
at times he seemed s elf assured to the point of cockiness.
sure its a big job he told a reporter.
but i dont know anybody who can do it any better than i can that he had been elected by the narrowest of margins and had no working majority in congress did not faze him.
in his mind he was destined to be a great president.
1314 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 the clumsy effort to overthrow the cuban government was a complete failure.
it humiliated kennedy and elevated castro in the eyes of the world.
to his credit kennedy admitted that the bay of pigs invasion was a colossal mistake only later did he learn that the planners of the operation had assumed that he would commit american forces once the invasion effort had failed.
he said that after the initial disastrous reports from the bay of pigs we all looked at each other and asked how could we have been so stupid after the failed invasion kennedy never again trusted his trigger happy military and intelligence leaders.
the vienna summit just weeks after the bay of pigs invasion kennedy met soviet premier nikita khrushchev at a summit conference in vienna austria.
khrushchev badgered and bullied the young president bragged about the superiority of communism and threatened to take control of all of berlin the divided city inside communist east germany.
a stunned kennedy told the british prime minister that khrushchev was much more of a barbarian than he had expected.
he confided to a journalist that the summit was awful.
worst thing of my life.
he rolled right over m e he thinks im a f ool he thinks im weak when asked what he planned to do next kennedy replied i have to confront them the soviets someplace to show that were tough the first thing kennedy did upon returning to the white house was to request an estimate of how many americans might be killed in a nuclear war with the soviet union.
the answer was chilling 70 million.
kennedy desperate not to appear weak in the face of khrushchevs aggressive actions in germany asked congress for additional spending on defense and called up 156 000 members of the army reserve and national guard to protect west berlin.
he also ordered an armed military convoy to travel from west germany across east germany to west berlin to show the soviets that he would protect the city with force.
the soviets responded on august 13 1961 they stopped all traffic between east and west berlin and began erecting the t wenty seven mile long berlin wall to separate east berlin from west berlin where thousands of refugees were fleeing communism each week many of them the best and the brightest engineers doctors scientists and writers.
for the united states the wall became a powerful propaganda weapon in the cold war.
as kennedy said freedom has many difficulties and democracy is not perfect but we have never had to put up a wall to keep our people in the berlin wall demonstrated the soviets willingness to challenge american resolve in europe.
in response kennedy and secretary of defense robert mcnamara embarked upon the most intensive arms race in history increasing the number of nuclear missiles fivefold adding 300 000 men to the armed the new frontier 1319 severed ties two west berliners climb the newly constructed berlin wall to talk with a family member at an open window.
forces and creating the u s special forces green berets an elite group of commandos who specialized in guerrilla warfare and could provide a more flexible response than nuclear weapons to hot spots around the world.
the cuban missile crisis soon after taking office president kennedy predicted that we shall have to test anew whether a nation such as ours can endure it was an accurate prediction.
in the fall of 1962 nikita khrushchev and the soviets decided to challenge kennedy again.
to protect communist cuba from another american backed invasion and to show critics at home that he was not afraid of the americans khrushchev approved the secret installation of soviet missiles on the island nation.
the soviets felt they were justified in doing so because kennedy after the bay of pigs invasion had ordered that u s missiles with nuclear warheads be installed in turkey along the soviet border.
on october 16 1962 kennedy learned that photos taken two days earlier by u s spy planes showed some forty soviet missile sites and twenty five jet bombers in cuba.
we have some big trouble he alerted his brother bobby by phone.
over the next thirteen days perhaps the most dangerous two weeks in history kennedy and the national security council nsc considered several 1320 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 his special assistant on civil rights to end the freedom rides.
cant you get your goddamned friends off those buses.
stop them when kennedy suggested to several civil rights leaders that they allow things to cool off james farmer replied that blacks had been cooling off for a hundred years.
if we got any cooler wed be in the deep freeze louis martin an influential black newspaper publisher explained that negroes are getting ideas about securing equal rights they didnt have before kennedy asked where they were getting such ideas.
martin replied from you the activists finally forced the president to provide another bus which enabled them to renew the journey to new orleans.
when the new group of riders reached montgomery the capital of alabama they too were attacked.
the next night civil rights activists including martin luther king jr gathered at a montgomery church to honor the freedom riders.
but their meeting was interrupted by a rampaging mob of whites armed with rocks and firebombs.
ministers made frantic appeals to the white house.
kennedy responded by urging the alabama governor to intervene.
after midnight national guardsmen arrived to disperse the mob.
the freedom riders continued into mississippi where they were jailed.
they never made it to new orleans.
still the courage and principled resistance of the freedom riders and of federal judges whose rulings supported integration efforts prompted the interstate commerce commission icc in september 1961 to order that all interstate transportation facilities be integrated.
equally important the freedom riders kindled the growth of civil rights groups.
the experience of being assaulted and jailed galvanized the participants to become f ull time members while attracting more recruits.
the freedom rides were thus a crucial turning point in the civil rights movement.
white segregationists however remained violently opposed to racial equality.
in birmingham in september 1962 dr king was speaking at the annual meeting of the southern christian leadership conference when a white member of the american nazi party jumped to the stage and punched him in the face.
king simply dropped his hands and allowed the man to punch him again.
dont touch him king yelled.
we have to pray for him his self control and composure were as remarkable as his bravery.
king was determined as an aide said to love segregation to death his home was bombed three times and he was arrested fourteen times yet he kept telling people to use the weapon of nonviolence the breastplate of righteousness the armor of truth and just keep marching toward justice.
james meredith in the fall of 1962 james meredith an african american student and air force veteran whose grandfather had been a slave civil rights 1329 tried to enroll at the all white university of mississippi in oxford.
ross barnett the governor of mississippi described by time magazine as bitter a racist as inhabits the nation refused to allow meredith to register for classes.
the militantly stubborn barnett breathed scorching defiance he vowed to rot in jail before he will let one negro ever darken the sacred threshold of our white schools attorney general robert f kennedy then dispatched federal marshals to enforce the law.
when the marshals were assaulted with bricks bottles and steel pipes by a white mob shouting go to hell jfk president kennedy sent national guard troops.
their arrival ignited rioting that left two dead and dozens injured.
once the violence subsided however meredith was registered at the university.
only in america a reporter noted would the federal government send thousands of troops to enforce the right of an otherwise obscure citizen to attend a particular university birmingham in early 1963 in conjunction with the celebration of the hundredth anniversary of abraham lincolns emancipation proclamation martin luther king jr defied president kennedys wishes by organizing a bulls dogs eugene bull connor ordered birmingham police to unleash their dogs and clubs on civil rights demonstrators in may 1963.
1330 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 johnson and his advisers also believed that u s military force would defeat the viet cong fighting in south vietnam.
yet the president insisted that the american war effort not reach levels that would cause the chinese or soviets to become involved which meant as it turned out that a military victory was never possible.
the united states was not fighting to win the war but to prevent the north vietnamese and viet cong from winning and eventually force them to sign a negotiated settlement.
this meant that the united states would have to maintain a military presence as long as the enemy retained the will to fight.
as the war ground on opposition hidden a vietnamese mother hides her son and herself in the bushes at home grew fierce.
in 1965 three near my lai in 1965 after u s marines dozen college campuses began hosting murdered vietnamese villagers.
teach ins critical of the war effort.
professors would gather in classrooms or outside on the grass to discuss with students a better policy in vietnam.
the times must be a changing wrote the michigan state student newspaper.
in april 1965 some 20 000 students from campuses across the nation converged on washington d c where they picketed the white house before moving to the washington monument where they carried signs saying get out of saigon and into selma freedom now in vietnam war on poverty not people.
the crowd then went to the capitol where it presented congress with a petition demanding that the legislators end not extend the war in vietnam the following year senator j william fulbright of arkansas chairman of the senate foreign relations committee began congressional investigations into american policy in vietnam.
george f kennan the former state department diplomat who had inspired the containment policy told the committee that the containment doctrine was appropriate for europe but not for southeast asia which was not vital to american security.
such opposition to the war effort brought out the worst in johnson.
he labeled his political critics and antiwar protesters communists and used government agencies to punish them.
the tragedy of vietnam 1353 still the resistance to the escalating war grew.
by 1967 anti war demonstrations were commonplace.
americans began dividing into hawks who supported the war and doves who opposed it.
nightly television accounts of the fighting vietnam was the first war to receive extended television coverage and hence was dubbed the living room war called into question the accuracy of statements by military and government officials claiming the americans were winning.
johnson admitted that the situation was a mess.
there is no question about that.
i wish it was better too but he dug in his heels and insisted that there would be no withdrawal from vietnam.
between 1965 and 1968 u s warplanes dropped more bombs on vietnam than had fallen on all enemy targets in the second world war.
but johnson and his advisers badly underestimated the strength and determination of the north vietnamese and viet cong.
while the united states fought a limited war for limited objectives the vietnamese communists aided by the soviets and chinese fought an all out war for their very survival.
johnson became preoccupied with the day to day conduct of the war insisting on giving the final approval to bombing targets fretting over logistical details demanding information about enemy movements.
as westmoreland requested more and more soldiers johnson found it impossible to turn him down explaining that doing so would be like hearing the call from the alamo for help and answering that were not coming yet spending so much time dealing with the war was bitterly frustrating to johnson.
how could he be expected to help every child get an education to help every negro and every american citizen have an equal opportunity to help every family get a decent home and to help bring healing to the sick and dignity to the old if the war kept siphoning away the nations resources.
the tet offensive on january 31 1968 the first day of the vietnamese new year tet the viet cong unleashed surprise attacks on u s and south vietnamese forces throughout south vietnam.
within a few days american firepower turned the tables but the damage had been done.
although general westmoreland proclaimed the tet offensive a major defeat for the viet cong the political impact of the surprise attack in the united states was dramatic it decisively turned americans against the war.
the scope and intensity of the tet offensive contradicted upbeat claims by u s commanders.
what the hell is going on cbs newscaster walter cronkite demanded.
i thought we were winning this war after the tet offensive johnsons popularity plummeted as did the presidents confidence in his vietnam policy.
the country is demoralized he admitted.
most of the press is against us.
we have no support for the war 1354 chapter 30 rebellion and reaction 1960s and 1970s columbia riots mark rudd leader of sds at columbia university speaks to the media during student protests on campus in april 1968 most americans viewed the student radicals with fear and loathing.
vice president spiro agnew dismissed them as impudent snobs who characterize themselves as intellectuals richard nixon declared that the campus unrest represented the first major skirmish in a revolutionary struggle to seize the universities the weather underground a small group of radical militants called the revolutionary youth movement rym surged into prominence during the summer of 1969 they wanted to move political radicalism from protest to resistance at the sds convention in chicago on june 18 1969 rym members distributed a position paper titled you dont need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows a line from bob dylans song subterranean homesick blues 1965.
the document called for a white fighting force to ally with the black panthers and other radical movements to pursue the destruction of u s imperialism and achieve a classless world world communism by embracing revolutionary violence however the so called weathermen essentially committed revolutionary suicide.
they killed sds by abandoning the pacifist principles forever young the youth revolt 1369 that had originally inspired participants and given the movement moral legitimacy.
members of the weather underground took to the streets of chicago in october 1969 to assault police and trash the city.
their goal was to lead white kids into armed revolution almost 300 were arrested.
during the so called days of rage between september 1969 and may 1970 there were 250 bombings of draft board offices rotc buildings providing military training on university campuses federal government facilities and corporate headquarters.
in march 1970 three members of the weather underground in new york city died when a bomb they were making exploded prematurely.
the weathermen and other radical groups were forced underground by the aggressive efforts of federal law enforcement agencies and their energy diminished as nixon ended the draft and withdrew u s troops from vietnam.
mark rudd one of the organizers of the weather underground later confessed that their totally failed strategy was designed to destroy sds because it wasnt revolutionary enough for us.
i am not proud of this history his own conversion to revolutionary violence he explained had something to do with an exaggerated sense of my own importance.
i wanted to prove myself as a man a motive exploited by all armies and terrorist groups rudd called the intentional destruction of sds by the weathermen a crime their hyper militancy and bombings weakened the larger a nti war movement and demoralized many good people blowing things up got us isolated by the media and smashed by the fbi.
the counterculture looking back over the 1960s tom hayden the founder of sds recalled that most rebellious young americans were not narrowly political.
most were not so interested in attaining elected office but in changing lifestyles.
they were not interested in being opinion makers as in changing the climate of opinion hayden acknowledged that the shocking events of 1968 led disaffected young rebels so called h ippies to embrace the counterculture an unorganized rebellion against mainstream institutions values and behavior that focused more on cultural change than political activism.
hippies rejected the pursuit of wealth and careers and embraced plain living authenticity friendship peace and especially freedom.
in a 1967 cover story the editors of time magazine suggested that in their independence of material possessions and their emphasis on peacefulness and honesty hippies lead considerably more virtuous lives than the great majority of their fellow citizens.
in the end it may be that the hippies have not so much dropped out of american society as given it something to think about 1370 chapter 30 rebellion and reaction 1960s and 1970s shooting at kent state mary ann vecchio a teenage runaway participating in the anti war demonstration decries the murder of a kent state student after the national guard fired into the crowd.
who forced the protesters to disperse and then marched on city hall to raise the u s flag which had been lowered to half staff in mourning for the kent state victims.
thank god for the hard hats nixon exclaimed.
the following year in june 1971 the new york times began publishing excerpts from the history of the u s decision making process of vietnam policy a secret defense department study commissioned by robert mcnamara before his resignation as secretary of defense in 1968 the so called pentagon papers leaked to the press by daniel ellsberg a former defense department official who had been one of henry kissingers students at harvard confirmed what many critics of the war had long suspected congress and the public had not received the full story about the gulf of tonkin incident of 1964 and contingency plans for u s entry into the war were being drawn up even as president johnson was promising that combat troops would never be sent to vietnam.
although the pentagon papers dealt with events only up to 1965 the nixon administration blocked their publication arguing that their release would endanger national security and prolong the war.
by a vote of 6 to 3 the supreme court ruled against the government.
newspapers throughout the country began publishing the documents the next day.
nixon was furious.
he peace with honor ending the vietnam war 1397 ordered the fbi to find out who had leaked the pentagon papers to the media.
when the agency identified ellsberg as the culprit the president launched a crusade to destroy him including a botched effort to break in to his psychiatrists office.
war without end in the summer of 1972 henry kissinger renewed private meetings with the north vietnamese negotiators in paris.
he now dropped his insistence upon the removal of all north vietnamese troops from south vietnam before the withdrawal of the remaining u s troops.
on october 26 only a week before the u s presidential election kissinger announced that peace is at hand as it turned out however this was a cynical ploy to win votes.
several days earlier the thieu regime in south vietnam had rejected the kissinger plan for a cease fire fearful that allowing north vietnamese troops to remain in the south would virtually guarantee a communist victory.
the peace talks broke off on december 16 and two days later the newly reelected nixon ordered massive bombings of hanoi and haiphong the two largest cities in north vietnam.
nixon told kissinger that he now would stop at nothing to bring the enemy to his knees.
we have the power.
the only question is whether we have the will to use that power.
what distinguishes me from johnson is that i have the will in spades the so called christmas bombings and the simultaneous u s mining of north vietnamese harbors aroused worldwide protest.
yet the talks in paris soon resumed and on january 27 1973 the united states north and south vietnam and the viet cong signed an agreement on ending the war and restoring peace in vietnam known as the paris peace accords.
in fact it was a carefully disguised surrender that enabled the united states to end its combat role.
while nixon and kissinger claimed that the bombings had brought north vietnam to its senses in truth the north vietnamese never altered their basic stance they kept 150 000 troops in south vietnam and remained committed to the reunification of vietnam under one government.
what had changed was the willingness of the south vietnamese who were never allowed to participate in the negotiations to accept the agreement on the basis of nixons promise that the united states would respond with full force to any communist violation of the agreement.
by the time the paris peace accords were signed in 1973 another 20 000 americans had died since nixon had taken office in 1969 the morale of the u s military had been shattered and millions of southeast asians had been killed or wounded.
fighting soon broke out again in both vietnam and cambodia.
in the end nixon and kissingers diplomatic efforts gained noth 1398 chapter review summary youth revolt civil rights activism inspired a heightened interest in social causes during the sixties especially among the young.
students for a democratic society sds embodied the new left ideology and their ideas and tactics spread to many other campuses.
by 1970 a distinctive counterculture had emerged among disaffected youth and attracted young people hippies alienated by mainstream american values and institutions.
the inspirational effects of the civil rights movement the energy ideals tactics and courage of the civil rights movement inspired many other social reform movements during the sixties and seventies including the womens movement the red power movement among native americans and the united farm workers ufw.
the stonewall riots in new york city in 1969 marked a militant new era for gay rights.
reaction and domestic agenda richard nixons southern strategy drew conservative southern white democrats into the republican party.
as president he sought to slow the momentum of the civil rights movement including affirmative action programs giving special treatment to minorities and vetoed the extension of the voting rights act of 1968 but congress overrode his veto.
nixon did grudgingly support new federal environmental policies such as the creation of the environmental protection agency epa.
end of the vietnam war in 1968 nixon campaigned for the presidency pledging to secure peace with honor in vietnam but years would pass before the war ended.
nixon implemented what was called the vietnamization of the war which involved increasing economic and military aid to the south vietnamese reducing u s ground forces and escalating the bombing of north vietnam and cambodia while attempting to negotiate a cease fire agreement.
the publication of the pentagon papers in 1971 and the intense bombing of north vietnam in december 1972 aroused more protests but a month after the bombings began north and south vietnam agreed to a cease fire called the paris peace accords.
dtente nixons greatest accomplishments were in foreign policy.
he opened diplomatic relations with communist china and pursued dtente with the soviet union.
he and henry kissinger also helped ease tensions in the middle east.
watergate during the 1972 presidential campaign burglars were caught breaking into the democratic partys national campaign headquarters at the watergate complex in washington d c nixon tried to block congressional investigations which eventually led to calls for his impeachment for obstruction of justice.
nixon resigned in 1974 to avoid being impeached.
he was succeeded by vice president gerald ford whose presidency was undermined by economic struggles international incidents and his controversial decision to pardon nixon.
chronology students for a democratic society sds founded united farm workers ufw established vietnam war expands national organization for women now founded 1967 six day war in middle east richard m nixon elected president june 1969 stonewall riots in new york city august 1969 woodstock music festival attracts 400 000 people epa created and clean air bill passed shooting of students at kent state university ratification of the twenty sixth amendment nixon ends draft begins withdrawing troops from vietnam nixon wins reelection and visits communist china nixon visits ussr and signs salt i treaty 1972 1974 watergate scandal unfolds january 1973 the united states north and south vietnam and the viet cong agree to a cease fire supreme court overturns a nti abortion laws in roe v wade gerald ford becomes president after nixons resignation april 1975 saigon falls to the north vietnamese key terms new left p 1365 counterculture p 1369 womens movement p 1375 roe v wade p 1377 united farm workers ufw p 1381 red power p 1382 stonewall riots p 1384 affirmative action p 1385 environmental protection agency epa p 1391 stagflation p 1391 vietnamization p 1393 dtente p 1401 strategic arms limitation treaty salt i p 1403 watergate 1972 1974 p 1405 war powers act 1973 p 1409 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
conservative revival 1977 1990 feels good to be right this proud republican and reagan supporter lets his cowboy hat adorned with campaign buttons speak for him at the 1980 republican national convention.
held in detroit michigan the convention nominated former california governor ronald reagan who promised to make america great again d uring the seventies the united states lost much of its s elf confidence as it confronted difficult lessons about its power and resources and the pitfalls of greed and corruption.
the vietnam war the watergate scandal and the spike in world oil prices interest rates and consumer prices revealed the limits of american power prosperity and virtue.
for a nation accustomed to economic growth and spreading prosperity the frustrating persistence of stagflation and gasoline shortages undermined national optimism.
in july 1976 as the united states celebrated the bicentennial of its independence many people were downsizing their expectations of the american dream.
jimmy carter the first president from the lower south took office in 1977 promising a government that would be competent as well as decent open fair and compassionate but after four years as president carter had little to show for his efforts.
the economy remained sluggish consumer prices continued to increase at historic levels and failed efforts to free americans held hostage in iran prompted critics including democrats to denounce the administration as indecisive and inept.
in the end carters inability to mobilize national support for an ill fated energy program and his call for a time of national austerity revealed both his ineffective legislative skills and his misreading of the public mood.
the republicans capitalized by electing ronald reagan president in 1980 where carter had denounced the evils of unregulated capitalism reagan focus questions 1 why did jimmy carter have such limited success as americas thirty ninth president.
2 what were the factors that led to the election of ronald reagan the rise of the conservative movement and the resurgence of the republican party.
3 what is reaganomics.
what were its effects on american society and economy.
4 how did reagans soviet strategy help end the cold war.
5 what were the social and economic issues and innovations that emerged during the 1980s.
6 what was the impact of the end of the cold war and the efforts of president george h w bush to create a p ost cold war foreign policy.
1416 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 organization plo arab christians syrian invaders cast as peacekeepers and israelis responding to plo attacks across the border.
in 1982 israeli forces pushed the plo from southern lebanon all the way north to beirut and then began shelling plo strongholds in beirut.
the united states sent a special ambassador to negotiate a settlement.
israeli troops moved into beirut and looked the other way when christian militiamen slaughtered muslim women and children in palestinian refugee camps.
french italian and u s forces then moved into lebanon as peacekeepers but in such small numbers as to become targets themselves.
angry muslims kept them constantly harassed.
american warships and planes responded by shelling and bombing muslim positions in the highlands behind beirut thereby increasing muslim resentment.
by 1983 israel had driven the plo from beirut but it made the capital city even more unstable.
in april 1983 islamic suicide bombers drove a truck laden with explosives into the u s embassy compound in beirut detonated it and killed forty people including seventeen americans.
on october 23 1983 an islamic suicide bomber attacked the u s marine headquarters at the beirut airport the explosion left 241 americans and 58 frenchmen dead.
in early 1984 reagan announced that the u s marines remaining in lebanon would be redeployed to warships offshore.
the israeli forces pulled back to southern lebanon while the syrians remained in eastern lebanon.
bloody anarchy remained a way of life in a formerly peaceful country.
grenada fortune as it happened presented reagan the chance for an easy triumph closer to home a rescue mission that eclipsed news of the debacle in lebanon.
on the tiny caribbean island of grenada the smallest independent country in the western hemisphere a leftist government had admitted cuban workers to build a new airfield and signed military agreements with communist countries.
in 1983 an even more radical military council seized power.
appeals from the governments of neighboring islands led reagan to order 1 900 marines to invade the island depose the new government and evacuate a small group of american students at grenadas medical school.
the un general assembly condemned the action but it was popular among grenadans and their neighbors and immensely popular in the united states.
although a lopsided affair the decisive action served as notice to latin american revolutionaries that reagan might use military force elsewhere in the region.
the iran contra affair during the fall of 1986 democrats regained control of the senate with a 55 to 45 majority.
they also picked up 6 seats in the house to increase their already comfortable margin to 259 to 176 an a nti soviet foreign policy 1439 these results were less a referendum on reagan than they were a response to the qualities of the particular candidates and particular local and state issues.
whatever the reason the 1986 elections meant that reagan would face an oppositional congress during the last two years of his presidency.
what boded worse reports surfaced in late 1986 that the united states had been secretly selling arms to u s hating iran which reagan had called an outlaw state in the hope of securing the release of american hostages held in lebanon by extremist groups sympathetic to iran.
such action contradicted reagans insistence that his administration would never negotiate with terrorists.
the disclosures angered americas allies as well as many americans who vividly remembered the 1979 iranian takeover of the embassy in tehran.
over the next several months revelations emerged of a complicated series of covert activities carried out by administration officials.
at the center of what came to be called the i ran contra affair was marine lieutenant colonel oliver north a national security council aide who specialized in counterterrorism.
working from the basement of the white house north had been secretly selling military supplies to iran and using the proceeds to support the contra rebels in nicaragua at a time when congress had voted to ban such aid.
norths illegal activities it turned out had been approved by national security adviser robert mcfarlane mcfarlanes successor admiral john poindexter and cia director william casey.
both secretary of state george shultz and secretary of defense caspar weinberger criticized the arms sales to iran but their objections were ignored and they were thereafter kept in the dark about what was going o n as was reagan.
after information about the secret dealings surfaced north and others erased incriminating computer files and destroyed documents.
mcfarlane attempted suicide before being convicted of withholding information from congress poindexter resigned north described by the white house as a loose cannon was fired.
casey who denied any connection to the clumsy operation left the cia and died shortly thereafter from a brain tumor.
facing a barrage of criticism reagan appointed a three member commission led by former republican senator john tower to investigate the iran contra hearings admiral john scandal.
the tower commission issued poindexter listens warily to a question from the congressional investigation a devastating report early in 1987 that committee on july 21 1987 placed much of the responsibility for 1440 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 senator lamented there is a total lack of courage among those of us in the congress to do what we all know has to be done the poor the eighties were years of vivid contrast.
despite unprecedented prosperity homelessness became the most acute social issue.
a variety of causes had led to a shortage of low cost housing.
the government had given up on building public housing u rban renewal programs had demolished blighted areas but provided no housing for those who were displaced and owners had abandoned unprofitable buildings in poor neighborhoods or converted them into expensive condominiums a process called gentrification.
in addition after new medications allowed for the release of some mentally ill patients from institutions many of them ended up on the streets because the promised m ental health services failed to materialize.
drug and alcohol abuse were rampant among the homeless mostly unemployed single adults.
a quarter of them had spent time in mental institutions some 40 percent had spent time in jail a third were delusional.
the aids epidemic act up.
members of the influential aids activist group act up.
protest a new orleans convention center where president reagan was scheduled to speak in 1988 the protester in the front holds a sign which reads he kills me still another group of outcasts included those suffering from a newly identified disease called aids acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
at the beginning of the eighties public health officials had reported that gay men and intravenous drug users were especially at risk for developing aids.
people contracted the human immunodeficiency virus hiv which causes aids by coming into contact with the blood or body fluids of an infected person.
those infected with the virus showed signs of extreme fatigue developed a strange combination of infections and soon died.
the reagan administration showed little interest in aids in part because it was initially viewed as a gay disease.
the presidency of george h w bush 1447 patrick buchanan who served as reagans director of communications said that homosexuals had declared war on nature and now nature is extracting an awful retribution buchanan and others convinced reagan not to engage the hiv aids issue.
by 2000 aids had claimed almost 300 000 american lives.
nearly 1 million americans were carrying the deadly virus and it had become the leading cause of death among men ages twenty five to forty four.
the presidency of george h w bush during 1988 ronald reagans final year in office his influence waned.
his claim that government is the problem not the solution was losing its appeal and people were ready for a new approach to governing.
kevin phillips a republican strategist explained that during the 1986 congressional elections voters chose candidates who promised to make the government work for the public good.
even conservatives had come to realize that hey we need something from government after all reagans t wo term vice president george h w bush won the republican presidential nomination in 1988 because he pledged to insist on ethical government be a more hands on president than reagan and promote a more compassionate conservatism the prominent republican mayor of indianapolis indiana william hudnut observed that republicans were moving away from the laissez faire approach of ronald reagan to one that takes a more active more compassionate approach to those in need it was time to move away from s elf congratulation and deal more seriously with the thorny problems of i nner city poverty homelessness and drug abuse.
george h w bush his son born into a prominent new george w bush would also serve as england family the son of a u s sena president making them the second tor george h w bush had at the age father son presidential duo in history the first was john adams and john of eighteen enlisted in the u s navy quincy adams.
at the start of the second world war 1448 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present americas changing population as the twenty first century dawned the united states began experiencing dramatic social changes.
in 2015 the countrys population surpassed 322 million more than 80 percent of whom lived in cities or suburbs.
even more important the nations racial and ethnic composition was changing rapidly.
in 1980 the population was 80 percent white.
by 2015 that percentage had fallen below 63 percent.
in 2005 hispanics became the nations largest minority group.
in 1980 hispanics were 6 percent in 2015 that number had tripled to 18 percent and was growing rapidly.
more than 56 million americans were hispanic in origin and a third of them were under the age of eighteen.
african americans were at 13 percent asians about 8 percent and native americans 1 percent.
the rate of increase among those four groups was twice what it had been during the 1980s.
yet the fastest growing group in the nation were the nearly 10 million who described themselves as multiracial representing more than 3 percent of the entire population.
the primary cause of this dramatic change in the nations ethnic mix was a surge of immigration.
in 2015 the united states had more foreign born residents than ever before more than 45 million 11 million of whom were undocumented immigrants formerly classified as illegal aliens.
in the first decade of the twenty first century the united states became home to more than twice as many immigrants as all other countries combined.
for the first time the majority of immigrants came not from europe but from other parts of the world asia latin america and africa.
mexicans made up the largest share of hispanics followed by puerto ricans and cubans.
asian americans increased their numbers at a faster rate than any other ethnic group largely because of a surge in chinese immigrants.
the nations changing ethnic composition has had an increasingly significant impact on social life.
in 1980 hispanic americans lived mainly in five states california arizona new mexico texas and florida.
by 2014 every state had a rapidly growing hispanic population.
demographers projected that by 2044 whites would become a minority in the united states.
immigration also is having potent political effects as almost 1 million hispanics reach voting age each year.
hispanics are usually catholic and tend to vote democratic.
in 1980 there were six hispanic americans serving in the u s congress.
by 2010 there were more than five times as many.
in 1992 hispanics constituted only 2 percent of american voters by 2014 they were 10 percent.
americas changing population 1461 over the quota under the radar large numbers of chinese risked their lives to gain entry to the united states during the late twentieth century.
a freighter carrying undocumented immigrants ran aground near rockaway beach new york in june 1993 forcing its undocumented passengers to swim ashore.
only 23 percent of baby boomers born during and after the second world war consider the surge in american diversity a change for the better they worry that hispanics will always be a race apart from m ainstream american culture a permanent underclass of people tied closely to their ancestral homelands.
yet such concerns are countered by growing evidence that hispanics are integrating themselves into american society and embracing its ideals.
high school graduation and college enrollment rates among hispanics are rising teen pregnancy is falling and more and more are learning english.
in recent years more than a quarter of hispanic marriages have involved a non hispanic partner.
far from being a disaster the growing hispanic population is providing the nation with a surge of youthful energy and vitality and demonstrating such traditional american attributes as self reliance rugged individualism thrift close family ties strong religious beliefs disproportionate participation in the military and an ethic of hard work.
1462 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present and legitimacy of programs designed to benefit a particular race gender or ethnic group.
legislative breakthrough after the surprising 1994 republican takeover of congress bill clinton shrewdly resolved to save his presidency by reinforcing his claim that he was a centrist he co opted much of the energy of the conservative movement by announcing that the era of big government is over and by reforming the federal system of welfare payments to the poor created during the 1930s under the new deal.
late in the summer of 1996 the republican congress passed a comprehensive welfare reform measure that clinton signed after some revisions.
the personal responsibility and work opportunity act of 1996 prwoa illustrated clintons efforts to move the democratic party away from the liberalism it had promoted since the 1930s.
prwoa abolished the aid to families with dependent children afdc program which provided poor families with almost 8 000 a year and replaced it with the temporary assistance for needy families program which limited the duration of welfare payments to two years in an effort to encourage unemployed people to get self supporting jobs.
liberal democrats bitterly criticized clintons welfare reform deal.
yet the new approach to supporting the poor was a statistical success.
both the number of welfare recipients and poverty rates declined during the late nineties leading the editors of the l eft leaning new republic to report that the prwoa had worked much as its designers had hoped the 1996 campaign the republican takeover of congress in 1994 gave the party hope that they could prevent president clintons reelection.
after clinching the republican presidential nomination in 1996 senate majority leader bob dole resigned his seat to devote his attention to the campaign.
clinton however maintained a large lead in the polls.
with an improving economy and no major f oreign policy crises cultural and personal issues surged into prominence.
concern about doles age seventy three and his gruff public personality as well as tensions between economic conservatives and social conservatives over volatile issues such as abortion and gun control hampered doles efforts to generate widespread support especially among independent voters.
clinton was able to frame the election as a stark choice between doles desire to build a bridge to the past and clintons promise to build a bridge to the future.
on november 5 1996 clinton won a second term with an electoral vote victory of 379 to 159 and 49 percent of the popular vote.
dole received 41 percent of the popular vote and third party candidate ross perot got 8 percent.
the clinton presidency 1467 the new economy bill clintons presidency benefited from a prolonged period of unprecedented economic prosperity.
during his last three years in office 1998 2000 the federal government generated unheard of budget surpluses.
what came to be called the new economy featured h igh flying electronics computer software telecommunications cellular phones cable tv etc.
and e commerce internet firms called dot com companies.
these dynamic tech enterprises helped the economy set records in every area low inflation low unemployment corporate profits and personal fortunes.
the stock market value of u s companies nearly tripled and people began to claim that the new economy defied the b oom and bust cycles of the previous hundred years.
alan greenspan the federal reserve board chairman suggested that we have moved beyond history into an economy that seemed only to grow.
he would be proven wrong.
globalization another major feature of the new economy was g lobalization.
the end of the cold war and the disintegration of the soviet union opened many new opportunities for u s companies in international trade.
in addition new globe spanning communication technologies and massive new container carrying ships and cargo jets shortened time and distance enabling united states based multinational companies to conduct more business abroad.
bill clinton accelerated the process of globalization.
the global economy he said is giving more of our own people and billions around the world the chance to work and live and raise their families with dignity he especially welcomed the world wide web which opened the internet to everyone and by doing so greatly accelerated u s dominance of the international economy.
by 2000 more than a third of the production of u s multinational companies was occurring abroad compared with only 9 percent in 1980 in 1970 there were 7 000 american multinational companies by 2000 the number had soared to 63 000 many u s multinational companies pursued controversial outsourcing strategies by which they moved their production offshore to nations such as mexico and china to take advantage of lower labor costs and fewer workplace and environmental regulations.
at the same time many european and asian companies especially automobile manufacturers built large plants in the united states to reduce the shipping expenses required to get their products to american markets.
the u s economy had become internationalized to such an extent that global concerns exercised an e ver increasing influence on domestic and foreign policies.
1468 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present a single nation but would be divided into two states a muslim croat federation controlling 51 percent of the t erritory and a bosnian serb republic controlling the rest.
basic human rights would be restored and free elections would be held.
to enforce the agreement 60 000 nato peacekeeping troops were dispatched to bosnia.
in 1998 the balkan tinderbox flared up again this time in the yugoslav mcrubble pro miloevic residents province of kosovo which had long of belgrade yugoslavia destroy the been considered sacred ground by storefront of a mcdonalds restaurant christian serbs although 90 percent in 1999 to protest nato and the united states airstrikes on their homeland.
of the 2 million kosovars were in fact albanian muslims.
in 1998 yugoslav president slobodan miloevi began a program of ethnic cleansing whereby yugoslav forces burned albanian villages murdered men raped women and displaced hundreds of thousands of muslim kosovars.
on march 24 1999 nato relying heavily upon u s military resources and leadership launched air strikes against yugoslavian military targets.
after seventy two days of bombardment miloevi sued for peace on natos terms in part because his russian allies had finally abandoned him.
an agreement was reached on june 3 1999 and clinton pledged extensive u s aid to help the yugoslavs rebuild.
the scandal machine for a time clintons preoccupation with foreign crises helped deflect attention from a growing number of investigations into his personal conduct.
during his first term he was dogged by old charges about investments he and his wife had made in whitewater a planned resort development in arkansas.
the project turned out to be a fraud and a failure and the clintons were accused of conspiring with the developer although they lost 40 000 in the enterprise.
in 1994 kenneth starr a sanctimonious former judge and a conservative republican was appointed to investigate the whitewater case.
starr did not uncover any evidence that the clintons were directly involved in the whitewater fraud but in the course of another investigation he happened upon evidence of a white house sex scandal.
for years rumors had cir the clinton presidency 1471 culated about the presidents dalliances with women.
james carville clintons political consultant once asked clinton about his sexual risk taking.
well clinton replied they havent caught me he spoke too soon.
monicagate between 1995 and 1997 clinton had engaged in a sexual affair with a t wenty two year old white house intern monica lewinsky.
more disturbing he had pressed her to lie about their relationship even under oath.
the news devastated the first family and staggered the white house staff.
clintons press secretary dee dee myers could not believe that her boss would risk his presidency for something so frivolous so reckless so small clinton initially denied the charges telling the nation in late january 1998 that i did not have sexual relations with that woman miss lewinsky yet the scandal would not disappear.
for the next thirteen months the media circus surrounding the monicagate or zippergate affair captured public attention.
after the watergate affair in 1973 1974 journalists have loved to attach the suffix gate to scandals.
other women stepped forward to claim that clinton had engaged in improper relations with them over the years charges that the president denied.
the first lady hillary clinton grimly stood by her husband amid his self inflicted agony declaring that the sexual rumors were the result of a vast right wing conspiracy to bring him down.
with the economy booming clintons public approval ratings actually rose during 1998 in august however the scandal revived when lewinsky agreed to provide a federal grand jury with a detailed account of her relationship with the president.
soon thereafter clinton became the first president to testify before a grand jury.
on august 17 the self pitying defiant president admitted having had inappropriate intimate physical contact with lewinsky that was wrong he also acknowledged that he had misled the american people.
in his eagerness to keep himself in office however he insisted that he had done nothing illegal.
public reaction was mixed.
a majority expressed sympathy for the president because of his public humiliation and because the lewinsky affair was a private act of consensual sex.
others however were eager to see the president resign or be impeached.
triumphant republicans were convinced they could impeach the president.
the impeachment of clinton on september 9 1998 enneth starr the special prosecutor submitted to congress t hirty six boxes k of documents that included a disturbingly graphic account of the presidents white house encounters with lewinsky.
the report claimed that there was substantial and creditable evidence of presidential wrongdoing perjury 1472 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present and the high tech american economy dominated global trade.
but the joyous mood did not last.
powerful and unstable new forces were emerging the most dangerous of which were sophisticated global networks of menacing terrorists eager to disrupt and destroy american values and institutions.
a disputed election the presidential election of 2000 proved to be one of the closest and most controversial in history.
the two m ajor party candidates vice president albert gore jr the democrat and texas governor george w bush son of the former republican president offered contrasting views on the role of the federal government tax cuts environmental policies and the best way to preserve social security and medicare.
gore a tennessee native and harvard graduate whose father had been a prominent senator favored an active federal government that would do much the election of 2000 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co sd ks ok nm ak nh 4 vt 3 wi mi ia ne tx hi mn pa oh il in 21 wv va 22 12 mo 5 13 ky 8 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga la fl george w bush republican al gore democrat figure m32 1 first proof ma 12 ri 4 ct 8 nj 15 de 3 md 10 dc 2 electoral vote popular vote 50 500 000 why was the 2000 presidential election so close.
was the conflict over the election results resolved.
wwn64 how ny me 51 000 000 a chaotic start to a new century 1475 more to protect the environment.
bush campaigned on a theme of compassionate conservatism promised to restore honor and dignity to the white house and proposed to transfer power from the federal government to the states.
a born again evangelical christian with degrees from yale university and harvard business school bush urged tax cuts and a more humble foreign policy that would end u s efforts to install democratic governments in undemocratic societies nation building.
the bitter tone of party politics called polarization continued to inspire candidates at the extremes to run as third party candidates.
two independent candidates added zest to the recount in yet another recount the 2000 presidential campaign the col on november 24 2000 judge robert orful conservative commentator patrick rosenberg examines a ballot with buchanan and the liberal consumer a magnifying glass.
that floridas activist ralph nader representing the voting machines were so unreliable introduced doubt about the legitimacy green party.
of the close results.
the november election created high drama.
the television networks i nitially reported that gore had narrowly won the state of florida and its decisive twenty five electoral votes.
later in the evening however they reversed themselves saying that florida was too close to call.
in the chaotic e arly morning hours the networks declared that bush had been elected president.
the final tally showed bush with a r azor thin lead but florida law required a recount.
for the first time in 125 years the results of a presidential election remained in doubt for weeks after the voting.
as a painstaking hand recount proceeded supporters of bush and gore sparred in the courts.
each side accused the other of trying to steal the e lection.
the political drama lasted for five weeks until on d ecember 12 a b itterly divided u s supreme court decided with a 5 4 m ajority ruling that the recount was to be halted.
bush was declared the winner in florida by 537 votes.
gore had amassed a 540 000 vote lead nationwide but l osing florida meant he lost in the electoral college by two votes.
although gore strongly disagreed with the 1476 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the taliban a young woman shows her face in public for the first time in five years after northern alliance troops capture kabul the capital of afghanistan in november 2001 the strict sharia law enforced by the taliban required that women be covered from head to foot.
the bush doctrine in the fall of 2002 president bush unveiled a dramatic new national security policy.
the bush doctrine said that the growing menace posed by shadowy networks of terrorist groups and unstable rogue nations with weapons of mass destruction wmds required the united states at times to use preemptive military action.
if we wait for threats to fully materialize or wait for allies to join america he explained we will have waited too long.
in the world we have entered the only path to safety is the path of action.
and this nation will act the dangerously sweeping bush doctrine promised to extend the benefits of freedom across the globe.
for all peoples everywhere without reference to the potential human and financial cost of such an open ended commitment.
the second iraq war during 2002 and 2003 iraq emerged as the focus of the bush administrations policy of preemptive military action.
three of the presidents most influential advisers all neocons vice president cheney secretary of defense rumsfeld and deputy defense secretary paul wolfowitz urged the president to use u s power to reshape the world in the american mold.
this included sponsoring regime change in nations lacking political and economic freedom in order to create a new world order friendly to our security our prosperity and our principles they convinced bush that a chaotic start to a new century 1481 the dictatorial regime of saddam hussein and his loyal sunni faction of muslims who lorded over the nations shiite majority and the ethnic kurds in the north represented a grave and gathering danger because of its supposed possession of biological and chemical weapons of mass destruction.
some in congress urged caution.
republican senator chuck hagel of nebraska a vietnam veteran warned that many of those who want to rush this country into war and think it would be so quick and easy dont know anything about war the white house responded trust us on march 17 2003 bush issued hussein an ultimatum he and his sons must leave iraq within f orty eight hours or face a united s tates led invasion.
hussein refused.
two days later on march 19 american and british forces the coalition of the willing attacked.
france and germany refused to participate in what they viewed as unnecessary american aggression.
operation iraqi freedom according to bush and his advisers would quickly topple hussein with overwhelming military force and then usher in a new era of u s style democracy in iraq.
the second iraq war began with a massive bombing campaign followed by a fast moving invasion from bases in kuwait.
some 250 000 american soldiers sailors and marines were joined by 50 000 british troops.
on april 9 after three weeks of intense fighting amid sweltering heat and blinding sandstorms u s forces captured baghdad the capital of iraq.
saddam husseins regime and his inept demoralized army collapsed a week later.
the six week war came at a cost of fewer than 200 combat deaths among the 300 000 allied troops.
more than 2 000 iraqi soldiers were killed civilian casualties numbered in the tens of thousands.
president bush staged a celebration on a u s aircraft carrier at which he announced victory under a massive banner proclaiming mission accomplished but he spoke too soon the initial military triumph carried with it the seeds of deception and disaster for no weapons of mass destruction were to be found in iraq.
secretary of state colin powell later admitted that he had been misled about the issue.
bush said that the absence of wmds in iraq left him with a sickening feeling for he knew that his primary justification for the war had evaporated.
rebuilding iraq it proved far easier to win the brief war than to rebuild iraq in americas image.
unprepared u s officials faced the daunting task of installing a democratic government in a nation fractured by religious feuds and ethnic tensions made worse by the breakdown in law and order caused by the allied invasion.
the successful invasion triggered a vicious civil war in iraq and the disintegration of law and order.
looting and violence engulfed the war torn country large parts of which fell under the control of 1482 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present rio vista california with an 816 000 deficit this northern california city filed for bankruptcy and pulled the plug on its massive 750 home housing development in november 2008 here model homes stand eerily in a blank landscape of sidewalks and cul de sacs.
had weakened the republican party strained the nations military eroded american prestige and created the largest budget deficits in history by cutting taxes while increasing spending.
i inherited a recession and im ending on a recession bush admitted at one of his last press conferences.
a historic new presidency george bushs unpopularity excited democrats about regaining the white house in 2008 the early f ront runner for the nomination was new york senator hillary rodham clinton the spouse of ex president bill clinton.
like her husband she displayed an impressive command of policy issues and mobilized a well funded campaign team.
and as the first woman with a serious chance of gaining the presidency she had widespread support among voters eager for female leadership.
in the end however an overconfident clinton was upset in the d emocratic primaries and caucuses by barack obama of illinois a l ittle known first term senator.
young handsome and intelligent a vibrant mixture of i dealism and a historic new presidency 1489 pragmatism coolness and passion obama was an inspiring speaker who attracted huge crowds by promising a politics of hope he mounted an innovative internet based campaign directed at grassroots voters donors and volunteers.
in early june 2008 he gained enough delegates to secure the nomination with senator joseph biden of delaware as his running mate.
obama was the first african amer the clinton campaign democratic ican presidential nominee of either presidential candidate senator hillary rodham clinton speaks at a rally in fort party the gifted biracial son of a white worth texas.
mother from kansas and a black father from kenya who left the household and returned to africa when barack was a toddler.
obama eventually graduated from columbia university before earning a law degree from harvard.
the forty seven year old senator presented himself as a deal maker who could inspire unite and forge bipartisan collaborations.
candidate obama radiated poise confidence and energy.
he told an aide that he didnt need to be president.
it turns out that being barack obama is a pretty good gig in and of itself he and his strategists were able to turn his vitality and political inexperience into strengths at a time when voter disgust with politics was widespread.
by contrast his republican opponent s eventy two year old arizona senator john mccain was the oldest presidential candidate in history.
as a twenty five year veteran of congress and a leading senator mccain had developed a reputation as a bipartisan maverick willing to work with democrats to achieve key legislative goals.
on november 4 2008 barack obama made history by becoming the first person of color to be elected presi barack obama the president elect and his family wave to supporters in dent.
he won the popular vote by 53 per chicagos grant park.
cent to 46 percent and the e lectoral 1490 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present to the judges this seemed to prove that there was no evidence of continuing racial discrimination.
todays laws must be justified by current needs chief justice john roberts wrote.
soon after the courts ruling counties and states in the south pushed through new laws that had the effect of making it more difficult for minorities and poor people to vote by reducing voting hours or requiring that drivers licenses be shown on voting days.
the 2012 election as the november 2012 presidential election approached one thing was certain it would be the most expensive election ever in part because the supreme court ruled in citizens united v federal elections committee 2010 that corporations could spend as much as they wanted in support of candidates.
after a divisive battle in the primaries mitt romney a former corporate executive and massachusetts governor won the republican nomination.
the main question for romney was whether the s till powerful religious right would allow him to sidestep tough social issues the question for president obama was whether he could sidestep his failure to restore prosperity.
two factors injured romneys candidacy toward the end of the most expensive campaign in history 6 billion.
the first was his decision to please right wing voters by opposing immigration reforms that might allow undocumented immigrants a pathway to citizenship.
the second was the disclosure that he had privately told a group of wealthy contributors that he did not care about the 47 percent of americans who failed to take personal responsibility and care for their lives it was not his job to worry about those who did not pay federal income taxes because they were dependent on federal government programs.
the obama campaign seized on the impolitic statement and demonized the wealthy romney as an uncaring elitist.
on election day obama won with 66 million votes to romneys 61 million and 332 electoral votes to 206 nearly 60 percent of white voters chose romney.
but the nations fastest growing groups hispanics asian americans and african americans voted overwhelmingly for obama as did c ollege educated women.
david frum a prominent republican speechwriter and columnist confessed that his party was becoming increasingly isolated and estranged from modern america obama began his second term on an assertive note.
in january 2013 the defense department lifted its ban on women serving in combat.
the following month obama announced that more u s troops would be withdrawn from afghanistan over the next year leaving 34 000 by early 2014 it had become americas longest war.
a historic new presidency 1503 obamacare on the defensive president obamas proudest achievement the affordable care act was so massive in its scope and complicated in its implementation that it took four years before it was ready to roll out in the fall of 2013 the federal online health insurance exchange where people without insurance could sign up opened with great fanfare.
obama assured americans that using the online registration system would be real simple it was not.
on october 1 millions tried to sign up only six succeeded.
as it turned out the website had never been properly tested and it was hobbled with technical glitches.
it also became evident that obama had misled the nation about key elements of the plan.
in campaigning for its passage in 2010 he had repeatedly told voters that if they liked their current health insurance plan they could under obamacare keep that insurance.
end of story as it turned out however many with substandard policies saw them canceled by insurers.
congressional republicans as well as many democrats condemned the president for his misleading statements and inept management of his signature program.
during the winter of 2013 2014 the r epublican led house of representatives repeatedly tried and failed to overturn the aca at one point passing a federal budget that would have stripped the new health care program of its funding.
when the president refused to sign the bill the federal government some 800 000 employees shut down after the existing budget expired on september 30 for sixteen days every nonessential federal agency was closed costing the government 2 billion.
the republicans shutdown strategy failed however as it had in 1995 when citizen outrage was directed not at president clinton but at republican legislators.
in response to widespread criticism and the threat of global economic repercussions house republicans on october 16 passed a revised senate approved budget that removed the a nti aca provision.
the conservative radio commentator rush limbaugh described the republican shutdown as one of the greatest political disasters ive ever seen democrats had little time to celebrate however.
by november 2013 some 57 percent of voters said they opposed obamacare in part because the program benefited only a quarter of the population the uninsured and the underinsured and obamas job approval ratings had plunged.
it had taken the president weeks to acknowledge the botched roll out of obamacare we created this problem we didnt need to create he said to aides.
and its our own doing and its our most important initiative and nobody is madder than me eventually the aca website was fixed and by august 2014 more than 9 million people well above the original target number had signed up for 1504.

chapter review breaking away what were some of the social problems facing britain in the 16th and 17th centuries that helped push english colonists to cross the atlantic.
the colony and ethnic rivalries shaped the politics of new york for decades.
in 1681 charles ii granted william penn a quaker a charter to establish pennsylvania.
penns guarantee to respect all christian settlers liberty of conscience drew immigrants from across northern europe.
p 44 quakers in america between 1580 and 1650 an expanding population strained englands agrarian economy.
competition for food and land threatened to disrupt law and order and drove many people to migrate from rural areas to london or across the atlantic.
p 30 te nn es s a fe roa m tuscarora no n ke ca r ia north pe ee ch carolina la pa cherokee catawba ap r r coo sa hattahoochee.
rr georgia w r ca south carolina yamasee georgeto charles town savannah how did the barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the carolinas.
about half the early settlers of carolina came from barbados a british caribbean island where the economy depended on the production of sugar by slave labor.
in the carolina colony these migrants recreated a similar slave based plantation economy that by the 1690s was based primarily on the cultivation of rice as a cash crop.
p 48 p ohio r.
claimed by virginia the founding of georgia shenandoah r s in ta un mo tuscarora n c r ia north ee ch carolina la pa cherokee catawba ap d ee r georgia how was the founding of the carolinas different from the founding of georgia.
r r ah nn va sa mu oc r e pe te nn es s carolina grant 1663 d oa br how did ethnic diversity shape the development of the middle colonies.
virginia r diversity in the middle colonies carolina grant 1663 r ah nn.
va er sa lge mu oc religious persecution drove thousands of puritans to new england.
john winthrop hoped the settlers would reform english protestantism and create a city on a hill the puritans did not welcome dissent.
they exiled roger williams and anne hutchinson to rhode island for their religious beliefs.
stable nuclear families and good health helped puritans avoid the social turmoil that plagued the chesapeake colonies.
p 37 planting the carolinas james r ns ai nt ou d oa br how did differences in religion affect the founding of the new england colonies.
m shenandoah r d ee reforming england in america pennsylvan ohio r.
claimed by virginia e pe until tobacco began to be cultivated as a profitable cash crop around 1617 the virginia colony suffered from disease hunger misgovernment and social dissension.
maryland which had been founded as a refuge for english catholics in the late 1630s and where tobacco also became the economic mainstay endured decades of political and religious conflict before a stable government was established there in the 1660s.
p 31 coo sa why did the chesapeake colonies not prosper during the earliest years of settlement.
william penn the founder of pennsylvania was a quaker a protestant sect that emphasized simplicity and the possibility of salvation for all in religious practice and belief and humility and tolerance in daily life.
he guaranteed that settlers in pennsylvania would enjoy liberty of conscience freedom from persecution no taxation without representation and due process of law.
the chesapeake dreams of wealth how did the quaker religion influence the development of pennsylvania.
south carolina immigrants from barbados began settling in the carolinas in the 1670s.
barbadian immigrants to the carolinas many of whom were wealthy planters seeking new lands for plantations brought slavery with them when they moved.
georgia was founded in 1732 as an alternative to debtors prison for impoverished englishmen and as a military outpost to guard against the spanish in florida.
p 50 after conquering the dutch colony of new netherland in 1664 the english renamed it new york.
despite the conquest the dutch remained an influential minority in key terms and definitions joint stock company business enterprise that enabled investors to pool money for commerce and funding for colonies.
p 32 house of burgesses virginia.
p 34 the elective representative assembly in colonial headright system of land distribution in which settlers were granted a 50 acre plot of land from the colonial government for each servant or dependent they transported to the new world.
it encouraged the recruitment of a large servile labor force.
p 34 mayflower compact agreement among the pilgrims aboard the mayflower in 1620 to create a civil government at plymouth colony.
p 37 puritans members of a reformed protestant sect in europe and america that insisted on removing all vestiges of catholicism from religious practice.
p 37 great migration migration of 16 000 puritans from england to the massachusetts bay colony during the 1630s.
p 39 antinomianism religious belief rejecting traditional moral law as unnecessary for christians who possess saving grace and affirming that a person could experience divine revelation and salvation without the assistance of formally trained clergy.
p 42 quakers members of a radical religious group formally known as the society of friends that rejects formal theology and stress each persons inner light a spiritual guide to righteousness.
p 46 study resources critical thinking questions 1 would the first chesapeake colonies have survived if the settlers had 3 how did william penns leadership style compare to those of john not discovered tobacco as a profitable cash crop.
2 would the historical development of new england have been winthrop and captain john smith.
4 how were the european migrants who were attracted to georgia and different if the puritans had developed a profitable cash crop like tobacco or rice.
the carolinas different from the migrants from the chesapeake and middle colonies.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 3 on myhistorylab social stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century read the document james oglethorpe the stono rebellion 1739 p 66 read the document prenuptial agreement 1653 p 57 rise of a commercial empire read the document anne bradstreet before the birth of one of her children p 58 view the map colonial products p 67 race and freedom in british america colonial factions spark political revolt view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 p 62 read the document nathaniel bacons declaration july 30 1676 p 69 view the closer look plan and sections of a slave ship and an illustration of a slave camp p 63 complete the assignment anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek p 64 read the document passage 1788 p 66 olaudah equiano the middle read the document cotton mather memorable providences relating to witchcraft p 71 complete the assignment witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 p 72 indicates study plan media assignment experience of empire eighteenth century america contents and learning objectives growth and diversity pg.
80 what difficulties did native americans face in maintaining their cultural independence on the frontier.
spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century pg.
83 religious revivals in provincial societies pg.
90 how did the great awakening transform the religious culture of colonial america.
clash of political cultures pg.
92 why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
why were eighteenth century colonial assemblies not fully democratic.
the impact of european ideas on american culture pg.
87 century of imperial war pg.
95 why did colonial americans support great britains wars against france.
how did european ideas affect eighteenth century american life.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase chapters of native american history.
during much of the seventeenth century various indian groups who contested the english settlers for control of coastal lands suffered terribly sometimes from war but more often from the spread of contagious diseases such as smallpox.
the two races found it very difficult to live in close proximity.
as one indian informed the members of the maryland assembly in 1666 your hogs cattle injure us you come too near us to live drive us from place to place.
we can fly no farther let us know where to live how to be secured for the future from the hogs cattle against such odds the indians managed to survive.
by the eighteenth century the site of the most intense and creative contact between the races had shifted to the cis mississippian west that is to the huge territory between the appalachian mountains and the mississippi river where several hundred thousand native americans made their homes.
tishcohan chief of the delaware tribe that lost much of its land in thomas penns walking purchase of 1737 is shown here in a 1735 portrait by gustavus hesselius.
although treaties and agreements with european settlers were often detrimental to native americans some alliances in the middle ground allowed the tribes to play the french against the british.
alliances were often signified by tokens such as certificates calumets ceremonial pipes wampum belts and medals.
many indians had only recently migrated to the area.
the delaware for example retreated to far western pennsylvania and the ohio valley to escape almost continuous confrontation with advancing european invaders.
other indians drifted west in less happy circumstances.
they were refugees the remnants of native american groups who had lost so many people that they could no longer sustain an independent cultural identity.
these survivors joined with other indians to establish new multiethnic communities.
in this respect the native american villages may not have seemed all that different from the mixed european settlements of the backcountry.
see the feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase pp.
stronger groups of indians such as the creek choctaw chickasaw cherokee and shawnee generally welcomed the refugees.
strangers were formally adopted to take the places of family members killed in battle or overcome by sickness and it should be appreciated that many seemingly traditional indian villages of the eighteenth century actually represented innovative responses to rapidly shifting external conditions.
as historian peter wood explained physically and linguistically diverse groups spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century moved to form loosely organized confederacies unions of mutual convenience that effectively restrained interethnic hostilities the concept of a middle ground a term that has only recently entered the interpretive vocabulary helps us more fully to comprehend how eighteenth century indians held their own in the backcountry beyond the appalachian mountains.
the native americans never intended to isolate themselves completely from european contact.
they relied on white traders french as well as english to provide essential metal goods and weapons.
the goal of the indian confederacies was rather to maintain a strong independent voice in these commercial exchanges whenever possible playing the french against the british and so long as they had sufficient military strength that is large numbers of healthy armed warriors they compelled everyone who came to negotiate in the middle ground to give them proper respect.
it would be incorrect therefore to characterize their relations with the europeans as a stark choice between resistance or accommodation between total war or abject surrender.
native americans took advantage of rivals when possible they compromised when necessary.
it is best to imagine the indians middle ground as an open dynamic process of creative interaction.
however desirable they may have appeared european goods subtly eroded traditional structures of native american authority.
during the period of earliest encounter with white men indian leaders reinforced their own power by controlling the character and flow of commercial exchange.
if a trader wanted a rich supply of animal skins for example he soon learned that he had better negotiate directly with a chief or tribal elder.
but as the number of european traders operating within the middle ground expanded ordinary indians began to bargain on their own account obtaining colorful and durable manufactured items without first consulting a native american leader.
independent commercial dealings of this sort tended further to weaken the indians ability to resist organized white aggression.
as john stuart a superintendent of indian affairs explained in 1761 a modern indian cannot subsist without europeans and would handle a flint ax or any other rude utensil used by his ancestors very awkwardly so that what was only convenience at first is now become necessity the survival of the middle ground depended ultimately on factors over which the native americans had little control.
imperial competition between france and great britain enhanced the indians bargaining position but after the british defeated the french in 1763 the indians no longer received the same solicitous attention as they had in earlier times.
keeping old allies happy seemed to the british a needless expense.
moreover contagious disease continued to take a fearful toll.
in the southern backcountry between 1685 and 1790 the indian population dropped an astounding 72 percent.
in the ohio valley the numbers suggest similar rates of decline.
in fact there is some evidence that british military officers practiced germ warfare against the native americans giving them blankets contaminated by smallpox.
based on experience the officers knew that personal belongings such as blankets taken from the sick were contaminated and thus that giving these items to the indians would put them at risk.
by the time the united states took control of this region the middle ground itself had become a casualty of history.
spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
in many traditional histories of north america the spanish make only a brief appearance usually as fifteenth century conquistadors.
but as soon as they have conquered mexico they are dropped from the story as if they had no serious part to play in the ongoing development of the continent.
this is of course a skewed perspective that masks the roots of ethnic diversity in the united states.
as anyone who visits the modern american southwest quickly discovers spanish administrators and priests not to mention ordinary settlers left a lasting imprint on the cultural landscape of this country.
until 1821 when mexico declared independence from madrid spanish authorities struggled to control a vast northern frontier.
during the eighteenth century the spanish empire in north america included widely dispersed settlements such as san francisco san diego santa fe san antonio and st augustine.
in these borderland communities european colonists mixed with peoples of other races and backgrounds forming multicultural societies.
according to historian ramn a gutirrez the spanish provinces present a story of the baroque style eighteenth century spanish mission at san xavier del bac in present day arizona.
spanish missions dotted the frontier of northern new spain from florida to california.
complete the assignment conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase on myhistorylab feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase william penns treaty with the indians painted by benjamin west in 1771 presents an idealized picture of relations between the pennsylvania government and its indian neighbors.
here the pious william penn offers the indians trade goods for their lands.
source courtesy of the pennsylvania academy of the fine arts philadelphia.
gift of mrs sarah harrison the joseph harrison jr collection.
e uropean conquest of native americans represents a black mark on the history of the new world.
violent dispossession murder and near genocide of americas native inhabitants has always fit uneasily into a history of national progress.
colonial writers sought to cover up these disturbing histories by creating myths of good settlers who allegedly respected native american rights and chose to buy indian lands rather than seize them through force.
but such reworkings of history overlook the threats of violence that often surrounded these supposedly fair negotiations.
pennsylvanias infamous walking purchase of 1737 offers a dramatic example of how the myth of a fair deal could cover english self interest and intimidation.
when he died in 1718 william penn the quaker founder of pennsylvania left his sons a legacy of peaceful co existence between english and indian.
he also burdened them with an imposing debt.
during the 1720s anxious to restore their finances the penn heirs began to sell off lands between pennsylvania and new jersey in a region known as the forks.
settlers coveted the abundant lumber iron ore and fertile soil found along the delaware river and were willing to pay good prices.
only one obstacle stood in the way of their plan to trade frontier lands for english currency.
the penns did not actually own the lands that they were selling.
these lands belonged to the regions native american nation the delawares who referred to themselves as the lenapes and they refused to sell.
the penns next move surprised the delawares.
thomas penn william penns eldest son produced what he claimed to be an old deed for lands in the forks purchased by his father in 1686 the document granted to pennsylvania a tract of land extending along the delaware river and containing as much land as a man could walk in a day and half a very imprecise measure of distance.
since the original deed was incomplete it had not been signed and did not even list all of the terms of the purchase penn had a new copy drawn up.
he presented this document to the delawares as proof of a legally binding contract transferring the indian lands in the forks to pennsylvania.
the delawares were not fooled.
nutimus leader of the delawares who lived in the forks region challenged the penns version of history.
the elders among his people remembered that although a land transfer had been discussed no contract had ever been signed and william penn and his agents had never delivered payment.
the new deed was a clumsy forgery.
cries of fraud did not discourage thomas penn.
he struck up an understanding with the powerful iroquois confederacy an alliance of six native american nations centered around the great lakes.
the government of pennsylvania promised to support the iroquois in pressing land claims against native tribes to the south and west.
the iroquois in turn pledged to support pennsylvania in its dealings with the delawares.
as one historian has put it the delawares found themselves caught between an iroquois hammer and a pennsylvania anvil not powerful enough to challenge both the pennsylvanians and their iroquois allies nutimus and three other delaware leaders put their marks on the fraudulent deed.
the walking of the boundary occurred on september 19 1737 the whole episode was a farce.
thomas penn had taken the initiative to have a path cleared through the trees for his walkers.
previously when william penn had purchased lands from the delawares the parties that walked off the boundaries had traveled at a normal travelers pace winding through the forest and stopping along the way to take meals.
now the three walkers who took off into the pennsylvania woods set an exhausting pace each promised a handsome reward if he should be the one that walked the farthest in the allotted day and a half.
one dropped out by days end.
a second collapsed the next morning and died from exhaustion a week later.
the final walker covered more than 60 miles of wilderness in the 18 hours of daylight allotted for his task.
the delawares protested this injustice grumbling about what they named the hurry walk but could do little about it.
in 1740 they filed a complaint with the pennsylvania superior court warning that if this practice must hold why we are no more brothers and friends but much more like open enemies the governor of pennsylvania dismissed the delawares complaint.
when the delawares refused to concede their claims in the forks the pennsylvania government turned to its iroquois allies.
at a council held in 1742 the iroquois headman canasatego told nutimus and the delawares you ought to be taken by the hair of the head and skakd severely till you recover your senses.
we conquered you we made women of you.
this land that you claim is gone canastego ordered the delawares to remove north to the wyoming or susquehanna valleys.
swindled by the pennsylvanians betrayed by the iroquois who they had once called their cousins and pressed on every side by encroaching white settlers nutimus and his delawares abandoned the delaware valley and withdrew to the west.
peaceful complaints had proven ineffectual.
all the delawares could do now was nurse their grievances and wait.
the waiting ended in 1755 with the beginning of the french and indian war.
the war began in catastrophe for the british and their iroquois allies in north america providing what one delaware described as a favourable opportunity for taking revenge still seething over the injustice of the walking purchase delaware warriors and their shawnee allies fell upon the pennsylvania settlements along the outskirts of the walking purchase lands.
led by nutimus nephew teedyuscung these warriors burned homes and fields and took over one hundred english lives.
the war soon turned in britains favor.
as british and iroquois troops routed their french and indian enemies in canada and the ohio territory the delawares realized that they would have to sue for peace.
in 1766 the delawares signed a treaty that relinquished the remainder of their pennsylvania lands and removed permanently towards the west.
in 1771 thomas penn commissioned the great early american artist benjamin west to create a painting commemorating his fathers compassion and fair treatment of pennsylvanias indian peoples.
the image shows william penn meeting with indian leaders bargaining with them to purchase land where english settlers might farm and raise families.
wests painting presents a highly flattering image of pennsylvania history and of the penn family.
it looks past the violence of 1755 and the underhanded dealings of 1737 it takes as its subject the much revered elder penn who had once admonished his children to let justice have its impartial course.
fly to no deceits to support or cover injustice in the end thomas penn betrayed his fathers advice.
in allowing his greed for land to overpower his sense of propriety and respect for the rights of the delaware indians thomas penn set an example emulated far too often throughout american history.
questions for discussion 1 why did thomas penn invent a phony deed for delaware lands.
2 why did the delawares side with the french during the french and indian war.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america complex web of interactions between men and women young and old rich and poor slave and free spaniard and indian all of whom fundamentally depended on the other for their own self definition with which florida is painted the governor of cuba complained in 1673.
only hoodlums and the mischievous go there from cuba california never figured prominently in spains plans for the new world.
early explorers reported finding only impoverished indians living along the pacific coast.
adventurers saw no natural resources worth mentioning and since the area proved extremely difficult to reach from mexico city the overland trip could take months california received little attention.
fear that the russians might seize the entire region belatedly sparked spanish activity however and after 1769 two indomitable servants of empire fra junpero serra and don gaspar de portol organized permanent missions and presidios forts at san diego monterey san francisco and santa barbara.
conquering the northern frontier not until late in the sixteenth century did spanish settlers led by juan de oate establish european communities north of the rio grande.
the pueblo indians resisted the invasion of colonists soldiers and missionaries and in a major rebellion in 1680 led by el pop the native peoples drove the whites completely out of new mexico.
the heathen have conceived a mortal hatred for our holy faith and enmity for the spanish nation concluded one imperial bureaucrat.
not until 1692 were the spanish able to reconquer this fiercely contested area.
by then native american hostility coupled with the settlers failure to find precious metal had cooled spains enthusiasm for the northern frontier.
concern over french encroachment in the southeast led spain to colonize st augustine florida in 1565 although the enterprise never flourished it claims attention as the first permanent european settlement established in what would become the united states predating the founding of jamestown and plymouth by several decades.
pedro menndez de avils brought some fifteen hundred soldiers and settlers to st augustine where they constructed an impressive fort but the colony failed to attract additional spanish migrants.
it is hard to get anyone to go to st augustine because of the horror read the document peoples of the spanish borderlands in sharp contrast to the english frontier settlements of the eighteenth century the spanish outposts in north america grew very slowly.
a few catholic priests and imperial administrators traveled to the northern provinces but the danger of indian attack as well as a harsh physical environment discouraged ordinary colonists.
the european migrants were overwhelmingly male most of them soldiers in the pay of the empire.
although some colonists came directly from spain most had been born in other spanish colonies such as minorca the canaries or new spain and because european women rarely appeared on the frontier spanish males formed relationships with indian women fathering large numbers of mestizos children of mixed race.
testimony by pedro naranjo to spanish authorities spain s north american empire m iss is si p pi 500 miles 500 kilometers r california san francisco 1776 miwok monterey 1770 san jos 1777 alta st louis san antonio de padua 1771 ute san luis obispo 1772 chumash santa barbara 1782 los angeles 1781 san gabriel 1771 san juan capistrano 1776 ipai r io oh navajo pueblo new mexico san diego 1769 atlantic ocean wichita santa fe quapaw louisiana comanche lipn apache pima coahuiltecan monterrey choctaw lower creek tonkawa hasinai texas san antonio pacific ocean creek chickasaw st augustine new orleans florida gulf of mexico the spanish borderlands ca.
1770 in the late eighteenth century spains north american empire extended across what is now the southern united states from florida through texas and new mexico to california.
the impact of european ideas on american culture as in other european frontiers of the eighteenth century encounters with spanish soldiers priests and traders altered native american cultures.
the experience here was quite different from that of the whites and indians in the british backcountry.
the spanish exploited native american labor reducing entire indian villages to servitude.
many indians moved to the spanish towns and although they lived in close proximity to the europeans something rare in british america they were consigned to the lowest social class objects of european contempt.
however much their material conditions changed the indians of the southwest resisted strenuous efforts to convert them to catholicism.
the pueblo maintained their own religious forms often at great personal risk and they sometimes murdered priests who became too intrusive.
angry pueblo indians at taos reportedly fed the hated spanish friars corn tortillas containing urine and mouse meat.
the spanish empire never had the resources necessary to secure the northern frontier fully.
the small military posts were intended primarily to discourage other european powers such as france great britain and russia from taking possession of territory claimed by spain.
it would be misleading however to overemphasize the fragility of spanish colonization.
the urban design and public architecture of many southwestern cities still reflect the vision of the early spanish settlers and to a large extent the old borderlands remain spanish speaking to this day.
the impact of european ideas on american culture of the mother country.
they sponsored concerts and plays they learned to dance.
women as well as men picked up the new fashions quickly and even though most of them had never been outside the colony of their birth they sometimes appeared to be the products of londons best families.
it was in the cities also that wealthy merchants transformed commercial profits into architectural splendor for in their desire to outdo one another they built grand homes of enduring beauty.
most of these buildings are described as georgian because they were constructed during the reign of britains early hanoverian kings who all happened to be named george.
actually these homes were provincial copies of grand country houses of great britain.
they drew their inspiration from the great italian renaissance architect andrea palladio 1508 1580 who had incorporated classical themes into a rigidly symmetrical form.
palladios ideas were popularized in the colonies by james gibbs an englishman whose book of architecture 1728 provided blueprints for the most spectacular homes of mid eighteenth century america.
their owners filled the houses with fine furniture.
each city patronized certain skilled craftsmen but the artisans of philadelphia were known for producing magnificent copies of the works of thomas chippendale great britains most famous furniture designer.
these developments gave american cities an elegance they had not possessed in the previous century.
one foreign visitor noted of philadelphia in 1748 that its natural advantages trade riches and power are by no means inferior to any even of the most ancient towns of europe as this traveler understood the cultural impact of the cities went far beyond the number of people who actually lived there.
how did european ideas affect eighteenth century american life.
ben franklin and american enlightenment the character of the older more established british colonies changed almost as rapidly as that of the backcountry.
the rapid growth of an urban cosmopolitan culture impressed eighteenth century commentators and even though most americans still lived on scattered farms they had begun to participate aggressively in an exciting consumer marketplace that expanded their imaginative horizons.
european historians often refer to the eighteenth century as an age of reason.
during this period a body of new often radical ideas swept through the salons and universities altering the way that educated europeans thought about god nature and society.
this intellectual revolution called the enlightenment involved the work of europes greatest minds men such as newton and locke voltaire and hume.
enlightenment thinkers shared basic assumptions.
philosophers of the enlightenment replaced the concept of original sin with a much more optimistic view of human nature.
a benevolent god having set the universe in motion gave human beings the power of reason to enable them to comprehend the orderly workings of his creation.
everything even human society operated according to these mechanical rules.
the responsibility of right thinking men and women therefore was to make certain that institutions such as church and state conformed to self evident natural laws.
it was possible or so some philosophers claimed to achieve perfection in this world.
in fact human suffering had come about only because people had lost touch with the fundamental insights of reason.
the writings of these thinkers eventually reached the colonies where they received a mixed reception.
on the whole the american enlightenment was a rather tame affair compared to its european counterpart for while the colonists welcomed experimental science they defended the tenets of traditional christianity.
for many americans the appeal of the enlightenment was its focus on a search for useful knowledge ideas and inventions provincial cities considering the rate of population growth it is surprising to discover how few eighteenth century americans lived in cities.
boston newport new york philadelphia and charles town the five largest cities contained only about 5 percent of the colonial population.
in 1775 none had more than forty thousand persons.
the explanation for the relatively slow development of colonial american cities lies in their highly specialized commercial character.
colonial port towns served as entrepts intermediary trade and shipping centers where bulk cargoes were broken up for inland distribution and where agricultural products were gathered for export.
they did not support large scale manufacturing.
indeed the pool of free urban laborers was quite small since the type of person who was forced to work for wages in europe usually became a farmer in america.
yet despite the limited urban population cities profoundly influenced colonial culture.
it was in the cities that americans were exposed to and welcomed the latest english ideas.
wealthy colonists merchants and lawyers tried to emulate the culture chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america minister described as full freighted with nonesense unmannerliness railery prophaneness immorality a r ro g an c e c a lu m n i e s lyes contradictions and what not all tending to quarrels and divisions and to debauch and corrupt the minds and manners of new england franklin got the point he left massachusetts in 1723 in search of a less hostile intellectual environment.
after he had moved to philadelphia leaving behind an irritable brother as well as new england puritanism franklin devoted himself to the pursuit of useful knowledge ideas that would increase the happiness of his fellow americans.
franklin never denied the existence of god.
rather he pushed the lord aside making room for the this 1743 map of boston depicts the port city as an active commercial and cultural center with many wharves buildings free exercise of human reachurches and meeting halls.
franklin tinkered experimented and reformed.
almost that would improve the quality of human life.
what mattered was everything he encountered in his daily life aroused his curiosity.
his practical experimentation.
a speech delivered in 1767 before the investigation of electricity brought him world fame but franklin members of the american society in philadelphia reflected the was never satisfied with his work in this field until it yielded practical new utilitarian spirit knowledge is of little use when confined application.
in 1756 he invented the lightning rod.
he also designed to mere speculation the colonist explained but when specua marvelously efficient stove that is still used today.
in modern lative truths are reduced to practice when theories grounded america franklin has become exactly what he would have wanted upon experiments.
and the arts of living made more easy and to be a symbol of material progress through human ingenuity.
comfortable.
knowledge then becomes really useful franklin energetically promoted the spread of reason.
in the enlightenment spawned scores of earnest scientific philadelphia he organized groups that discussed the latest european tinkerers people who dutifully recorded changes in temperaliterature philosophy and science.
in 1727 for example he formd ture the appearance of strange plants and animals and the details most of my ingenious acquaintances into a club for mutual of astronomic phenomena.
while these eighteenth century improvement which we calld the junto four years later franklin americans made few earth shattering discoveries they did encourtook a leading part in the formation of the library company a volage their countrymen especially those who attended college to untary association that for the first time allowed people like him to apply reason to the solution of social and political problems.
pursue useful knowledge the members of these societies combenjamin franklin 1706 1790 absorbed the new cosmopolitan municated with americans living in other colonies providing them culture.
european thinkers regarded him as a genuine philosophe a not only with new information but also with models for their own person of reason and science a role that he self consciously cultivated clubs and associations.
such efforts broadened the intellectual horiwhen he visited england and france in later life.
franklin had little zons of many colonists especially those who lived in cities.
formal education but as a young man working in his brothers print shop he managed to keep up with the latest intellectual currents.
economic transformation in 1721 franklin and his brother founded the new england courant a weekly newspaper that satirized bostons political the colonial economy kept pace with the stunning growth in and religious leaders in the manner of the contemporary british population.
during the first three quarters of the eighteenth cenpress.
writing under the name silence dogood young franklin tury the population increased at least tenfold and yet even with so asked his readers whether a commonwealth suffers more by many additional people to feed and clothe the per capita income hypocritical pretenders to religion or by the openly profane did not decline.
indeed with the exception of poor urban dwellers proper bostonians were not prepared for a journal that one such as sailors whose employment varied with the season white the impact of european ideas on american culture americans did quite well.
an abundance of land and the extensive growth of agriculture accounted for their economic success.
new farmers were able not only to provide for their families well being but also to sell their crops in european and west indian markets.
each year more americans produced more tobacco wheat or rice to cite just the major export crops and by this means they maintained a high level of individual prosperity without developing an industrial base.
at midcentury colonial exports flowed along well established routes.
more than half of american goods produced for export went to great britain.
the navigation acts see chapter 8.
the south even came away with a clause assuring the return of fugitive slaves.
we have obtained charles cotesworth pinckney told the planters of south carolina a right to recover our slaves in whatever part of america they may take refuge which is a right we had not before although these deals disappointed many northerners they conceded that establishing a strong national government was of greater immediate importance than ending the slave trade.
great as the evil is madison wrote a dismemberment of the union would be worse the last details on july 26 the convention formed a committee of detail a group that prepared a rough draft of the constitution.
after the committee completed its work writing a document that still after so constitution requires confirmation by three fourths of state conventions or legislatures two two senators represent each state in upper house each senator holds one vote.
one representative to lower house represents every thirty thousand people in 1788 in a state each representative holds one vote senators chosen by state legislatures for six year term direct election after 1913 representatives chosen by vote of citizens for two year term separate executive branch president elected by electoral college to four year term granted veto power to conduct policy and to appoint ambassadors judges and officers of executive departments established by legislation separate branch consisting of supreme court and inferior courts established by congress to enforce federal law federal government granted powers of taxation congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty all state regulations must obtain congressional consent many hours of debate preserved the fundamental points of the virginia plan the delegates reconsidered each article.
the task required the better part of a month.
during these sessions the members of the convention concluded that the president as they now called the executive should be selected by an electoral college a body of prominent men in each state chosen by local voters.
the number of electoral votes held by each state equaled its number of representatives and senators.
this awkward device guaranteed that the president would not be indebted to the congress for his office.
whoever received the second largest number of votes in the electoral college automatically became vice president.
in the event that no person received a majority of the votes the election would be decided by the lower house the house of representatives with each state casting a single vote.
delegates also armed the chief executive with veto power over legislation as well as the right to nominate judges.
both privileges of course would have been unthinkable a decade earlier but the state experiments revealed the importance of having an independent executive to maintain a balanced system of republican government.
complete the assignment the elusive constitution search for original intent on myhistorylab feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent this nineteenth century engraving shows how the pennsylvania state house would have looked in 1776 after the revolution and the drafting of the constitution the building became known as independence hall.
during the hot summer of 1787 delegates kept the windows closed so that no one on the street could hear the debates.
m any prominent national leaders alarmed at a perceived judicial imperialism in recent activist courts have urged that judges interpret the constitution strictly according to the intent of the framers arguing that a jurisprudence of original intent is the only legitimate basis for constitutional decision making intentionalists demand that judges measure decisions against a demonstrable consensus among the framers and ratifiers as to principles stated or implied in the constitution yet when one considers circumstances surrounding the constitutions framing demonstration of the founders intent proves elusive indeed.
delegates to the constitutional convention in philadelphia in 1787 deliberately veiled the purpose of the convention in secrecy to avoid pressure by local constituencies who harbored deep suspicions concerning strong central government.
newspapers barred from access to the convention printed only occasional rumors.
delegates refused to speak or correspond with outsiders concerning the proceedings.
the strictness with which delegates observed the rule of secrecy not only restricted contemporary knowledge of what transpired but has also limited the number of sources in which subsequent generations may search for original intent.
only three members preserved complete accounts of convention debates.
these records remained unpublished for more than thirty years forcing the first generation of lawyers and federal judges to rely on the words of the constitution alone for clues to the framers intent.
the publication of the three accounts did not necessarily make the delegates intent more accessible.
the journal acts and proceedings of the convention assemblies in philadelphia recorded by the convention secretary william jackson provided only a chronological listing of motions resolutions and vote tallies.
his unpublished manuscript of convention debates which could have fleshed out the published journals mere skeleton of the proceedings was lost.
the notes of new york delegate robert yates appeared in 1821 as secret proceedings and debates of the convention assembled at philadelphia but the circumstances of their publication rendered them thoroughly unreliable.
their editor the former french minister citizen edmond gent attained notoriety in the 1790s when he violated american neutrality in the anglo french war by commissioning american privateers against british shipping.
gent supported states rights and popular government and manipulated yatess notes to support his views.
a comparison of secret proceedings with the two surviving pages of yatess manuscript reveals that gent altered or deleted more than half the original text.
if the intent of the delegates survives anywhere madisons notes of debates in the federal convention of 1787 provides its likeliest repository.
the father of the constitution as contemporaries called him carefully preserved notes on convention proceedings and took every measure to ensure their accuracy.
recognizing his own limitations as a stenographer madison did not try to record everything said but sought manuscript copies of delegates speeches that he incorporated into his notes at the end of each day.
madison also waited until the end of each day to record his own speeches every one of which was extemporaneous from memory.
at the conventions end he obtained a manuscript copy of secretary jacksons notes which he used to supplement and correct his own.
though madison tinkered at times with his notes over the next thirty years recent analysis has demonstrated that none of these minor corrections impaired the faithfulness of the text.
yet in spite of the meticulous care that madison lavished on his notes they remain at best incomplete repositories of the framers original intent.
each days notes contain only a few minutes of oral discourse whereas actual delivery occupied between five and seven hours.
furthermore written manuscripts of speeches may have approximated only roughly what the debaters actually said.
madisons speech on the benefits of a large republic for example occupies two closely reasoned pages in his notes.
yet others who took notes seem to have recorded a much shorter and far less impressive oral version.
such discrepancies raise important questions.
how did the framers understand the actual speeches on the convention floor.
how did their understanding shape their intentions.
how much of their intent is lost in the vast omissions.
these questions take on even greater significance when one considers that the constitution was forged through a series of compromises among representatives whose interests and intentions differed widely.
no delegate was completely satisfied and the finished document permitted some functions none had intended.
madison himself complained for example that the principle of judicial review was never intended and can never be proper moreover he thought it would be a mistake to search for the original intent of convention delegates.
the delegates intent could never possibly determine constitutional interpretation he argued for the only authoritative intentions were those of the people of the states as expressed thro the conventions which ratified the constitution yet the works most commonly cited from the time of state ratification raise problems with the application of this principle as well.
stenographers who recorded the debates of the several state conventions on the adoption of the federal constitution did not possess skills adequate to their task and federalist partisans edited the speeches with abandon in order to promote their own views.
evidence also suggests that jonathan eliot the journalist who published the debates in 1836 altered them further.
given the limitations of sources most often cited by modern judges and lawyers the original intent of most framers remains as elusive today as it was for the first generation who had no access to those documents.
the constitutions often ambiguous wording which furnished the sole guide to the framers intent in their day remains the best recourse in our own.
questions for discussion 1 why do some lawyers and politicians still emphasize the constitutions original meaning despite how the country has changed since 1787.
2 how could one try to determine the original meaning of the constitutions framers.
3 why did james madison believe that it would be a mistake to try to search for the original intent of the delegates to the constitutional convention.
chapter review chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 the victory was short lived.
hamilton and congressional supporters resorted to legislative horse trading to revive his foundering program.
in exchange for locating the new federal capital on the potomac river a move that would stimulate the depressed economy of northern virginia several key congressmen who shared madisons political philosophy changed their votes on assumption.
hamilton may also have offered to give the state of virginia more federal money than it actually deserved.
whatever the details of these negotiations may have been in august washington signed assumption and funding into law.
the first element of hamiltons design was now securely in place.
interpreting the constitution the bank controversy the persistent hamilton submitted his second report to congress in january 1791 he proposed that the u s government charter a national bank.
this privately owned institution would be funded in part by the federal government.
indeed since the bank of the united states would own millions of dollars of new u s bonds its financial stability would be tied directly to the strength of the federal government and of course to the success of hamiltons program.
the secretary of the treasury argued that a growing financial community required a central bank to facilitate increasingly complex commercial transactions.
the institution not only would serve as the main depository of the u s government but also would issue currency acceptable in payment of federal taxes.
because of that guarantee the money would maintain its value while in circulation.
madison and others in congress immediately raised a howl of protest.
while they were not oblivious to the many important services a national bank might provide for a growing country they suspected that banks especially those modeled on british institutions might perpetuate a large monied interest in the united states.
and how was one to interpret the constitution.
that document said nothing specifically about chartering financial corporations and critics warned that if hamilton and his supporters were allowed to stretch fundamental law on this occasion they could not be held back in the future.
popular liberties would be at the mercy of whomever happened to be in office.
to take a single step jefferson warned beyond the boundaries thus specifically drawn around the powers of congress is to take possession of a boundless field of power no longer susceptible to definition on this issue hamilton stubbornly refused to compromise announcing angrily this is the first symptom of a spirit which must either be killed or will kill the constitution of the united states this intense controversy involving his closest advisers worried the president.
even though the bank bill passed congress february 8 washington seriously considered vetoing the legislation on constitutional grounds.
before doing so however he requested written opinions from the members of his cabinet.
jeffersons rambling wholly predictable attack on the bank of the united states was not one of his more persuasive performances.
by contrast in only a few days hamilton prepared a masterful essay titled defense of the constitutionality of the bank he assured the president that article i section 8 of the constitution the congress shall have power.
to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers justified issuing charters to national banks.
the foregoing powers on which hamilton placed so much weight were taxation regulation of commerce and making war.
he boldly articulated a doctrine of implied powers an interpretation of the constitution that neither madison nor jefferson had anticipated.
hamiltons loose construction carried the day and on february 25 1791 washington signed the bank act into law.
hamilton triumphed in congress but the general public looked on his actions with growing fear and hostility.
many persons associated huge national debts and privileged banks with the decay of public virtue.
men of jeffersons temperament believed that great britain a country hamilton held in high regard had compromised the purity of its ancient constitution by allowing speculators to worm their way into positions of political power.
hamilton seemed intent on reproducing this corrupt system in the united states.
when news of his proposal to fund the national debt at full face value leaked out for example urban speculators rushed to rural areas where they purchased loan certificates from unsuspecting citizens at bargain prices.
to backcountry farmers making money without actually engaging in physical labor appeared immoral unrepublican and certainly un american.
when the greed of a former treasury department official led to several serious bankruptcies in 1792 ordinary citizens began to listen more closely to what madison jefferson and their associates were saying about growing corruption in high places.
setback for hamilton in his third major report report on manufactures submitted to congress in december 1791 hamilton revealed the final details of his grand design for the economic future of the united states.
this lengthy document suggested ways by which the federal government might stimulate manufacturing.
if the country wanted to free itself from dependence on european imports hamilton observed then it had to develop its own industry textile mills for example.
without direct government intervention however the process would take decades.
americans would continue to invest in agriculture.
but according to the secretary of the treasury protective tariffs and special industrial bounties would greatly accelerate the growth of a balanced economy and with proper planning the united states would soon hold its own with england and france.
in congress the battle lines were clearly drawn.
hamiltons opponents not yet a disciplined party but a loose coalition of men who shared madisons and jeffersons misgivings about the secretarys program ignored his economic arguments.
instead they engaged him on moral and political grounds.
madison railed against the dangers of consolidation a process that threatened to concentrate all power in the federal government leaving the states defenseless.
under the confederation of course madison had stood with the nationalists against the advocates of extreme states rights.
his disagreements with hamilton over economic policy coupled with the necessity of pleasing the voters of his virginia congressional district every two years transformed madison into a spokesman for the states echoing the substance of antifederalist arguments he had once hotly rejected see chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 but adams still brooding over hamiltons appointment to the army decided to throw his own waning prestige behind peace.
in february he suddenly asked the senate to confirm william vans murray as u s representative to france.
the move caught the high federalists totally by surprise.
they sputtered with outrage.
it is solely the presidents act pickering cried and we were all thunderstruck when we heard of it adams was just warming to the task.
in may he fired pickering and mchenry an action he should have taken months earlier.
with peace in the offing american taxpayers complained more and more about the cost of maintaining an unnecessary army.
the president was only too happy to dismantle hamiltons dream.
when the new negotiators oliver ellsworth and william davie joined murray finally arrived in france in november 1799 they discovered that yet another group had come to power there.
this government headed by napoleon bonaparte cooperated in drawing up an agreement known as the convention of mortefontaine.
the french refused to compensate the americans for vessels taken during the quasi war but they did declare the treaties of 1778 null and void.
moreover the convention removed annoying french restrictions on u s commerce.
not only had adams avoided war but he had also created an atmosphere of mutual trust that paved the way for the purchase of the louisiana territory.
the president declared with considerable justification that the second french mission was the most disinterested the most determined and the most successful act of my whole life it also cost him reelection.
the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 what did jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that we are all republicans we are all federalists.
on the eve of the election of 1800 the federalists were fatally divided.
adams enjoyed wide popularity among the federalist rank and file especially in new england but articulate party leaders such as hamilton vowed to punish the president for his betrayal of their militant policies.
hamilton even composed a scathing pamphlet titled letter concerning the public conduct and character of john adams an essay that questioned adamss ability to hold high office.
once again the former secretary of the treasury attempted to rig the voting in the electoral college so that the partys vice presidential candidate charles cotesworth pinckney would receive more ballots than adams and america would be saved from the fangs of jefferson as in 1796 the conspiracy backfired.
the republicans gained 73 votes while the federalists trailed with 65 to everyones surprise however the election was not resolved in the electoral college.
when the ballots were counted jefferson and his running mate aaron burr had tied.
this accident a republican elector should have thrown away his second vote sent the selection of the next president to the house of representatives a lame duck body still controlled by members of the federalist party.
as the house began its work on february 27 1801 excitement ran high.
each state delegation cast a single vote with nine votes needed for election.
on the first ballot jefferson received the support of eight states burr six and two states divided evenly.
people predicted a quick victory for jefferson but after dozens of ballots the house had still not selected a president.
the scene was now ludicrous observed one witness.
many had sent home for night caps and pillows and wrapped in shawls and greatcoats lay about the floor of the committee rooms or sat sleeping in their seats the drama dragged on for days.
to add to the confusion burr unaccountably refused to withdraw.
contemporaries thought his ambition had overcome his good sense.
the logjam finally broke when leading federalists decided that jefferson whatever his faults would make a more responsible president than would the shifty burr.
even hamilton labeled burr the most dangerous man of the community on the thirty sixth ballot representative james a bayard of delaware announced he no longer supported burr.
this decision coupled with burrs inaction gave jefferson the presidency ten states to four.
the election of 1800 candidate jefferson burr j adams c pinckney party republican republican federalist federalist electoral vote the twelfth amendment ratified in 1804 saved the american people from repeating this potentially dangerous turn of events.
henceforth the electoral college cast separate ballots for president and vice president.
listen to the audio file jefferson and liberty william birchs illustration of the partially constructed united states capitol building in washington d c in 1800 when jefferson first took office the nations new capital was little more than a swampy and isolated village.
study resources during the final days of his presidency adams appointed as many federalists as possible to the federal bench.
jefferson protested the hasty manner in which these midnight judges were selected.
one of them john marshall became chief justice of the united states a post he held with distinction for thirty four years.
but behind the last minute flurry of activity lay bitterness and disappointment.
adams never forgave hamilton.
no party the federalist president wrote that ever existed knew itself so little or so vainly overrated its own influence and popularity as ours.
none ever understood so ill the causes of its own power or so wantonly destroyed them on the morning of jeffersons inauguration adams slipped away from the capital now located in washington d c unnoticed and unappreciated.
in the address that adams missed jefferson attempted to quiet partisan fears.
we are all republicans we are all federalists the new president declared.
by this statement he did not mean to suggest that party differences were no longer important.
jefferson reminded his audience that whatever the politicians might say the people shared a deep commitment to a federal union based on republican ideals set forth during the american revolution.
indeed the president interpreted the election of 1800 as a revolutionary episode as the fulfillment of the principles of 1776 the federalists were thoroughly dispirited by the entire experience.
in the end it had not been hamiltons foolish electoral schemes that destroyed the partys chances in 1800 rather the federalists had lost touch with a majority of the american people.
in office adams and hamilton whatever their own differences may have been betrayed their doubts about popular sovereignty too often and when it came time to marshal broad support to mobilize public opinion in favor of the party of wealth and privilege few responded.
as secretary of war oliver wolcott observed on hearing of jeffersons victory have our party shown that they possess the necessary skill and courage to deserve.
what have they done.
they write private letters.
to each other but they do nothing to give a proper direction to the public mind conclusion danger of political extremism from a broader historical perspective the election of 1800 seems noteworthy for what did not occur.
there were no riots in the streets no attempted coup by military officers no secession from the union nothing except the peaceful transfer of government from the leaders of one political party to those of the opposition.
americans had weathered the alien and sedition acts the meddling by predatory foreign powers in domestic affairs the shrilly partisan rhetoric of hack journalists and now at the start of a new century they were impressed with their own achievement.
as one woman who attended jeffersons inauguration noted the changes of administration which in every government and in every age have most generally been epochs of confusion villainy and bloodshed in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction or disorder but as she well understood indeed as modern americans must constantly relearn extremism in the name of partisan political truth can easily unravel the delicate fabric of representative democracy and leave the republic at the mercy of those who would manipulate the public for private benefit.
study resources take the study plan for chapter review force of public opinion how did the ideas of jeffersonians differ from those of the federalists.
while both jeffersonians and federalists agreed that the new united states would eventually become a great commercial power they differed on how best to achieve the transition from an agrarian economy to an international system based on trade and industry.
the federalists believed that this would require strong national institutions directed by a social elite but jeffersonians distrusted strong financial institutions and put their faith in independent white yeomen farmers who would be free of intrusive government regulations.
p 156 principle and pragmatism establishing a new government charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs how did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s.
the french revolution split american opinion.
republicans cheered it federalists condemned it.
when france declared war on britain 1793 the extremely unpopular jays treaty 1794 with britain provoked heated political debate between its federalist supporters and republican opponents.
disagreements over how to deal with french aggression and insults during the quasi war and the xyz affair drove a wedge between the peace seeking president john adams and the high federalists who called for war and military expansion.
this divide helped jefferson win the election of 1800.
p 163 popular political culture pa n why was george washington unable to overcome division within the new government.
why was it hard for americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity.
despite his huge popularity among all segments of the american population president washington was unable to bridge the differences between the two most brilliant and strong willed members of his cabinet thomas jefferson and alexander hamilton.
these two men fought throughout washingtons presidency over their different visions for the future of the republic.
hamilton imagined an urban commercial nation with a strong central government jefferson championed a simple agrarian republic.
p 158 in the 1790s many americans equated political dissent with disloyalty.
during the whiskey rebellion 1794 both federalists and republicans feared the other party planned to use violence to crush political opposition.
in the 1790s many americans lamented the loss of unity that had tied them together during the struggle for independence.
they feared that partisan politics might lead to a conspiracy to overthrow the legitimately elected government.
p 169 conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton the adams presidency va why did alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of washingtons cabinet.
why were some federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage.
while both hamilton and jefferson insisted they were working to create a strong prosperous republic in which commerce would be important they differed profoundly on how to achieve that goal.
where hamilton was pro british and wanted the american economy to imitate britains reliance on trade and industry jefferson supported the french revolution and believed that americas economic strength lay not in developing an industrial workforce but in increasing the countrys agricultural productivity so that farmers could exchange raw materials for imported manufactured goods.
p 159 many republicans believed that the support of jeffersonian republicans for france had compromised american sovereignty.
hamilton and the high federalists believed that a standing army was necessary to defend against invasion and to silence domestic dissent so that it could not split the republic apart.
they rationalized that the sacrifice of political liberties entailed in the alien and sedition acts were necessary to protect the republic from corrupting foreign particularly french influences.
this was especially important since they anticipated the onset of a war with france.
they used the rationale of national security to justify their pursuit of party power.
p 171 hamiltons plan for prosperity and security the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 fer dutchman s point vt n h oswego mass.
n y why did many americans oppose alexander hamiltons blueprint for national prosperity.
many citizens especially farmers and former soldiers felt that hamiltons plan to fund state loan certificates at full value would reward the immoral unrepublican and un american actions of speculators by allowing them to make money without physical labor.
many also complained that this plan rewarded the financial irresponsibility of states like massachusetts and south carolina.
supporters of jefferson rejected hamiltons vision of the united states as a commercial and manufacturing nation feared that his plan for a bank of the united states would perpetuate a large monied interest and protested that his doctrine of implied powers would lead to the steady growth of governmental power.
p 161 r i conn what did jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that we are all republicans we are all federalists.
jefferson did not mean that party differences had disappeared or were no longer important after the election of 1800 instead he wished to remind his audience that whatever their political differences the people were united by a deep commitment to a federal union based on republican ideals as set forth in the american revolution.
p 174 study resources key terms and definitions bank of the united states national bank proposed by secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton and established in 1791 it served as a central depository for the u s government and had the authority to issue currency.
p 162 implied powers powers the constitution did not explicitly grant the federal government but that it could be interpreted to grant.
p 162 french revolution 1789 1799.
p 163 a social and political revolution in france interests and warned americans against political factions and foreign entanglements.
p 171 quasi war undeclared war between the united states and france in the late 1790s.
p 171 xyz affair a diplomatic incident in which american peace commissioners sent to france by president john adams in 1797 were insulted with bribe demands from their french counterparts dubbed x y and z in american newspapers.
the incident heightened war fever against france.
p 172 jays treaty treaty with britain negotiated by chief justice john jay in 1794 though the british agreed to surrender forts on u s territory the treaty provoked a storm of protest in america.
p 164 alien and sedition acts collective name given to four laws congress passed in 1798 to suppress criticism of the federal government and curb liberties of foreigners living in the united states.
p 172 whiskey rebellion protests in 1794 by western pennsylvania farmers against a federal tax on whiskey.
the uprising was suppressed when president george washington called an army of 15 000 troops to the area.
p 170 kentucky and virginia resolutions statements penned by thomas jefferson and james madison to mobilize opposition to the alien and sedition acts which they argued were unconstitutional.
jeffersons statement the kentucky resolution suggested that states could declare null and void congressional acts they deemed unconstitutional.
p 173 farewell address in this 1796 document president george washington announced his intention not to seek a third term.
he also stressed federalist critical thinking questions 1 how were the disagreements between hamilton and jefferson a 3 how important were popular opinion and party politics in poisoning reflection of popular culture in the country during the 1790s.
2 how did american foreign policy during the 1790s influence the the adams presidency.
4 how could a constitutional republic justify the passage of highly growth of political dissent.
partisan legislation such as the alien and sedition acts.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision the trial judge was john marshall a strong federalist not likely to do the republican administration any favors.
he refused to hear testimony regarding burrs supposed intentions.
troops must be embodied marshall thundered men must be actually assembled he demanded two witnesses to each overt act of treason.
burr of course had been too clever to leave this sort of evidence.
while jefferson complained bitterly about the miscarriage of justice the jurors declared on september 1 1807 that the defendant was not proved guilty by any evidence submitted to us the public was outraged and burr prudently went into exile in europe.
the president threatened to introduce an amendment to the constitution calling for the election of federal judges.
nothing came of his proposal.
and marshall inadvertently helped protect the civil rights of all americans.
if the chief justice had allowed circumstantial evidence into the richmond courtroom if he had listened to rumor and hearsay he would have made it much easier for later presidents to use trumped up conspiracy charges to silence legitimate political opposition.
read the document the slave trade slavery sparked angry debate at the constitutional convention of 1787 see chapter 8 republican ascendancy on myhistorylab time line 1800 thomas jefferson elected president 1801 adams makes midnight appointments of federal judges judiciary act is repealed march 1803 chief justice john marshall rules on marbury v madison february sets precedent for judicial review louisiana purchase concluded with france may 1803 1806 lewis and clark explore the northwest 1804 aaron burr kills alexander hamilton in a duel july 1809 embargo is repealed non intercourse act passed march harrison defeats indians at tippecanoe november 1812 declaration of war against great britain june jefferson elected to second term justice samuel chase acquitted by senate march 1807 burr is tried for conspiracy august september embargo act passed december slave trade is ended january madison elected president madison elected to second term defeating de witt clinton of new york perry destroys british fleet at battle of put in bay september jackson crushes creek indians at horseshoe bend march british marines burn washington d c august hartford convention meets to recommend constitutional changes december treaty of ghent ends war of 1812 december jackson routs british at battle of new orleans january chapter 9 nation building and nationalism a thriving settlement existed around natchez in the mississippi territory.
elsewhere in the trans appalachian west white settlement was sparse and much land remained in indian hands.
u s citizens eager to expand into lands held by indian nations as well as spain used diplomacy military action force and fraud to open lands for u s settlement and westward migration.
general andrew jackson provided such an opening.
in 1816 u s troops first crossed into east florida in pursuit of hostile seminole indians.
this raid touched off a wider conflict and after taking command in late 1817 jackson went beyond his official orders and occupied east florida in april and may of 1818 this operation became known as the first seminole war.
except for adams all the members of monroes cabinet privately condemned this aggressive action so did a report of the house of representatives.
but no disciplinary action was taken mainly because public opinion rallied behind the hero of new orleans.
in november 1818 secretary adams informed the spanish government that the united states had acted in self defense and that further conflict would be avoided only if east florida were ceded to the united states.
the madrid government weakened by latin american revolutions and the breaking up of its empire was in no position to resist american bullying.
as part of the adams ons treaty signed on february 22 1819 spain relinquished florida to the united states.
in return the united states assumed 5 million of the financial claims of american citizens against spain.
extending the boundaries postwar expansionists turned their attention first to spanish holdings which included florida and much of the present day american west.
their first goal was to obtain florida from spain.
between 1810 and 1812 the united states had annexed part of what is now alabama claiming that it was part of the louisiana purchase.
the remainder known as east florida became a prime object of territorial ambition for president james monroe and his energetic secretary of state john quincy adams.
adams was looking for opportunities to confront spain for control of the region and put into effect his grand design for continental expansion.
north america 1819 treaties with britain following the war of 1812 setting the border between the united states and canada british north america made this border the longest unfortified boundary line in the world.
greenland russian america danish settlements oregon country joint u s british occupation british north america con ven tion a tre dam aty s o lin ns e 1 of 1 st pierre and miquelon fr.
united states s new pa c i f i c ocean at l a n t i c ocean n pai gulf of mexico santo domingo cuba belize jamaica puerto rico sp.
guadeloupe fr.
haiti indep.
1804 martinique fr.
united states british possessions spanish possessions russian possessions 1000 miles 1000 kilometers gran colombia brazil port.
expansion and migration a strong believer that the united states had a continental destiny adams also used the confrontation over florida to make spain give up its claim to the pacific coast north of california thus opening a path for future american expansion.
taking advantage of spains desire to keep its title to texas a portion of which the united states had previously claimed as part of the louisiana purchase adams induced the spanish minister luis de ons to agree to the creation of a new boundary between american and spanish territory that ran north of texas but extended all the way to the pacific.
great britain and russia still had competing claims to the pacific northwest but the united states was now in a better position to acquire frontage on a second ocean.
interest in exploitation of the far west continued to grow during the second and third decades of the nineteenth century.
in 1811 a new york merchant john jacob astor founded the fur trading post of astoria at the mouth of the columbia river in the oregon country.
astors american fur company operated out of st louis in the 1820s and 1830s with fur traders working their way up the missouri to the northern rockies and beyond.
first they limited themselves to trading for furs with the indians but later businesses such as the rocky mountain fur company founded in 1822 relied on trappers or mountain men who went after game on their own and sold the furs to agents of the company at an annual meeting or rendezvous these colorful characters who included such legendary figures as jedediah smith jim bridger kit carson and jim beckwourth one of the many african americans who contributed to the opening of the west as fur traders scouts or settlers accomplished prodigious feats of survival under harsh natural conditions.
following indian trails they explored many parts of the rockies and the great basin.
many of them married indian women and assimilated much of the culture and technology of the native americans.
the mountain men were portrayed in american literature and popular mythology as exemplars of a romantic ideal of lonely self reliance in harmony with unspoiled nature.
the far west however remained beyond american dreams of agrarian expansion.
the real focus of attention between 1815 and the 1840s was the nearer west the rich agricultural lands between the appalachians and the mississippi that were inhabited by numerous indian tribes.
native american societies under pressure five indian nations with a combined population of nearly sixty thousand occupied much of what later became mississippi alabama georgia and florida.
these nations the cherokee chickasaw choctaw creek and seminole became known as the five civilized tribes because by 1815 they had adopted many of the features of the surrounding white southern society an agricultural economy a republican form of government and the institution of slavery.
though these southeastern indians consciously strategized to respond to jeffersonian exhortations toward civilization and the promise of citizenship that came with it between 1815 and 1833 it became increasingly clear that most white americans were not interested in incorporating them into u s society whether as nations or as individuals.
the five nations varied in their responses to white encroachment on their lands.
so called mixed blood leaders such as john ross convinced the cherokee to adopt a strategy of accommodation to increase their chances of survival the creek and seminole by contrast took up arms in resistance.
the cherokee were the largest of the five nations.
traditional cherokee society had combined hunting by men and subsistence farming by women.
in the early nineteenth century the shift to a more agrarian market based economy led to an erosion of the traditional matrilineal kinship system in which a person belonged to his mothers clan.
the new order replaced matrilineal inheritance with the u s system of patriarchy in which fathers headed the household and property passed from father to son.
an emphasis on the nuclear family with the husband as producer and the wife as domestic caretaker diminished the role of the clan.
the shift toward agriculture also helped introduce americanstyle slavery to cherokee society.
as the cherokee adopted plantation style agriculture they also began to adopt white attitudes toward blacks.
by the time of indian removal a few cherokeeowned plantations with hundreds of slaves and there were more than fifteen hundred slaves in the cherokee nation.
discrimination against africans in all five nations grew under pressure of contact with whites.
beginning in the 1820s the cherokee council adopted rules regulating slaves.
whereas a few africans in the eighteenth century had been adopted into the tribe and become citizens under the new laws slaves could not intermarry with cherokee citizens engage in trade or barter or hold property.
in an effort to head off encroachments by southern states the cherokee attempted to centralize power in a republican government in the 1820s as well.
cherokee historian william mcloughlin has described a series of eleven laws passed between 1820 and 1823.
constituted a political revolution in the structure of cherokee government.
under these laws the national council created a bicameral legislature a district and superior court system an elective system of representation by geographical district rather than by town and a salaried government bureaucracy this process culminated in the 1827 adoption of a formal written constitution modeled on the u s constitution.
at the same time a renaissance of cherokee culture was spurred by sequoyahs invention of a written cherokee language in 1821 1822.
while the alphabet was complicated and lacked punctuation sequoyan provided the cherokee a new means of selfexpression and a reinvigorated sense of cherokee identity.
the first american indian newspaper the cherokee phoenix was published in sequoyan in 1828 by the time of indian removal cherokee leaders like john ross and elias boudinot could point with pride to high levels of cherokee acculturation education and economic success at american style civilization the seminole nation the smallest of the five nations presents perhaps the starkest cultural contrast to the cherokee both because the seminole reacted to pressure from white settlers with armed resistance rather than accommodation and because their multicultural history gave them a very different relationship to slavery.
the seminole nation in florida formed after the european conquest of america from the disparate groups of creek indians migrating from georgia and alabama in the wake of war and disease who mingled with the remnants of native floridians to form the new chapter 11 slaves and masters nat turners rebellion a turning point in the slave south on august 22 1831 the worst nightmare of southern slaveholders became reality.
a group of slaves in southampton county virginia rose in open and bloody rebellion.
their leader was nat turner a preacher and prophet who believed god had given him a sign that the time was ripe to strike for freedom a vision of black and white angels wrestling in the sky had convinced him that divine wrath was about to be visited upon the white oppressor.
beginning with a few followers and rallying others as he went along turner led his band from plantation to plantation and oversaw the killing of nearly sixty whites.
after only forty eight hours white forces dispersed the rampaging slaves.
the rebels were then rounded up and executed along with dozens of other slaves who were vaguely suspected of complicity.
nat turner was the last to be captured and he went to the gallows unrepentant convinced he had acted in accordance with gods will.
after the initial panic and rumors of a wider insurrection had passed white southerners went about making sure such an incident would never happen again.
their anxiety and determination were strengthened by the fact that 1831 also saw the emergence of a more militant northern abolitionism.
just two years after african american abolitionist david walker published his appeal to the colored citizens of the world calling for blacks to take up arms against slavery william lloyd garrison put out the first issue of his newspaper the liberator the first publication by a white author to demand immediate abolition of slavery rather than gradual emancipation.
nat turner and william lloyd garrison were viewed as two prongs of a revolutionary attack on the southern way of life.
although no evidence came to light that turner was directly influenced by abolitionist propaganda many whites believed that he must have been or that future rebels might be.
consequently they launched a massive campaign to quarantine the slaves from possible exposure to antislavery ideas and attitudes.
a series of new laws severely restricted the rights of slaves to move about assemble without white supervision or learn to read and write.
the wave of repression did not stop at the color line laws and the threat of mob action prevented white dissenters from read the document the confessions of nat turner 1831 a ride for liberty the fugitive slaves by eastman johnson depicts a slave family in flight to the north.
source brooklyn museum of art.
gift of gwendolyn o l.
conkling 40 59a a ride for liberty the fugitive slaves by eastman johnson ca.
1862 oil on paper board 22 26 1 4 in.
publicly criticizing or even questioning the institution of slavery.
loyalty to the region was firmly identified with defense of it and proslavery agitators sought to create a mood of crisis and danger requiring absolute unity and single mindedness among the white population.
this embattled attitude lay behind the growth of a more militant sectionalism and inspired threats to secede from the union unless the souths peculiar institution could be made safe from northern or abolitionist attack.
chapter 11 slaves and masters read the document overseers report from chicora wood plantation chicora wood was an extremely successful rice plantation in south carolina owned by robert allston.
allston owned several plantations and of course many slaves.
in 1850 he owned 401 slaves by 1860 that number had increased to 603 but in areas where most slaves lived on farms or small plantations and especially in areas of the upper south where the trading and hiring out of slaves was frequent a different pattern seems to have prevailed.
under these circumstances slaves frequently had spouses who resided on other plantations or farms often some distance away and ties between husbands and wives were looser and more fragile.
the result was that female headed families were the norm and responsibility for child rearing was vested in mothers assisted in most cases by female relatives and friends.
mothercentered families with weak conjugal ties were a natural response to the infrequent presence of fathers and to the prospect of their being moved or sold beyond visiting distance.
where the breakup of unions by sale or relocation could be expected at any time it did not pay to invest all of ones emotions in a conjugal relationship.
but whether the basic family form was nuclear or matrifocal female headed the ties that it created were infinitely precious to its members.
masters acquired great leverage over the behavior of slaves by invoking the threat of family breakup through sale.
the terrible anguish that usually accompanied the breakup of families through sale showed the depth of kinship feelings.
masters knew that the first place to look for a fugitive was in the neighborhood of a family member who had been sold away.
indeed many slaves tried to shape their own sales in order to be sold with family members or to the same neighborhood.
these efforts were fraught with danger.
as one ex slave recalled the mistress asked her which she loved the best her mammy or her daddy and she thought it would please her daddy to say that she loved him the best so she said my daddy but she regretted it very much when she found this caused her to be sold along with her father the next day harriet jacobs an escaped slave famous for her published autobiography hid in her grandmothers attic for seven years while attempting to secure her childrens freedom.
for more on harriet jacobs see the feature essay harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households pp.
feelings of kinship and mutual obligation extended beyond the primary family.
grandparents uncles aunts and even cousins were often known to slaves through direct contact or family lore.
a sense of family continuity over three or more generations was revealed in the names that slaves gave to their children or took for themselves.
infants were frequently named after grandparents and those slaves who assumed surnames often chose that of an ancestors owner rather than the family name of a current master.
kinship ties were not limited to blood relations.
when families were broken up by sale individual members who found themselves on plantations far from home were likely to be adopted into new kinship networks.
orphans or children without responsible parents were quickly absorbed without prejudice into new families.
soon after the civil war one reconstruction official faced an elderly exslave named roger who demanded land to raise crop on for his family of sixty parents that is relations children included a family with sixty parents made no sense to this official but it made sense in a community in which families were defined by ties of affection and cooperation rather than blood relation.
for some purposes all the slaves on a plantation were in reality members of a single extended family as their forms of address clearly reveal.
elderly slaves were addressed by everyone else as uncle and aunty and younger unrelated slaves commonly called each other brother or sister strong kinship ties whether real or fictive meant slaves could depend on one another.
the kinship network also provided a vehicle for the transmission of african american folk traditions from one generation to the next.
african american religion from the realm of culture and fundamental beliefs african americans drew the strength to hold their heads high and look beyond their immediate condition.
religion was the cornerstone of this emerging african american culture.
black christianity may have owed its original existence to the efforts of white missionaries but it was far from a mere imitation of white religious forms and beliefs.
this distinctive variant of evangelical protestantism incorporated elements of african religion and emphasized those portions of the bible that spoke to the aspirations of an enslaved people thirsting for freedom.
most slaves did not encounter christianity in a church setting.
there were a few independent black churches in the antebellum south which mainly served free blacks and urban slaves with indulgent masters.
free blacks who seceded from white congregations that discriminated against them formed a variety of autonomous baptist groups as well as southern branches of the highly successful african methodist episcopal ame church organized as a national denomination under the leadership of the reverend richard allen of philadelphia in 1816 but the mass of blacks did not have access to the independent churches.
plantation slaves who were exposed to christianity either attended the neighboring white churches or worshiped at home.
the world of southern blacks on large estates masters or white missionaries often conducted sunday services.
but the narratives and recollections of ex slaves reveal that white sanctioned religious activity was only a superficial part of the slaves spiritual life.
the true slave religion was practiced at night often secretly and was led by black preachers.
historian albert j raboteau has described this underground black christianity as the invisible institution this covert slave religion was a highly emotional affair that featured singing shouting and dancing.
in some ways the atmosphere resembled a backwoods revival meeting.
but much of what went on was actually an adaptation of african religious beliefs and customs.
the chanting mode of preaching with the congregation responding at regular intervals and the expression of religious feelings through rhythmic movements especially the counterclockwise movement known as the ring shout had clear african origins.
the black conversion experience was normally a state of ecstasy more akin to possession by spirits a major form of african religious expression than to the agony of those read the document struck down at white revivals.
the emphasis on sinfulness and fear of damnation that were core themes of white evangelicalism played a lesser role among blacks.
for them religion was more an affirmation of the joy of life than a rejection of worldly pleasures and temptations.
slave sermons and religious songs spoke directly to the plight of a people in bondage and implicitly asserted their right to be free.
the most popular of all biblical subjects was the deliverance of the children of israel from slavery in egypt in the book of exodus.
in one moving spiritual god commands moses to tell old pharaoh to let my people go many sermons and songs refer to the crossing of jordan and the arrival in the promised land.
oh canaan sweet canaan i am bound for the land of canaan and oh brothers dont get weary.
well land on canaans shore are typical of lines from spirituals known to have been sung by slaves.
other songs invoke the liberation theme in different ways.
one recalls that jesus had set poor sinners free and another prophesies well soon be free when the lord will call us home frances e w harper the slave mother on large plantations slave men and women formed stable monogamous unions that often lasted until the couple was broken up by the death or sale of one of the partners.
this painting by christian mayr portrays a slave wedding celebrated in white sulphur springs virginia in 1838 the wedding couple wears white attire.
complete the assignment harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households on myhistorylab feature essay harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households this 1836 engraving from an antislavery novel depicts a plantation mistress scolding a slave woman while the master looks on.
though white women were also subjugated to the authority of white men in southern society the divide of race prevented plantation ladies and slaves from finding potential solidarity as women.
h arriet jacobs born enslaved in north carolina in 1813 became a slave in james and maria norcoms household in 1825 james began to whisper foul words in harriets ears when she was a young teenager.
harriet had no one to whom she could turn except for her free black grandmother who lived in the town.
although her grandmother had been a slave harriets master dreaded her scorching rebukes and furthermore he did not wish to have his villainy made public for a time this wish to keep up some outward show of decency protected harriet.
harriet jacobss grandmother was an unusual woman who had worked extra for years to buy her childrens freedom only to be cheated out of her earnings at the end.
like most free black women harriets grandmother was the unmarried head of her own household separated long ago from the father of her children.
running their own households gave some free black women a measure of autonomy but also left them with little support in the daily struggle against poverty and racism.
maria norcom as the wife of a prominent doctor and large plantation owner lived a life very different from harriets or her grandmothers.
yet it was not the life of carefree luxury sometimes portrayed in movies and books about the old south.
compared to poorer women in the south maria had more access to education and periods of recreation and relaxation.
but as a lady of the upper class she was expected to master strict rules of womanhood that demanded moral purity and virtue.
she also had to learn the personal and managerial skills necessary to oversee a household staffed by slaves.
most southern white women worked hard to keep households and families together and they all lived within a social system that denied them legal rights by placing them under the domination of husbands and fathers.
james norcoms behavior while it certainly violated his vows of marriage was not egregious enough to have won maria a divorce under the laws of north carolina.
whether they were rich or poor free or enslaved women were to a large degree defined by their relationship to the head of the household nearly always a white man.
although there were expectations that husbands would protect and care for their wives women had little recourse against husbands who departed from those expectations.
for example marion s d converse a woman from a prominent south carolina family dreaded her abusive second husband augustus.
through years of beatings and jealous tirades marion was unable to escape the bonds of marriage because augustuss deplorable conduct fell short of legal grounds for divorce in south carolina only abandonment or impotence.
yet marion converse was able to gain aid and protection from her prominent family who shielded her from the worst consequences of an abusive marriage.
when maria norcom discovered her husbands overtures toward harriet she was distraught and took harriet to sleep in her own room.
yet as harriet later described it maria pitied herself as a martyr but she was incapable of feeling for the condition of shame and misery in which her unfortunate helpless slave was placed harriet often woke to find maria bending over her and came to fear for her safety around this jealous mistress harriet jacobss and maria norcoms story illustrates that planters ruled their wives as well as their slaves.
all southern women were embedded in a social system that gave authority over their lives and choices to men.
despite this commonality few women were able to reach across the divides of race and class to recognize these similarities.
tormented by jealousy and humiliation maria came to blame the slave rather than her husband for their intimacy imagining that harriet herself had seduced him.
harriet managed to elude her masters advances in part due to marias vigilance.
enslaved women such as harriet jacobs were the most vulnerable of southern women.
they were subject to a level of violence and sexual assault that was unknown to other women in the south and when they were victims of violence they lacked even the limited legal defenses that were open to poor white women.
because black women were considered unable to give or withhold consent it was not a crime to rape a black woman.
and had harriet fought back physically against her masters advances she risked criminal prosecution and even death.
when the slave celia killed the master who had been raping her for years her court appointed lawyer argued that she should not be criminally liable based on a georgia statute allowing women to use force to defend their honor against a rapist.
the court however decreed that black women were not women within the meaning of the statute.
celia had no honor that the law recognized.
she was thus convicted of murder sentenced to death and hanged.
excluding black women from the laws of rape also reinforced common images of black women as either sexually aggressive jezebels or sexless nurturing mammies the first stereotype justified the sexual exploitation of slave women and the second fed the slaveowners fantasy that their slaves loved and cared for them.
of course neither of these images corresponded to the realities and hardships of slave life.
enslaved women were often assigned backbreaking labor that paid little attention to common distinctions about womens work they were expected to do all of the normal tasks assigned to women sewing washing child care as well as working a full day in the fields.
despite these brutal conditions slave women organized communities and households and tried to protect them against the worst excesses of the slave system.
harriet and her grandmother were involved in a complicated network of extended kin and invested a great deal of energy in protecting brothers and sons from sale up the river harriet eventually escaped from the norcoms in 1835 hiding in her grandmothers attic for seven years.
escaped from the bonds of slavery harriet eventually joined the battle to abolish it.
her book incidents in the life of a slave girl the autobiography of linda brent was published in 1861 with the help of abolitionist novelist lydia maria child.
for many years critics dismissed the narrative as either a work of fiction or the product of childs own pen but historians today have laid those charges to rest recognizing harriet jacobss important contribution to the struggle against slavery and to american literature.
we know much less about what happened to maria norcom who neither kept a diary nor wrote her own story.
all that we know is that she continued in her unhappy marriage to james norcom.
her daughter mary matilda when she came of age pursued and attempted to reclaim harriet as her slave under the fugitive slave act.
to thwart this effort harriet allowed an abolitionist friend to buy her and set her free.
in slaveholding households like that of the norcoms all the women whether white or black free or enslaved were subject to the will of the master of the household.
most southern women depended on white men legally and socially giving them little recourse against men like james norcom who burst the bounds of decency despite their shared submission to james an impassable gulf separated harriet and maria and its name was race.
after the civil war southern women white and black reorganized their households in a changed society but it would still be another century before they began to bridge that gulf.
questions for discussion 1 how did race affect the lives of southern women like harriet jacobs and maria norcom.
2 why did slaveholding white men like james norcom have so much power over their slaves and wives.
3 why were male slaveholders able to sexually abuse black women without having to face legal consequences in the south.
chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection reform turns radical what were some of the major antebellum reform movements.
during the 1830s internal dissension split the great reform movement spawned by the second great awakening.
efforts to promote evangelical piety improve personal and public morality and shape character through familial or institutional discipline continued and even flourished.
but bolder spirits went beyond such goals and set their sights on the total liberation and perfection of the individual.
divisions in the benevolent empire early nineteenth century reformers were for the most part committed to changing existing attitudes and practices gradually and in ways that would not invite conflict or disrupt society.
but by the mid1830s a new mood of impatience and perfectionism surfaced within the benevolent societies.
in 1836 for example the temperance society split over two issues whether the abstinence pledge should be extended to include beer and wine and whether pressure should be applied to producers and sellers of alcoholic beverages as well as to consumers.
radicals insisted on a total commitment to cold water and were prepared to clash head on with an important economic interest.
moderates held back from such goals and tactics because they wanted to avoid hostility from prominent citizens who drank wine or had money invested in the liquor industry.
read the document william lloyd garrison first issue of the liberator 1831 a similar rift occurred in the american peace society an antiwar organization founded in 1828 by clergymen seeking to promote christian concern for world peace.
most of the founders admitted the propriety of defensive wars and were shocked when some members of the society began to denounce all use of force as a violation of the sermon on the mount.
dissidents who called themselves nonresistants withdrew from the organization in 1838 led by henry c wright they formed the new england non resistance society to promote an absolute pacifism which denied the right of self defense to nations or individuals and repudiated all forms of government coercion.
the new perfectionism realized its most dramatic and important success within the antislavery movement.
before the 1830s most people who expressed religious and moral concern over slavery were affiliated with the american colonization society a benevolent organization founded in 1817 most colonizationists admitted that slavery was an evil but they also viewed it as a deeply rooted social and economic institution that could be eliminated only very gradually and with the cooperation of slaveholders.
reflecting the power of racial prejudice they proposed to provide transportation to africa for free blacks who chose to go or were emancipated for the purpose as a way of relieving southern fears that a race war would erupt if slaves were simply released from bondage and allowed to remain in america.
in 1821 the society established the colony of liberia in west africa and during the next decade a few thousand african americans were settled there.
colonization proved to be grossly inadequate as a step toward the elimination of slavery.
many of the blacks transported to africa were already free and those liberated by masters influenced by the movement represented only a tiny percentage of the natural increase of the southern slave population.
northern blacks denounced the enterprise because it denied the prospect of racial equality in america.
black opposition to colonizationism helped persuade william lloyd garrison and other white abolitionists to repudiate the colonization society and support immediate emancipation without emigration.
garrison launched a new and more radical antislavery movement in 1831 in boston when he began to publish a journal called the liberator.
besides calling for immediate and unconditional emancipation garrison denounced colonization as a slaveholders plot to remove troublesome free blacks and as an ignoble surrender to un christian prejudices.
his rhetoric was as severe as his proposals were radical.
as he wrote in the first issue of the liberator i will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice.
i am in earnest i will not equivocate i will not excuse i will not retreat a single inch and i will be heard heard he was.
in 1833 garrison and other abolitionists founded the american anti slavery society.
we shall send forth agents to lift up the voice of remonstrance of warning of entreaty and of rebuke its declaration of sentiments proclaimed.
the colonization movement was placed on the defensive and during the 1830s many of its most active northern supporters became abolitionists.
the abolitionist enterprise in the inaugural issue of his antislavery weekly the liberator william lloyd garrison announced that he was launching a militant battle against the evil and sin of slavery.
the stirring words that appeared in that first issue are repeated on the liberators banner.
the abolitionist movement like the temperance crusade was a direct outgrowth of the second great awakening.
many leading abolitionists had undergone conversion experiences in the 1820s reform turns radical and were already committed to a life of christian activism before they dedicated themselves to freeing the slaves.
several were ministers or divinity students seeking a mission in life that would fulfill spiritual and professional ambitions.
the career of theodore dwight weld exemplified the connection between revivalism and abolitionism.
weld came from a long line of new england ministers.
after dropping out of divinity school he migrated to western new york.
there he fell under the influence of charles g finney and after a long struggle underwent a conversion experience in 1826 he then became an itinerant lecturer for various reform causes.
by the early 1830s he focused his attention on the moral issues raised by the institution of slavery.
after a brief flirtation with the colonization movement weld was converted to abolitionism in 1832 recognizing that colonizationists did not really accept blacks as equals or brothers in christ in 1834 he instigated what amounted to a series of abolitionist revivals at lane theological seminary in cincinnati.
when the trustees of the seminary attempted to suppress further discussion of the case for immediate emancipation weld led a mass walkout of most students.
the lane rebels subsequently founded oberlin college as a center for abolitionist activity.
in 1835 and 1836 weld toured ohio and western new york preaching abolitionism.
he also supervised and trained other agents and orators as part of a campaign to convert the entire region to immediate emancipation.
the tried and true methods of the revival fervent preaching protracted meetings and the call for individuals to come forth and announce their redemption were put at the service of the antislavery movement.
weld and his associates often had to face angry mobs but they left behind them tens of thousands of new abolitionists and hundreds of local antislavery societies.
as a result of their efforts northern ohio and western new york became hotbeds of abolitionist sentiment.
antislavery orators and organizers tended to have their greatest successes in the small to medium sized towns of the upper north.
the typical convert came from an upwardly mobile family engaged in small business the skilled trades or market farming.
in larger towns and cities or when they ventured close to the mason dixon line abolitionists were more likely to encounter fierce and effective opposition.
in 1835 garrison was mobbed in the streets of boston and almost lynched.
in new york city the tappan brothers lewis and arthur were frequent objects of threats and violence.
these two successful merchants were key figures in the movement because they used their substantial wealth to finance antislavery activities.
in 1835 1836 they supported a massive effort to print antislavery pamphlets and distribute them through the u s mail.
but they made relatively few converts in their own city most new yorkers regarded them as dangerous radicals.
abolitionists who thought of taking their message to the fringes of the south had reason to pause given the fate of the antislavery editor elijah lovejoy.
in 1837 while attempting to defend himself and his printing press from a mob in alton illinois just across the mississippi river from slaveholding missouri lovejoy was shot and killed.
racism was a major cause of antiabolitionist violence in the north.
rumors that abolitionists advocated or practiced interracial marriage could easily incite an urban crowd.
if it could not find white abolitionists the mob was likely to turn on local blacks.
working class whites tended to fear that economic and social competition with blacks would increase if abolitionists succeeded in freeing slaves and making them citizens.
but a striking feature of many of the mobs was that they were dominated by gentlemen of property and standing solid citizens resorted to violence it would appear because abolitionism threatened their conservative notions of social order and hierarchy.
by the end of the 1830s the abolitionist movement was under great stress.
besides the burden of external repression there was dissension within the movement.
becoming an abolitionist required an exacting conscience and an unwillingness to compromise on matters of principle.
these character traits also made it difficult for abolitionists to work together and maintain a united front.
during the late 1830s garrison the most visible proponent of the cause began to adopt positions that some other abolitionists found extreme and divisive.
he embraced the nonresistant or no government philosophy of henry c wright and urged abolitionists to abstain from voting or otherwise participating in a corrupt political system.
he also attacked the clergy and the churches for refusing to take a strong antislavery stand and encouraged his followers to come out of the established denominations rather than continuing to work within them.
these positions alienated those members of the anti slavery society who continued to hope that organized religion and the existing political system could be influenced or even taken over by abolitionists.
but it was garrisons stand on womens rights that led to an open break at the national convention of the american anti slavery society in 1840 following their leaders principle that women should be equal partners in the crusade a garrison led majority elected a woman abolitionist to the societys executive committee.
a minority led by lewis tappan then withdrew to form a competing organization the american and foreign anti slavery society.
the new organization never amounted to much but the schism did weaken garrisons influence within the movement.
when he later repudiated the u s constitution as a proslavery document and called for northern secession from the union few antislavery people in the middle atlantic or midwestern states went along.
outside new england most abolitionists worked within the churches and avoided controversial side issues such as womens rights and nonresistant pacifism.
some antislavery advocates chose the path of political action.
the liberty party organized in 1840 was their first attempt to enter the electoral arena under their own banner it signaled a new effort to turn antislavery sentiment into political power.
black abolitionists from the beginning the abolitionist movement depended heavily on the support of the northern free black community.
most of the early subscribers to garrisons liberator were african americans.
black orators especially escaped slaves such as frederick douglass made northern audiences aware of the realities of bondage.
but relations between white and black abolitionists were often tense and uneasy.
blacks protested that they did not have their fair share of leadership positions or influence over policy.
eventually a black antislavery movement emerged that was largely independent of the white led crusade.
in addition to douglass prominent black male abolitionists were charles remond william wells brown robert purvis and henry highland garnet.
outspoken women such as sojourner truth maria stewart and frances harper also played a significant role in black antislavery activity.
the negro convention movement chapter 12 chapter 14 the sectional crisis radical abolitionists saw this problem clearly and resolved it by rejecting the law of the land in favor of a higher law prohibiting human bondage.
in 1844 william lloyd garrison publicly burned the constitution condemning it as a covenant with death an agreement with hell but garrison spoke for a small minority dedicated to freeing the north at whatever cost from the sin of condoning slavery.
during the 1840s the majority of northerners showed that while they disliked slavery they were not abolitionists.
they were inclined to view slavery as a backward and unwholesome institution much inferior to their own free labor system and could be persuaded that slaveholders were power hungry aristocrats seeking more than their share of national political influence.
but they regarded the constitution as a binding contract between slave and free states and were likely to be prejudiced against blacks and reluctant to accept large numbers of them as free citizens.
consequently they saw no legal or desirable way to bring about emancipation within the southern states.
but the constitution had not predetermined the status of slavery in future states.
since congress had the power to admit new states to the union under any conditions it wished to impose a majority arguably could require the abolition of slavery as the price of admission.
an effort to use this power had led to the missouri crisis of 1819 1820 see chapter 14 the sectional crisis on myhistorylab time line 1846 david wilmot introduces proviso banning slavery in the mexican cession free soil party is founded zachary taylor whig elected president defeating lewis cass democrat and martin van buren free soil california seeks admission to the union as a free state congress debates sectional issues and enacts compromise of 1850 1856 preston brooks assaults charles sumner on senate floor james buchanan wins presidency despite strong challenge in the north from john c frmont supreme court decides dred scott case and legalizes slavery in all territories congress refuses to admit kansas to union under the proslavery lecompton constitution lincoln and douglas debate slavery issue in illinois 1852 harriet beecher stowe publishes uncle toms cabin 1859 john brown raids harpers ferry is captured and franklin pierce democrat elected president by a large majority over winfield scott whig 1854 congress passes kansas nebraska act repealing missouri compromise republican party founded in several northern states anti nebraska coalitions score victories in congressional elections in the north 1854 1855 know nothing party achieves stunning successes in state politics 1854 1856 free state and slave state forces struggle for control of kansas territory executed 1859 1860 fierce struggle takes place over election of a republican as speaker of the house december february 1860 republicans nominate abraham lincoln for presidency may democratic party splits into northern and southern factions with separate candidates and platforms june lincoln wins the presidency over douglas breckinridge and bell chapter review the compromise of 1850 how did territorial expansion intensify the conflict over slavery.
manifest destiny raised questions about states rights.
the constitution did not permit the federal government to override state slavery laws but the wilmot proviso attempted and failed to ban slavery in the mexican cession.
despite that defeat california was admitted as a free state under the compromise of 1850 while the fugitive slave law appeased the south.
p 315 political upheaval 1852 1856 how did the two party system change during this period.
the whig candidate lost in 1852 for supporting the antislavery cause while the kansas nebraska act sought to repeal the missouri compromise a move most northerners and some southerners considered abominable.
this gave rise to republicanism which adhered to native protestant values while supporting development in the west and opposing slavery.
the 1856 election was largely a choice between rivals one northern and one southern.
p 319 the house divided 1857 1860 how did the institution of slavery go beyond political and economic debates.
slavery divided american society culturally legally and morally.
religious congregations broke up while literature expressed increasingly the sentiments surrounding slaveholding.
the dred scott decision stripped american blacks free and slave alike of most legal rights.
finally lincoln chose to oppose slavery on moral grounds making freedom a human and not simply legal right.
p 324 study resources key terms and definitions wilmot proviso in 1846 shortly after outbreak of the mexicanamerican war congressman david wilmot of pennsylvania introduced this amendment banning slavery in any lands won from mexico.
p 316 fugitive slave law passed in 1850 this federal law made it easier for slaveowners to recapture runaway slaves it also made it easier for kidnappers to take free blacks.
the law became an object of hatred in the north.
p 319 popular sovereignty the concept that the settlers of a newly organized territory had the right to decide through voting whether to accept slavery.
p 318 kansas nebraska act this 1854 act repealed the missouri compromise split the louisiana purchase into two territories and allowed its settlers to accept or reject slavery by popular sovereignty.
p 321 compromise of 1850 five federal laws that temporarily calmed the sectional crisis.
the compromise made california a free state ended the slave trade in the district of columbia and strengthened the fugitive slave law.
p 318 ostend manifesto written by american diplomats in 1854 this secret memorandum urged acquiring cuba by any means necessary.
when it became public northerners claimed it was a plot to extend slavery and the manifesto was disavowed.
p 322 critical thinking questions 1 how did popular sovereignty reemerge as a definitive concept in the debates on slavery in new and existing states.
3 how did cultural divisions affect the political compromises made over slavery.
2 which qualities did the whig and republican parties share.
which did they not.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 15 secession and the civil war view the map wash in secession british north america canada gr ea g s.
n y wis r i conn mich nebraska territory nevada terr.
vt n h ke n to oregon minn dakota territory maine t l a utah territory pa iowa ind.
ill colorado territory calif kansas ohio w va n j md.
statehood d c 1863 del.
ky n c new mexico territory tenn indian territory ark.
unorganized s c ala miss.
texas ga ft sumter la.
fla pacific ocean slave states seceding before the fall of ft sumter april 1861 slave states seceding after the fall of ft sumter april 1861 slave states loyal to the union gulf of mexico mexico atlantic ocean 500 miles 500 kilometers free states free territories secession the fall of fort sumter was a watershed for the secessionist movement.
with no room left for compromise slave states of the upper south chose to join the confederacy.
the montgomery convention did not try to establish a slaveholders reactionary utopia but just aimed to re create the union as it had been before the rise of the new republican party.
the decision to allow free states to join the confederacy reflected a hope that much of the old union could be reconstituted under southern direction.
some optimists even predicted that all of the north except new england would eventually transfer its loyalty to the new government.
secession and the formation of the confederacy thus amounted to a very conservative and defensive kind of revolution the only justification for southern independence on which a majority could agree was the need for greater security for the peculiar institution vice president stephens spoke for all the founders of the confederacy when he described the cornerstone of the new government as the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man that slavery subordination to the superior race is his natural condition the failure of compromise while the deep south was opting for independence moderates in the north and border slave states were trying to devise a compromise that would stem the secessionist tide before it could engulf the entire south.
when the lame duck congress reconvened in december 1860 strong sentiment existed even among some republicans to seek an adjustment of sectional differences.
senator john crittenden of kentucky presented a plan that served as the focus for discussion.
the proposed crittenden compromise which resembled henry clays ear lier compromises advocated extending the missouri compromise line to the pacific to guarantee the protection of slavery in the southwestern territories and in any territories south of the line that might later be acquired.
it also recommended federal compensation to the owners of escaped slaves and a constitutional amendment that would forever prohibit the federal government from abolishing or regulating slavery.
initially congressional republicans showed some willingness to take the proposals seriously.
at one point william seward of new york the leading republican in the senate leaned toward supporting a version of the crittenden plan.
republicans in congress turned for guidance to the president elect who had remained in springfield and was refusing to make public statements on the secession crisis.
an emissary brought back word that lincoln was adamantly opposed to the compromise.
congressional republicans therefore voted against compromise as did the remaining senators and congressmen of the seceding states who had vowed in advance to support no compromise unless the majority of republicans also endorsed it.
their purpose in taking this stand was to obtain guarantees that the northern sectional party would end its attacks on southern rights the republicans did in the end agree to support crittendens un amendable amendment guaranteeing that slavery would be immune from future federal action.
this action was not really a concession to the south because republicans had always acknowledged that the federal government had no constitutional authority to meddle with slavery in the states.
the storm gathers some historians have blamed lincoln and the republicans for causing an unnecessary war by rejecting a compromise that would have appeased southern pride without providing any immediate practical opportunities for the expansion of slavery.
but it is questionable whether approval of the compromise would have halted secession of the deep south.
the republicans also believed that extending the missouri compromise line of 3630 to the pacific would not halt agitation for extending slavery to new areas such as cuba and central america.
the only way to resolve the crisis over the future of slavery and to reunite the house divided was to remove any chance that slaveholders could enlarge their domain.
lincoln was also convinced that backing down in the face of secessionist threats would fatally undermine the democratic principle of majority rule.
in his inaugural address of march 4 1861 he recalled that during the winter many patriotic men had urged him to accept a compromise that would shift the ground on which he had been elected.
but to do so would have signified that a victorious presidential candidate cannot be inaugurated till he betrays those who elected him by breaking his pledges and surrendering to those who tried and failed to defeat him at the polls making such a concession would mean that this government and all popular government is already at an end and the war came by the time of lincolns inauguration seven states had seceded formed an independent confederacy and seized most federal forts and other installations in the deep south without firing a shot.
some northerners thought it would be best to let the confederate states depart in peace whether because they wanted to maintain commercial links with the cotton producing south or because they opposed a bloody war.
the collapse of compromise efforts narrowed the choices to peaceful separation or war between the sections.
by early march the tide of public opinion even in the business community was beginning to shift in favor of coercive measures to preserve the union.
in his inaugural address lincoln called for a cautious and limited use of force.
he would defend federal forts and installations not yet in confederate hands but would not attempt to recapture the ones already taken.
he thus tried to shift the burden for beginning hostilities to the confederacy which would have to attack before it would be attacked.
as lincoln spoke only four military installations within the seceded states were still held by u s forces.
one of these was fort sumter in charleston harbor which was under pressure from the confederacy and running low on food.
against the advice of some of his cabinet lincoln decided to send a ship to resupply the fort.
before the expedition arrived the confederate army attacked the fort.
after two days of heavy bombardment the union forces surrendered and the confederate flag was raised over fort sumter.
the south had won a victory without a single death on either side.
on april 15 lincoln proclaimed that an insurrection against federal authority existed in the deep south and called on the militia of the loyal states to provide seventy five thousand troops for short term service to put it down.
two days later a sitting virginia convention which had earlier rejected secession reversed itself this contemporary currier and ives lithograph depicts the bombardment of fort sumter on april 12 13 1861 the soldiers are firing from fort moultrie in charleston harbor which the union garrison had evacuated the previous december in order to strengthen fort sumter.
chapter 15 secession and the civil war pa antietam sept 17 1862 ohio bull run july 21 1861 aug 29 30 1862 winchester may 25 1862 kernstown washington d c jacksons valley campaign apr il ju ma ne y mar.
23 1862 cross keys fredericksburg dec 13 1862 lee mc c cedar mountain llan le lee jacks on june 8 1862 richmond aug 9 1862 seven pines james r may 31 july 1 1862 fortress monroe seven days battles virginia june 25 july 1 1862 pennsylvania yorktown besieged apr.
5 may 4 1862 ohio monitor vs merrimac virginia washington d c mar.
9 1862 oh north carolina io r virginia richmond louisville james r ft henry paducah missouri fortress monroe kentucky feb 6 1862 ft donelson cairo feb 16 1862 island no.
8 1862 nashville tennessee north carolina e ll bu memphis shiloh june 6 1862 apr.
6 7 1862 corinth a s.
joh nston south carolina r be au re ga rd arkansas ft sumter bragg mississippi alabama apr.
12 13 1861 georgia vicksburg mississippi at l a n t i c ocean mobile louisiana new orleans captured apr.
26 1862 farr agu t gulf of mexico 200 miles florida 200 kilometers union troop movements confederate troop movements union blockade confederate troop retreat union victories confederate victories civil war 1861 1862 defeats on the battlefield forced a change in the unions initial military campaign of capturing richmond the confederate capital.
the unions targets in the west were the key cities of vicksburg and new orleans.
fight to the finish the rash union general to attack jackson with full force and then threw the main confederate army against the unions flank.
badly beaten pope retreated to the defenses of washington where he was stripped of command.
out of sheer desperation lincoln reappointed mcclellan to head the army of the potomac.
lee proceeded to lead his exuberant troops on an invasion of maryland in the hope of isolating washington from the rest of the north.
mcclellan caught up with him near sharpsburg and the bloodiest one day battle of the war ensued.
when the smoke cleared at antietam on september 17 almost five thousand men had been killed on the two sides and more than eighteen thousand wounded.
the result was a draw but lee was forced to fall back south of the potomac to protect his dangerously extended supply lines.
mcclellan was slow in pursuit and lincoln blamed him for letting the enemy escape.
convinced that mcclellan was fatally infected with the slows lincoln once again sought a more aggressive general and put ambrose e burnside in command of the army of the potomac.
burnside was aggressive enough but he was also rather dense.
his limitations were disastrously revealed at the battle of fredericksburg virginia on december 13 1862 when he launched a direct assault to try to capture an entrenched and elevated position.
throughout the civil war such uphill charges almost invariably failed because of the range and deadly accuracy of small arms fire when concentrated on exposed troops.
the debacle at fredericksburg where union forces suffered more than twice as many casualties as their opponents ended a year of bitter failure for the north on the eastern front.
the diplomatic struggle the critical period of civil war diplomacy was 1861 to 1862 when the south was making every effort to induce major foreign powers to recognize its independence and break the union blockade.
the hope that england and france could be persuaded to intervene on the confederate side stemmed from the fact that these nations depended on the south for three quarters of their cotton supply.
the confederate commissioners sent to england and france in may 1861 succeeded in gaining recognition of southern belligerency which meant the new government could claim some international rights of a nation at war.
the main advantage of belligerent status was that it permitted the south to purchase and outfit privateers in neutral ports.
as a result confederate raiders built and armed in british shipyards devastated northern shipping to such an extent that insurance costs eventually forced most of the american merchant marine off the high seas for the duration of the war.
in the fall of 1861 the confederate government dispatched james m mason and john slidell to be its permanent envoys to england and france respectively.
a u s warship stopped and boarded the british steamer trent on which they were traveling and mason and slidell were taken into u s custody.
this flagrant violation of its maritime rights almost led england to declare war on the united states.
after a few weeks of ferocious posturing by both sides lincoln and secretary of state seward made the prudent decision to release mason and slidell.
these envoys may as well have stayed at home they failed in their mission to obtain full recognition of the confederacy from either england or france.
the anticipated cotton shortage was slow to develop for the bumper crop of 1860 had created a large surplus in british and french warehouses.
while napoleon iii the emperor of france personally favored the southern cause he was unwilling to risk war with the united states without british support.
although sympathetic to the south the british feared the consequences of recognition or support for the confederacy.
in september 1862 the british cabinet debated mediation and recognition as serious possibilities.
but they hesitated to intervene unless the south won decisively on the battlefield.
the cotton famine finally hit in late 1862 causing massive unemployment in the british textile industry.
but contrary to southern hopes public opinion did not compel the government to abandon its neutrality and use force to break the union blockade.
influential interest groups actually benefited from the famine including owners of large cotton mills who had made extravagant profits on their existing stocks and were happy to see weaker competitors go under while they awaited new sources of supply.
by early 1863 cotton from egypt and india put the industry back on the track toward full production.
by early 1863 when it was clear that king cotton diplomacy had failed the confederacy broke off formal relations with great britain.
its hopes for foreign intervention came to nothing because the european powers acted out of self interest and calculated that the advantages of getting involved were not worth the risk of a long and costly war with the united states.
only a decisive military victory would have gained recognition for southern independence and if the confederacy had actually won such a victory it would not have needed foreign backing.
fight to the finish how did the union finally attain victory and what role did emancipation play in it.
the last two and a half years of the struggle saw the implementation of more radical war measures.
the most dramatic and important of these was the norths effort to follow through on lincolns decision to free the slaves and bring the black population into the war on the union side.
the tide of battle turned in the summer of 1863 but the south continued to resist valiantly for two more years until it was finally overcome by the sheer weight of the norths advantages in manpower and resources.
the coming of emancipation at the beginning of the war when the north still hoped for a quick and easy victory only dedicated abolitionists favored turning the struggle for the union into a crusade against slavery.
in the summer of 1861 congress voted almost unanimously for a resolution affirming that the war was being fought only to preserve the union and not to change the domestic institutions of any state.
but as it became clear how hard it was going to be to subdue the rebels sentiment developed for striking a blow at the souths economic and social system by freeing its slaves.
in a tentative move toward emancipation congress in july 1862 authorized the government to confiscate the slaves of masters who supported the confederacy.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction croppers had to live on credit until their cotton was sold and planters or merchants seized the chance to provision them at high prices and exorbitant rates of interest.
creditors were entitled to deduct what was owed to them out of the tenants share of the crop and this left most sharecroppers with no net profit at the end of the year more often than not with a debt that had to be worked off in subsequent years.
various methods legal and extralegal were eventually devised in an effort to bind indebted tenants to a single landlord for extended periods but considerable movement was still possible.
black codes a new name for slavery.
while landless african americans in the countryside were being reduced to economic dependence those in towns and cities found themselves living in an increasingly segregated society.
the black codes of 1865 attempted to require separation of the races in public places and facilities when most of the codes were overturned by federal authorities as violations of the civil rights act of 1866 the same end was often achieved through private initiative and community pressure.
in some cities blacks successfully resisted being consigned to separate streetcars by appealing to the military during the period when it exercised authority or by organizing boycotts.
but they found it almost impossible to gain admittance to most hotels restaurants and other privately owned establishments catering to whites.
although separate black or jim crow cars were not yet the rule on railroads african americans were often denied firstclass accommodations.
after 1868 black supported republican governments passed civil rights acts requiring equal access to public facilities but little effort was made to enforce the legislation.
the black codes had other onerous provisions meant to control african americans and return them to quasi slavery.
most codes even made black unemployment a crime which meant blacks had to make long term contracts with white employers or be arrested for vagrancy.
others limited the rights of african americans to own property or engage in occupations other than those of servant or laborer.
the codes were set aside by the actions of congress the military and the freedmens bureau but vagrancy laws remained in force across the south.
furthermore private violence and discrimination against blacks continued on a massive scale unchecked by state authorities.
hundreds perhaps thousands of blacks were murdered by whites in 1865 1866 and few of the perpetrators were brought to justice.
the imposition of military rule in 1867 was designed in part to protect former slaves from such violence and intimidation but the task was beyond the capacity of the few thousand troops stationed in the south.
when new constitutions were approved and states readmitted to the union under the congressional plan in 1868 the problem became more severe.
white opponents of radical reconstruction adopted systematic terrorism and organized mob violence to keep blacks away from the polls.
the freed slaves in the face of opposition from both their democratic enemies and some of their republican allies tried to defend themselves by organizing their own militia groups for protection and to assert their political rights.
however the militia groups were not powerful enough to overcome the growing power of the anti republican forces.
also the military presence was progressively reduced leaving the new republican regimes to fight a losing battle against armed white supremacists.
in the words of historian william gillette there was simply no federal force large enough to give heart to black republicans or to bridle southern white violence republican rule in the south hastily organized in 1867 the southern republican party dominated the constitution making of 1868 and the regimes that came out of it.
the party was an attempted coalition of three social groups which varied in their relative strength from state to state.
one was the same class that was becoming the backbone of the republican party in the north businessmen with an interest in enlisting government aid for private enterprise.
many republicans of this stripe were recent arrivals from the north the so called carpetbaggers but some were scalawags former whig planters or merchants who were born in the south or had immigrated to the region before the war and now saw a chance to realize their dreams for commercial and industrial development.
poor white farmers especially those from upland areas where unionist sentiment had been strong during the civil war were a second element in the original coalition.
these owners of small farms expected the party to favor their interests at the expense of the wealthy landowners and to come to their aid with special legislation when as was often the case in this period of economic upheaval they faced the loss of their homesteads to creditors.
newly enfranchised blacks were the third group to which the republicans appealed.
blacks formed the vast majority of the republican rank and file in most states and were concerned mainly with education civil rights and landownership.
under the best of conditions these coalitions would have been difficult to maintain.
each group had its own distinct goals and did not fully support the aims of the other segments.
white yeomen for example had a deeply rooted resistance to black equality.
and for how long could one expect essentially conservative businessmen to support costly measures for the elevation or relief of the lower classes of either race.
in some states astute democratic politicians exploited these divisions by appealing to disaffected white republicans.
but during the relatively brief period when they were in power in the south varying from one to nine years depending on the state the republicans made some notable achievements.
they established on paper at least the souths first adequate systems of public education democratized state and local government and appropriated funds for an enormous expansion of public services and responsibilities.
as important as these social and political reforms were they took second place to the republicans major effort to foster economic development and restore southern prosperity by subsidizing the construction of railroads and other internal improvements.
but the policy of aiding railroads turned out to be disastrous even though it addressed the regions real economic needs and was initially very popular.
extravagance corruption and routes laid out in response to local political pressure rather than on sound economic grounds made for an increasing burden of public debt and taxation.
the policy did not produce the promised payoff of efficient cheap transportation.
subsidized railroads frequently went bankrupt reconstructing southern society leaving the taxpayers holding the bag.
when the panic of 1873 brought many southern state governments to the verge of bankruptcy and railroad building came to an end it was clear the republicans gospel of prosperity through state aid to private enterprise had failed miserably.
their political opponents many of whom had originally favored such policies now saw an opportunity to take advantage of the situation by charging that republicans had ruined the southern economy.
in general the radical regimes failed to conduct public business honestly and efficiently.
embezzlement of public funds and bribery of state lawmakers or officials were common occurrences.
state debts and tax burdens rose enormously mainly because governments had undertaken heavy new responsibilities but partly because of waste and graft.
the situation varied from state to state ruling cliques in louisiana and south carolina were guilty of much wrongdoing yet mississippi had a relatively honest and frugal regime.
furthermore southern corruption was not exceptional nor was it a special result of the extension of suffrage to uneducated african americans as critics of radical reconstruction have claimed.
it was part of a national pattern during an era when private interests considered buying government favors to be a part of the cost of doing business and many politicians expected to profit by obliging them.
blacks bore only a limited responsibility for the dishonesty of the radical governments.
although sixteen african americans served in congress two in the senate between 1869 and 1880 only in south carolina did blacks constitute a majority of even one house of the state legislature.
furthermore no black governors were elected during reconstruction although pinkney b s pinchback served for a time as acting governor of louisiana.
the biggest grafters were opportunistic whites.
some of the most notorious were carpetbaggers but others were native southerners.
businessmen offering bribes included members of the prewar gentry who were staunch opponents of radical programs.
some black legislators went with the tide and accepted loans from those railroad lobbyists who would pay most for their votes but the same men could usually be depended on to vote the will of their constituents on civil rights or educational issues.
if blacks served or supported corrupt and wasteful regimes it was because the alternative was dire.
although the democrats or conservatives as they called themselves in some states made sporadic efforts to attract african american voters it was clear that if they won control they would attempt to strip blacks of their civil and political rights.
but opponents of radical reconstruction were able to capitalize on racial prejudice and persuade many americans that good government was synonymous with white supremacy.
contrary to myth the small number of african americans elected to state or national office during reconstruction demonstrated on the average more integrity and competence than their white counterparts.
most were fairly well educated having been free or unusually privileged slaves before the war.
among the most capable were robert smalls whose career was described earlier blanche k bruce of mississippi elected to the u s senate in 1874 after rising to deserved prominence in the republican party of his home state congressman robert brown elliott of south carolina an adroit politician who was also a consistent champion of civil rights and congressman james t rapier of alabama who stirred congress and the nation in 1873 with his eloquent appeals for federal aid to southern education and new laws to enforce equal rights for african americans.
claiming public and private rights as important as party politics to the changing political culture of the reconstruction south were the ways that freed slaves claimed rights for themselves.
they did so not only in negotiations with employers and in public meetings and convention halls but also through the institutions they created and perhaps most important the households they formed.
as one black corporal in the union army told an audience of ex slaves the marriage covenant is at the foundation of all our rights.
in slavery we could not have legalized marriage now we have it.
and we shall be established as a people through marriage historian laura edwards tells us african americans claimed citizenship.
freedmen hoped that marriage would allow them to take on the rights that accrued to the independent head of a household not only political rights but the right to control the labor of wives and children for the first time.
while they were in effect in 1865 1866 many states black codes included apprenticeship provisions providing for freed children to be apprenticed by courts to some white person with preference given to former masters if their parents were paupers unemployed of bad character or even simply if it were found to be better for the habits and comfort of a child ex slaves struggled to win their children back from what often amounted to reenslavement.
freedpeople challenged the apprenticeship system in county courts and through the freedmens bureau.
as one group of petitioners from maryland asserted our homes are invaded and our little ones seized at the family fireside while many former slaves lined up eagerly to formalize their marriages many also retained their own definitions of marriage and defied the efforts of the freedmens bureau to use the marriage relation as a disciplinary tool.
perhaps as many as 50 percent of ex slaves chose not to marry legally and whites criticized them heavily for it.
african american leaders worried about this refusal to follow white norms.
the army corporal who had described marriage as the foundation of all our rights urged his audience let us conduct ourselves worthy of such a blessing and all the people will respect us yet many poor blacks continued to recognize as husband and wife people who cared for and supported one another without benefit of legal sanction.
the new legal system punished couples who deviated from the legal norm through laws against bastardy adultery and fornication.
furthermore the freedmens bureau made the marriage of freedpeople a priority because as historian noralee frankel explained the agencys overriding concern was keeping blacks from depending on the federal government for economic assistance once married the husband became legally responsible for his familys support.
some ex slaves used institutions formerly closed to them like the courts to assert rights against white people as well as other blacks suing over domestic violence child support assault and debt.
freed women sued their husbands for desertion and alimony in order to enlist the freedmens bureau to help them claim property from men.
other ex slaves mobilized kin networks and other community resources to make claims on property and family.
chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire thousands of miners climbed the sierra nevada that summer.
on the rough slopes of davidson mountain they created virginia city the prototype of the tumultuous western mining town.
the biggest strike was yet to come.
in 1873 john w mackay and three partners formed a company to dig deep into the mountain and at 1 167 feet they hit the big bonanza a seam of gold and silver more than 54 feet wide.
it was the richest discovery in the history of mining.
between 1859 and 1879 the comstock lode produced gold and silver worth 306 million.
most of it went to financiers and corporations.
mackay himself became the richest person in the world earning according to a european newspaper 25 a minute 5 a minute more than czar alexander ii of russia.
in the 1860s and 1870s important strikes were made in washington idaho nevada colorado montana arizona and dakota.
extremely mobile miners flocked from strike to strike and new camps and mining towns sprang up overnight.
the miners of idaho were like quicksilver said hubert howe bancroft an early historian.
a mass of them dropped this photograph from the mid 1800s shows gold miners on the american river in california in any locality broke up into individual globules and pausing for a lunch break.
although significantly outnumbered by men women on the mining ran off after any atom of gold in their vicinity.
they frontier took a variety of jobs including working claims.
stayed nowhere longer than the gold attracted them the final fling came in the black hills rush of 1874 to 1876 the army had tried to keep miners out of the area the the california gold rush of 1849 began the mining boom and heart of the sioux hunting grounds and even sent a scientific party set the pattern for subsequent strikes in other regions.
individual under colonel george armstrong custer to disprove the rumors prospectors made the first strikes discovering pockets of gold along of gold and stop the miners invasion.
instead custer found gold streams flowing westward from the sierra nevada.
to get the gold all over the hills and the rush was on.
miners gamblers desperathey used a simple process called placer mining which required does and prostitutes flocked to deadwood the most lawless of all little skill technology or capital.
a placer miner needed only a the mining camps.
there martha jane canary a crack shot who shovel a washing pan and a good claim.
as the placers gave out as calamity jane won fame as a scout and teamster fell in love a great deal of gold remained but it was locked in quartz or buried with wild bill hickok.
hickok himself a western legend who deep in the earth.
mining became an expensive business far beyond had tamed kansas cow towns killed an unknown number of men the reach of the average miner.
and toured in buffalo bills wild west show died in deadwood large corporations moved in to dig the deep shafts and shot in the back of the head.
hickok was thirty nine years old.
finance costly equipment.
quartz mining required heavy rock towns such as deadwood in the dakota territory virginia crushers mercury vats to dissolve the gold and large retorts to city nevada leadville colorado and tombstone arizona demrecapture it.
eastern and european financiers assumed control onstrated a new development process in the frontier experience.
labor became unionized and mining towns took on some of the the farming frontier had developed naturally in a rural setting.
characteristics of the industrial city.
individual prospectors meanon the mining frontier the germ of a city the camp appeared while dashed on to the next find.
unlike other frontiers the minalmost simultaneously with the first strike periodicals the latest ing frontier moved from west to east as the original california fashions theaters schools literary clubs and lending libraries came miners the yonder siders they were called hurried eastward quickly to the camps providing civilized refinements not available in search of the big strike.
on other frontiers.
urbanization also created the need for municipal in 1859 fresh strikes were made near pikes peak in colorado government sanitation and law enforcement.
and in the carson river valley of nevada.
news of both discovmining camps were governed by a simple democracy.
soon eries set off wild migrations one hundred thousand miners were after a strike the miners in the area met to organize a mining in pikes peak country by june 1859 the gold there quickly played district and adopted rules governing behavior in it.
rules reguout but the nevada find uncovered a thick bluish black ore that lated the size and boundaries of claims established procedures for was almost pure silver and gold.
a quick witted drifter named settling disputes and set penalties for crimes.
petty criminals were henry t p comstock talked his way into partnership in the claim banished from the district serious offenders were hanged.
in the and word of the comstock lode with ore worth 3 876 a case of a major dispute the whole camp gathered chose legal counton flashed over the mountains.
sel for both sides and heard the evidence.
if all else failed miners read the document john lester hydraulic mining the bonanza west canada wash terr.
co lumbia r.
dakota territory deadwood mo un wyoming black terr.
hills ta virginia city va utah terr.
s e an salt lake city nevada nebraska in sierr san francisco ky sn ak er montana territory roc idaho terr.
oregon central city denver leadville da colo terr.
r sutters mill miss uri r o couer dalene do silverton kansas col a or california pacific ocean santa fe arizona terr.
indian terr.
silver city tombstone ri o texas and gr e mexico major mining towns licensing fee.
as intended it drove out mexicans and other foreigners.
riots against chinese laborers occurred in the 1870s and 1880s in los angeles san francisco seattle reno and denver.
responding to pressure congress passed the chinese exclusion act of 1882 which suspended immigration of chinese laborers for ten years.
the number of chinese in the united states fell drastically.
by the 1890s the early mining bonanza was over.
all told the western mines contributed billions of dollars to the economy.
they had helped finance the civil war and provided needed capital for industrialization.
the vast boost in silver production from the comstock lode changed the relative value of gold and silver the base of american currency.
bitter disputes over the currency affected politics and led to the famous battle of the standards in the presidential election of 1896 see chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire on myhistorylab time line 1849 gold rush to california 1859 more gold and silver discoveries in colorado and nevada 1862 congress passes homestead act encouraging western settlement 1864 nevada admitted to the union colonel john chivington leads massacre of indians at sand creek colorado 1865 1867 sioux war against white miners and u s army 1866 long drive of cattle touches off cattle bonanzas 1867 horace greeley urges easterners to go west young man national grange of the patrons of husbandry the grange founded to enrich farmers lives 1867 1868 policy of small reservations for indians adopted 1873 congress passes timber culture act big bonanza discovered on the comstock lode in nevada 1874 joseph f glidden invents barbed wire discovery of gold in dakota territory sets off black hills gold rush 1876 colorado admitted to the union custer and his men defeated and killed by the sioux at battle of the little bighorn june 1883 museum expedition discovers fewer than two hundred buffalo in the west 1886 1887 severe drought and winter damage cattle and farming bonanzas 1887 congress passes dawes severalty act making indians individual landowners hatch act provides funds for establishment of agricultural experiment stations 1889 washington montana and the dakotas admitted to the union oklahoma territory opened to settlement 1890 idaho and wyoming admitted to the union teton sioux massacred at battle of wounded knee south dakota december 1893 young historian frederick jackson turner analyzes closing of the frontier 1902 congress passes national reclamation act the newlands act chapter review chapter review beyond the frontier what were the challenges of settling the country west of the mississippi.
west of the mississippi river settlers encountered new conditions including vast treeless plains and towering mountain ranges.
above all they left behind the water and timber on which they had depended in the east forcing them to devise new ways to deal with the different challenges.
p 391 settlement of the west why did americans and others move to the west.
americans moved west for many reasons including a desire to get rich seek religious freedom and improve health.
the federal government helped out with generous land laws and laws favoring irrigation in the arid west.
in the southwest a proud culture took shape around spanish laws and customs involving water the rights of women and the sale ownership and use of land.
p 400 crushing the native americans the bonanza west how did white americans crush the culture of the native americans as they moved west.
native americans had a complex culture suited to the various environments in which they lived.
the united states government and white settlers employed various methods political military legal and cultural to oust the indians from their lands civilize them and contain and control them.
p 392 why was the west a bonanza of dreams and get rich quick schemes.
the west attracted many people seeking a better economic life.
many failed but others found bonanzas in mining cattle ranching and farming.
in many of these areas western development paralleled trends in the rest of the nation larger and larger businesses new uses for technology and the employment of outside capital.
p 403 key terms and definitions ghost dances a religious movement that arose in the late nineteenth century under the prophet wavoka a paiute indian.
its followers believed that dances and rites would cause white men to disappear and restore lands to the native americans.
the u s government outlawed the ghost dances and army intervention to stop them led to the wounded knee massacre.
p 396 wounded knee massacre in december 1890 troopers of the seventh cavalry under orders to stop the ghost dance religion among the sioux took chief big foot and his followers to a camp on wounded knee creek in south dakota.
it is uncertain who fired the first shot but two hundred native americans were killed.
p 396 dawes severalty act legislation passed by congress in 1887 that aimed to break up traditional indian life by promoting individual land ownership.
it divided tribal lands into small plots that were distributed among members of each tribe.
provisions were made for education and eventual citizenship.
the law led to corruption and exploitation and weakened tribal culture.
p 397 gold rush of 1849 prospectors made the first gold strikes along the sierra nevada mountains in california in 1849 touching off a mining boom that set the pattern for subsequent strikes in other regions.
p 401 overland trail the route from the mississippi valley to the pacific coast in the last half of the nineteenth century.
p 401 homestead act of 1862 legislation granting 160 acres to anyone who paid a 10 fee and pledged to live on and cultivate the land for five years.
between 1862 and 1900 nearly 600 000 families claimed homesteads under its provisions.
p 402 national reclamation act newlands act passed in 1902 this legislation set aside most of the proceeds from the sale of public land in sixteen western states to fund irrigation projects.
p 402 placer mining mining that included using a shovel and washing pan to separate gold from the ore in streams and riverbeds.
placer miners worked as individuals or in small groups.
p 404 comstock lode discovered in 1859 near virginia city nevada this ore deposit was the richest discovery in the history of mining.
named after t p comstock the deposit produced silver and gold worth more than 306 million.
p 404 chinese exclusion act of 1882 legislation passed in 1882 that excluded chinese immigrants for ten years and denied u s citizenship to chinese nationals.
it was the first u s exclusionary law aimed at a specific racial group.
p 405 exodusters a group of about 6 000 african americans who left louisiana mississippi and texas in 1879 for freer lives as farmers or laborers in kansas.
p 406 dry farming a farming technique developed to allow farming in the more arid parts of the west where settlers had to deal with far less rainfall than they had east of the mississippi.
furrows were plowed approximately a foot deep and filled with a dust mulch to loosen soil and slow evaporation.
p 408 bonanza farms huge farms covering thousands of acres on the great plains.
in relying on large size and new machinery they represented a development in agriculture similar to that taking place in industry.
p 409 national grange of the patrons of husbandry founded by oliver h kelly in 1867 the grange sought to relieve the drabness of farm life by providing a social educational and cultural outlet for its members.
it also set up grain elevators cooperative stores warehouses insurance companies and farm machinery factories.
p 409 turners thesis put forth by historian frederick jackson turner in 1893 this thesis asserted that the existence of a frontier and its settlement had shaped american character given rise to individualism independence and self confidence and fostered the american spirit of invention and adaptation.
later historians modified the thesis by pointing out the environmental and other consequences of frontier settlement the federal governments role in peopling the west and the clash of races and cultures that took place on the frontier.
p 411 study resources critical thinking questions 1 what kinds of conditions did settlers find as they moved into lands west of the mississippi river and how had the peoples who already lived there dealt with these conditions.
2 what was the nature of indian culture on the plains and how did it deal with the hordes of settlers moving into the area.
3 by what methods did settlers move west and adjust to the bonanzas they found in the west and southwest.
4 what were the three bonanzas that drew settlers into the west and in what ways did they lead to the destruction of native american culture and shape the growth of the area.
myhistorylab y sto y ab media ed a assignments ss g e ts find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 18 the industrial society almost 90 percent of the federal land grants lay in twenty states west of the mississippi river.
federal land grants helped build 18 738 miles of track less than 8 percent of the system.
the land was frequently distant and difficult to market.
railroad companies sometimes sold it to raise cash but more often they used it as security for bonds or loans.
beyond doubt the grants of cash and land promoted waste and corruption.
the companies built fast and wastefully eager to collect the subsidies that went with each mile of track.
wanting quick profits some owners formed separate construction companies to which they awarded lavish contracts.
in this way the notorious crdit mobilier a construction company controlled by an inner ring on the union pacific enriched its owners in the 1860s while the contract and finance company did the same on the central pacific.
the crdit mobilier bribed congressmen and state legislators to avoid investigation of its activities.
the grants also enabled railroads to build into territories that were pledged to the indians thus contributing to the wanton destruction of indian life.
yet on balance the grants probably worked more benefits than evils.
as congress had hoped the grants were the lure for railroad building across the rugged unsettled west where it would be years before the railroads revenues would repay their construction.
farmers ranchers and merchants poured into the newly opened areas settling the country and boosting the value of government and private land nearby.
the grants seemed necessary in a nation which unlike europe expected private enterprise to build the railroads.
in return for government aid congress required the railroads to carry government freight troops and for nearly a hundred years the railroad era lasted through the 1940s children gathered at depots paused in the fields to wave as the fast express flashed by listened at night to far off whistles and wondered what lay down the tracks.
they lived in a world grown smaller.
building the empire when lee surrendered at appomattox in 1865 the country already had thirty five thousand miles of track and much of the railroad system east of the mississippi river was in place.
farther west the rail network stood poised on the edge of settlement.
although southern railroads were in shambles from the war the united states had nearly as much railroad track as the rest of the world.
after the civil war rail construction increased by leaps and bounds.
from 35 000 miles in 1865 the network expanded to 93 000 miles in 1880 166 000 in 1890 and 193 000 in 1900 more than in all europe including russia.
mileage peaked at 254 037 miles in 1916 just before the industry began its long decline into the mid twentieth century.
to build such an empire took vast amounts of capital more than 4 5 billion by 1880 before even half of it was complete.
american and european investors provided some of the money government supplied the rest.
in all local governments gave railroad companies about 300 million and state governments added 228 million more.
the federal government loaned nearly 65 million to a half dozen western railroads and donated millions of acres of the public domain.
between 1850 and 1871 some eighty railroads received more than 170 million acres of land.
south er n pacific wash terr.
maine montana territory ic acif minn vt northern p oregon idaho territory wyoming territory n h mass.
wis dakota territory n y pa nebraska calif union pac ific central pacific nevada r he ut so n pacific utah territory colorado territory ill kans.
r i conn mich mo.
w va n j del.
washington d c va ky santa fe n c atlantic an i d pac fic okla tenn ark.
arizona new mexico territory territory s c miss.
texas land reserved for grants to railroads fla approximate area of land actually received by railroads area forfeited by railroads 400 miles 400 kilometers federal land grants to railroads as of 1871 besides land the government provided loans of 16 000 for each mile built on level ground 32 000 for each mile built on hilly terrain and 48 000 for each mile in high mountain country.
an empire on rails and its owner cornelius vanderbilt the commodore a crusty old multimillionaire from the shipping business.
1830 1840 nearly seventy years old when he first entered railroading vanderbilt wasted no 1841 1850 time.
in 1867 he took over the new york central and merged it with other lines to pro1851 1860 vide a track from new york city to buffalo and chicago.
when he died in 1877 his central 1861 1870 operated more than 4 500 miles of track.
j edgar thomson and thomas a scott 1871 1880 built the fourth trunk line the pennsylvania railroad which initially ran from philadelphia 1881 1890 to pittsburgh.
restless and energetic they dreamed of a rail empire stretching through 1891 1900 the south and west.
an aggressive business leader scott expanded the pennsylvania sys1901 1910 tem to cincinnati indianapolis st louis and chicago in 1869 new york city in 1871 and 1911 1920 baltimore and washington soon thereafter.
in the war damaged south consolidation 10 000 20 000 30 000 40 000 50 000 60 000 70 000 took longer.
as reconstruction waned northmiles of track ern and european capital rebuilt and intesource u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 bicentennial grated the southern lines especially during the edition washington dc 1975.
1880s when rail construction in the south led the nation.
by 1900 the south had five large mail at substantially reduced rates resulting in savings to the systems linking its major cities and farming and industrial regions.
government of almost 1 billion between 1850 and 1945 in no four decades after the secession crisis these systems tied the south other cases of federal subsidies to carriers canals highways and into a national transportation network.
airlines did congress exact specific benefits in return.
over that rail system passengers and freight moved in relative speed comfort and safety.
automatic couplers 1867 air brakes 1869 refrigerator cars 1867 dining cars heated cars electric linking the nation via trunk lines switches and stronger locomotives transformed railroad service.
george pullmans lavish sleeping cars became popular.
handsome the early railroads may seem to have linked different regions but depots such as new yorks grand central and washingtons union in fact they did not.
built with little regard for through traffic they station were erected at major terminals.
passenger miles per year were designed more to protect local interests than to tap outside increased from five billion in 1870 to sixteen billion in 1900 markets.
many extended less than fifty miles.
to avoid cooperin november 1883 the railroads even changed time.
ending ating with other lines they adopted conflicting schedules built the crazy quilt jumble of local times that caused scheduling difseparate depots and above all used different gauges.
gauges the ficulties the american railway association divided the country distance between the rails ranged from 4 feet 8 inches which into four time zones and adopted the modern system of standard became the standard gauge to 6 feet.
without special equipment time.
congress took thirty five years longer it adopted standard trains of one gauge could not run on tracks of another.
time in 1918 in the midst of world war i the civil war showed the value of fast long distance transportation and after 1865 railroad managers worked to provide it.
in a burst of consolidation the large companies swallowed the small integrated rails across the continent rail networks became a reality.
railroads also adopted standard schedules signals and equipment and finally in 1886 the standard gauge.
the dream of a transcontinental railroad linking the atlantic and in 1866 in a dramatic innovation to speed traffic railroad companies pacific oceans stretched back many years but had always been introduced fast freight lines that pooled cars for service between cities.
lost to sectional quarrels over the route.
in 1862 and 1864 with in the northeast four great trunk lines took shape all the south out of the picture congress moved to build the first intended to link eastern seaports with the rich traffic of the great transcontinental railroad.
it chartered the union pacific railroad lakes and western rivers.
like a massive river system trunk lines company to build westward from nebraska and the central pacific drew traffic from dozens of tributaries feeder lines and carried railroad company to build eastward from the pacific coast.
for each it to major markets.
the baltimore and ohio b o which mile built the two companies received from congress 20 square reached chicago in 1874 was one the erie railroad which ran miles of land in alternate sections along the track.
for each mile from new york to chicago was another.
the erie competed bitthey also received a thirty year loan of 16 000 32 000 or 48 000 terly with the new york central railroad the third trunk line depending on the difficulty of the terrain over which they built.
railroad construction 1830 1920 chapter 18 the industrial society on myhistorylab time line 1859 first oil well drilled near titusville pennsylvania 1866 william sylvis establishes national labor union 1869 transcontinental railroad completed at promontory utah knights of labor organize alexander graham bell invents the telephone centennial exposition held in philadelphia railroads cut workers wages leading to bloody and violent strike thomas a edison invents the incandescent lamp rockefellers standard oil company becomes nations first trust edison opens first electric generating station in new york 1883 railroads introduce standard time zones 1886 samuel gompers founds american federation of labor afl labor protest erupts in violence in haymarket riot in chicago railroads adopt standard gauge workers strike at homestead steel plant in pennsylvania economic depression begins j p morgan announces formation of u s steel corporation nations first billion dollar company chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 only 15 in 1880 to 432 in 1900 doctors lawyers and others became part of a growing middle class that shaped the concerns of the progressive era of the early twentieth century.
although less than 5 percent of the college age population attended college during the 1877 1890 period the new trends had great impact.
a generation of men and women encountered new ideas that changed their views of themselves and society.
courses never before offered such as philosophy ii at harvard the ethics of social reform which students called drainage drunkenness and divorce heightened interest in social problems and the need for reform.
some graduating students burned with a desire to cure societys ills.
my life began.
at johns hopkins university frederic c howe an influential reformer recalled.
i came alive i felt a sense of responsibility to the world i wanted to change things the spread of jim crow why did jim crow laws spread across the south after the end of reconstruction.
though washington and du bois differed widely in their views both of them fought the growing restrictions on black civil rights known as jim crow laws see chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s the election of 1900 view the closer look republican campaign poster of 1896 william mckinley candidate mckinley bryan woolley debs party republican democrat prohibition socialist popular vote 7 207 923 6 358 133 209 004 94 768 electoral vote in 1898 and 1899 the mckinley administration focused on the war with spain the peace treaty that followed and the dawning realization that the war had thrust the united states into a position of world power.
in march 1900 congress passed the gold standard act which declared gold the standard of currency and ended the silver controversy that had dominated the 1890s.
the presidential campaign of 1900 was a replay of the mckinley bryan fight of 1896 mckinleys running mate was theodore roosevelt hero of the spanish american war and former governor of new york who was nominated for vice president to capitalize on his popularity and his enemies hoped to sidetrack his political career into oblivion.
bryan emphasized the issues of imperialism and the trusts mckinley emphasized his record at home and abroad.
the result in 1900 was a landslide.
on september 6 1901 a few months after his second inauguration mckinley stood in a receiving line at the panamerican exposition in buffalo.
leon czolgosz a 28 year old unemployed laborer and anarchist moved through the line and reaching the president shot him.
surgeons probed the wound but could find nothing.
a recent discovery called the x ray was on display at the exposition but it was not used.
on september 14 mckinley died and vice president theodore roosevelt became president.
a new century had begun.
this republican campaign poster of 1896 depicts candidate william mckinley as the champion of commerce and civilization.
the sun rising behind the flag mckinley is holding suggests that a new day will dawn with a republican administration.
firmly in place the focus had shifted.
the need to regulate to control the effects of industrialism became a central public concern of the new century.
mckinley prodded the republicans to meet that shift but he died before his plans matured.
mckinley toyed with the idea of lowering the tariff but one obstacle always stood in the way the government needed revenue and tariff duties were one of the few taxes the public would support.
the spanish american war of 1898 persuaded people to accept greater federal power and with it new forms of taxation.
in 1899 mckinley spoke of lowering tariff barriers in a world that technology had made smaller.
god and man have linked the nations together he said in his last speech at buffalo new york in 1901.
isolation is no longer possible or desirable conclusion a decades dramatic changes as the funeral train carried mckinleys body back to ohio mark hanna mckinleys old friend and ally sat slumped in his parlor car.
i told william mckinley it was a mistake to nominate that wild man at philadelphia he mourned.
i asked him if he realized what would happen if he should die.
now look that damned cowboy is president of the united states hannas world had changed and so had the nations not so much because that damned cowboy was suddenly president but because events of the 1890s had had powerful effects.
in the course of that decade political patterns shifted the presidency acquired fresh power and massive unrest prompted social change.
the war with spain brought a new empire and worldwide responsibilities.
economic hardship posed questions of the most difficult sort about industrialization urbanization and the quality of american life.
worried people embraced new ideas study resources and causes.
reform movements begun in the 1890s flowered in the progressive era after 1900 technology continued to alter the way americans lived.
in 1896 henry ford produced a two cylinder four horsepower car the first of the famous line that bore his name.
in 1899 the first automobile salesroom opened in new york and some innovative thinkers were already imagining a network of service stations to keep the new cars running.
at kitty hawk north carolina wilbur and orville wright two bicycle manufacturers neared the birth of powered flight.
the realignments that reached their peak in the 1890s seem distant yet they are not.
important decisions in those years shaped nearly everything that came after them.
in character and influence the 1890s were as much a part of the twentieth century as of the nineteenth and continue to have repercussions into the twenty first century.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 21 toward empire a splendid little war ten weeks after the declaration of war the fighting was over.
for americans they were ten glorious dizzying weeks with victories to fill every headline and slogans to suit every taste.
no war can be a happy occasion for those who fight it but the spanishamerican war came closer than most.
declared in april it ended in august.
relatively few americans died and the quick victory seemed to verify burgeoning american power though sherwood anderson the author suggested that fighting a weakened spain was like robbing an old gypsy woman in a vacant lot at night after a fair john hay soon to be mckinleys secretary of state called it a splendid little war at the outset the united states was militarily unprepared.
unlike the navy the army had not been rebuilt or modernized and it had shrunk drastically since the day thirty three years before when grants great civil war army marched sixty abreast two hundred thousand strong down washingtons pennsylvania avenue.
in 1898 the regular army consisted of only twenty eight thousand officers and men most of them more experienced in quelling indian uprisings than fighting large scale battles.
when mckinley called for 125 000 volunteers as many as one million young americans responded.
ohio alone had 100 000 volunteers.
keeping the regular army units intact war department officials enlisted the volunteers in national guard units that were then integrated into the national army.
men clamored to join.
the secretary of war feared there is going to be more trouble to satisfy those who are not going than to find those who are willing to go in an army inundated with men problems of equipment and supply quickly appeared.
the regulars had the new 30 caliber krag jorgensen rifles but national guard units carried civil war springfield rifles that used old black powder cartridges.
the cartridges gave off a puff of smoke when fired neatly marking the troops position.
spanish troops were better equipped they had modern mausers with smokeless powder which they used to devastating effect.
food was also a problem as was sickness.
the war department fell behind in supplies and received many complaints about the canned beef it offered the men.
tropical disease felled many soldiers.
scores took ill after landing in cuba and the philippines and it was not uncommon for half a regiment to be unable to answer the bugle call.
americans then believed that a foreign war should be fought by the hometown military unit acting as an extension of their community soldiers identified with their hometowns dressed in the local fashion and thought of themselves as members of a town unit in a national army.
the poet carl sandburg twenty years old in 1898 rushed to join the army and called his unit a living part of his hometown of galesburg illinois.
and the citizens of galesburg for their part took a special interest in sandburgs unit in a fashion repeated in countless towns across the country.
not surprisingly then national guard units mirrored the social patterns of their communities.
since everyone knew each other there was an easygoing familiarity tempered by the deference charge of the 24th and 25th colored infantry and rescue of the rough riders at san juan hill july 2 1898 colored lithograph by kurz and allison 1899 above.
the twenty fourth and twenty fifth colored infantry regiments served with exceptional gallantry in the spanish american war.
charles young right an 1889 graduate of west point was the only african american officer in the army during the spanish american war except for a few chaplains.
war with spain view the map the spanish american war united states tampa china atlantic ocean florida miami nassau china c chi na s sea key west us havana sinking of the maine feb 15 1898 nav a l blo cka d bahamas e el caney and san juan kettle hill santiago july 1 1898 de cuba ey manila 500 miles philippines 0 500 km guantnamo bay us na santiago jamaica 400 miles 400 km br.
pa pacific p acific a c ocean oc c an ce n cuba us e naval blockad cayman is.
formosa hong kong de w gulf of mexico br.
kingston santiago de cuba july 1 2 1898 haiti val b loc ka dominican republic port au prince hispaniola santo domingo u s forces de spanish forces san juan puerto rico u s victories caribbean sea u s naval blockade disputes regarding cuba and the sinking of the battleship u s s.
maine prompted the united states to declare war on spain in 1898 the two nations dueled over another spanish possession the philippines.
the treaty of paris of 1898 that ended the war granted cuba its independence although it remained an american protectorate until 1934 and established u s control over puerto rico guam and the philippines.
that went with hometown wealth occupation education and length of residence.
enlisted men resented officers who grabbed too much authority and they expected officers and men to call each other by their first names.
sandburg knew most of the privates in his unit had worked for his corporal and had gone to school with the first lieutenant.
officers and men of the guard mingle on a plane of beautiful equality said a visitor to one volunteer camp.
privates invade the tents of their officers at will and yell at them half the length of the street each community thought of the hometown unit as its own unit an extension of itself.
in later wars the government censored news and dominated press relations there was little censorship in the war with spain and the freshest news arrived in the latest letter home.
small town newspapers printed news of the men and townswomen knit special red or white bellybands of stitched flannel thought to ward off tropical fevers.
towns sent food clothing and occasionally even local doctors to the front.
at the close of the war the clyde ohio ladies society collected funds to provide each member of the towns company a medal struck on behalf of the town.
smoked yankees when the invasion force sailed for cuba nearly one fourth of it was african american.
in 1898 the regular army included four regiments of african american soldiers the twenty fourth and twenty fifth infantry and the ninth and tenth cavalry.
black regiments had served with distinction in campaigns against the indians in the west.
most african american troops in fact were posted in the west no eastern community would accept them.
a troop of the ninth cavalry was stationed in virginia in 1891 but whites protested and the troop was ordered back to the west.
when the war broke out the war department called for five black volunteer regiments.
the army needed men and military authorities were sure that black men had a natural immunity to the climate and diseases of the tropics.
but most state governors refused to accept black volunteers.
only alabama ohio and massachusetts mustered in black units in response to mckinleys first call for volunteers.
company l of the sixth massachusetts regiment took part in the invasion of puerto rico in july 1898 the only one of the black volunteer units to see action in the caribbean.
african american leaders among them p b s pinchback former acting governor of louisiana and george white of north carolina the lone african american member of congress protested the discrimination.
the mckinley administration intervened and in the end the volunteer army included more than ten thousand black troops.
orders quickly went out to the four black regular army regiments in the west to move to camps in the south to prepare for the invasion of cuba.
crowds and cheers followed the troop trains across the plains but as they crossed into kentucky and tennessee the cheering stopped.
welcoming crowds were kept away from the trains and the troops were hustled onward.
station restaurants chapter review america looks outward alaska russia canad hina why did americans look outward in the last half of the nineteenth century.
acquisition of empire alaska a north aleutian is.
americ un st pacific ocean japan in the late nineteenth century americans increasingly looked overseas influenced by the example of other nations and confidence in what their country could offer other peoples including christianity commerce and american values.
policy makers were sure that the nation needed a navy colonial outposts foreign markets and a new foreign policy.
p 492 hawaiian islands pacific ocean equator australia what were the various viewpoints about the acquisition of empire after the war with spain.
united s samoan islands war with spain what were the causes and results of the war with spain.
in 1898 the united states fought a war with spain which resulted in a quick victory and enormous changes for american society including a larger military an increased role for the federal government in american life the acquisition of colonies and increased power for the presidency.
p 497 in the peace treaty ending the war with spain the united states acquired a new empire including puerto rico guam and the philippines.
for the first time the united states owned territories overseas to which it did not intend to grant statehood.
that together with historical racial and other arguments caused an angry debate between those in favor and those opposing the new colonies.
adding to the furor was the outbreak of warfare between american troops and filipino insurgents in the philippines.
p 503 midway is.
philippine is.
guam hawaiian is.
johnston is.
1858 kingman reef 1858 palmyra is.
1898 howland is.
equato jarvis is.
american samoa australia study resources key terms and definitions isolationism a belief that the united states should avoid entanglements with other nations.
p 492 imperialism the policy of extending a nations power over other areas through military conquest economic domination or annexation.
p 492 yellow journalism to sell newspapers before and during the spanishamerican war publishers william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer engaged in blatant sensationalization of the news which became known as yellow journalism although it did not cause the war it helped turn u s public opinion against spain.
p 498 teller amendment in this amendment to the declaration of war on spain in 1898 the united states pledged that it did not intend to annex cuba and that it would recognize cuban independence after the spanishamerican war.
p 499 anti imperialist league an organization formed in 1898 to fight the treaty of paris ending the spanish american war.
members opposed acquiring overseas colonies believing it would subvert american ideals and institutions.
membership centered in new england the cause was less popular in the south and west.
p 504 philippine american war a war fought from 1899 to 1903 to quell filipino resistance to u s control of the philippine islands.
p 505 open door policy this policy established free trade between the united states and china in 1900 and attempted to induce european nations and japan to recognize the territorial integrity of china.
it marked a departure from the american tradition of isolationism and signaled the countrys growing involvement in the world.
p 507 treaty of paris treaty in december 1898 ending the spanish american war.
under its terms spain recognized cubas independence assumed the cuban debt and ceded puerto rico guam and the philippines to the united states.
p 504 critical thinking questions 1 what were the key developments in leading the united states to look abroad between the 1870s and the 1890s and how did these developments ultimately lead to the war with spain in 1898.
3 what were the most important effects of the end of the war and the acquisition of empire.
2 why did the important causes and events of the spanish american war lead to the crucial decision to acquire and overseas empire.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 22 the progressive era read the document gifford pinchot the fight for conservation 1910 co lum bia r canada ssouri r.
mi washington north dakota r montana india called picking asparagus a ghastly job paid at the rate of ten cents a box they gave us miles and miles of asparagus rows.
as soon as i had knelt down with my knife and cut out one head and put it in the box there would be another one sprouting before me.
then i would have to stoop again and it was continuous picking and stooping that made it a terrible form of exercise.
it is walk and bend bend and walk from half past four in the morning or thereabouts until seven in the evening.
o c k oregon south dakota y idaho sn ake r wyoming m s t n sierr utah d ra lo co r nebraska.
a ad ev an california nevada o colorado kansas oklahoma arizona pacific ocean new mexico texas o ri and gr e 400 miles mexico 400 kilometers irrigation projects reservoirs and lakes used as reservoirs federal land reserves irrigation and conservation in the west to 1917 to make the arid lands of the western states productive the state and federal governments regulated the water supply through irrigation projects and the creation of water reservoirs.
the federal government also created land reserves.
class structure that sharply separated owners from workers.
under the newlands act of 1902 the secretary of the interior formed the u s reclamation service which gathered a staff of thousands of engineers and technicians the largest bureaucracy ever assembled in irrigation history dams and canals channeled water into places such as californias imperial valley and as the water streamed in cotton cantaloupes oranges tomatoes lettuce and a host of other crops streamed out to national markets.
by 1920 idaho montana utah wyoming colorado and oregon had extensive irrigation systems all drawing on scarce water supplies california the foremost importer of water had 4 2 million acres under irrigation many of them picked by migrant workers from mexico china and japan.
the work was backbreaking and poorly paid.
a worker from women and children at work women worked in larger and larger numbers.
in 1900 more than five million worked one fift h of all adult women and among those aged fourteen to twenty four the employment rate was almost one third.
of those employed single women outnumbered married women by seven to one yet more than one third of married women worked.
most women held service jobs.
only a small number held higher paying jobs as professionals or managers.
in the 1890s women made up more than one quarter of medical school graduates.
using a variety of techniques men gradually squeezed them out and by the 1920s only about 5 percent of the graduates were women.
few women taught in colleges and universities and those who did were expected to resign if they married.
in 1906 harriet brooks a promising physicist at barnard college in new york became engaged and refused to resign the dean told her icily that barnard expected a married woman to dignify her home making into a profession and not assume that she can carry on two full professions at a time more women than men graduated from high school and with such professions as medicine and science largely closed to them women often turned to the new business schools that offered training in stenography typing and bookkeeping.
in 1920 more than one quarter of all employed women held clerical jobs.
many others taught school.
in 1907 and 1908 investigators studied twenty two thousand women workers in pittsburgh 60 percent of them earned less than 7 a week a minimum for decent living fewer than 1 percent held skilled jobs most tended machines wrapped and labeled or did handwork that required no particular skill.
in new york many women toiled six days a week as garment workers from eight in the morning to six in the evening with an extra hour off on saturdays.
they earned 7 to 12 a week nothing at all during slack season.
they had to buy their own needles and thread and pay for electricity and chairs to sit on.
black women had always worked and in far larger numbers than their white counterparts.
the reason was usually economic an african american man or woman alone could rarely earn enough to support a family.
unlike many white women black women tended to remain in the labor force after marriage or the start of a family.
they also had less opportunity for job advancement and in 1920 between one third and one half of all african american women who were working were restricted to personal and domestic service jobs.
societys masses read the document john spargo from the bitter cry of the children 1906 spurred by the data the childrens bureau was formed within the u s bureau of labor with grace abbott a social worker at its head.
it immediately began its own investigations showing among other things the need for greater protection of maternal and infant health.
in 1921 congress passed the sheppard towner maternity and infancy protection act which helped fund maternity and pediatric clinics.
providing a precedent for the social security act of 1935 it demonstrated the increasing effectiveness of women reformers in the progressive era.
numerous middle class women became involved in the fight for reform while many others reflecting the ongoing changes in the family took increasing pride in homemaking and motherhood.
mothers day the national holiday was formally established in 1913 women who preferred smaller numbers of children turned increasingly to birth control which became a more acceptable practice.
margaret sanger a nurse and outspoken social reformer led a campaign to give physicians broad discretion in prescribing contraceptives.
when sanger became involved in the birth control movement the federal comstock law banned the interstate transport of contraceptive devices and information.
the niagara movement and the naacp breaker boys who picked out pieces of slate from the coal as it rushed past often became bent backed and suffered respiratory diseases such as bronchitis and tuberculosis after years of working fourteen hours a day in the coal mines.
accidents and deaths were common in the mines.
critics charged that womens employment endangered the home threatened their reproductive functions and even as one man said stripped them of that modest demeanor that lends a charm to their kind adding to these fears the birthrate continued to drop between 1900 and 1920 and the divorce rate soared in part because working class men took advantage of the newer moral freedom and deserted their families in growing numbers.
by 1916 there was one divorce for every nine marriages as compared to one for twenty one in 1880 many children also worked.
in 1900 about three million children nearly 20 percent of those between the ages of 5 and 15 held full time or almost full time jobs.
twenty five thousand boys under 16 worked in mining twenty thousand children under 12 mainly girls worked in southern cotton mills.
gradually as public indignation grew the use of child labor shrank.
determined to do something about the situation the womens trade union league lobbied the federal bureau of labor to investigate the conditions under which women and children worked.
begun in 1907 the investigation took four years and produced nineteen volumes of data some of it shocking all of it factual.
in 1911 at the turn of the century eight of every ten african americans still lived in rural areas mainly in the south.
most were poor sharecroppers.
jim crow laws segregated many schools railroad cars hotels and hospitals.
poll taxes and other devices disfranchised blacks and many poor whites.
violence was common from 1900 to 1914 white mobs murdered more than a thousand black people.
two murders occurred near vicksburg mississippi in 1904 and they revealed a great deal about the kind of violence african americans faced.
looking for the killer of a white planter a mob captured a black man and woman their guilt or innocence unknown.
they were tied to trees and their fingers and ears were cut off as souvenirs.
the most excruciating form of punishment consisted in the use of a large corkscrew in the hands of some of the mob.
this instrument was bored into the flesh of the man and the woman in the arms legs and body and then pulled out the spirals tearing out big pieces of raw quivering flesh every time it was withdrawn finally both people were thrown on a fire and burned to death a relief a witness said to the maimed and suffering victims many african americans labored on the cotton farms and in the railroad camps sawmills and mines of the south under conditions of peonage.
peons traded their lives and labor for food and shelter.
often illiterate they were forced to sign contracts allowing the planter to use such force as he or his agents may deem necessary to require me to remain on his farm and perform good and satisfactory services armed guards patrolled the camps and whipped those trying to escape.
in the woods a peon said they can do anything they please and no one can see them but god few blacks belonged to labor unions and blacks almost always earned less than whites in the same job.
in atlanta white electricians earned 5 00 a day blacks 3 50.
black songs such as ive got a white man workin for me 1901 voiced more hope than reality.
the illiteracy rate among african americans dropped from 45 percent in 1900 to 30 percent in 1910 but nowhere were chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism conclusion the fruits of progressivism the election of 1916 showed how deeply progressivism had reached into american society.
we have in four years wilson said that fall come very near to carrying out the platform of the progressive party as well as our own for we are also progressives in retrospect however 1916 also marked the beginning of progressivisms decline.
at most the years of progressive reform lasted from the 1890s to 1921 and in large measure they were compressed into a single decade between 1906 and american entry into world war i in 1917 many problems the progressives addressed but did not solve and some important ones such as race they did not even tackle.
yet their regulatory commissions direct primaries city improvements and child labor laws marked an era of important and measured reform.
the institution of the presidency expanded.
from the white house radiated executive departments that guided a host of activities.
independent commissions operating within flexible laws supplemented executive authority.
these developments owed a great deal to both roosevelt and wilson.
to manage a complex society roosevelt developed a simple formula expert advice growth minded policies a balancing of business labor and other interests the use of publicity to gather support and stern but often permissive oversight of the economy.
roosevelt strengthened the executive office and he called on the newer group of professional educated public minded citizens to help him.
i believe in a strong executive he said i believe in power at first wilson had different ideas wanting to dismantle much of roosevelts governing apparatus.
but driven by outside forces and changes in his own thinking wilson soon moved in directions similar to those roosevelt had championed.
starting out to disperse power he eventually consolidated it.
through such movements government at all levels accepted responsibility for the welfare of various elements in the social order.
a reform minded and bureaucratic society took shape in which men and women labor and capital political parties and social classes competed for shares in the expansive framework of twentieth century life.
but there were limits to reform.
as both roosevelt and wilson found the new government agencies understaffed and underfinanced depended on the responsiveness of those they sought to regulate.
soon there was a far darker cloud on the horizon.
the spirit of progressivism rested on a belief in human potential peace and progress.
after napoleons defeat in 1815 a century of peace began in western europe and as the decades passed war seemed a dying institution.
it looks as though this were going to be the age of treaties rather than the age of wars an american said in 1912 the century of reason rather than the century of force it was not to be.
two years later the most devastating of wars broke out in europe and in 1917 americans were fighting on the battlefields of france.
study resources study y resources take the study plan for chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism on myhistorylab time line 1894 national municipal league formed to work for reform in cities galveston texas is first city to try commission form of government theodore roosevelt becomes president robert m la follette elected reform governor of wisconsin doctors reorganize the american medical association socialist party of america organized roosevelt sues northern securities company for violation of antitrust act coal miners in northeastern pennsylvania strike maryland is first state to pass workers compensation law oregon adopts the initiative and referendum roosevelt elected president hepburn act strengthens interstate commerce commission icc upton sinclair attacks meatpacking industry in the jungle congress passes meat inspection act and pure food and drug act 1908 taft elected president supreme court upholds oregon law limiting working hours for women in muller v oregon payne aldrich tariff act divides republican party mann elkins act passed to regulate railroads taft fires gifford pinchot head of u s forest service democrats sweep midterm elections progressive party formed nominates roosevelt for president woodrow wilson elected president underwood tariff act lowers rates federal reserve act reforms u s banking system sixteenth amendment authorizes congress to collect taxes on incomes clayton act strengthens antitrust legislation wilson wins reelection supreme court strikes down federal law limiting child labor in hammer v dagenhart nineteenth amendment gives women the right to vote chapter review the ordeal of william howard taft woodrow wilsons new freedom why was the presidency of william howard taft so difficult for him.
what were the central principles of woodrow wilsons new freedom.
roosevelt had left taft a variety of difficult problems including the tariff and a widening split between progressive and conservative republicans.
taft increasingly alienated the progressives and roosevelt.
in the election of 1912 taft finished third behind woodrow wilson and roosevelt.
p 550 victorious in 1912 wilson set out to put into effect the central principles of his new freedom program including tariff reform an antitrust law and the federal reserve act a measure that still guides our economy today.
by 1916 however wilson found greater value in roosevelts new nationalism which had emphasized government intervention and measures to protect women labor and other groups.
p 553 key terms and definitions progressive or bull moose party this political party was formed by theodore roosevelt to advance progressive ideas and unseat president william howard taft in 1912 p 537 national american woman suffrage association founded by susan b anthony in 1890 this organization worked to secure women the right to vote.
it stressed careful organization and peaceful lobbying.
p 541 pragmatism an early twentieth century doctrine based n the ideas of william james.
pragmatists were impatient with the concept of truth as an abstract reality.
they believed that truth should work for the individual and that people were not only shaped by their environment but also helped to shape it.
if an idea worked it became truth.
p 542 hepburn act a 1906 law that strengthened the power of the interstate commerce commission icc to regulate the railroads.
p 548 conservation president theodore roosevelt made this principle one of his administrations top goals.
conservation in his view aimed at protecting the nations natural resources but called for the wise use of them rather than locking them away.
p 549 new freedom president woodrow wilsons program which emphasized business competition and small government.
it sought to rein in federal authority release individual energy and restore competition.
it achieved many of the progressive social justice objectives while pushing for a free economy rather than a planned one.
p 553 underwood tariff act this 1913 law reduced tariff rates and levied a graduated income tax to make up for the lost revenue.
p 554 federal reserve act this 1913 act created a central banking system consisting of 12 regional banks governed by the federal reserve board.
it was an attempt to provide the united states with a sound yet flexible currency.
p 554 clayton antitrust act this law outlawed interlocking directorates in which the same people served as directors for several competing companies forbade policies that created monopolies and made corporate officers responsible for antitrust violations.
it also declared that unions were not conspiracies in restraint of trade and outlawed the use of injunctions in labor disputes unless they were necessary to protect property.
p 554 new nationalism president theodore roosevelts program calling for a national approach to the countrys affairs and a strong president to deal with them efficiency in government and society and protection of children women and workers.
it accepted good trusts and exalted the expert and the executive.
it also encouraged large concentrations of capital and labor.
p 553 critical thinking questions 1 how might american history have changed if the progressive era had not occurred.
2 how did the major measures of roosevelts second term continue the progressive approaches on his first term.
3 how did the differences of opinion during the progressive era affect the taft administration.
4 how did the wilson administration draw on the characteristics of the progressive era.
study resources myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal on myhistorylab time line 1932 franklin d roosevelt elected president 1933 emergency banking relief act passed in one day march twenty first amendment repeals prohibition december securities and exchange commission authorized june works progress administration wpa hires unemployed april wagner act grants workers collective bargaining july congress passes social security act august 1936 fdr wins second term as president 1937 united automobile workers sit down strike forces general motors contract february fdr loses court packing battle july roosevelt recession begins august congress sets minimum wage at 40 cents an hour june chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 axis powers before world war ii 400 miles extent of axis control early nov 1942 400 kilometers finland allies norway neutral nations est.
northern ireland sweden warsaw be o mar.
de r austria switz.
s ov ie t uni o n poland g stalingrad aug 21 1942 jan 31 1943 ukraine hungary caucasus romania aug a east prussia ger.
el france vichy france.
19 apr lith.
rr germany.
battle of cze c h the bulge oslo vakia dec 16 1944 jan 31 1945 danu be r normandy paris liberated aug 1944 ic au rhine r at l a n t i c ocean lt ba berlin surrendered may 2 1945 neth.
moscow aug 1944 denmark g reat bri tai n d day june 6 1944 volg a r a north sea london t 1 sep lat.
se major battles ireland leningrad besieged sept 1941 june 19 1944 ju ly allied troop movements r danube dec 1944 yugo.
italy port.
spain black sea bulgaria rome liberated june 4 1944 a turkey greece nov sp.
morocco july 1943 sicily syria rhodes it.
kasserine pass feb 14 22 1943 morocco tunisia cyprus br.
mediterranean sea palestine f r e n c h n or t h af r ic a br.
19 el alamein oct 23 nov.
5 1942 algeria libya it.
egypt transjordan suez canal nile r vichy france joined allies nov 1942 world war ii in europe and north africa the tide of battle shifted in this theater during the winter of 1942 1943.
the massive german assault on the eastern front was turned back by the russians at stalingrad and the allied forces recaptured north africa.
including russian control over manchuria.
while neither a sellout nor a betrayal as some critics have charged yalta was a significant diplomatic victory for the soviets one that reflected russias major contribution to a victory in europe.
for the president the long journey to yalta proved to be too much.
his health continued to fail after his return to washington.
in early april fdr left the capital for warm springs georgia where he had always been able to relax.
he was sitting for his portrait at midday on april 12 1945 when he suddenly complained of a terrific headache then slumped forward and died.
the nation mourned a man who had gallantly met the challenge of depression and global war.
unfortunately fdr had taken no steps to prepare his successor for the difficult problems that lay ahead.
the defeat of nazi germany dissolved the one strong bond between the united states and the soviet union.
with very different histories cultures and ideologies the two nations were bound to drift apart.
it was now up to the inexperienced harry truman to manage the growing rivalry that was destined to develop into the future cold war.
triumph and tragedy in the pacific the total defeat of germany in may 1945 turned all eyes toward japan.
although the combined chiefs of staff had originally estimated it would take eighteen months after germanys surrender to conquer japan american forces moved with surprising speed.
victory watch the video the big three yalta conference british prime minister winston churchill left and soviet foreign minister vyacheslav molotov right meet prior to the start of the yalta conference february 4 11 1945 the wartime conference also attended by president franklin roosevelt and soviet premier joseph stalin was organized mainly to discuss the postwar reorganization of european nations and soviet entrance into the war against japan.
admiral nimitz swept through the gilbert caroline and marshall islands in 1944 securing bases for further advances and building airfields for american b 29s to begin a deadly bombardment of the japanese home islands.
general macarthur cleared new guinea of the last japanese defender in early 1944 and began planning his long heralded return to the philippines.
american troops landed on the island of leyte on october 20 1944 and manila fell in early february 1945 the japanese navy in a pacific version of the battle of the bulge launched a daring three pronged attack on the american invasion fleet in leyte gulf.
the u s navy rallied to blunt all three japanese thrusts sinking four carriers and ending any further japanese naval threat.
the defeat of japan was now only a matter of time.
the united states had three possible ways to proceed.
the military favored a full scale invasion beginning on the southernmost island of kyushu in november 1945 and culminating with an assault on honshu the main island of japan and a climactic battle for tokyo in 1946 casualties were expected to run into the hundreds of thousands.
diplomats suggested a negotiated peace urging the united states to modify the unconditional surrender formula to permit japan to retain the institution of the emperor.
the third possibility involved the highly secret manhattan project.
since 1939 the united states had spent 2 billion to develop an atomic bomb based on the fission of radioactive uranium and plutonium.
scientists many of them refugees from europe worked to perfect this deadly new weapon at the university of chicago oak ridge tennessee hanford washington and a remote laboratory in los alamos new mexico.
in the new mexico desert on july 16 1945 they successfully tested the first atomic bomb creating a fireball brighter than several suns and a telltale mushroom cloud that rose some 40 000 feet above an enormous crater in the desert floor.
truman had been unaware of the existence of the manhattan project before he became president on april 12 now he simply followed the recommendation of a committee headed by secretary of war henry l stimson to drop the bomb on a japanese city.
the committee discussed but rejected the possibility of inviting the complete the assignment the face of the holocaust on myhistorylab feature essay the face of the holocaust thousands of piled shoes formerly belonging to jewish and other european men women and children murdered at an unidentified nazi death camp during world war ii.
t he liberation of the nazi death camps near the end of world war ii was not a priority objective nor was it a planned operation.
since 1942 the u s government had known that the nazis were murdering jews en masse but officials of the roosevelt administration were divided on what to do about it.
some argued for air raids on the death camps even if such raids were likely to kill large numbers of the jewish inmates.
others contended that air raids alone would not stop the killing that they would divert resources from the broader offensive against germany and that military victory was the surest path to the liberation of the camps.
in part because no one in the united states comprehended the full enormity of hitlers final solution roosevelt sided with the latter group and no special action was taken against the death camps.
as a result it was by chance that allied forces first stumbled upon the camps and the gis who threw open the gates to that living hell were totally unprepared for what they found.
in november 1944 the u s army discovered its first camp natzwillerstruthof which had been abandoned by the germans months before.
viewing natzwiller from a distance milton bracker of the new york times noted its deceptive similarity to an american civilian conservation corps camp the sturdy green barracks buildings looked exactly like those that housed forestry trainees in the u s during the early new deal as he toured the grounds however he faced a starker reality and slowly came to think the unthinkable.
in the crematorium he reported i cranked the elevator tray a few times and slid the furnace tray a few times and even at that moment i did not believe what i was doing was real there were no prisoners he wrote no screams no burly guards no taint of death in the air as on a battlefield bracker had to stretch his imagination to its limits to comprehend the camps silent testimony to the nazi attempt to exterminate the jews of europe.
u s military personnel who toured natzwiller shared this sense of the surreal.
in their report to headquarters they carefully qualified every observation.
they described what appeared to be a disinfection unit a room allegedly used as a lethal gas chamber a cellar room with a special type elevator and an incinerator room with equipment obviously intended for the burning of human bodies they saw before them the evidence of german atrocities but the truth was so horrible they could not quite bring themselves to draw the obvious conclusions.
inside the vicious heart robert abzugs study of the liberation of the concentration camps refers to this phenomenon as double vision faced with a revelation so terrible witnesses could not fully comprehend the evidence of the systematic murder of more than six million men women and children.
but as the allied armies advanced into germany the shocking evidence mounted.
on april 4 1945 the fourth armored division of the third army unexpectedly discovered ohrdruf a relatively small concentration camp.
ohrdrufs liberation had a tremendous impact on american forces.
it was the first camp discovered intact with its grisly array of the dead and dying.
inside the compound corpses were piled in heaps in the barracks.
an infantryman recalled i guess the most vivid recollection of the whole camp is the pyre that was located on the edge of the camp.
it was a big pit where they stacked bodies stacked bodies and wood and burned them on april 12 generals eisenhower bradley and patton toured ohrdruf.
the generals professional soldiers familiar with the devastation of battle had never seen its like.
years later bradley recalled the smell of death overwhelmed us even before we passed through the stockade.
more than 3200 naked emaciated bodies had been flung into shallow graves.
others lay in the street where they had fallen eisenhower ordered every available armed forces unit in the area to visit ohrdruf.
we are told that the american soldier does not know what he is fighting for said eisenhower.
now at least he will know what he is fighting against he urged government officials and journalists to visit the camps and tell the world.
in an official message eisenhower summed it up we are constantly finding german camps in which they have placed political prisoners where unspeakable conditions exist.
from my own personal observation i can state unequivocally that all written statements up to now do not paint the full horrors.
on april 11 the timberwolf division of the third army uncovered nordhausen.
they found three thousand dead and only seven hundred survivors.
the scene sickened battlehardened veterans the odors well there is no way to describe the odors.
many of the boys i am talking about now these were tough soldiers there were combat men who had been all the way through the invasion were ill and vomiting throwing up just at the sight of this.
for some the liberation of nordhausen changed the meaning of the war.
i must also say that my fellow gis most thought that any stories they had read in the paper.
were either not true or at least exaggerated.
and it did not sink in what this was all about until we got into nordhausen.
if the experience at nordhausen gave many gis a new sense of mission in battle it also forced them to distance themselves from the realities of the camps.
only by closing off their emotions could they go about the grim task of sorting out the living from the dead and tending to the survivors.
margaret bourke white whose life magazine photographs brought the horrors of the death camps to millions on the home front recalled working with a veil over my mind people often ask me how it is possible to photograph such atrocities.
in photographing the murder camps the protective veil was so tightly drawn that i hardly knew what i had taken until i saw prints of my own photographs.
by the end of 1945 most of the liberators had come home and returned to civilian life.
once home their experiences produced no common moral responses.
no particular pattern emerged in their occupational political and religious behavior beyond a fear of the rise of postwar totalitarianism shared by most americans.
few spoke publicly about their role in the liberation of the camps most found that after a short period of grim fascination their friends and families preferred to forget.
some had nightmares but few reported being tormented by memories.
for the liberators the ordeal was over.
for the survivors of the holocaust liberation was but the first step in the tortuous process of rebuilding broken bodies and shattered lives.
questions for discussion 1 why did american leaders during the war have such difficulty comprehending the scope of the holocaust.
2 how did the discovery of the holocaust confirm americans belief that the war was necessary and just.
chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 the atomic bomb dropped on nagasaki a provincial capital and naval base in southern japan on august 9 1945 virtually obliterated the city and killed about forty thousand people.
only buildings made with reinforced concrete remained standing after the blast.
japanese to observe a demonstration shot at a remote pacific site and even ruled out the idea of giving advance notice of the bombs destructive power.
neither truman nor stimson had any qualms about the decision to drop the bomb without warning.
they viewed it as a legitimate wartime measure one designed to save the lives of hundreds of thousands of americans and japanese that would be lost in a full scale invasion.
weather conditions on the morning of august 6 dictated the choice of hiroshima as the bombs target.
the explosion incinerated four square miles of the city instantly killing more than sixty thousand.
two days later russia entered the war against japan and the next day august 9 the united states dropped a second bomb on nagasaki.
there were no more atomic bombs available but no more were needed.
the emperor personally broke a deadlock in the japanese cabinet and persuaded his ministers to surrender unconditionally on august 14 1945 three weeks later japan signed a formal capitulation agreement on the decks of the battleship missouri in tokyo bay to bring world war ii to its official close.
many years later scholars charged that truman had more in mind than defeating japan when he decided to use the atomic bomb.
citing air force and naval officers who claimed japan could be defeated by a blockade or by conventional air attacks these revisionists suggested the real reason for dropping the bomb was to impress the soviet union with the fact that the united states had exclusive possession of the ultimate weapon.
the available evidence indicates that while truman and his associates were aware of the possible effect on the soviet union their primary motive was to end world war ii as quickly and effortlessly as possible.
the saving of american lives along with a desire for revenge for pearl harbor were uppermost in the decision to bomb hiroshima and nagasaki.
yet in using the atomic bomb to defeat japan the united states virtually guaranteed a postwar arms race with the soviet union.
conclusion the transforming power of war the second great war of the twentieth century had a lasting impact on american life.
for the first time the nations military potential had been reached.
in 1945 the united states was unquestionably the strongest country on the earth with eleven million men and women in uniform a vast array of shipyards aircraft plants and munitions factories in full production and a monopoly over the atomic bomb.
for better or worse the nation was now launched on a global career.
in the future the united states would be involved in all parts of the world from western conclusion the transforming power of war europe to remote jungles in asia from the nearby caribbean to the distant persian gulf.
and despite its enormous strength in 1945 the nations new world role would encompass failure and frustration as well as power and dominion.
the legacy of war was equally strong at home.
four years of fighting brought about industrial recovery and unparalleled prosperity.
the old pattern of unregulated free enterprise was as much a victim of the war as of the new deal big government and huge deficits had now become the norm as economic control passed from new york and wall street to washington and pennsylvania avenue.
the war led to far reaching changes in american society that would become apparent only decades later.
such distinctive patterns of recent american life as the baby boom and the growth of the sunbelt can be traced back to wartime origins.
world war ii was a watershed in twentieth century america ushering in a new age of global concerns and domestic upheaval.
chapter review retreat reversal and rivalry turning the tide against the axis why were the united states and japan on a collision course in the years following world war i.
how did america and its allies halt the advances of germany and japan.
to sustain its developing industrial economy after world war i japan sought to dominate china and exploit its resources.
in response the united states either had to abandon china or forcefully oppose japans expansion there.
p 639 the united states formed an alliance with britain and the soviet union against germany and japan.
american and british forces fought the germans in north africa and italy while soviet forces beat back the germans in russia.
american ships and planes defeated japanese forces at the coral sea and midway.
p 647 isolationism the home front what were isolationism and why was it so appealing to americans in the 1920s and 1930s.
mongolia manchuku manchuria a how did american domestic life change during world war ii.
ug 1 disillusionment with the outcome of world war i led to a policy of isolationism by which americans hoped to avoid responsibility for the peace of europe and asia and to spare themselves the agony of war if peace failed.
isolationism had traditionally served americans well and many americans expected that it would continue to do so.
p 641 during the war american industry churned out equipment at a rate unimagined before 1941 record numbers of women and minorities entered the workforce.
but 120 000 japanese americans were forced into concentration camps.
p 649 china kore nanking nagasak aug 9 1945 victory the road to war how did the united states go from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941.
fdr gradually led the united states from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941 responding to german and japanese aggression with careful political and diplomatic steps including aid to britain an undeclared naval war against germany and economic pressure on japan which lashed out by attacking pearl harbor.
p 644 how did the war end and what were its consequences.
the war in europe ended in may 1945 after allied and soviet forces overran germany.
the war in the pacific ended after the atomic bombing of hiroshima and nagasaki and left the united states in undisputed control of japan.
p 654 study resources key terms and definitions kellogg briand pact also called the pact of paris this 1928 agreement was the brainchild of u s secretary of state frank b kellogg and french premier aristide briand.
its signatories eventually including nearly all nations pledged to shun war as an instrument of policy.
it had little effect on the conduct of world affairs.
p 638 axis powers during world war ii the alliance between italy germany and japan was known as the rome berlin tokyo axis and the three members were called the axis powers.
they fought against the allied powers led by the united states britain and the soviet union.
p 642 neutrality acts laws in the 1930s that forbade selling munitions or lending money to belligerents.
the 1937 act required that all other trade with countries at war be conducted on a cash and carry basis.
p 642 lend lease in 1941 congress gave president franklin d roosevelt the authority to sell lend lease or transfer war materials to any country whose defense he declared vital to that of the united states.
p 644 pearl harbor on december 7 1941 japanese warplanes attacked the u s fleet at pearl harbor hawaii.
the attack marked americas entrance into world war ii.
p 647 d day june 6 1944 the day allied troops crossed the english channel and opened a second front in western europe during world war ii.
the d stands for disembarkation to leave a ship and go ashore.
p 654 yalta conference a wartime conference in february 1945 in which the allies agreed to final plans for the defeat of germany and the terms of its occupation.
the soviets agreed to allow free elections in poland but they were never held.
p 655 manhattan project the top secret world war ii program that produced the first atomic weapons.
p 657 holocaust the slaughter of six million jews and other persons by hitlers regime.
p 659 critical thinking questions 1 how did the memory of world war i affect the american approach to world war ii.
4 what happened to the civil rights movement during the war.
5 was the atom bomb necessary to end the war.
why or why not.
2 how did franklin roosevelt aid britain prior to american entry into world war ii.
why did he have to be so careful in doing so.
3 what were some causes of tension within the american alliance during the war.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 27 on myhistorylab isolationism view the map the road to war read the document 1941 p 645 read the document a philip randolph why should we march 1942 p 652 world war ii in europe p 643 charles lindbergh radio address watch the video rosie the riveter p 651 view the closer look p 655 d day landing june 6 1944 watch the video the big three yalta conference p 657 the home front world war ii in the pacific p 650 japanese relocation victory view the closer look the japanese raid on pearl harbor december 7 1941 p 646 view the map read the document order p 653 complete the assignment holocaust p 658 indicates study plan media assignment the face of the the onset of the cold war contents and learning objectives the cold war begins pg.
666 eisenhower wages the cold war pg.
680 how did the cold war begin.
how successful was eisenhower at dealing with the foreign policy issues facing the united states.
containment pg.
668 what was containment and why was it adopted.
feature essay america enters the middle east the cold war expands pg.
671 how did the cold war expand from europe to asia.
the cold war at home pg.
674 how did the cold war affect life in america.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 28 the onset of the cold war had banged through three items one day he commented i am not going to stay around this terrible place all summer just to listen to speeches.
ill go home to the senate for that in an indirect roundabout way he informed stalin of the existence of the atomic bomb tested successfully in the new mexico desert just before the conference began.
truman offered no details and the impassive stalin asked for none commenting only that he hoped the united states would make good use of it against the japanese reparations proved to be the crucial issue at potsdam.
the russians wanted to rebuild their war ravaged economy with german industry the united states feared it would be saddled with the entire cost of caring for the defeated germans.
a compromise was finally reached.
each side would take reparations primarily from its own occupation zone a solution that foreshadowed the future division of germany.
because they could not agree on how to govern europe wrote historian daniel yergin truman and stalin began to divide it the other issues were referred to the newly created council of foreign ministers which would meet in the fall in london.
he potsdam conference thus ended on an apparent note of harmony beneath the surface however the bitter antagonism of the cold war was festering.
a dozen years later truman reminisced to an old associate about potsdam.
what a show that was describing himself as an innocent idealist surrounded by wolves he claimed that all the agreements reached there were broken as soon as the unconscionable russian dictator returned to moscow he added ruefully and i liked the little son of a bitch potsdam marked the end of the wartime alliance.
america and russia each distrustful of the other began to engage in a long and bitter confrontation.
for the next decade the two superpowers would vie for control of postwar europe and later clash over the spread of communism to asia.
by the time trumans and stalins successors met for the next summit conference at geneva in 1955 the cold war was at its height.
t the cold war begins how did the cold war begin.
the conflict between the united states and the soviet union began gradually.
for two years the nations tried to adjust their differences over the division of europe postwar economic aid and the atomic bomb through discussion and negotiation.
the council of foreign ministers provided the forum.
beginning in london during the fall of 1945 and meeting with their russian counterparts in paris new york and moscow american diplomats searched for a way to live in peace with a suspicious soviet union.
the division of europe the fundamental disagreement was over who would control postwar europe.
in the east the red army had swept over poland and the balkans laying the basis for soviet domination there.
american and british forces had liberated western europe from scandinavia to italy.
the russians mindful of past invasions from the west across the plains of poland were intent on imposing communist governments loyal to moscow in the soviet sphere.
the united states on the other hand upheld the principle of national self determination insisting the people in each country should freely choose their postwar rulers.
the soviets saw the demand for free elections as subversive since they knew that popularly chosen regimes would be unfriendly to russia.
suspecting american duplicity stalin brought down an iron curtain churchills phrase from the baltic to the adriatic as he created a series of satellite governments.
germany was the key.
the temporary zones of occupation gradually hardened into permanent lines of division.
ignoring the potsdam conference agreement that the country be treated as an economic unit the united states and great britain were by 1946 refusing to permit the russians to take reparations from the industrial western zones.
the initial harsh occupation policy gave way to more humane treatment of the german people and a slow but steady economic recovery.
the united states and england merged their zones and championed the idea of the unification of all germany.
russia fearing a resurgence of german military power responded by intensifying the communization of its zone which included the jointly occupied city of berlin.
by 1947 england france and the united states were laying plans to transfer their authority to an independent west germany.
the soviet union consolidated its grip on eastern europe in 1946 and 1947 one by one communist regimes replaced coalition governments in poland hungary romania and bulgaria.
moving cautiously to avoid provoking the west stalin used communism as a means to dominate half of europe both to protect the security of the soviet state and to advance its international power.
the climax came in march 1948 when a coup in czechoslovakia overthrew a democratic government and gave the soviets a strategic foothold in central europe.
the division of europe was an inevitable aftereffect of world war ii.
both sides were intent on imposing their values in the areas liberated by their troops.
the russians were no more likely to withdraw from eastern europe than the united states and britain were from germany france and italy.
a frank recognition of competing spheres of influence might have avoided further escalation of tension.
but the western nations remembering hitlers aggression in the 1930s began to see stalin as an equally dangerous threat to their well being.
instead of accepting him as a cautious leader bent on protecting russian security they perceived him as an aggressive dictator leading a communist drive for world domination.
withholding economic aid world war ii had inflicted enormous damage on russia.
the brutal fighting had taken between fifteen and twenty million russian lives destroyed more than thirty thousand factories and torn up forty thousand miles of railroad track.
the industrialization the cold war begins read the document churchills iron curtain speech march 5 1946 iceland hamburg western bloc communist bloc soviet zone hanover berlin nonaligned nations british zone finland iron curtain norway sweden 500 miles soviet zone 500 kilometers north sea ireland den.
soviet union united kingdom french zone frankfurt american zone neth.
poland belg.
atlantic ocean germany czech.
france switz.
romania 100 miles berlin airlift 1948 1949 100 kilometers bulg.
italy spain a ck se bla yugoslavia portugal hun.
french alb.
morocco greece british berlin soviet american morocco fr.
algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
medi cyprus terranea n sea europe after world war ii the heavy red line splitting germany shows in graphic form the division of europe between the western and soviet spheres of influence.
from stettin in the baltic to trieste in the adriatic said winston churchill in a speech at fulton missouri in 1946 an iron curtain has descended across the continent that stalin had achieved at such great sacrifice in the 1930s had been badly set back even agricultural production had fallen by half during the war.
outside aid and assistance were vital for the reconstruction of the soviet union.
american leaders knew of russias plight and hoped to use it to good advantage.
wartime ambassador averell harriman wrote in 1944 that economic aid was one of the most effective weapons at our disposal in dealing with russia.
president truman was convinced that economically we held all the cards and the russians had to come to us there were two possible forms of postwar assistance loans and lend lease.
in january 1945 the soviets requested a 6 billion loan to finance postwar reconstruction.
despite initial american encouragement president roosevelt deferred action on this request as relations with russia cooled the chances for action dimmed.
our experience commented harriman in april 1945 had incontrovertibly proved it was not possible to bank goodwill in moscow by the wars end the loan request though never formally turned down was dead.
lend lease proved no more successful.
in the spring of 1945 congress instructed the administration not to use lend lease for postwar reconstruction.
president truman went further however by signing an order on may 11 1945 terminating all shipments to russia including those already at sea.
the state department saw the action as applying leverage against the soviet union stalin termed it brutal heeding russian protests truman resumed lend lease shipments but only until the war was over in august.
after that all lend lease ended.
deprived of american assistance the russians were forced to rebuild their economy through reparations.
american and british resistance prevented them from taking reparations in western germany but the soviets systematically removed factories and plants from other areas they controlled including their zone of germany eastern europe and manchuria.
slowly the russian economy recovered from the war but the bitterness over the american refusal to extend aid convinced stalin of western hostility and thus deepened the growing antagonism between the soviet union and the united states.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war his reckless cruelty and ask rhetorically as millions watched on television have you no sense of decency sir courageous republicans led by senators ralph flanders of vermont and margaret chase smith of maine joined with democrats to bring about the senates censure of mccarthy in december 1954 by a vote of sixty seven to twenty two.
once rebuked mccarthy fell quickly from prominence.
he died three years later virtually unnoticed and unmourned.
yet his influence was profound.
not only did he paralyze national life with what a senate subcommittee described as the most nefarious campaign of half truth and untruth in the history of the republic but he also helped impose a political and cultural conformity that froze dissent for the rest of the 1950s.
long after mccarthys passing the nation tolerated loyalty oaths for teachers the banning of left wing books in public libraries and the blacklisting of entertainers in radio television and films.
freedom of expression was inhibited and the opportunity to try out new ideas and approaches was lost as the united states settled into a sterile cold war consensus.
while dwight eisenhower could claim that his policy of giving mccarthy enough rope to hang himself had worked it is possible that a bolder and more forthright presidential attack on the senator might have spared the nation some of the excesses of the second red scare.
he would settle for a relaxation of tensions with the soviet union.
in part he was motivated by a deeply held concern about the budget.
defense spending had increased from 13 billion to 50 billion under truman ike was convinced the nation was in danger of going bankrupt unless military spending was reduced.
as president he inaugurated a new look for american defense cutting back on the army and navy and relying even more heavily than truman had on the air force and its nuclear striking power.
as a result the defense budget dropped below 40 billion annually.
in 1954 dulles announced reliance on massive retaliation in fact a continuance of trumans policy of deterrence.
rather than becoming involved in limited wars such as korea the united states would consider the possibility of using nuclear weapons to halt any communist aggression that threatened vital u s interests anywhere in the world.
while he permitted dulles to make his veiled nuclear threats eisenhowers fondest dream was to end the arms race.
sobered by the development of the hydrogen bomb successfully tested by the united states in november 1952 and by the soviet union in august 1953 the president began a new effort at disarmament with the russians.
yet before this initiative could take effect ike had to weather a series of crises around the world that tested his skill and patience to the utmost.
entanglement in indochina eisenhower wages the cold war how successful was eisenhower at dealing with the foreign policy issues facing the united states.
dwight d eisenhower came into the presidency in 1952 unusually well prepared to lead the nation at the height of the cold war.
his long years of military service had exposed him to a wide variety of international issues both in asia and in europe and to an even broader array of world leaders such as winston churchill and charles de gaulle.
he was not only an experienced military strategist but a gifted politician and diplomat as well.
he was blessed with a sharp pragmatic mind and organizational genius that enabled him to plan and carry out large enterprises grasping the precise relationship between the parts and the whole.
above all he had a serene confidence in his own ability.
at the end of his first day in the white house he confided in his diary plenty of worries and difficult problems.
but such has been my portion for a long time the result is that this just seems like a continuation of all ive been doing since july 1941 eisenhower chose john foster dulles as his secretary of state.
the myth soon developed that ike had given dulles free rein to conduct american diplomacy.
appearances were deceptive.
eisenhower preferred to work behind the scenes.
he let dulles make the public speeches and appearances before congressional committees where the secretarys hard line views placated gop extremists.
but dulles carefully consulted with the president before every appearance meeting frequently with eisenhower at the white house and telephoning him several times a day.
ike respected his secretary of states broad knowledge of foreign policy and skill in conducting american diplomacy but he made all the major decisions himself.
theres only one man i know who has seen more of the world and talked with more people and knows more than he does ike said of dulles and thats me from the outset eisenhower was determined to bring the cold war under control.
ideally he wanted to end it but as a realist the first crisis facing the new president came in indochina.
since 1950 the united states had been giving france military and economic aid in a war in indochina against communist guerrillas led by ho chi minh.
the chinese increased their support to hos forces known as the vietminh after the korean war ended by the spring of 1954 the french were on the brink of defeat.
the vietminh had surrounded nearly ten thousand french troops at dien bien phu deep in the interior of northern indochina in desperation france turned to the united states for help.
admiral arthur radford chairman of the joint chiefs of staff proposed an american air strike to lift the siege.
although the other joint chiefs had strong objections to involving american forces in another asian war so soon after korea hawkish republican senators were clamoring for action.
eisenhower decided against radfords bold proposal but he killed it in his typically indirect fashion.
fearful that an air attack would lead inevitably to the use of ground troops ike insisted that both congress and american allies in europe approve the strike in advance.
congressional leaders recalling the recent korean stalemate were reluctant to agree the british were appalled and ruled out any joint action.
the president used these objections to reject intervention in indochina in 1954 years later he stated his reasons more candidly.
the jungles of indochina would have swallowed up division after division of united states troops he explained.
equally important he believed that u s involvement in frances war would have compromised the american tradition of anticolonialism dien bien phu fell to the vietminh in may 1954 at an international conference held in geneva a few weeks later indochina was divided at the 17th parallel.
ho gained control of north vietnam while the french continued to rule in the south with provision for a general election within two years to unify the country.
the election was never held largely because eisenhower feared it would result in an overwhelming mandate for ho.
instead the united states gradually took over from the french in south vietnam sponsoring a new government in saigon headed by ngo dinh diem a vietnamese eisenhower wages the cold war read the document dwight d eisenhower letters on dien bien phu 1954 a french soldier stands guard over a truckload of vietnamese nationalists captured in the fighting in indochina.
french efforts to quash the rebellion in vietnam ended on may 7 1954 when the vietminh took the french stronghold at dien bien phu.
nationalist from a northern catholic family.
while eisenhower can be given credit for refusing to engage american forces on behalf of french colonialism in indochina his determination to resist communist expansion had committed the united states to a long and eventually futile struggle to prevent ho chi minh from achieving his long sought goal of a unified independent vietnam.
containing china the communist government in beijing posed a serious challenge for the eisenhower administration.
senate republicans led by william knowland of california blamed the democrats for the loss of china.
they viewed mao as a puppet of the soviet union and insisted the united states recognize the nationalists on formosa as the only legitimate government of china.
while state department experts realized there were underlying tensions between china and russia maos intervention in the korean war had convinced most americans that the chinese communists were an integral part of a larger communist effort at world domination.
thus truman and acheson had abandoned any hope of trying to exploit differences between mao and stalin by wooing china away from the soviet union.
eisenhower and dulles chose to accentuate the potential conflict between russia and china.
by taking a strong line against china the united states could make the chinese realize that russia was unable to protect their interests at the same time such a hawkish policy would please congressional conservatives such as knowland.
ultimately eisenhower and dulles hoped that a policy of firmness would not only contain communist chinese expansion in asia but also drive a wedge between moscow and beijing.
a crisis in the formosa straits provided the first test of the new policy.
in the fall of 1954 communist china threatened to seize coastal islands notably quemoy and matsu occupied by the nationalists.
fearful that seizure of these offshore islands would be the first step toward an invasion of formosa eisenhower permitted dulles to sign a security treaty with chiang kai shek committing complete the assignment america enters the middle east on myhistorylab feature essay h arry truman never liked disagreeing with george marshall.
the secretary of state was in trumans view the greatest living american and as the architect of the american victory in world war ii marshall possessed a stature no civilian and certainly no accidental president such as truman remained in the spring of 1948 could hope to match.
marshall adamantly opposed an action recommended by several of trumans closest advisers.
the british government had decided to relinquish control of palestine the region on the eastern shore of the mediterranean it had inherited from the ottoman empire after world war i the united nations general assembly in november 1947 proposed partitioning palestine into two states one controlled by the arab inhabitants of the region the other controlled by the jewish inhabitants.
the un plan provoked violence between the arabs and jews with each group struggling to position itself most favorably for the moment the british left.
the u s state department advocated a cautious policy in the evolving situation.
robert lovett the american undersecretary of state told truman that hasty recognition of the new jewish state israel would constitute buying a pig in a poke that the united states didnt know what kind of government israel would have what the boundaries of the new jewish state would be or how israels neighbors would respond to the creation of this novel entity.
george marshall was even more adamant than lovett.
marshall knew that truman was being told by his political advisers that recognition of israel america enters the middle east would help him and the democrats in the upcoming 1948 elections but the secretary of state thoroughly rejected the idea that politics should influence such a crucial foreign policy decision.
these considerations have nothing to do with the issue marshall told the president.
i dont think politics should play any part in this clark clifford was the adviser who made the strongest case for early recognition and marshall resented that clifford was even present at the meetings regarding israel.
the secretary of state told truman in the bluntest of terms if you follow cliffords advice and if i were to vote in the election i would vote against you well that was rough as a cob truman remarked after marshall left the oval office.
i never saw the general so furious but truman had reasons for going ahead with recognition and politics was only one.
the cold war was under way and truman feared that the soviet union would recognize israel before the united states did giving moscow a potential advantage in the middle east at a time when that oil rich region was becoming critical in the balance of international power.
moreover the jewish people had been promised a homeland by the british many years before and israel was the manifestation of that promise.
to be sure britains promises didnt bind the united states but britain was americas ally and truman felt a certain obligation to follow through on britains behalf.
finally the jews had suffered horribly during world war ii and although a jewish state wouldnt bring back the six million slaughtered in the holocaust it would provide the jews of the world a refuge against future threats.
truman gave marshall time to cool off confident that the generals military training would incline him to support or at least not oppose his commander in chief once the president made up his mind.
and when truman did choose in favor of early recognition of israel marshall gritted his teeth but indeed held his tongue.
on may 14 1948 fifteen minutes after the official proclamation of the jewish state of israel the united states announced its recognition.
this first american step into the middle east was followed by others.
in 1951 the populist prime minister of iran mohammad mossadeq announced a plan to nationalize the anglo iranian oil company a giant firm that held exclusive rights to develop and exploit irans richest oil fields.
the british government was the principal shareholder in anglo iranian and the companys identity and presence reminded iranians of the power britain had long wielded over their country.
mossadeqs nationalization plan was intended to break britains hold forever.
the british government not surprisingly resisted the nationalization effort.
the british approached the truman administration about joining in a secret operation to overthrow mossadeq.
truman had consented to the 1947 establishment of the central intelligence agency but he never lost his fear that the spy agency would become an american gestapo as he called it and he rejected the british overture.
but after dwight eisenhower succeeded truman in the white house the british reproposed their plan.
they argued that mossadeq was either a communist in disguise or the dupe of communists and that if he remained in power iran and its oil would slip into the grasp of the neighboring soviet union.
eisenhower took this possibility very seriously.
he couldnt know that things would happen the way the british predicted but neither could he know that they would not happen that way.
at a moment when the cold war was spreading beyond europe and becoming a global contest eisenhower didnt want to risk letting the soviets seize iran.
accordingly he approved a joint british american plan against mossadeq.
operation ajax as it was labeled called for the constitutional monarch of iran the shah to demand mossadeqs resignation.
if mossadeq resisted as he was expected to do the cia and its british counterpart would mobilize mobs in tehran to force the prime minister from office.
a pro shah general would send tanks into the streets and complete the coup.
the plan went off with only minor glitches and the pro american shah assumed power.
the eisenhower administration brokered an agreement between the iranian government and the british over the fate of the angloiranian oil company an agreement that awarded american companies a share of iranian production.
to keep the shah in power the united states sent large amounts of economic and military aid to tehran.
the american aid helped the shah suppress dissent in iran but made him increasingly unpopular with the masses of the iranian people who over time transferred that animosity to the united states.
washington won back a bit of credibility with the peoples of the middle east three years later.
the british government had a new enemy gamal abdel nasser an egyptian colonel who seized power in cairo and nationalized the suez canal company another vestige of britains declining empire.
the british talked france and israel who had their own reasons for disliking nasser into a tripartite operation to overthrow the egyptian leader.
in october 1956 the three countries attacked egypt near the suez canal hoping the military pressure would result in nassers downfall.
eisenhower refused to back them.
the president distrusted nasser but president harry truman left listened to secretary of state george marshall right on most matters of foreign policy but charted his own course regarding israel.
he didnt think the egyptian leaders actions warranted a middle eastern war.
he told the british the ringleaders of the suez operation in eisenhowers accurate assessment that they must shut down the nascent war at once.
when they hesitated he threatened to use americas trump cards against the british oil and the dollar.
the president prepared to block oil shipments from the americas to britain and to let the british currency the pound decline against the dollar.
a loss of american oil would squeeze british industry and transport a collapse of the pound would ravage british finance.
the british had no choice but to acquiesce in eisenhowers ultimatum.
the suez war halted almost as soon as it began causing much soul searching in britain where the fiasco symbolized the end of britains pretensions to great power status.
the american role in the wars end momentarily belied the prevalent impression in the middle east that washington would always stand with the european imperialists and the zionists the label applied to the israelis by the arabs in a crisis.
yet the good feeling faded before long and it only underscored the larger reality that by the end of 1956 the united states had become the most important outside power in the middle east.
how america would play its new role remained to be seen but henceforward nothing of substance would occur in the middle east without requiring a significant response from the united states.
questions for discussion 1 why did truman decide to recognize israel in 1948.
2 why did eisenhower side with the british in iran but against them when they invaded egypt together with the french and israelis during the suez crisis in 1956.
chapter 29 affluence and anxiety bus.
her action often viewed as spontaneous grew out of a long tradition of black protest against the rigid segregation of the races in the south.
rosa parks herself had been ejected from a bus a decade earlier for refusing to obey the drivers command niggers move back in 1953 black church leaders in baton rouge louisiana had mounted a weeklong boycott of that citys bus system and succeeded in modifying the traditional segregated seating rules.
in montgomery the arrest of rosa parks sparked a massive protest movement.
black women played a particularly important role in the protest printing and handing out fifty thousand leaflets to rally the african american community behind parks.
the movement also led to the emergence of martin luther king jr as an eloquent new spokesman for african americans.
king agreed to lead the subsequent bus boycott.
the son of a famous atlanta preacher he had recently taken his first church in montgomery after years of studying theology while earning a ph d at boston university.
now he would be able to combine his wide learning with his charismatic appeal in behalf of a practical goal fair treatment for the african americans who made up the bulk of the riders on the citys buses.
the montgomery bus boycott started out with a modest goal.
instead of challenging the legality of segregated seating king simply asked that seats be taken on a first come first served basis with african americans being seated from the back and the whites from the front of each bus.
as the protest continued however and as they endured both legal harassment and sporadic acts of violence the protesters began to be more assertive.
an effective system of car pools enabled them to avoid using the city buses.
soon they were insisting on a complete end to segregated seating as they sang their new song of protest voice became familiar to the entire nation.
unlike many african american preachers he never shouted yet he captured his audience by presenting his ideas with both passion and a compelling cadence.
though still a boy to many of his older listeners branch noted he had the commanding air of a burning sage even more important he had a strategy and message that fitted perfectly with the plight of his followers.
drawing on sources as diverse as gandhi and henry david thoreau king came out of the bus boycott with the concept of passive resistance.
if cursed he had told protesters in montgomery do not curse back.
if struck do not strike back but evidence love and goodwill at all times the essence of his strategy was to use the apparent weakness of southern blacks their lack of power and turn it into a conquering weapon.
his message to southern whites was clear and unmistakable we will match your capacity to inflict suffering with our capacity to endure suffering.
we will meet your physical force with soul force.
we will not hate you but we will not obey your evil laws.
we will soon wear you down by pure capacity to suffer his ultimate goal was to unite the broken community through bonds of christian love.
he hoped to use nonviolence to appeal to middle class white america to the conscience of the great decent majority who through blindness fear pride or irrationality have allowed their consciences to sleep the result king prophesied would be to enable future historians to say of the effort there lived view the map civil rights movement aint gonna ride them buses no more aint gonna ride no more why in the hell dont the white folk know that i aint gonna ride no more.
the boycott ended in victory a year later when the supreme court ruled the alabama segregated seating law unconstitutional.
the protest movement had triumphed not only in denting the wall of southern segregation but in featuring the leadership of martin luther king jr he had emerged as the charismatic leader of a new civil rights movement a man who won acclaim not only at home but around the world.
a year after the successful bus boycott king founded the southern christian leadership conference sclc to direct the crusade against segregation.
he visited third world leaders in africa and asia and paid homage to indias mahatma gandhi who had influenced his reliance on civil disobedience.
he led a triumphant prayer pilgrimage to washington in 1957 on the third anniversary of the brown decision stirring the crowd of thirty thousand with his ringing demand for the right to vote.
his cry give us the ballot boomed in salvos that civil rights historian taylor branch likened to cannon bursts in a diplomatic salute his remarkable rosa parks refusal to surrender her seat to a white man on a montgomery alabama bus led to a citywide bus boycott that brought rev.
martin luther king jr to prominence as a leader of the civil rights movement.
parks remained active in the movement as well she is shown here being fingerprinted in february 1956 after her arrest for violating an antiboycott law.
conclusion restoring national confidence read the document student nonviolent coordinating committee statement from north carolina agricultural and technical college sat down at a dime store lunch counter in greensboro north carolina and refused to move after being denied service.
other students both whites and blacks joined in similar sit ins across the south as well as kneel ins at churches and wade ins at swimming pools.
by the end of the year some fifty thousand young people had succeeded in desegregating public facilities in more than a hundred southern cities.
several thousand of the demonstrators were arrested and put in jail but the movement gained strength leading to the formation of the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc in april 1960 from this time on the sclc and sncc with their tactic of direct though peaceful confrontation would replace the naacp and its reliance on court action in the forefront of the civil rights movement.
the change would eventually lead to dramatic success for the movement but it also ushered in a period of heightened tension and social turmoil in the 1960s.
conclusion restoring national confidence in february 1960 black students from north carolina a t college staged a sit in at a whites only woolworths lunch counter in greensboro north carolina.
their act of nonviolent protest spurred similar demonstrations in public spaces across the south in an effort to draw national attention to racial injustice to demand desegregation of public facilities and to prompt the federal government to take a more active role to end segregation.
a great people a black people who injected new meaning and dignity into the veins of civilization king was not alone in championing the cause of civil rights.
joann robinson helped pave the way in montgomery with the womans political caucus and leaders as diverse as bayard rustin and ella baker were advancing the cause at the grassroots level.
in february 1960 another spontaneous event sparked a further advance for passive resistance.
four african american students in 1959 disturbed by the criticism of american society sparked by sputnik president eisenhower appointed a commission on national goals to develop a broad outline of national objectives for the next decade and longer ten prominent citizens from all walks of life led by henry w wriston of brown university issued a report that called for increased military spending abroad greater economic growth at home broader educational opportunities and more government support for both scientific research and the advancement of the arts.
the consensus seemed to be that rather than a change of direction all the united states needed was a renewed commitment to the pursuit of excellence.
the 1950s ended with the national mood less troubled than when the decade began amid the turmoil of the second red scare and the korean war yet hardly as tranquil or confident as eisenhower had hoped it would be.
the american people felt reassured about the state of the economy no longer fearing a return to the grim years of the great depression.
at the same time however they were aware that abundance alone did not guarantee the quality of everyday life and realized that there was still a huge gap between american ideals and the reality of race relations in the north as well as the south.
chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 30 the turbulent sixties their war.
they are the ones who have to win it or lose it but at the same time kennedy was not prepared to accept the possible loss of all southeast asia.
saying it would be a great mistake to withdraw from south vietnam he told reporters strongly on our mind is what happened in the case of china at the end of world war ii where china was lost.
we dont want that although aides later claimed he planned to pull out after the 1964 election kennedy raised the stakes by tacitly approving a coup that led to diems overthrow and death on november 1 1963 the resulting power vacuum in saigon made further american involvement in vietnam almost certain.
containing castro the bay of pigs fiasco kennedys determination to check global communist expansion reached a peak of intensity in cuba.
in the 1960 campaign pointing to the growing ties between the soviet union and fidel castros regime he had accused the republicans of permitting flames engulf buddhist monk the reverend quang duc who set himself afire at an intersection in a communist satellite to arise on our very saigon vietnam to protest persecution of buddhists by vietnam president ngo dinh diem and his doorstep kennedy had even issued a stategovernment.
other monks placed themselves in front of the wheels of nearby fire trucks to prevent ment backing anti castro forces in exile them from reaching duc.
calling them fighters for freedom who held out hope for overthrowing castro elections throughout vietnam in 1956 as called for in the geneva in reality the eisenhower administration had been training accords.
instead diem sought to establish a separate government in a group of cuban exiles in guatemala since march 1960 as part the south with large scale american economic and military assisof a cia plan to topple the castro regime.
many of the new presitance.
by the time kennedy entered the white house however the dents advisers had doubts about the proposed invasion.
some saw communist government in north vietnam led by ho chi minh was little chance for success because the operation depended heavily directing the efforts of vietcong rebels in the south.
as the guerrilla on a broad uprising of the cuban people.
others notably senator war intensified in the fall of 1961 the president sent two trusted adviswilliam fulbright of arkansas chairman of the foreign relations ers walt rostow and general maxwell taylor to south vietnam.
committee viewed it as an immoral act that would discredit the they returned favoring the dispatch of eight thousand american united states.
the castro regime is a thorn in the flesh fulbright combat troops.
as an area for the operation of u s troops reported argued but it is not a dagger in the heart the president however general taylor svn south vietnam is not an excessively difficult committed by his own campaign rhetoric and assured of success or unpleasant place to operate.
the risks of backing into a major by the military decided to proceed.
asian war by way of svn are present but are not impressive on april 17 1961 fourteen hundred cuban exiles moved the president decided against sending in combat troops in 1961 ashore at the bay of pigs on the southern coast of cuba.
even but he authorized substantial increases in economic aid to diem and though the united states had masterminded the entire operation in the size of the military mission in saigon.
the number of american kennedy insisted on covert action even canceling at the last minute advisers in vietnam grew from fewer than one thousand in 1961 to a planned american air strike on the beachhead.
with air superimore than sixteen thousand by late 1963 the flow of supplies and the ority castros well trained forces had no difficulty in quashing the creation of strategic hamlets fortified villages designed to protect invasion.
they killed nearly five hundred exiles and forced the rest the peasantry from the vietcong slowed the communist momentum.
to surrender within forty eight hours.
american helicopters gave government forces mobility against the aghast at the swiftness of the defeat president kennedy took vietcong but by 1963 the situation had again become critical.
diem personal responsibility for the bay of pigs.
in his address to the had failed to win the support of his own people buddhist monks set american people however he showed no remorse for arranging themselves aflame in public protests against him and even diems the violation of a neighboring countrys sovereignty only regret own generals plotted his overthrow.
at the outcome.
above all he expressed renewed defiance warning president kennedy was in a quandary.
he realized that the fate the soviets that our restraint is not inexhaustible he went on to of south vietnam would be determined not by america but by the assert that the united states would resist communist penetration vietnamese.
in the final analysis he said in september 1963 it is in the western hemisphere terming it part of the primary kennedy intensifies the cold war obligations.
to the security of our nation for the remainder of his presidency kennedy continued to harass the castro regime imposing an economic blockade on cuba supporting a continuing series of raids by exile groups operating out of florida and failing to stop the cia from experimenting with bizarre plots to assassinate fidel castro.
containing castro the cuban missile crisis the climax of kennedys crusade came in october 1962 with the cuban missile crisis.
throughout the summer and early fall the soviets engaged in a massive arms buildup in cuba ostensibly to protect castro from an american invasion.
in the united states republican candidates in the 1962 congressional elections called for a firm american response kennedy contented himself with a stern warning against the introduction of any offensive weapons believing their presence would directly threaten american security.
khrushchev publicly denied any such intent but secretly he took a daring gamble building sites for twenty four medium range 1 000 mile and eighteen intermediate range 2 000 mile missiles in cuba.
later he claimed his purpose was purely defensive but most likely he was responding to the pressures from his own military to close the enormous strategic gap in nuclear striking power that kennedy had opened.
unfortunately the kennedy administration had stopped direct u 2 overflights of cuba in august.
fearful that recently installed soviet surface to air missiles could bring down the american spy plane and create an international incident similar to the 1960 u 2 episode see p 712 the white house over the objections of cia director john mccone limited u 2 flights to the air space bordering the island.
mccone finally prevailed on the president to resume direct overflights and on october 14 the first such mission brought back indisputable photographic evidence of the missile sites which were nearing completion.
as soon as president kennedy was informed of this development he decided to keep it secret while he consulted with a hand picked group of advisers to consider how to respond.
in the excomm as this group became known the initial preference for an immediate air strike gradually gave way to discussion of either a full scale invasion of cuba or a naval blockade of the island.
the president and his advisers ruled out diplomacy rejecting a proposal to offer the withdrawal of obsolete american jupiter missiles from turkey in return for a similar russian pullout in cuba.
kennedy finally agreed to a two step procedure.
he would proclaim a quarantine of cuba to prevent the arrival of new missiles and threaten a nuclear confrontation to force the removal of those already there.
if the russians did not cooperate then the united states would invade cuba and dismantle the missiles by force.
on the evening of october 22 the president informed the nation of the existence of the soviet missiles and his plans to remove them.
he blamed khrushchev for this clandestine reckless and provocative threat to world peace and he made it clear that any missile attack from cuba would lead to a full retaliatory response upon the soviet union for the next six days the world hovered on the brink of nuclear catastrophe.
khrushchev replied defiantly accusing kennedy of pushing mankind to the abyss of a world nuclear missile war in the atlantic some sixteen soviet ships continued on course toward cuba while the american navy was deployed to intercept them five hundred miles from the island.
in florida nearly a quarter million men were being concentrated in the largest invasion force ever assembled in the continental united states.
the first break came at midweek when the soviet ships suddenly halted to avert a confrontation at sea.
were eyeball to eyeball commented secretary of state dean rusk and i think the other fellow just blinked on friday khrushchev sent kennedy a long rambling letter offering a face saving way out russia would remove the missiles in return for an american promise never to invade cuba.
the president was ready to accept when a second russian message raised the stakes by insisting that american jupiter missiles be withdrawn from turkey.
heeding the advice of his brother attorney general robert kennedy the president refused to bargain khrushchev had endangered world peace by putting the missiles in cuba secretly and he must take them out immediately.
nevertheless while the military went ahead with plans for the invasion of cuba the president heeding his brothers advice decided to make one last appeal for peace.
ignoring the second russian message he sent a cable to khrushchev accepting his original offer.
on saturday night october 27 robert kennedy met with soviet ambassador anatoly dobrynin to make clear it was the last chance to avert nuclear confrontation.
we had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed robert kennedy recalled telling him.
he should understand that if they did not remove those bases we would remove them then the presidents brother calmly remarked that if khrushchev did not back down there would be not only dead americans but dead russians as well in reality john f kennedy was not quite so ready to risk nuclear war.
he instructed his brother to assure dobrynin that the jupiter missiles would soon be removed from turkey.
the president preferred that the missile swap be done privately but twenty five years later secretary of state dean rusk revealed that jfk had instructed him to arrange a deal through the united nations involving the removal of both the jupiters and the missiles in cuba in recently released transcripts of his meetings with his advisers the president reaffirmed his intention of making a missile trade with khrushchev publicly as a last resort to avoid nuclear war.
we cant very well invade cuba with all its toil he commented when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles in turkey president kennedy never had to make this final concession.
at nine the next morning khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in return only for kennedys promise not to invade cuba.
the crisis was over.
the world however had come perilously close to a nuclear conflict.
we now know the soviets had nuclear warheads in cuba not only for twenty of the medium range missiles but also for short range tactical launchers designed to be used against an american invading force.
if kennedy had approved the militarys recommendations for an invasion of cuba the consequences might have been disastrous.
the peaceful resolution of the cuban missile crisis became a personal and political triumph for john f kennedy.
his party successfully overcame the republican challenge in the november elections and his own popularity reached new heights.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties humphrey a classic cold war liberal who had worked equally hard for social reform at home and american expansion abroad was totally unacceptable to the antiwar movement.
accordingly he decided to avoid the primaries and work for the nomination within the framework of the party.
kennedy and mccarthy the two antiwar candidates were thus left to compete in the spring primaries requiring agonizing choices among those who desired change.
kennedy won everywhere except in oregon but his narrow victory in california ended in tragedy when a palestinian immigrant sirhan sirhan assassinated him in a los angeles hotel.
with his strongest opponent struck down hubert humphrey had little difficulty at the chicago convention.
backed by that citys political boss mayor richard daley the vice president relied on party leaders to defeat an antiwar resolution and win the nomination on the first ballot by a margin of more than two to one.
humphreys triumph was marred by violence outside the heavily guarded convention hall.
radical groups had urged their members to come to chicago to agitate the turnout was relatively small but included many who were ready to provoke the authorities in their despair over the conventions outcome.
epithets and cries of pigs brought on a savage response from daleys police.
the cops had one thing on their mind commented journalist jimmy breslin.
club and then gas club and then gas club and then gas the bitter fumes of tear gas hung in the streets for days afterward the battered heads and bodies of demonstrators and innocent bystanders alike flooded the citys hospital emergency rooms.
what an official investigation later termed a police riot marred humphreys nomination and made a sad mockery out of his call for the politics of joy the democratic party itself had become the next victim of the vietnam war.
the republican resurgence the primary beneficiary of the democratic debacle was richard nixon.
written off as politically dead after his unsuccessful race for governor of california in 1962 nixon had slowly rebuilt his place within the party by working loyally for barry goldwater in 1964 and for gop congressional candidates two years later.
positioning himself squarely in the middle he quickly became the front runner for the republican nomination.
at the gop convention in miami beach nixon won an easy first ballot nomination and chose maryland governor spiro agnew as his running mate.
agnew little known on the national scene had won the support of conservatives by taking a strong stand against african american rioters.
in the fall campaign nixon opened up a wide lead by avoiding controversy and reaping the benefit of discontent with the vietnam war.
he played the peace issue shrewdly appearing to advocate an end to the conflict without ever taking a definite stand.
the united states should end the war and win the peace he declared hinting he had a secret formula for peace but never revealing what it was.
above all he chose the role of reconciler for a nation torn by emotion a leader who promised to bring a divided country together again.
election of 1968 electoral vote by state popular vote republican richard m nixon 31 770 237 democratic hubert h humphrey 31 270 533 american independent george c wallace 9 906 141 239 908 minor parties 73 186 819 hawaii wash d c alaska humphrey in contrast found himself hounded by antiwar demonstrators who heckled him constantly.
he walked a tightwire desperate for the continued support of president johnson but handicapped by lbjs stubborn refusal to end all bombing of north vietnam.
only when he broke with johnson in late september by announcing that if elected he would stop the bombing of north vietnam as an acceptable risk for peace did his campaign begin to gain momentum.
unfortunately for humphrey a third party candidate cut deeply into the normal democratic majority.
george c wallace had first gained national attention as the racist governor of alabama whose motto was segregation now.
segregation tomorrow segregation forever in 1964 he had shown surprising strength in democratic primaries in northern states.
by attacking both black leaders and their liberal white allies wallace appealed to the sense of powerlessness among the urban working classes.
liberals intellectuals and longhairs have run the country for too long wallace told his followers.
when i get to washington he promised ill throw all these phonies and their briefcases into the potomac running on the ticket of the american independent party wallace was a close third in the september polls gaining support from more than 20 percent of the electorate.
but as the election neared his following declined.
humphrey continued to gain especially after johnson agreed in late october to end all bombing of north vietnam.
by the first week in november the outcome was too close for the experts to call.
conclusion the end of an era nixon won the election with the smallest share of the popular vote of any winning candidate since 1916 but he swept a broad band of states from virginia and the carolinas through the midwest to the pacific for a clear cut victory in the electoral college.
humphrey held on to the urban northeast wallace took just five states in the deep south but his heavy inroads into blue collar districts in the north shattered the new deal coalition.
conclusion the end of an era the election of 1968 was a repudiation of the politics of protest and the cultural insurgency of the mid 1960s.
the combined popular vote for nixon and wallace 56 5 percent of the electorate signified there was a silent majority that was fed up with violence and confrontation.
a growing concern over psychedelic drugs rock music long hair and sexual permissiveness had offset the usual democratic advantage on economic issues and led to the election of a republican president.
richard nixons victory marked the end of an era with the passing of two concepts that had guided american life since the 1930s.
first the liberal reform impulse which reached its zenith with the great society legislation in 1965 had clearly run its course.
civil rights medicare and federal aid to education would continue in place but nixons election signaled a strong reaction against the growth of federal power.
at the same time the vietnam fiasco spelled the end of an activist foreign policy that had begun with american entry into world war ii.
containment so successful in protecting western europe against the soviet threat had proved a disastrous failure when applied on a global scale.
the last three decades of the twentieth century would witness a struggle to replace outmoded liberal internationalism with new policies at home and abroad.
chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 mass.
vt maine wash n dak.
minn n h oreg.
nev utah colo calif ariz okla texas pa ohio ill ind.
w va va mo.
ky n c tenn s c ark.
ala ga miss.
n y wis s dak.
r i conn n j del.
fla alaska states ratifying hawaii states not ratifying voting on the equal rights amendment by the end of 1974 thirty four states had ratified the era indiana finally approved the amendment in 1977 but the remaining fifteen states held out leaving ratification three states short of the required three fourths majority.
yet at the same time women encountered a great deal of resistance.
most women continued to work in female dominated fields as nurses secretaries teachers and waitresses.
those who entered such male areas as management and administration soon encountered the so called glass ceiling which kept them from advancing beyond midlevel executive status.
in 1990 only 4 3 percent of corporate officers were women.
most in business worked at the middle and lower rungs of management with staff jobs in personnel and public relations not key operational positions in sales and marketing that would lead to the boardroom women held fewer than 3 percent of the top jobs in fortune 500 companies.
the economic boom of the 1990s however led to a steady increase in the number of women executives in 1998 there was an increase of 514 000 even with these gains however by 2004 womens wages still averaged only 76 5 percent of mens earnings.
a college education helped close the gap but a woman with a degree made only 600 a year more on the average than a man with a high school diploma.
younger women did best those between 16 and 24 earned almost 90 cents for every dollar paid to a male in the same age group.
older women who often had no other source of support fared poorly those over the age of 50 earned only 64 percent as much as men their age.
feminists had once hoped to close the gender gap by the year 2000 but experts predicted women would not reach pay equity with men until 2018 the most encouraging development for women came in business ownership.
often blocked by the glass ceiling and seeking flexible schedules more and more women went into business for themselves.
the number of female business owners increased 40 percent between 1987 and 1992 twice the national rate of business growth.
a womens trade group estimated that in 1996 women owned almost eight million businesses employing more than eighteen million workers one out of four american workers.
a speaker at the first national womens economic summit in 1996 exaggerated only slightly in crediting her group with restoring prosperity claiming that the american economy has been revitalized in good measure because of the participation of and contributions of women business owners beyond economic opportunity the womens movement had two goals.
the first was ratification of the equal rights amendment era.
approved by congress in 1972 the era stated simply equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or any state on account of sex within a year twenty two states had approved the amendment but the efforts gradually faltered just three states short of ratification.
the opposition came in part from working class women who feared as one union leader explained that those employed as maids laundry workers hospital cleaners or dishwashers would lose the protection of state laws that regulated wages and hours of work for women.
right wing activist phyllis schlafly led an organized effort to defeat the era claiming the amendment would lead to unisex toilets homosexual marriages and the drafting of women.
the national organization of women now fought back persuading congress to extend the time for ratification by three years and waging intense campaigns for approval in florida and illinois.
but the deadline for ratification finally passed on june 30 1982 with the era forces still three states short.
now leader eleanor smeal vowed a continuing struggle the crusade is not over.
we know that we are the wave of the future the womens movement focused even more of its energies in protecting a major victory it had won in roe v wade in 1973.
see the law and society essay roe v wade the struggle over womens reproductive rights pp.
right to life groups consisting mainly of orthodox catholics fundamentalist protestants and conservatives fought back.
in 1978 with strong support from president carter congress passed the hyde amendment which denied the use of federal funds to pay for abortions for poor women.
nevertheless prochoice groups organized privately funded family planning agencies and abortion clinics to give more women a chance to exercise their constitutional right to abortion.
as presidents reagan and bush appointed more conservative judges to the court however prochoice groups began to fear the future overturn of roe v wade.
the court avoided a direct challenge contenting itself with lesser actions that upheld the rights of states to regulate abortion clinics impose a 24 hour waiting period and require the approval of one parent or a judge before a minor could have an abortion.
abortion became an issue in presidential contests with the republicans upholding a prolife position and the democrats taking a prochoice stand.
bill clintons election and appointment of ruth bader ginsburg to the court appeared to end the danger to roe v wade but in 2000 the court margin in rejecting a nebraska law forbidding certain late term abortions fell to a bare majority 5 4.
and even the exercise of the right to abortion proved difficult and sometimes dangerous in view of the often violent protests of prolife groups outside abortion clinics.
for many women abortion was a hard won right they still had to struggle to protect.
the gay liberation movement on the night of june 27 1969 a squad of new york policemen raided the stonewall inn a greenwich village bar frequented by drag queens and lesbians.
as the patrons were being herded into private lives public issues read the document roe v wade january 22 1973 roe v wade exerted a tremendous impact throughout the country as only four states had enacted laws guaranteeing a woman widespread access to an abortion at the time of the ruling.
the abortion issue continues to be a major source of controversy within u s politics and society.
vans a crowd of gay onlookers began to jeer and taunt the police.
a riot quickly broke out.
beer cans and bottles were heaved at the windows and a rain of coins descended on the cops reported the village voice.
almost by signal the crowd erupted into cobblestone and bottle heaving the next night more than four hundred police officers battled two thousand gay demonstrators through the streets of greenwich village.
the two day stonewall riots marked the beginning of the modern gay liberation movement.
refusing to play the role of victims any longer gays and lesbians decided to affirm their sexual orientation and demand an end to discrimination against homosexuals.
within a few days two new organizations were formed in new york the gay liberation front and the gay activist alliance with branches and offshoots quickly appearing in cities across the country.
the basic theme of gay liberation was to urge all homosexuals to come out of the closet and affirm with pride their sexual identity instead of shame they would find freedom and self respect in the very act of coming out.
come out for freedom.
come out now proclaimed the gay liberation fronts newspaper.
come out of the closet before the door is nailed shut in the course of the 1970s hundreds of thousands of gays and lesbians responded to this call.
they formed more than a thousand local clubs and organizations and won a series of notable victories.
in 1974 the american psychiatric association stopped classifying homosexuality as a mental disorder and by the end of the decade half the states had repealed their sodomy statutes.
gays fought hard in cities and states for laws forbidding discrimination against homosexuals in housing and employment and in 1980 they finally succeeded in getting a gay rights plank in the democratic national platform.
in the 1980s the onset of the aids epidemic see pp.
748 749 forced the gay liberation movement onto the defensive.
stung by the accusation that aids was a gay disease male homosexuals faced new public condemnation at a time when they were trying desperately to care for the growing number of victims of the disease within their ranks.
the gay organizations formed in the 1970s to win new rights now were channeling their energies into caring for the ill promoting safe sex practices and fighting for more public funding to help conquer aids.
in 1986 act up aids coalition to unleash power began a series of violent demonstrations in an effort to shock the nation into doing more about aids.
act up members disrupted public meetings chained themselves to a new york stock exchange balcony and spray painted outlines of corpses on the streets of san francisco to call attention to those who had died of aids.
chapter 30 unintended consequences the second great migration pp.
the number of arrivals continued to grow during the first decade of the new century with nearly 8 million immigrants reaching america between the beginning of 2000 and early 2005 by 2005 a record high of 35 million foreign born persons lived in the united states constituting 12 percent of the total population.
the new wave of immigrants came mainly from latin america and asia.
by 2005 over half the foreign born population of the united states came from latin america about one quarter from asia and about one out of seven from europe.
the new immigrants tended to settle in urban areas in six states california texas new york florida illinois and new jersey.
in california the influx of immigrants from asia and mexico created growing pressure on public services especially during the recessions of the early 1990s and the early 2000s.
the arrival of so many immigrants was bound to lead to controversy over whether immigrants were a benefit or a liability to american society.
a study by the national academy of sciences in the changing faces of america 1997 reported that while government services used by immigrants schools welfare health clinics cost more initially than was collected from them in taxes in the long run immigrants and their families more than paid their way.
in regard to employment immigrants tended to help consumers and employers by working for relatively low wages in restaurants the textile industry and farming but they hurt low skilled u s workers notably high school dropouts and many african americans by keeping wages low.
economist george j borjas a refugee from cuba claimed that immigrants from developing countries lacked the education and job skills needed to achieve the level of prosperity attained by newcomers in the past instead of entering the mainstream of american life they were likely to remain a permanent underclass.
emerging hispanics people of hispanic origin became the nations largest ethnic group in 2002 surpassing african americans for the first time.
the rapidly growing hispanic population climbed to over 41 million by 2005 accounting for 14 percent of the nations population.
it doesnt surprise me commented the leader of the league of latin american citizens.
anybody that travels around.
can see latinos everywhere working everywhere trying to reach the american dream the census bureau identified four major hispanic groups mexican americans puerto ricans cuban americans and other hispanics including many from central america.
even though read the document most of the hispanic population was concentrated in cities such as new york los angeles san antonio and miami the 2000 census showed a surprising geographical spread.
hispanics made up 20 percent of the population in individual counties in states such as georgia iowa and minnesota.
the latinization of the country is not just happening in new york miami or l a observed a puerto rican leader.
its greatest impact is in the heartland in places like reading pennsylvania lorain ohio and lowell massachusetts the hispanic groups had several features in common.
all were relatively youthful with a median age of 22 and a high fertility rate.
they tended to be relatively poor with one fourth falling below the poverty line and to be employed in low paying positions as manual laborers domestic servants and migrant workers.
although the position of hispanics had improved considerably in the boom years of the 1980s and 1990s they still lagged behind mainstream america.
the poverty rate among hispanics was twice the national average and family median income in 2005 was 34 000 or roughly two thirds the level for whites.
lack of education was a key factor in preventing economic progress for hispanics.
fewer hispanics graduated from high school than other minorities and their school dropout rate was the nations highest at more than 50 percent.
hispanic leaders warned that these figures boded ill not just for their own group but for society as a whole.
you either educate us claimed a san antonio activist or you pay for building more jails or for more welfare illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 newly sworn in citizens of the united states wave u s flags during a naturalization ceremony in miami on april 28 2006 days later more than one million immigrants participated in a nationwide boycott called a day without immigrants to protest the proposed tightening of u s immigration laws.
chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 in addition individuals of mixed ancestry could mark several racial categories not just one as in the past.
the results were startling.
nearly seven million americans claimed to be multiracial with most choosing either black white or asian white.
levonne gaddy president of the association of multiethnic americans was ecstatic.
this is the beginning of our having to redefine this social myth that we call race she declared.
a more neutral census bureau official observed the nation is much more diverse in the year 2000 than it was in 1990 that diversity he added is much more complex than weve ever measured before horace kallen one of the early critics of zangwills melting pot analogy offered the most appealing image of the nations diverse heritage.
he likened the united states to a symphony orchestra in which each nationality and ethnic group contributed its own specific timbre and tonality to create a multiplicity in a unity an orchestration of mankind as americans wrestled with the continuing dilemma embodied in the national motto e pluribus watch the video unum the image of a great symphony in which all groups blended harmoniously offered a way to balance the pride individuals find in ethnic identity with the need for national unity.
the new democrats what were the accomplishments and failures of the clinton administration.
the democrats victims of the runaway inflation of the 1970s became the beneficiaries of the lingering recession of the early 1990s.
moving away from its traditional liberal reliance on big government the party regained strength by choosing moderate candidates and tailoring its programs to appeal to the hard pressed middle class.
these tactics enabled the democrats to regain the white house in 1992 and retain it in 1996 despite a republican sweep of congress in 1994 the key figure in this political shift was bill clinton who overcame some early setbacks to reap the rewards of a sustained economic boom.
bill clinton sells himself to america twelve years of republican administrations and economic turmoil left voters ready to make a change.
enter bill clinton democratic governor of arkansas who would best george bush in the election of 1992 and go on to serve two full terms.
the new democrats the election of 1992 the persistence of the recession that had begun two years earlier became a major political issue in 1992 although mild by postwar standards the economic downturn that began in july 1990 proved unusually stubborn especially in states such as california that relied heavily on the defense industry which was hurt by the end of the cold war.
the recovery which started just after the end of the persian gulf war in the spring of 1991 proved slow and uneven.
unemployment remained high for eighteen months and the gross domestic product rose only an anemic 2 9 percent in the same period.
the political impact was devastating for the bush administration.
three million americans joined the ranks of the unemployed and many were white collar employees rather than factory workers typically hit by hard times.
although the economy began to advance more briskly in 1992 unemployment persisted as businesses still hesitated to hire new workers.
as a result the average american worker was ready to look beyond the republican party for relief.
as bushs popularity plummeted two men sought to capitalize on the dismal state of the u s economy.
first arkansas governor bill clinton defeated a field of five other challengers for the democratic nomination by becoming the champion of economic renewal.
forgoing traditional liberal appeals to interest groups clinton stressed the need for investment in the nations future rebuilding roads and bridges training workers for high tech jobs and solving the growing national health care crisis.
despite his victories in the democratic primaries however clinton faced a new rival in h ross perot.
an eccentric texas billionaire perot singled out the deficit as the nations gravest election of 1992 electoral vote by state popular vote democratic bill clinton 44 908 254 republican george bush 39 102 343 independent h ross perot 19 741 065 minor parties 773 161 104 524 823 alaska hawaii wash d c problem and agreed to run as an independent candidate in response to a grassroots movement which he financed to place his name on the november ballot.
when clinton and his running mate senator albert gore jr of tennessee succeeded in unifying the democratic party and gaining agreement on a moderate platform promising economic change perot stunned his supporters by suddenly dropping out of the race in july.
clinton immediately became the front runner rising from 30 percent to more than 50 percent in the polls leaving bush far behind.
a relentless democratic attack on the administrations lackluster economic performance overcame all the presidents efforts to remind the nation of reagan prosperity and bush triumphs abroad.
even gop assaults on clintons character notably his evasion of the draft during the vietnam war failed to halt the democratic momentum.
the message that clintons political advisers tacked up at the democratic candidates headquarters in little rock the economy stupid provided the key to victory in november.
clinton wound up with 43 percent of the popular vote but with a commanding lead in the electoral college 370 to 168 for bush.
perot who had reentered the race won 19 percent of the popular vote but failed to carry a single state.
clinton and congress in the white house bill clinton proved to be the most adept politician since franklin roosevelt.
born in hope arkansas in 1946 clinton weathered a difficult childhood with an alcoholic stepfather by developing skills at dealing with people and using personal charm to achieve his goals.
intelligent and ambitious he completed his undergraduate work at georgetown university studied law at yale and spent two years as a rhodes scholar at oxford university in england.
entering politics after teaching law briefly at the university of arkansas he won election first as arkansas attorney general and then as governor.
defeated after his first term in 1980 clinton won the nickname comeback kid by regaining the governors office in 1982 he was elected three more times earning a reputation as one of the nations most successful young political leaders.
in keeping with the theme of his campaign clinton concentrated at first on the economy.
the federal budget he proposed to congress in february 1993 called for tax increases and spending cuts to achieve a balanced budget.
congress was skeptical of such unpopular measures but clinton cajoled shamed and threatened sufficient members to win approval of 241 billion in new taxes and 255 billion in spending cuts for a total deficit reduction of 496 billion over four years.
this major achievement earned clinton the confidence of financial markets and helped fuel the economic boom of the 1990s.
clinton scored another victory when congress approved the north american free trade agreement nafta in the fall of 1993 nafta initiated and nearly completed by bush was a free trade plan that united the united states mexico and canada into a common market without tariff barriers.
clinton endorsed the treaty as a way of securing american prosperity and spreading american values.
critics complained that free trade would cost american workers their jobs as american companies moved production overseas ross perot the defeated 1992 third party candidate predicted a giant sucking sound as american jobs went south to mexico.
but clinton carried the day winning a bruising fight in the house and an easier contest in the senate.

chapter 1 conquerors cut off the citys supply of food and water and the residents of tenochtitln suffered spectacularly.
by 1521 corts and his men had toppled the aztec empire.
the spanish had a silent ally disease.
having been separated from eurasia for thousands of years the inhabitants of the americas had no immunities to common european diseases.
after the spaniards arrived a massive smallpox epidemic ravaged tenochtitln striking everywhere in the city according to an aztec source and killing moctezumas brother and thousands more.
they could not move they could not stir.
covered mantled with pustules very many people died of them subsequent outbreaks of smallpox influenza and measles killed hundreds of thousands of indians and sapped the survivors morale.
exploiting this demographic weakness corts quickly extended spanish rule over the aztec empire.
his lieutenants then moved against the mayan city states of the yucatn peninsula eventually conquering them as well.
in 1524 francisco pizarro set out to accomplish the same feat in peru.
by the time he and his small force of 168 men and 67 horses finally reached their destination in 1532 half of the inca population had already died from european diseases.
weakened militarily and divided between rival claimants to the throne the inca nobility was easy prey.
pizarro killed atahualpa the last inca emperor and seized his enormous wealth.
although inca resistance continued for a generation the conquest was complete by 1535 and spain was now the master of the wealthiest and most populous regions of the western hemisphere.
the spanish invasion changed life forever in the americas.
disease and warfare wiped out virtually all of the indians of hispaniola at least 300 000 people.
in peru the population of 9 million in 1530 plummeted to fewer than 500 000 a century later.
mesoamerica suffered the greatest losses in one of the great demographic disasters in world history its population of 20 million native americans in 1500 had dwindled to just 3 million in 1650 cabral and brazil at the same time portuguese efforts to find a sailing route around the southern tip of africa led to a surprising find.
as vasco da gama and his contemporaries experimented with winds and currents their voyages carried them ever farther away from the african coast and into the atlantic.
on one such voyage in 1500 the portuguese commander pedro alvares cabral and his fleet were surprised to see land loom up in the west.
cabral named his discovery ihla da vera cruz the island of the true cross and colliding worlds 1450 1600 continued on his way toward india.
others soon followed and changed the regions name to brazil after the indigenous tree that yielded a valuable red dye for several decades portuguese sailors traded with the tupi indians for brazilwood.
then in the 1530s to secure portugals claim king dom joo iii sent settlers who began the long painstaking process of carving out sugar plantations in the coastal lowlands.
for several decades native americans supplied most of the labor for these operations but african slaves gradually replaced them.
brazil would soon become the worlds leading producer of sugar it would also devour african lives.
by introducing the plantation system to the americas a form of estate agriculture using slave labor that was pioneered by italian merchants and crusading knights in the twelfth century and transplanted to the islands off the coast of africa in the fifteenth century the portuguese set in motion one of the most significant developments of the early modern era.
by the end of the sixteenth century the european colonization of the americas had barely begun.
yet several of its most important elements were already taking shape.
spanish efforts demonstrated that densely populated empires were especially vulnerable to conquest and were also especially valuable sources of wealth.
the portuguese had discovered the viability of sugar plantations in the tropical regions of the americas and pioneered the transatlantic slave trade as a way of manning them.
and contacts with native peoples revealed their devastating vulnerabilities to eurasian diseases one part of the larger phenomenon of the columbian exchange discussed in chapter 2 the puritan revolution in england meanwhile a religious civil war engulfed england.
archbishop laud had imposed the church of england prayer book on presbyterian scotland in 1637 five years later a rebel scottish army invaded england.
thousands of english puritans and hundreds of american puritans joined the scots demanding religious reform and parliamentary power.
after years of civil war parliamentary forces led by oliver cromwell emerged victorious.
in 1649 parliament beheaded king charles i proclaimed a republican commonwealth and banished bishops and elaborate rituals from the church of england.
the protestant almanack 1700 the conflict between protestants and catholics took many forms.
to reinforce the religious identity of english protestants a writer using the pseudonym philopretes published this almanac that charted not only the passage of the seasons and the influence of the pagan signs of the zodiack but also the pernicious revolutions of the papacy against the lord and his anointed cambridge university library.
american experiments 1521 1700 the puritan triumph in england was short lived.
popular support for the commonwealth ebbed after cromwell took dictatorial control in 1653 following his death in 1658 moderate protestants and a resurgent aristocracy restored the monarchy and the hierarchy of bishops.
with charles ii r 1660 1685 on the throne englands experiment in radical protestant government came to an end.
for the puritans in america the restoration of the monarchy began a new phase of their errand into the wilderness they had come to new england expecting to return to europe in triumph.
when the failure of the english revolution dashed that sacred mission ministers exhorted congregations to create a godly republican society in america.
the puritan colonies now stood as outposts of calvinism and the atlantic republican tradition.
puritanism and witchcraft like native americans puritans believed that the physical world was full of supernatural forces.
devout christians saw signs of gods or satans power in blazing stars birth defects and other unusual events.
noting after a storm that the houses of many ministers had been smitten with lightning cotton mather a prominent puritan theologian wondered what the meaning of god should be in it puritans were hostile toward people who they believed tried to manipulate these forces and many were willing to condemn neighbors as satans wizards or witches people in the town of andover were much addicted to sorcery claimed one observer and there were forty men in it that could raise the devil as well as any astrologer between 1647 and 1662 civil authorities in new england hanged fourteen people for witchcraft most of them older women accused of being double tongued or of having an unruly spirit the most dramatic episode of witch hunting occurred in salem in 1692 several girls who had experienced strange seizures accused neighbors of bewitching them.
when judges at the accused witches trials allowed the use of spectral evidence visions of evil beings and marks seen only by the girls the accusations spun out of control.
eventually massachusetts bay authorities tried 175 people for witchcraft and executed 19 of them.
the causes of this mass hysteria were complex and are still debated.
some historians point to group rivalries many accusers were the daughters or servants of poor farmers whereas many of the alleged witches were wealthier church members or their friends.
because 18 of those put to death were women other historians see the episode as part of a broader part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 puritan effort to subordinate women.
still others focus on political instability in massachusetts bay in the early 1690s and on fears raised by recent indian attacks in nearby maine which had killed the parents of some of the young accusers.
it is likely that all of these causes played some role in the executions.
whatever the cause the salem episode marked a major turning point.
shaken by the number of deaths government officials now discouraged legal prosecutions for witchcraft.
moreover many influential people embraced the outlook of the european enlightenment a major intellectual movement that began around 1675 and promoted a rational scientific view of the world.
increasingly educated men and women explained strange happenings and sudden deaths by reference to natural causes not witchcraft.
unlike cotton mather 1663 1728 who believed that lightning was a supernatural sign benjamin franklin 1706 1790 and other well read men of his generation would investigate it as a natural phenomenon.
a yeoman society 1630 1700 in building their communities new england puritans consciously rejected the feudal practices of english society.
many puritans came from middling families in east anglia a region of pasture lands and few manors and had no desire to live as tenants of wealthy aristocrats or submit to oppressive taxation by a distant government.
they had escaped out of the pollutions of the world the settlers of watertown in massachusetts bay declared and vowed to live close togither in self governing communities.
accordingly the general courts of massachusetts bay and connecticut bestowed land on groups of settlers who then distributed it among the male heads of families.
widespread ownership of land did not mean equality of wealth or status.
god had ordained different degrees and orders of men proclaimed boston merchant john saffin some to be masters and commanders others to be subjects and to be commanded town proprietors normally awarded the largest plots to men of high social status who often became selectmen and justices of the peace.
however all families received some land and most adult men had a vote in the town meeting the main institution of local government map 2 7.
in this society of independent households and selfgoverning communities ordinary farmers had much more political power than chesapeake yeomen and european peasants did.
although nathaniel fish was one of the poorest men in the town of barnstable he owned just a two room cottage 8 acres of land an ox and a cow he was a voting member of the town meeting.
each year fish and other barnstable farmers levied taxes enacted ordinances governing fencing roadbuilding and the use of common fields and chose the mason children this 1670 portrait of david joanna and abigail mason by an unknown painter illustrates the growing prosperity of well to do boston households.
all three wear white linen edged with fine lace and expensive ribbons.
eight year old david is dressed like a gentleman his slashed sleeves kid gloves and silvertipped walking stick represent the height of english fashion.
puritans with their plain style were uneasy about such finery.
as minister samuel torrey complained a spirit of worldliness a spirit of sensuality was gaining strength in the younger generation.
the fine arts museums of san francisco m h de young memorial museum gift of mr and mrs john d rockefeller iii 1979 7 3.
fine arts museums of san francisco.
chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 table 3 2 navigation acts 1651 1751 purpose compliance act of 1651 cut dutch trade mostly ignored act of 1660 ban foreign shipping enumerate goods that go only to england partially obeyed act of 1663 allow european imports only through england partially obeyed staple act 1673 ensure enumerated goods go only to england mostly obeyed act of 1696 prevent frauds create vice admiralty courts mostly obeyed woolen act 1699 prevent export or intercolonial sale of textiles partially obeyed hat act 1732 prevent export or intercolonial sale of hats partially obeyed molasses act 1733 cut american imports of molasses from french west indies extensively violated iron act 1750 prevent manufacture of finished iron products extensively violated currency act 1751 end use of paper currency as legal tender in new england mostly obeyed maine part of mass.
er nc re lake ontario n d hudson r new york maryland massachusetts boston w bay plymouth r i connecticut new york pennsylvania philadelphia the dominion of new england the puritans troubles had only begun thanks to the accession of king james ii r 1685 1688 an aggressive and inflexible ruler.
during the reign of oliver cromwell james had grown up in exile in france and he admired its authoritarian king louis xiv.
james wanted stricter control over the colonies and targeted new england for his reforms.
in 1686 the lords of trade revoked the charters of connecticut and rhode island and merged them with massachusetts bay and plymouth to form a new royal province the dominion of new england.
as governor of the dominion james ii appointed sir edmund andros a hard edged former military officer.
two years later james ii added new york and new jersey to the dominion creating a vast colony that stretched from maine to pennsylvania map 3 1.
fran ce connecticu t r st la w n e w re r wa ela england are bounded within the seas surrounding it and do not reach america outraged by this insolence customs official edward randolph called for troops to reduce massachusetts to obedience instead the lords of trade the administrative body charged with colonial affairs chose a less violent but no less confrontational strategy.
in 1679 it denied the claim of massachusetts bay to new hampshire and eventually established a separate royal colony there.
then in 1684 the lords of trade persuaded an english court to annul the massachusetts bay charter by charging the puritan government with violating the navigation acts and virtually outlawing the church of england.
east jersey s a t la n t i c o c ea n west jersey e 100 miles 100 kilometers dominion of new england royal colonies virginia st marys city proprietary colonies political revolts in 1689 boston overthrow of governor andros new york leislers rebellion maryland protestant association map 3 1 the dominion of new england 1686 1689 in the dominion james ii created a vast royal colony that stretched nearly 500 miles along the atlantic coast.
during the glorious revolution in england politicians and ministers in boston and new york city led revolts that ousted dominion officials and repudiated their authority.
king william and queen mary replaced the dominion with governments that balanced the power held by imperial authorities and local political institutions.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 the dominion extended to america the authoritarian model of colonial rule that the english government had imposed on catholic ireland.
james ii ordered governor andros to abolish the existing legislative assemblies.
in massachusetts andros banned town meetings angering villagers who prized local self rule and advocated public worship in the church of england offending puritan congregationalists.
even worse from the colonists perspective the governor invalidated all land titles granted under the original massachusetts bay charter.
andros offered to provide new deeds but only if the colonists would pay an annual fee.
the glorious revolution in england and america fortunately for the colonists james ii angered english political leaders as much as andros alienated colonists.
the king revoked the charters of english towns rejected the advice of parliament and aroused popular opposition by openly practicing roman catholicism.
then in 1688 jamess spanish catholic wife gave birth to a son.
to forestall the outcome of having a catholic heir to the english throne protestant bishops and parliamentary leaders in the whig party invited william of orange a staunchly protestant dutch prince who was married to jamess protestant daughter mary stuart to come to england at the head of an invading army.
with their support william led a quick and nearly bloodless coup and king james ii was overthrown in an event dubbed the glorious revolution by its supporters.
whig politicians forced king william and queen mary to accept the declaration of rights creating a constitutional monarchy that enhanced the powers of the house of commons at the expense of the crown.
the whigs wanted political power especially the power to levy taxes to reside in the hands of the gentry merchants and other substantial property owners.
to justify their coup the members of parliament relied on political philosopher john locke.
in his two treatises on government 1690 locke rejected the divine right monarchy celebrated by james ii arguing that the legitimacy of government rests on the consent of the governed and that individuals have inalienable natural rights to life liberty and property.
lockes celebration of individual rights and representative government had a lasting influence in america where many political leaders wanted to expand the powers of the colonial assemblies.
rebellions in america the glorious revolution sparked rebellions by protestant colonists in massachusetts maryland and new york.
when news of the coup reached boston in april 1689 puritan leaders and 2 000 militiamen seized governor andros and shipped him back to england.
heeding american complaints of authoritarian rule the new monarchs broke up the dominion of new england.
however they refused to restore the old puritan dominated government of massachusetts bay instead creating in 1692 a new royal colony which included plymouth and maine.
the new charter empowered the king to the leviathan absolutist state this detail from the title page engraving of thomas hobbess leviathan 1651 conveys hobbess belief that peace and security required submission to a powerful sovereign.
in this image a giant king looms over his domain his staff and sword symbolizing his civil and religious powers.
he is the head of a body made up of the multitudes of his faceless and voiceless subjects as they carry out his commands.
what hobbes celebrated a majority of english politicians and people rejected.
fearing the claims of absolute power by stuart kings they revolted twice executing charles i in 1649 and deposing james ii in 1688 title page from the first edition of thomas hobbess leviathan published in 1651 chapter 3 write a short essay that compares servitude and slavery.
in what ways did african slavery in the british colonies grow out of servitude and bear close similarities to it and in what ways were slaves set apart and treated fundamentally differently than their servant counterparts.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 hulling rice in west africa and georgia cultural practices often extend over time and space.
the eighteenth century engraving on the left shows west african women using huge wooden mortars and pestles to strip the tough outer hull from rice kernels.
in the photo on the right taken a century and a half later african american women in georgia use similar tools to prepare rice for their families.
library of congress.
courtesy georgia vanishing archives collection sap093.
brands or scars that identified them with their owners.
but other tangible markers of african heritage persisted including hairstyles motifs used in wood carvings and pottery the large wooden mortars and pestles used to hull rice and the design of houses in which rooms were arranged from front to back in a distinctive i pattern not side by side as was common in english dwellings.
musical instruments especially drums gourd rattles and a stringed instrument called a molo forerunner to the banjo helped africans preserve cultural traditions and eventually shape american musical styles.
african values also persisted.
some slaves passed down muslim beliefs and many more told their children of the spiritual powers of conjurers called obeah or ifa who knew the ways of the african gods.
enslaved yorubas consulted orunmila the god of fate and other africans a jamaican planter noted relied on obeah to revenge injuries and insults discover and punish thieves and adulterers and to predict the future resistance and accommodation slaves freedom of action was always dramatically circumscribed.
it became illegal to teach slaves to read and write and most slaves owned no property of their own.
because the institution of slavery rested on fear planters had to learn a ferocious form of cruelty.
slaves might be whipped restrained or maimed for any infraction large or small.
a female cook in a virginia household was cruelly loaded with various kinds of iron machines she had one particularly on her head which locked her mouth so fast that she could scarcely speak and could not eat nor drink thomas jefferson who witnessed such punishments on his fathers virginia plantation noted that each generation of whites was nursed educated and daily exercised in tyranny and he concluded that the relationship between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most unremitting despotism on the one part and degrading submission on the other a fellow virginian planter george mason agreed every master is born a petty tyrant chapter 4 churches.
to signify their state of grace some baptist men cut off their hair like cromwells round headed chaplains others forged a new evangelical masculinity crying weeping lifting up the eyes groaning when touched by the holy spirit.
the baptist revival in the chesapeake challenged customary authority in families and society but did not overturn it.
rejecting the pleas of evangelical women baptist men kept church authority in the hands of free born male members and anglican slaveholders retained control of the political system.
still the baptist insurgency infused the lives of poor tenant families with spiritual meaning and empowered yeomen to defend their economic interests.
moreover as baptist ministers spread christianity among slaves the cultural gulf between blacks and whites shrank undermining one justification for slavery and giving some blacks a new religious identity.
within a generation african americans would develop distinctive versions of protestant christianity.
the midcentury challenge war trade and social conflict 1750 1763 between 1750 and 1763 three significant events transformed colonial life.
first britain went to war against the french in america sparking a worldwide conflict the great war for empire.
second a surge in trade boosted colonial consumption but caused americans to become deeply indebted to british creditors.
third westward migration sparked warfare with indian peoples violent disputes between settlers and land speculators and backcountry rebellions against easterncontrolled governments.
the french and indian war in 1754 overlapping french and british claims in north america came to a head map 4 4.
the french maintained their vast claims through a network of forts and trading posts that sustained alliances with neighboring indians.
the soft underbelly of this sprawling empire was the ohio valley where french claims were tenuous.
native peoples were driven out of the valley by iroquois attacks in the seventeenth century but after 1720 displaced indian populations especially delawares and shawnees from pennsylvania resettled there in large numbers.
in the 1740s british traders from pennsylvania began traveling down the ohio growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 river.
they traded with delawares and shawnees in the upper valley and began to draw french allied indians into their orbit and away from french posts.
then in 1748 the ohio company of virginia a partnership of prominent colonial planters and london merchants received a 200 000 acre grant from the crown to establish a new settlement on the upper ohio threatening french claims to the region.
conflict in the ohio valley by midcentury britain relied on the iroquois confederacy as its partner in indian relations throughout the northeast.
by extending the covenant chain the iroquois had become a kind of indian empire in their own right claiming to speak for other groups throughout the region based on their seventeenth century conquests.
the delawares shawnees and other groups who repopulated the ohio valley did so in part to escape the iroquois yoke.
to maintain influence on the ohio the iroquois sent two half kings tanaghrisson an adopted seneca and scarouady an oneida to the native settlement of logstown a trading town on the upper ohio where britain recognized them as leaders.
french authorities alarmed by british inroads built a string of forts from lake erie to the headwaters of the ohio culminating with fort duquesne on the site of present day pittsburgh.
to reassert british claims governor dinwiddie dispatched an expedition led by colonel george washington a twenty twoyear old virginian whose half brothers were ohio company stockholders.
washington discovered that most of the ohio indians had decided to side with the french only the iroquois half kings and a few of their followers supported his efforts.
after washingtons party fired on a french detachment tanaghrisson rushed in and killed a french officer to ensure war a prospect that would force british arms to support iroquois interests in the valley.
washingtons party was soon defeated by a larger french force.
the result was an international incident that prompted virginian and british expansionists to demand war.
but war in north america was a worrisome prospect the colonies were notoriously incapable of cooperating in their own defense and the covenant chain was badly in need of repair.
the albany congress the iroquois confederacy was unhappy with its british alliance and believed that the british were neglecting the iroquois while settlers from new york pressed onto their lands.
moreover the ohio indians france and britain were all acting in the ohio valley without consulting them.
to mend labrador sea y hudson bay cree m c r f algonquin fox law me.
la ie er ke s t penn.
delaware n h ft stanwix n y albany n j boston new york at l a n t i c ocean cherokee n c it br s c catawba comanche chickasaw wichita pueblo rt h santa fe s philadelphia no i e w is u s a l o i n n mass.
r i conn ft duquesne md.
ohio ft cumberland company of shawnee virginia.
va williamsburg r io oh h osage a port royal abenaki miami pawnee micmac ft ticonderoga iroquois ottawa detroit quebec rica lake michigan sioux.
ir ipp iss iss cheyenne on ur m ft beausjour n montreal ft frontenac ft oswego tario l on lak eh anishinaabeg e n superior ke la w a ren ce r.
assiniboine mandan ft louisbourg e y b a o n ame s n s o d h u c a p savannah creek caddo natchez charleston ga choctaw san antonio a id or fl new orleans sh ni apache st augustine sp a french claims british claims spanish claims disputed british french claims disputed british spanish claims major fort rio gr french outposts and settlements a nde gulf of mexico n e w s p a i n mexico city map 4 4 european spheres of influence in north america 1754 in the mid eighteenth century france spain and the british owned hudson bay company laid claim to the vast areas of north america still inhabited primarily by indian peoples.
british settlers had already occupied much of the land east of the appalachian mountains.
to safeguard their lands west of the mountains native americans played off one european power against another.
as a british official remarked to preserve the ballance between us and the french is the great ruling principle of modern indian politics when britain expelled france from north america in 1763 indians had to face encroaching anglo american settlers on their own.
500 miles 500 kilometers chapter 3 we saw the rise of the south atlantic system an engine of economic growth that tied britains colonies more closely together and generated prosperity throughout the british atlantic world.
what consequences of that integration and prosperity are evident in the topics discussed in this chapter 5 the problem of empire 1763 1776 patriot propaganda silversmith paul revere issued this engraving of the confrontation between british redcoats and snowballthrowing bostonians in the days after it occurred.
to whip up opposition to the military occupation of their town revere and other patriots labeled the incident the boston massacre the shooting confirmed their radical whig belief that standing armies were instruments of tyranny.
library of congress.
were now distinct and separate states with the same head or sovereign the king franklins suggestion outraged thomas hutchinson the american born royal governor of massachusetts.
hutchinson emphatically rejected the idea of two independent legislatures in one and the same state he told the massachusetts assembly i know of no line that can be drawn between the supreme authority of parliament and the total independence of the colonies there the matter rested.
the british had twice imposed revenue acts on the colonies and american patriots had twice forced a retreat.
if parliament insisted on a policy of constitutional absolutism by imposing taxes a third time some americans were prepared to pursue violent resistance.
nor did they flinch when reminded that george iii condemned their agitation.
as the massachusetts house replied to hutchinson there is more reason to dread the consequences trace change of absolute uncontrolled supreme over time power whether of a nation or a what was benjamin monarch than those of total inde franklins position on colonial representation pendence fearful of civil war in 1765 and why had his lord norths ministry hesitated to view changed by 1770.
force the issue.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the road to independence 1771 1776 repeal of the townshend duties in 1770 restored harmony to the british empire but strong feelings and mutual distrust lay just below the surface.
in 1773 those emotions erupted destroying any hope of compromise.
within two years the americans and the british clashed in armed conflict.
despite widespread resistance among loyal colonists patriot legislators created provisional governments and military forces the two essentials for independence.
a compromise repudiated once aroused political passions are not easily quieted.
in boston samuel adams and other radical patriots continued to warn americans of imperial domination and late in 1772 persuaded the town meeting to set up a committee of correspondence to state the rights of the colonists of this province soon eighty massachusetts towns had similar committees.
when british officials threatened to seize the americans responsible for the burning of the customs vessel gaspe and prosecute them in britain the virginia house of burgesses and several other assemblies set up their own committees of correspondence.
these standing committees allowed patriots to communicate with leaders in other colonies when new threats to liberty occurred.
by 1774 among the colonies that would later declare independence only pennsylvania was without one.
the east india company and the tea act these committees sprang into action when parliament passed the tea act of may 1773 the act provided financial relief for the east india company a royally chartered private corporation that served as the instrument of british imperialism.
the company was deeply in debt it also had a huge surplus of tea as a result of high import duties which led britons and colonists alike to drink smuggled understand dutch tea instead.
the tea act points of view gave the company a government why did colonists react so loan and to boost its revenue strongly against the tea act which imposed a small canceled the import duties on tea tax and actually lowered the company exported to ireland the price of tea.
and the american colonies.
now even with the townshend duty of 3 pence a pound on tea high quality east india company tea would cost less than the dutch tea smuggled into the colonies by american merchants.
radical patriots accused the british ministry of bribing americans with the cheaper east india companys tea so they would give up their principled opposition to the tea tax.
as an anonymous woman wrote to the massachusetts spy the use of british tea is considered not as a private but as a public evil.
a handle to introduce a variety of.
oppressions amongst us merchants joined the protest because the east india company planned to distribute its tea directly to shopkeepers excluding american wholesalers from the trades profits.
the fear of an introduction of a monopoly in this country british general frederick haldimand reported from new york has induced the mercantile part of the inhabitants to be very industrious in opposing this step and added strength to a spirit of independence already too prevalent the tea party and the coercive acts the sons of liberty prevented east india company ships from delivering their cargoes in new york philadelphia and charleston.
in massachusetts royal governor hutchinson was determined to land the tea and collect the tax.
to foil the governors plan artisans and laborers disguised as indians boarded three ships the dartmouth the eleanor and the beaver on december 16 1773 broke open 342 chests of tea valued at about 10 000 or about 900 000 today and threw them into the harbor.
this destruction of the tea.
must have so important consequences john adams wrote in his diary that i cannot but consider it as an epoch in history the king was outraged.
concessions have made matters worse george iii declared.
the time has come for compulsion early in 1774 parliament passed four coercive acts to force massachusetts to pay for the tea and to submit to imperial authority.
the boston port bill closed boston harbor to shipping the massachusetts government act annulled the colonys charter and prohibited most town meetings a new quartering act mandated new barracks for british troops and the justice act allowed trials for capital crimes to be transferred to other colonies or to britain.
patriot leaders throughout the colonies branded the measures intolerable and rallied support for massachusetts.
in georgia a patriot warned the freemen of the province that every privilege you at present claim as a birthright may be wrested from you by the same authority that blockades the town of boston the cause of boston george washington declared in virginia now is and ever will be considered as the cause of america the committees of correspondence had created a firm sense of patriot unity.
chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
proclamation line limits white settlement sugar act and currency act colonists oppose vice admiralty courts stamp act imposes direct tax quartering act requires barracks for british troops stamp act congress meets americans boycott british goods first compromise stamp act repealed declaratory act passed townshend duties second american boycott second compromise partial repeal of townshend act boston massacre committees of correspondence form tea act leads to boston tea party coercive acts punish massachusetts dunmores war against the shawnees continental congress meets third american boycott general gage marches to lexington and concord second continental congress creates continental army lord dunmore recruits loyalist slaves patriots invade canada and skirmish with loyalists in south western settlers occupy kentucky thomas paines common sense declaration of independence key turning points the boston tea party 1773 the coercive acts 1774 and the first continental congress 1774.
what did parliament hope to achieve with the coercive acts.
how did the decision to convene a continent wide congress demonstrate the failure of parliaments efforts.
making war and republican governments 1776 1789 c h a p t e r the trials of war 1776 1778 war in the north armies and strategies victory at saratoga the perils of war financial crisis valley forge the path to victory 1778 1783 the french alliance war in the south the patriot advantage diplomatic triumph creating republican institutions 1776 1787 the state constitutions how much democracy.
women seek a public voice the wars losers loyalists native americans and slaves the articles of confederation shayss rebellion the constitution of 1787 the rise of a nationalist faction the philadelphia convention the people debate ratification w hen patriots in frederick identify the big idea county maryland demanded how revolutionary was the amerhis allegiance to their cause in ican revolution.
what political 1776 robert gassaway would have none social and economic changes did it of it.
it was better for the poor people to produce and what stayed the same.
lay down their arms and pay the duties and taxes laid upon them by king and parliament than to be brought into slavery and commanded and ordered about by you he told them.
the story was much the same in farmington connecticut where patriot officials imprisoned nathaniel jones and seventeen other men for remaining neutral in pennsylvania quakers accused of loyalism were rounded up jailed and charged with treason and some were hanged for aiding the british cause.
everywhere the outbreak of fighting in 1776 forced families to choose the loyalist or the patriot side.
the patriots control of most local governments gave them an edge in this battle.
patriot leaders organized militia units and recruited volunteers for the continental army a ragtag force that surprisingly held its own on the battlefield.
i admire the american troops tremendously exclaimed a french officer.
it is incredible that soldiers composed of every age even children of fifteen of whites and blacks almost naked unpaid and rather poorly fed can march so well and withstand fire so steadfastly military service created political commitment and vice versa.
many patriot leaders encouraged americans not only to support the war but also to take an active role in government.
as more people did so their political identities changed.
previously americans had lived within a social world dominated by the links of family kinship and locality.
now the abstract bonds of citizenship connected them directly to more distant institutions of government.
from subjects to citizens the difference is immense remarked south carolina patriot david ramsay.
by repudiating monarchical rule and raising a democratic army the patriots launched the age of republican revolutions.
soon republicanism would throw france into turmoil and inspire revolutionaries in spains american colonies.
the independence of the anglo american colonies remarked the venezuelan political leader francisco de miranda who had been in new york and philadelphia at the end of the american revolution was bound to be.
the infallible preliminary to our own independence movement the patriot uprising of 1776 set in motion a process that gradually replaced an atlantic colonial system that spanned the americas with an american system of new nations.
general washington 1780 by wars end george washington was a hero on both sides of the atlantic.
this engraving printed in paris in 1780 shows him with various british bills and declarations in tatters at his feet while he holds copies of the declaration of independence and the treaty of alliance with france.
in the background of this vaguely orientalized scene a black slave presumably william lee washingtons valet and constant companion during the revolution saddles his horse.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the trials of war 1776 1778 the declaration of independence appeared just as the british launched a full scale military assault.
for two years british troops manhandled the continental army.
a few inspiring american victories kept the rebellion alive but during the winters of 1776 and 1777 the patriot cause hung in the balance.
once the british resorted to military force few europeans gave the rebels a chance.
the population of great britain was 11 million the colonies 2 5 million 20 percent of whom were enslaved africans.
moreover the british government had access to the immense wealth generated by the south atlantic system and the emerging industrial revolution.
britain also had the most powerful navy in the world a standing army of 48 000 britons plus thousands of german hessian soldiers and the support of thousands of american loyalists and powerful indian coalitions.
in the carolinas the cherokees resisted colonists demands for their lands by allying with the british as did four of the six iroquois nations of new york map 6 1.
in the ohio country shawnees and their allies armed by the british attacked the new kentucky settlements.
by contrast the americans were economically and militarily weak.
they lacked a strong central government and a reliable source of tax revenue.
their new continental army commanded by general george washington consisted of 18 000 poorly trained and inexperienced recruits.
to demonstrate britains military superiority the prime minister lord north ordered general william howe to capture new york city.
his strategy was to seize control of the hudson river and thereby isolate the radical patriots in new england from the colonies to the south.
as the second continental congress declared independence in philadelphia in july 1776 howe landed 32 000 troops british regulars and german mercenaries outside new york city.
in august 1776 understand howe defeated the americans in points of view the battle of long island and why was control of new forced their retreat to manhattan york city britains first military objective in the island.
there howe outflanked emerging war.
washingtons troops and nearly trapped them.
outgunned and outmaneuvered the continental army again retreated eventually crossing the hudson river to new jersey.
nova scotia mass.
vt n h o ntari l o l war in the north halifax british canada boston new york mass.
conn newport n rhode island e w ie er s new york philadelphia pennsylvania new jersey delaware atlantic ocean maryland virginia norfolk north carolina wilmington south carolina savannah 300 miles 300 kilometers loyalist strongholds strongly contested areas indians loyalist or neutral patriot strongholds charles town georgia a scattering of loyalists could be found in many areas of patriot strength.
map 6 1 patriot and loyalist strongholds patriots were in the majority in most of the thirteen mainland colonies and used their control of local governments to funnel men money and supplies to the rebel cause.
although loyalists could be found in every colony their strongholds were limited to nova scotia eastern new york new jersey and certain areas in the south.
however most native american peoples favored the british cause and bolstered the power of loyalist militias in central new york see map 6 3 and in the carolina backcountry.
by december the british army had pushed the rebels across new jersey and over the delaware river into pennsylvania.
from the patriots perspective winter came just in time.
following eighteenth century custom the british halted their military campaign for the cold months allowing the americans to catch them off guard.
on christmas night 1776 washington crossed the delaware river and staged a successful surprise attack on trenton new jersey where he forced the surrender of 1 000 german soldiers.
in early january 1777 the continental army won a small victory at nearby princeton map 6 2.
but these minor triumphs could chapter 5.
in 1779 the philipsburg proclamation declared that any slave who deserted a rebel master would receive protection freedom and land from great britain.
together these proclamations led some 30 000 african americans to take refuge behind british lines.
george washington initially barred blacks from the continental army but he relented in 1777 by wars end african americans could enlist in every state but south carolina and georgia and some 5 000 slave and free fought for the patriot cause thinking like a historian p 192.
it fell to sir henry clinton acutely aware of the role slaves might play to implement britains southern strategy.
from the british armys main base in new york city clinton launched a seaborne attack on savannah georgia.
troops commanded by colonel archibald campbell captured the town in december 1778 mobilizing hundreds of blacks to transport supplies campbell moved inland and captured augusta early in 1779 by years end clintons forces and local loyalists controlled coastal georgia and had 10 000 troops poised for an assault on south carolina.
in 1780 british forces marched from victory to victory map 6 4.
in may clinton forced the surrender of charleston south carolina and its garrison of 5 000 troops.
then lord charles cornwallis assumed control of the british forces and at camden defeated an chapter 6 mens scorn filled their letters diaries and conversations with opinions on public issues.
the men say we have no business with politics eliza wilkinson of south carolina complained in 1783.
they wont even allow us liberty of thought and that is all i want as wilkinsons remark suggests most women did not insist on civic equality with men many sought only an end to restrictive customs and laws.
abigail adams demanded equal legal rights for married women who under common law could not own property enter into contracts or initiate lawsuits.
the war bonds she purchased had to be held in a trust run by a male relative.
men would be tyrants if they continued to hold such power over women adams declared to her husband john criticizing him and other patriots for emancipating all nations from monarchical despotism while retaining absolute power over wives most politicians ignored womens requests and most men insisted on traditional sexual and political prerogatives.
long married husbands remained patriarchs who dominated their households and even young men who embraced the republican ideal of companionate marriage did not support legal equality for their wives and daughters.
except in new jersey which until 1807 allowed unmarried and widowed female property holders to vote women remained disenfranchised.
in the new american republic only white men enjoyed full citizenship.
nevertheless the republican belief in an educated citizenry created opportunities for some women.
in her 1779 essay on the equality of the sexes judith sargent murray argued that men and women had equal capacities for memory and that women had superior imaginations.
she conceded that most women were inferior to men in judgment and reasoning but only from lack of training we can only reason from what we know she argued and most women had been denied the opportunity of acquiring knowledge that situation changed in the 1790s when the attorney general of massachusetts declared that girls had an equal right to schooling under the state constitution.
by 1850 the literacy rates of women and men in the northeastern states were equal and educated women again challenged their subordinate legal and political status.
the wars losers loyalists native americans and slaves the success of republican institutions was assisted by the departure of as many as 100 000 loyalists many of whom suffered severe financial losses.
some patriots demanded revolutionary justice the seizure of making war and republican governments 1776 1789 judith sargent murray judith sargent murray was perhaps the most accomplished female essayist of the revolutionary era.
publishing under various pen names she advocated for economic independence and better educational opportunities for women.
two years before mary wollstonecrafts a vindication of the rights of woman 1792 she published on the equality of the sexes in the massachusetts magazine.
her letter books which run to twenty volumes were discovered only in 1984 the judith sargent murray society is now transcribing and indexing them for publication.
this striking portrait by john singleton copley hints at her intelligence and sardonic wit.
terra foundation for american art chicago art resource ny.
all loyalist property and its distribution to needy americans.
but most officials were unwilling to go so far.
when state governments did seize loyalist property they often auctioned it to the highest bidders only rarely did small scale farmers benefit.
in the cities patriot merchants replaced loyalists at the top of the eco identify causes nomic ladder supplanting a tradi what impact did republitional economic elite who often can ideals have on gender invested profits from trade in real roles and expectations durestate with republican entre ing the revolutionary era.
preneurs who tended to promote new trading ventures and domestic manufacturing.
this shift facilitated americas economic development in the years to come.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 though the revolution did not result in widespread property redistribution it did encourage yeomen middling planters and small time entrepreneurs to explain believe that their new republican consequences governments would protect their how did the revolutionary property and ensure widespread commitment to liberty and access to land.
in western counthe protection of property ties former regulators demanded affect enslaved african americans and western that the new governments be indians.
more responsive to their needs beyond the appalachians thousands of squatters who had occupied lands in kentucky and tennessee expected their claims to be recognized and lands to be made available on easy terms.
if the united states were to secure the loyalty of westerners it would have to meet their needs more effectively than the british empire had.
this meant among other things extinguishing native american claims to land as quickly as possible.
at wars end george washington commented on the rage for speculating in ohio valley lands.
men in these times talk with as much facility of fifty a hundred and even 500 000 acres as a gentleman formerly would do of 1000 acres if we make a right use of our natural advantages a fourth of july orator observed we soon must be a truly great and happy people native american land claims stood as a conspicuous barrier to the natural advantages he imagined.
for southern slaveholders the revolution was fought to protect property rights and any sentiment favoring slave emancipation met with violent objections.
when virginia methodists called for general emancipation in 1785 slaveholders used revolutionary principles to defend their right to human property.
they risked their lives and fortunes and waded through seas of blood to secure the possession of their rights of liberty and property only to hear of a very subtle and daring attempt to dispossess us of a very important part of our property emancipation would bring want poverty distress and ruin to the free citizen the liberties coveted by ordinary white americans bore hard on the interests of native americans and slaves.
the articles of confederation a black loyalist pass 1783 white patriots claimed their freedom by fighting against the british thousands of black slaves won their liberty by fighting for them.
this pass certifies that cato rammsay actually ramsey a negro resorted to the british lines in search of the freedom promised by virginia royal governor dunmore and british commander henry clinton to slaves who escaped from patriot owners.
now age forty five and a slim fellow ramsey had escaped from his owner john ramsey of norfolk virginia in 1776 probably fleeing to dunmores ships.
seven years later he ended up in new york reunited with his wife china godfrey thirty five and their three children james twenty betsey fifteen and nelly ramsey ten who had fled subsequently from other owners.
as the british evacuated new york in 1783 ramsey and his family were free to go to nova scotia where they worked as farmers.
nova scotia archives and records management.
as patriots embraced independence in 1776 they envisioned a central government with limited powers.
carter braxton of virginia thought the continental congress should regulate the affairs of trade war peace alliances c but should by no means have authority to interfere with the internal police governance or domestic concerns of any colony that idea informed the articles of confederation which were approved by the continental congress in november 1777 the articles provided for a loose union in which each state retains its sovereignty freedom and independence as an association of equals each state had one vote regardless of its size population or wealth.
important laws needed the approval of nine of the thirteen states and changes in the articles required unanimous consent.
though the confederation had significant powers on paper it could declare war make treaties with foreign nations adjudicate disputes between the states borrow and print money and requisition funds from the states for the common defense or general welfare it had major weaknesses as well.
it had neither a chief executive nor a judiciary.
though it could make treaties it could not enforce their provisions since the states remained sovereign.
most important it lacked the power to tax either the states or the people.
chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter.
gregory dowd a spirited resistance 1993.
a penetrating account of indian resistance to american expansion.
joanne b freeman affairs of honor 2002.
a cultural analysis of the politics of the 1790s.
jon kukla a wilderness so immense 2004.
a sweeping account of the contexts for the louisiana purchase.
alan taylor the civil war of 1812 2010.
presents the contest for canada as a multiethnic civil war.
ashli white encountering revolution 2012.
considers the impact of the haitian revolution on the united states.
the war of 1812 pbs video 2011 and its accompanying web site pbs org wned war of 1812 home offer reenactments animations interpretive essays and historical site analyses.
chapter 8 creating a republican culture 1790 1820 the wedding 1805 bride and groom stare intently into each others eyes as they exchange vows suggesting that their union was a love match not an arranged marriage based on economic calculation.
the plain costumes of the guests and the sparse furnishings of the room suggest that the unknown artist may have provided us with a picture of a rural quaker wedding.
the granger collection nyc.
sturbridge in central massachusetts women now bore an average of six children their grandmothers had usually given birth to eight or nine.
in the growing seaport cities native born white women now bore an average of only four children.
the united states was among the first nations to experience this sharp decline in the birthrate what historians call the demographic transition.
there were several causes.
beginning in the 1790s thousands of young men migrated to the trans appalachian west which increased the number of never married women in the east and delayed marriage for many more.
women who married in their late twenties had fewer children.
in addition white urban middle class couples deliberately limited the size of their families.
fathers wanted to leave children an adequate inheritance while mothers influenced by new ideas of individualism and self achievement refused to spend their entire adulthood rearing children.
after having four or five children these couples used birth control or abstained from sexual intercourse.
even as women bore fewer children they accepted greater responsibility for the welfare of the family.
in his thoughts on female education 1787 philadelphia physician benjamin rush argued that young women should ensure their husbands perseverance in the paths of rectitude and called for loyal republican mothers who would instruct their sons in the principles of liberty and government to see a longer excerpt of thoughts on female education along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
christian ministers readily embraced this idea of republican motherhood.
preserving virtue and instructing the young are not the fancied but the real rights of women the reverend thomas bernard told the female charitable society of salem massachusetts.
he urged his audience to dismiss public roles for women such as voting or serving on juries that english femi identify causes nist mary wollstonecraft had how did republican ideals new economic circumadvocated in a vindication of the stances and changing rights of woman 1792.
instead cultural values affect marwomen should care for their chil riage practices.
dren a responsibility that gave american voices the trials of married life as the text explains the ideal american marriage of the early nineteenth century was republican a contract between equals and romantic a match in which mutual love was foremost.
were these ideals attainable given the social authority of men and the volatility of human passions.
letters memoirs and diaries are excellent sources for answering these questions.
these selections from the personal writings of a variety of american women offer insights into the new system of marriage and how changes in cultural values intersected with individual lives.
emma hart willard the danger of high expectations born in connecticut in 1787 emma hart married john willard in 1809 an early proponent of advanced education for women she founded female academies in middlebury vermont 1814 and waterford and troy new york 1821.
she wrote this letter to her sister almira hart in 1815 you think it strange that i should consider a period of happiness as more likely than any other to produce future misery.
i know i did not sufficiently explain myself.
those tender and delicious sensations which accompany successful love while they soothe and soften the mind diminish its strength to bear or to conquer difficulties.
it is the luxury of the soul and luxury always enervates.
this life is a life of vicissitude.
suppose you are secured to each other for life.
it will be natural that at first he should be much devoted to you but after a while his business must occupy his attention.
while absorbed in that he will perhaps neglect some of those little tokens of affection which have become necessary to your happiness.
his affairs will sometimes go wrong.
and he may sometimes hastily give you a harsh word or a frown.
but where is the use say you of diminishing my present enjoyment by such gloomy apprehensions.
its use is this that if you enter the marriage state believing such things to be absolutely impossible if you should meet them they would come upon you with double force.
caroline howard gilman female submission in marriage born in boston in 1794 caroline howard married in 1819 and moved to charleston south carolina with her husband samuel gilman a unitarian minister.
a novelist she published recollections of a housekeeper 1835 a portrait of domestic life in new england and recollections of a southern matron 1838 a fictional account that includes this selection.
the planters bride who leaves a numerous and cheerful family in her paternal home little imagines the change which awaits her in her own retired residence.
she dreams of an independent sway over her household devoted love and unbroken intercourse with her husband and indeed longs to be released from the eyes of others that she may dwell only beneath the sunbeam of his.
and so it was with me.
there we were together asking for nothing but each others presence and love.
at length it was necessary for him to tear himself away to superintend his interests.
but the period of absence was gradually protracted then a friend sometimes came home with him and their talk was of crops and politics draining the fields and draining the revenue.
a growing discomfort began to work upon my mind.
i had undefined forebodings i mused about past days my views of life became slowly disorganized my physical powers enfeebled a nervous excitement followed i nursed a moody discontent.
if the reign of romance was really waning i resolved not to chill his noble confidence but to make a steadier light rise on his affections.
this task of self government was not easy.
to repress a harsh answer to confess a fault.
in gentle submission sometimes requires a struggle like life and death but these.
efforts are the golden threads with which domestic happiness is woven.
how clear is it then that woman loses by petulance and recrimination.
her first study must be self control almost to hypocrisy.
a good wife must smile amid a thousand perplexities.
martha hunter hitchcock isolation unmentionable sorrows and suffering martha hunter hitchcock married a doctor in the u s army.
these excerpts from letters in the virginia historical society to her cousins martha and sarah hunter describe her emotional dependence on her husband and her unhappy life.
to martha hunter 1840 if i had never married how much of pain and dissatisfaction should i have escaped at all events i should never have known what jealousy is.
you must not betray me dear cousin for despite all my good resolutions i find it impossible always to struggle against my nature the school of indulgence in which i was educated was little calculated to teach me those lessons of forbearance which i have had to practice so frequently since my marriage it is ungrateful in me to murmur if perchance a little bitter is mingled in my cup of life.
to sarah hunter 1841 i have lived so long among strangers since my marriage that when i contrast it with the old warm affection in which i was nurtured the contrast is so terrible that i cannot refrain from weeping at the thought of it i hope my dear cousin that yours will be a happier destiny than mine in that respect only think of it.
nearly a year and a half have passed away since i have seen a single relation.
to martha hunter 1845 uneasiness about my daughter lillie and very great sorrows of my own which i cannot commit to paper have almost weighed me down to the grave and indeed without any affectation i look forward to that as the only real rest i shall ever know.
to martha hunter 1846 lillie had the scarlet fever during our visit to alabama and she has never recovered from the effects of it my life is a constant vigil and there is nothing which wearies mind and body so much as watching a sickly child.
all this i have to endure and may have to suffer more for i know not what fate may have in store for me.
elizabeth scott neblett my seasons of gloom and despondency elizabeth scott neblett lived with her husband and children in navarro county texas.
in 1860 she reflected in her diary on her bouts of depression and the difficulties of wives and husbands in understanding each others inner lives.
it has now been almost eight years since i became a married woman.
eight years of checkered good and ill and yet thro all it seems the most of the ill has fallen to my lot until now my poor weak cowardly heart sighs only for its final resting place where sorrow grief nor pain can never reach it more.
i feel that i have faithfully discharged my duty towards you and my children but for this i know that i deserve no credit nor aspire to none my affection has been my prompter and the task has proven a labor of love.
you have not rightly understood me at all times and being naturally very hopeful you could in no measure sympathize with me during my seasons of gloom and despondency.
but marriage is a lottery and that your draw proved an unfortunate one on your part is not less a subject of regret with me than you.
it is useless to say that during these eight years i have suffered ten times more than you have and ten times more than i can begin to make you conceive of but of course you can not help the past nor by knowing my suffering relieve it but it might induce you to look with more kindness upon my faults.
the 17th of this month i was 27 years old and i think my face looks older than that perhaps ill never see an other birth day and i dont grieve at the idea.
source these selections are abridged versions of materials in anya jabour ed major problems in the history of american families and children boston houghton mifflin 2005 108 113.
questions for analysis 1 what problems do these women share.
how might their problems reflect larger social and economic issues in nineteenth century america.
2 how would you characterize the unhappiness of these women.
in what ways is it related to their expectations about love based marriage.
3 what was caroline gilmans advice to wives.
how does it apply to the other women in this section.
4 do these selections suggest that most american women had unfulfilled marriages.
or were these isolated cases.
would you expect to find more records of happy or unhappy marriages.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 them an extensive power over the fortunes of man in every generation raising republican children republican values changed assumptions about inheritance and child rearing.
english common law encouraged primogeniture the bequest of the familys property to the eldest son chapter 8 creating a republican culture 1790 1820 share of all congregations anglican episcopalian 2 100 baptist 12 150 2 500 congregational 2 200 lutheran 2 100 methodist 20 000 6 400 2 447 47 450 catholic presbyterian 1 000 2 000 4 000 6 000 8 000 10 000 12 000 14 000 16 000 18 000 20 000 figure 8 1 number of church congregations by denomination 1780 and 1860 the growth of evangelical churches methodist and baptist transformed american christianity during the first half of the nineteenth century.
also noteworthy was the surge in the number of roman catholic congregations the result of catholic immigration from ireland and germany after 1830 great number of irreligious americans.
the baptists boasted a thoroughly republican church organization with self governing congregations.
also baptists and methodists as well developed an egalitarian religious culture marked by communal singing and emotional services.
these denominations formed a dynamic new force in american religion.
the second great awakening as americans adopted new religious principles a decades long series of religious revivals the second great awakening made the united states a genuinely christian society.
evangelical denominations began the revival in the 1790s as they spread their message in seacoast cities and the backcountry of new england.
a new sect of universalists who repudiated calvinism and preached universal salvation also gained tens of thousands of converts especially in massachusetts and northern new england.
after 1800 enthusiastic camp meetings swept the frontier regions of south carolina tennessee ohio and kentucky.
the largest gathering at cane ridge in kentucky in 1801 lasted for nine electrifying days and nights and attracted almost 20 000 people map 8 4.
with these revivals baptist and methodist preachers reshaped the spiritual landscape throughout the south.
offering a powerful emotional message and the promise of religious fellowship revivalists attracted both unchurched individuals and pious families searching for social ties as they migrated to new communities america compared p 272.
a new religious landscape the second great awakening transformed the denominational makeup of american religion.
the main colonial period churches the congregationalists episcopalians and quakers grew slowly through natural increase while methodist and baptist churches expanded spectacularly by winning converts.
in rural areas their preachers followed a regular circuit riding a hardy pony or horse with their bible hymn book and discipline to visit existing congregations.
they began new churches by searching out devout families bringing them together for worship and then appointing lay elders to lead the congregation and enforce moral discipline.
soon baptists and methodists were the largest denominations.
to attract converts evangelical ministers copied the practical preaching techniques of george whitefield and other eighteenth century revivalists chapters main ideas.
1 how important were the regional differences in the social aspects of republicanism given the national scope of other republican inspired developments such as state mercantilism and religious revivalism.
2 trace the relationship between americas republi can culture and the surge of evangelism called the second great awakening.
in what ways are the goals of the two movements similar.
how are they different.
3 in what ways did womens private and public lives change during the years between 1790 and 1820 and what were the motive forces behind those changes.
4 thematic understanding review the events listed under work exchange and technology ideas beliefs and culture and identity on the thematic timeline on page 149 how did the emerging economic and social order of early nineteenth century america represent an advance upon or a retreat from the republican ideology articulated during the decades of the independence struggle.
part 3 chapter 8 timeline chapter 8 distributed manufactures throughout the nation.
the division of labor and the factory increased output stemmed initially from changes in the organization of work that turned independent artisans into wage laborers.
traditionally new england shoemakers had turned leather hides into finished shoes and identify causes boots in small wooden shacks how did the division of called ten footers where they labor increase output worked at their own pace.
during and what was its impact on workers.
the 1820s and 1830s merchants in lynn massachusetts destroyed the businesses of these artisans by introducing an outwork system and a division of labor.
the merchants item value added by manufacture in millions product value millions cotton textiles 1.
54 7 107 3 lumber 2.
53 8 boots and shoes 3.
49 2 flour and meal hired semiskilled journeymen and set them up in large shops cutting leather into soles and uppers.
they sent out the upper sections to rural massachusetts towns where women binders sewed in fabric linings.
the manufacturers then had other journeymen attach the uppers to the soles and return the shoes to the central shop for inspection packing and sale.
this more efficient system increased output and cut the price of shoes and boots even as it turned employers into powerful shoe bosses and eroded workers wages and independence.
for products not suited to the outwork system manufacturers created the modern factory which concentrated production under one roof.
for example in the 1830s cincinnati merchants built large slaughterhouses that processed thousands of hogs every month.
the technology remained simple but a division of labor increased output.
as a system of overhead rails moved the hog carcasses along a disassembly line one worker split the animals another removed the organs and others trimmed the carcasses into pieces.
packers then stuffed the pork into barrels and salted it to prevent spoilage.
reported landscape architect and journalist frederick law olmsted we entered an immense low ceiling room and followed a vista of dead swine upon their backs their paws stretching mutely toward heaven.
walking down to the vanishing point we found there a sort of human chopping machine where the hogs were number of workers value added per worker 115 000 8.
475 104 9 75 600 6.
710 91 9 123 000 4.
40 1 248 6 27 700 mens clothing 5.
36 7 80 8 114 800 10.
320 iron cast forged etc.
35 7 73 1 49 000 5.
1 450 machinery 7.
32 5 52 0 41 200 woolen goods 8.
25 0 60 7 40 600 7.
615 leather 9.
22 8 67 3 22 700 3.
1 005 liquors 10.
22 5 56 6 12 700 1.
1 770 figure 9 1 leading branches of manufacture 1860 this chart shows clearly that in 1860 three industries boots and shoes cotton textiles and mens clothing each employed more than 100 000 workers.
however the workers in three other industries had the highest productivity with each worker adding more than 1 000 in value to the finished goods.
what were these industries.
why were their workers more productive.
adapted from douglass c north growth and welfare in the american past second edition.
copyright 1974 reprinted with permission of the author.
chapter 9 ezra stiles ely.
union activists agreed organizing nearly fifty strikes for higher wages in 1836 appealing to the spirit of the american revolution which had destroyed the aristocracy of birth they called for a new revolution to demolish the aristocracy of capital.
women textile operatives were equally active.
competition in the woolen and cotton textile industries was fierce because mechanization caused output to grow faster than consumer demand.
as textile prices fell manufacturers revenues declined.
to maintain profits employers reduced workers wages and imposed tougher work rules.
in 1828 and again in 1834 women mill workers in dover new hampshire went on strike and won some relief.
in lowell two thousand women operatives backed a strike by withdrawing their savings from an employer owned bank.
one of the leaders mounted a pump the boston transcript reported and made a flaming.
speech on the rights of women and the iniquities of the monied aristocracy increasingly young new england women refused to enter the mills and impoverished irish and later french canadian immigrants took their places.
in 1857 the new economic system faltered as overproduction and a financial panic sparked by the bankruptcies of several railroads pushed the economy into a recession.
urban unemployment soared to 10 percent and reminded americans of the social costs of industrial production.
the market revolution as american factories and farms churned out more goods legislators and businessmen created faster and cheaper ways to get those products to consumers.
around 1820 they began constructing a massive system of canals and roads linking states along the atlantic coast with new states in the trans appalachian west.
this transportation system set in motion both a crucial market revolution and a massive migration of people to the greater mississippi river basin.
this huge area drained by six river systems the missouri arkansas red ohio tennessee and mississippi contains the largest and most productive contiguous acreage of arable land in the world.
by 1860 nearly one third of the nations citizens lived in eight of its states the midwest consisting of the five states carved out of the northwest territory ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin along with missouri iowa and minnesota.
there they created a rich agricultural economy and an industrializing society similar to that of the northeast.
transforming the economy 1800 1860 the transportation revolution forges regional ties with the indian peoples in retreat slave owning planters from the lower south settled in missouri admitted to the union in 1821 and pushed on to arkansas admitted in 1836.
simultaneously yeomen families from the upper south joined migrants from new england and new york in farming the fertile lands near the great lakes.
once indiana and illinois were settled land hungry farmers poured into michigan 1837 iowa 1846 and wisconsin 1848 where they resided among tens of thousands of hardworking immigrants from germany.
to meet the demand for cheap farmsteads congress in 1820 reduced the price of federal land from 2 00 an acre to 1 25.
for 100 a farmer could buy 80 acres the minimum required under federal law.
by the 1840s this generous policy had enticed about 5 million people to states and territories west of the appalachians map 9 2.
to link the midwestern settlers to the seaboard states congress approved funds for a national road constructed of compacted gravel.
the project began in 1811 at cumberland in western maryland at the head of navigation of the potomac river reached wheeling virginia now west virginia on the ohio river in 1818 and ended in vandalia illinois in 1839 the national road and other interregional highways carried migrants and their heavily loaded wagons westward these migrants passed livestock herds heading in the opposite direction destined for eastern markets.
to link the settler communities with each other state legislatures chartered private companies to build toll roads or turnpikes.
canals and steamboats shrink distance even on well built gravel roads overland travel was slow and expensive.
to carry people crops and manufactures to and from the great mississippi river basin public money and private businesses developed a water borne transportation system of unprecedented size complexity and cost.
the key event was the new york legislatures 1817 financing of the erie canal a 364 mile waterway connecting the hudson river and lake erie.
previously the longest canal in the united states was just 28 miles long reflecting the huge capital cost of canals and the lack of american engineering expertise.
new yorks ambitious project had three things working in its favor the vigorous support of new york citys merchants who wanted access to western markets the backing of new yorks governor de witt clinton who proposed to finance the waterway from tax revenues part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 1830 1839 n w e s iowa territory 1850 1862 minn n wis w wis terr.
e mich n y mich s n y iowa pa souri mis souri mis ohio r nebr.
pa ill r ill ohio ind.
io r va kan ky mo.
ohi o r ky n c la.
ala miss issi ppi r miss issi ppi r s c texas 300 miles ala ga miss.
republic of texas n c tenn tenn fla terr.
300 kilometers la.
300 miles fla 300 kilometers map 9 2 western land sales 1830 1839 and 1850 1862 the federal government set up local offices to sell land in the national domain to settlers.
during the 1830s the offices sold huge amounts of land in the corn and wheat belt of the midwest ohio indiana illinois and michigan and the cotton belt to the south especially alabama and mississippi.
as settlers moved westward in the 1850s most sales were in the upper mississippi river valley particularly iowa and wisconsin.
each circle indicates the relative amount of land sold at a local office.
tolls and bond sales to foreign investors and the relatively gentle terrain west of albany.
even so the task was enormous.
workers many of them irish immigrants dug out millions of cubic yards of soil quarried thousands of tons of rock for the huge locks that raised and lowered the boats and constructed vast reservoirs to ensure a steady supply of water.
the first great engineering project in american history the erie canal altered the ecology of an entire region.
as farming communities and market towns sprang up along the waterway settlers cut down millions of trees to provide wood for houses and barns and to open the land for growing crops and grazing animals.
cows and sheep foraged identify causes in pastures that had recently which was more important been forests occupied by deer in the market revolution and bears and spring rains government support for caused massive erosion of the transportation or technodenuded landscape.
logical innovations and whatever its environmental why was that the case.
consequences the erie canal was an instant economic success.
the first 75 mile section opened in 1819 and quickly yielded enough revenue to repay its construction cost.
when workers finished the canal in 1825 a 40 foot wide ribbon of water stretched from buffalo on the eastern shore of lake erie to albany where it joined the hudson river for the 150 mile trip to new york city.
the canals water must be the most fertilizing of all fluids suggested novelist nathaniel hawthorne for it causes towns with their masses of brick and stone their churches and theaters their business and hubbub their luxury and refinement their gay dames and polished citizens to spring up the erie canal brought prosperity to the farmers of central and western new york and the entire great lakes region.
northeastern manufacturers shipped clothing boots and agricultural equipment to farm families in return farmers sent grain cattle and hogs as well as raw materials leather wool and hemp for example to eastern cities and foreign markets.
onehundred ton freight barges each pulled by two horses chapter 9 transforming the economy 1800 1860 view of the erie canal this pastoral view of the erie canal near lockport new york painted by artist john william hill hints at this waterways profound impact on american life.
without the canal the town in the background would not exist and farmers such as the man in the foreground would not have a regional market for their cattle and grain.
the success of the erie canal had led to the construction of a vast system of canals by 1860 this infrastructure was as important to the nation as the railroad network of the late nineteenth century and the interstate highway and airport transportation systems of the late twentieth century.
bettmann corbis.
moved along the canal at a steady 30 miles a day cutting transportation costs and accelerating the flow of goods.
in 1818 the mills in rochester new york processed 26 000 barrels of flour for export east and north to montreal for sale as canadian produce to the west indies ten years later their output soared to 200 000 barrels and by 1840 it was at 500 000 barrels.
the spectacular benefits of the erie canal prompted a national canal boom.
civic and business leaders in philadelphia and baltimore proposed waterways to link their cities to the midwest.
copying new yorks fiscal innovations they persuaded their state legislatures to invest directly in canal companies or to force state chartered banks to do so.
they also won state guarantees that encouraged british and dutch investors as one observer noted in 1844 the prosperity of america her railroads canals steam navigation and banks are the fruit of english capital soon artificial waterways connected philadelphia and baltimore via the pennsylvania canal and the chesapeake and ohio canal to the great lakes region.
equally important was the vast network of navigable rivers that drained into the mississippi.
every year 25 000 farmer built flatboats used these waterways to carry produce to new orleans.
in 1848 the completion of the michigan and illinois canal which linked chicago to the mississippi river completed an inland all water route from new york city to new orleans the two most important port cities in north america map 9 3.
the steamboat another product of the industrial age added crucial flexibility to the mississippi basins river based transportation system.
in 1807 engineerinventor robert fulton built the first american steamboat the clermont which he piloted up the hudson river.
to navigate shallow western rivers engineers broadened steamboats hulls to reduce their draft and enlarge their cargo capacity.
these improved vessels halved the cost of upstream river transport along the mississippi river and its tributaries and dramatically increased the flow of goods people and news.
in 1830 a traveler or a letter from new york could reach buffalo or pittsburgh by water in less than a week and detroit chicago or st louis in two weeks.
in 1800 the same journeys had taken twice as long.
the state and national governments played key roles in developing this interregional network of trade and travel.
state legislatures subsidized canals while the national government created a vast postal system the first network for the exchange of information.
thanks to the post office act of 1792 there were more than eight thousand post offices by 1830 and they safely delivered thousands of letters and banknotes worth millions of dollars.
the u s supreme court headed by john marshall likewise encouraged interstate trade by firmly establishing federal authority over part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 map 9 3 e superior lak l lake michiga n n y n r dso hu tario l on buffalo mich albany n h boston mass.
r i conn r ie l e chicago iowa vt uron eh ak wis the transportation revolution roads and canals 1820 1850 maine canada minn terr.
ss oh io r i ll in ois r pa cleveland new york n j ind.
ohio pittsburgh philadelphia wheeling cumberland d baltimore columbus ill indianapolis roa l md.
m na n del.
o i potomac r i cincinnati t vandalia na ou r i r va louisville james r w st louis wabash r richmond mo.
c ky arka nsa memphis tenn e s s e e r sa va n s c.
ala a r ga am re d r.
natchez mobile ab al montgomery la.
atl a n t i c o cean n c.
hr na miss.
canals roads navigable river jacksonville fla by 1850 the united states had an efficient system of water borne transportation with three distinct parts.
short canals and navigable rivers carried cotton tobacco and other products from the countryside of the southern seaboard states into the atlantic commercial system.
a second system centered on the erie chesapeake and ohio and pennsylvania mainline canals linked northeastern seaports to the vast trans appalachian region.
finally a set of regional canals in the midwest connected most of the great lakes region to the ohio and mississippi rivers and the port of new orleans.
charleston savannah new orleans gulf of mexico e s land r ber um nashville tenn.
mississippi r interstate commerce chapter 9 minnesota transforming the economy 1800 1860 canada maine even in 1860 it was impossible to go from new york city to chicago without changing trains because of nonconnecting railroad lines.
although the railroads seem to form an integrated system companies used different gauges of track and two lines ending in the same city often did not connect with one another.
vt new york wisconsin michigan milwaukee mass.
rochester buffalo cleveland des moines illinois kansas washington d c cincinnati virginia louisville kentucky raleigh nashville north carolina tennessee unorg.
in 1852 president fillmore and lord elgin the viceroy for british north america met at a jubilee in boston to celebrate its rail connection to canada.
richmond st louis missouri s n j philadelphia md.
baltimore del.
indianapolis independence e w new york pennsylvania pittsburgh ohio indiana n r i chicago nebr.
boston providence conn detroit iowa n h memphis arkansas mississippi louisiana jackson a t l a nt i c o c e a n south carolina atlanta alabama charleston montgomery georgia in the south atlanta emerged as the key railway hub.
texas jacksonville new orleans florida gulf o f me xi c o 300 miles 300 kilometers railroads in operation 1850 railroads added by 1861 map 9 4 railroads of the north and south 1850 and 1861 in the decade before the civil war entrepreneurs in the northeast and the midwest financed thousands of miles of new railroad lines creating an extensive and dense transportation system that stimulated economic development.
the south built a more limited railroad system.
in all regions railroad companies used different track gauges which prevented the efficient flow of traffic.
cut by hand.
with the harvest bottleneck removed farmers planted more acres and grew even more wheat.
flour soon accounted for 10 percent of all american exports to foreign markets.
interregional trade also linked southern cotton planters to northeastern textile plants and foreign markets.
this commerce in raw cotton bolstered the wealth of white southerners but did not transform their economic and social order as it did in the midwest.
with the exception of richmond virginia and a few other places southern planters did not invest their profits in manufacturing.
lacking cities factories and highly trained workers the south remained tied to agriculture even as the commerce in wheat corn and livestock promoted diversified economies in the northeast and midwest.
the growth of cities and towns the expansion of industry and trade dramatically increased americas urban population.
in 1820 there were 58 towns with more than 2 500 inhabitants by thinking like a historian the risks and rewards of technological innovation the nineteenth century was the age of progress and improved transportation was one of its hallmarks.
between the 1830s and the 1860s american capitalists and workers aided by state governments built steam powered railroads that stretched across the nation and reduced the cost of moving goods and people by more than 90 percent.
yet like all major technological changes the railroad revolution was controversial expensive and politically explosive.
1 speech by john b morris a director of the baltimore and ohio railroad july 4 1828 at the dedication of the first steam railway in the united states.
3 poster protesting the laying of tracks through the most beautiful streets of philadelphia 1839 fellow citizens.
we have met to celebrate the laying of the first stone of the baltimore and ohio railroad.
the result of our labors will be felt not only by ourselves but also by posterity not only by baltimore but also by maryland and by the united states.
we are about opening the channel through which the commerce of the mighty country beyond the alleghany must seek the atlantic ocean.
we are in fact commencing a new era in our history for there are none present who even doubt the beneficial influence which the intended road will have in promoting the agriculture manufactures and inland commerce of our country.
2 illustration of a passenger car built by m p m e green of hoboken new jersey for the camden and amboy railway linking new york city and philadelphia 1831 source national archives.
4 opposition to the state financing of railroads from the republican compiler gettysburg pennsylvania october 6 1851 as american track mileage grew from 3 000 miles in 1840 to 30 000 miles by 1860 entrepreneurs in pennsylvania assisted by the state legislature led the nation in laying rail.
source division of work industry national museum of american history smithsonian institution.
the governors organ newspaper is still harping about the governor having paid off the state debt and reducing the taxes.
if the taxes have been reduced why is it that every farmer finds that he has paid more taxes the last year than he has ever paid in a single year before.
the true issue is that gov.
johnston and his friends created the huge state debt.
the people remember that gov.
johnston voted 405 000 to the gettysburg railroad.
they remember that he voted 150 000 to the danville and pottsville railroad.
they remember that he voted 140 000 to the laughlintown and pittsburg railroad that never was incorporated.
they remember that he voted 120 000 to the norristown railroad.
they remember that he voted for a bill appropriating over three millions of dollars to state and company improvements in one year and that gov.
ritner said that such appropriations would increase the state debt in four years to 45 000 000.
5 lyrics to the waggoners curse c 1850 come all ye bold wagoners turn out man by man thats opposed to the railroad or any such a plan tis once i made money by driving my team but the goods are now hauled on the railroad by steam.
if we go to philadelphia inquiring for a load theyll tell us quite directly its gone out on the railroad.
the rich folks the plan they may justly admire but it ruins us poor wagners and it makes our taxes higher.
it ruins wheelwrights blacksmiths and every other trade so damned be all the railroads that ever was made.
it ruins our mechanics what think you of it then.
and it fills our country full of just a lot of great rich men.
the ships they will be coming with irishmen by loads all with their picks and shovels to work on the railroads when they get on the railroad it is then that they are fixed theyll fight just like the devil with their cudgels and their sticks.
the american with safety can scarcely ever pass for they will blacken both his eyes for one word of his sass if it wasnt for the torment i as life would be in hell as upon the cursed railroad or upon the canal.
6 henry david thoreau walden or life in the woods 1854 the workers who built and ran the railroads suffered high rates of injury and death facts noted by henry david thoreau a critic of the market transportation and industrial revolutions of his day.
we do not ride on the railroad it rides upon us.
did you ever think what those sleepers are that underlie the railroad.
each one is a man.
the rails are laid on them and they are covered with sand and the cars run smoothly over them.
so that if some have the pleasure of riding on a rail others have the misfortune to be ridden upon.
7 senator l j rose from testimony taken by the united states pacific railway commission 1887 the railroads have made southern california what it is to day.
before the completion of the.
union and central pacific roads the southern half of california which is now famous the world over as the most favored quarter in america in point of climate and soil conditions was no more nor less than a barren sheep pasture.
our redemption came in 1869 when the railroad people completed that gigantic and wonderful work.
giving california a direct rail connection with the east.
the effect was marvelous and immediate.
we beheld ourselves in a day as it were surrounded by possibilities which made us a new and different people in a new and completely changed land.
sources 1 eli bowen rambles in the path of the steam horse philadelphia wm.
bromwell and wm.
white smith 1855 37 4 adapted from 5 george korson ed pennsylvania songs and legends philadelphia university of pennsylvania press 1949 255 257 6 henry david thoreau walden or life in the woods 1854 boston 1910 102 7 testimony taken by the united states pacific railway commission vol.
5 washington d c government printing office 1887 2505 analyzing the evidence 1 what does source 1 tell us about the hopes of steam railroad pioneers.
do the other sources suggest their hopes were achieved.
2 what does source 2 suggest about early railroad design and marketing.
how does this image contrast with source 3.
what threats does source 3 highlight.
what audiences were the targets of these illustrations and how successful are their respective messages.
3 according to source 4 how did pennsylvania raise the money for these subsidies.
who was left holding the bag.
why would governments fund such private enterprises.
4 what social tensions do the lyrics to source 5 reveal.
what other conflicts are manifest in the documents presented here.
5 who are the sleepers in source 6.
how does thoreau calculate the cost of progress.
how are these costs similar to or different from the ones described by the author of source 5.
putting it all together after re reading the section in this chapters and more than 200 000 members.
its nationwide campaign employed revivalist methods group confession and prayer using women as spiritual guides and sudden emotional conversion and was a stunning success.
on one day in new york city in 1841 more than 4 000 people took the temperance pledge the annual consumption of spirits fell dramatically from an average of 5 gallons per person in 1830 to 2 gallons in 1845 evangelical reformers celebrated religion as the key to moral improvement.
laziness and drinking might be cured by self discipline as benjamin franklin had argued but religious conversion would ensure a profound change of heart.
religious discipline and the ideology of social mobility thus served as powerful cements bonding middle class americans and wageearning citizens as they grappled with the economic divisions created by industrialization market expansion and increasing cultural diversity.
immigration and cultural conflict cultural diversity was the result of a vast wave of immigration.
between 1840 and 1860 about 2 million irish 1 5 million germans and 750 000 britons poured into the united states.
the british migrants were primarily protestants and relatively prosperous trained professionals propertied farmers and skilled workers.
many german immigrants also came from propertied farming and artisan families and had sufficient resources to move to the midwestern states of wisconsin iowa and missouri.
poorer germans and most of the irish settled in the northeast where by 1860 they numbered nearly one third of white adults.
most immigrants avoided the south because they feared competition from enslaved understand workers.
points of view why did the catholic irish poverty the poorest hierarchy consider repubmigrants irish peasants and licanism a threat.
why did laborers were fleeing a famine morse think the same of caused by severe overpopulation catholicism.
and a devastating blight that destroyed much of the irish potato crop.
they settled mostly in the cities of new england and new york.
the men took low paying jobs as factory hands construction workers and canal diggers while the women became washerwomen and domestic servants.
irish families crowded into cheap tenement buildings with primitive sanitation systems and were the first to die when disease struck a city.
in the summer of 1849 cholera epidemics took the lives of thousands of poor immigrants in st louis and new york city.
in times of hardship and sorrow immigrants turned to their churches.
many germans and virtually all the irish were catholics and they fueled the growth of the american catholic church.
in 1840 there were 16 catholic dioceses and 700 churches by 1860 there were 45 dioceses and 2 500 churches.
guided by their priests and bishops catholics built an impressive network of institutions charitable societies orphanages militia companies parochial schools and political organizations that maintained both their religion and their german or irish identity.
nativism confronted by catholic and germanspeaking immigrants some american born citizens formed nativist movements that condemned immigration and asserted the superiority of protestant religious and cultural values.
in 1834 artist and inventor samuel f b morse published foreign conspiracy against the liberties of the united states which warned of a catholic threat to american republican institutions.
morse argued that catholic immigrants would obey the dictates of pope gregory xvi 1831 1846 who urged catholics to repudiate republicanism and acknowledge the submission due to princes and to the papacy.
republican minded protestants of many denominations shared morses fears of papal interference in american life and politics and foreign conspiracy became their handbook american voices p 308.
the social tensions stemming from industrialization intensified nativist and anti catholic attitudes.
unemployed protestant mechanics and factory workers joined mobs that attacked catholic immigrants accusing them of taking jobs and driving down wages.
these cultural conflicts undercut trade unionism because many protestant wage earners sided more with their protestant employers than with their catholic coworkers.
benevolent minded protestants supported the anti catholic movement for reasons of public policy.
as crusaders for public education they opposed the use of tax resources for catholic schools as advocates of temperance and civilized manners they condemned the rowdyism of drunken irish men.
chapters 8 and 10 write an essay that discusses public education responsible citizenship and social reform in america between 1820 and 1860 part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 department in 1836 to issue the specie circular an executive order that required the treasury department to accept only gold and silver in payment for lands in the national domain.
critics charged mistakenly that the circular drained so much specie from the economy that it sparked the panic of 1837 in fact as noted above the curtailing of credit by the bank of england was the main cause of the panic.
nonetheless the public turned its anger on van buren who took office just before the panic struck.
ignoring the pleas of influential bankers the new president refused to revoke the specie circular or take actions to stimulate the economy.
holding to his philosophy of limited government van buren advised congress that the less government interferes with private pursuits the better for the general prosperity as the depression deepened in 1839 this laissezfaire outlook commanded less and less political support.
worse van burens major piece of fiscal legislation the independent treasury act of 1840 delayed recovery by pulling federal specie out of jacksons pet banks where it had backed loans and placing it in government vaults where it had little economic impact.
the log cabin campaign the whigs exploited van burens weakness.
in 1840 they organized their first national convention and nominated william henry harrison of ohio for president and john tyler of virginia for vice president.
a military hero of the battle of tippecanoe and the war of 1812 harrison was well advanced in age sixty eight and had little political experience.
however the whig leaders in congress henry clay and daniel webster wanted a president who would rubber stamp their program for protective tariffs and a national bank.
an unpretentious amiable man harrison told voters that whig policies were the only means under heaven by which a poor industrious man may become a rich man without bowing to colossal wealth the depression stacked the political cards against van buren but the election turned as much on style as on substance.
it became the great log cabin campaign the first time two well organized parties competed for votes through a new style of campaigning.
whig songfests parades and well orchestrated mass meetings drew new voters into politics.
whig speakers assailed martin van ruin as a manipulative politician with aristocratic tastes a devotee of fancy wines elegant clothes and polite refinement as indeed he was.
less truthfully they portrayed harrison as a self made man who lived contentedly in a log cabin and quaffed hard cider a drink of the common people.
in fact harrisons father was a wealthy virginia planter who the whigs boost harrison and tyler for the white house in their quest for victory in 1840 whig political strategists advanced a wide ranging and misleading set of policies.
this poster celebrates william henry harrison and john tyler as candidates who would secure protective tariffs for american manufacturers a policy that appealed to northern voters but one that tyler opposed.
it also promises to cut the size of the u s army which general harrison did not favor.
however denouncing a large standing army would win votes in virginia where it recalled the fears of radical whig patriots of 1776 and remained central to the states rights ideology espoused by senator tyler and other old republicans grouseland foundation inc photo courtesy of fords the art of photography vincennes in.
chapter 11 spreading information and fostering discussion among the middle classes.
beginning in 1826 the lyceum movement modeled on the public forum of the ancient greek philosopher aristotle arranged lecture tours by hundreds of poets preachers scientists and reformers.
the lyceum became an important cultural institution in the north and midwest but not in the south where the middle class was smaller and popular education had a lower priority.
in 1839 nearly 150 lyceums in massachusetts invited lecturers to address more than 33 000 subscribers.
emerson was the most popular speaker eventually delivering fifteen hundred lectures in more than three hundred towns in twenty states.
emerson celebrated those who rejected tradition and practiced self discipline and civic responsibility.
his individualistic ethos spoke directly to the experiences of many middle class americans who had left family farms to make their way in the urban world.
his pantheistic view of nature that it was saturated with the presence of god encouraged unitarians in boston to create the mount auburn cemetery a beautiful planned landscape of trees and bushes and burial markers for the dead of all faiths soon there were similar rural cemeteries in many american cities.
emersons optimism also inspired many religious preachers of the second great awakening such as finney who told believers to transcend old doctrines and constraints.
god has made man a moral free agent finney declared.
emerson worried that the new market society the focus on work profits and consumption was debasing americans spiritual lives.
things are in the saddle he wrote and ride mankind seeking to revive intellectual life transcendentalists created communal experiments.
the most important was brook farm just outside boston where emerson henry david thoreau and margaret fuller were residents or frequent visitors.
members recalled that they inspired the young with a passion for study and the middleaged with deference and admiration whatever its intellectual excitement and spiritual rewards brook farm was an economic failure.
the residents planned to produce their own food and exchange their surplus milk vegetables and hay for manufactures.
however most members were ministers teachers writers and students who had few farming skills only the cash of affluent residents kept the enterprise afloat for five years.
after a devastating fire in 1846 the organizers disbanded the community and sold the farm.
with the failure of brook farm the emersonians abandoned their quest for new social institutions.
they religion and reform 1800 1860 accepted the brute reality of the emergent commercial and industrial order and tried to reform it especially through the education of workers and the movement to abolish slavery.
understand points of view what were the main principles of transcendentalism and how did they differ from the beliefs of most protestant christians.
emersons literary influence even as emerson urged his fellow citizens to break free from tradition and expand their spiritual awareness he issued a declaration of literary independence.
in the american scholar 1837 emerson urged american authors to free themselves from the courtly muse of old europe and find inspiration in the experiences of ordinary americans the ballad in the street the news of the boat the glance of the eye the form and gait of the body thoreau fuller and whitman one young new england intellectual henry david thoreau 1817 1862 heeded emersons call and sought inspiration from the natural world.
in 1845 depressed by his beloved brothers death thoreau built a cabin near walden pond in concord massachusetts and lived alone there for two years.
in 1854 he published walden or life in the woods an account of his search for meaning beyond the artificiality of civilized society i went to the woods because i wished to live deliberately to front only the essential facts of life and see if i could not learn what it had to teach and not when i came to die discover that i had not lived.
waldens most famous metaphor provides an enduring justification for independent thinking if a man does not keep pace with his companions perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer beginning from this premise thoreau advocated a thoroughgoing individuality urging readers to avoid unthinking conformity to social norms and peacefully to resist unjust laws.
as thoreau was seeking self realization for men margaret fuller 1810 1850 was exploring the possibilities of freedom for women.
born into a wealthy boston family fuller mastered six languages and read broadly in classic literature.
embracing emersons ideas she started a transcendental conversation or discussion group for educated boston women in 1839 while editing the dial the leading transcendentalist journal fuller published woman in the nineteenth century 1844.
part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 to see a longer excerpt of woman in the nineteenth century along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
margaret fuller 1848 at the age of thirty eight the american transcendentalist author margaret fuller moved to italy where she reported on the revolution of 1848 for the new york tribune.
there she fell in love with thomas hicks 1823 1890 a much younger american artist.
hicks rebuffed fullers romantic advances but painted this flattering portrait softening her features and giving her a pensive look.
fuller took as a lover a petty noble and republican revolutionary giovanni angelo marchese dossoli and gave birth to a son in september 1848 two years later the entire family died in a shipwreck while en route to the united states.
constance fuller threinen.
fuller embraced the transcendental principle that all people could develop a life affirming mystical relationship with god.
every woman therefore deserved psychological and social independence the ability to grow as an intellect to discern as a soul to live freely and unimpeded she wrote we would have every arbitrary barrier thrown down and every path laid open to woman as freely as to man fuller became the literary critic of the new york explain tribune and traveled to italy to consequences report on the revolution of 1848 how did authors of the only to drown in a shipwreck en american renaissance route home to the united states.
incorporate transcenfullers life and writings inspired a dentalist ideas into their rising generation of women writwork.
ers and reformers.
the poet walt whitman 1819 1892 also responded to emersons call.
he had been simmering simmering he recalled and then emerson brought me to a boil whitman worked as a printer a teacher a journalist an editor of the brooklyn eagle and an influential publicist for the democratic party.
however poetry was the direction of his dreams in leaves of grass a collection of wild exuberant poems first published in 1855 and constantly revised and expanded whitman recorded in verse his efforts to transcend various invisible boundaries between solitude and community between prose and poetry even between the living and the dead.
at the center of leaves of grass is the individual i walt he begins alone i celebrate myself and sing myself because he has an emersonian original relation with nature whitman claims perfect communion with others for every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you for emerson thoreau and fuller the individual had a divine spark for whitman the collective democracy assumed a sacred character.
the transcendentalists were optimistic but not naive.
whitman wrote about human suffering with passion and emerson laced his accounts of transcendence with twinges of anxiety.
i am glad he once said to the brink of fear thoreau was gloomy about everyday life the mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation nonetheless dark murmurings remain muted in their work overshadowed by assertions that nothing was impossible for the individual who could break free from tradition.
darker visions emersons writings also influenced two great novelists nathaniel hawthorne and herman melville who had more pessimistic worldviews.
both sounded powerful warnings that unfettered egoism could destroy individuals and those around them.
hawthorne brilliantly explored the theme of excessive individualism in his novel the scarlet letter 1850.
the two main characters hester prynne and arthur dimmesdale blatantly challenge their seventeenthcentury new england community by committing adultery and producing a child.
their decision to ignore social restraints results not in liberation but in degradation a profound sense of guilt and condemnation by the community.
herman melville explored the limits of individualism in even more extreme and tragic terms and emerged chapter 11 religion and reform 1800 1860 the underground railroad helped runaway slaves to leave the south and find refuge either in canada or in remote northern towns where professional slave catchers rarely ventured.
l superior minnesota unorg.
l n h r mass.
r i conn atlantic ocean n j md.
north carolina tenn s c miss.
ala georgia.
this map shows free and slave del.
areas as determined by state and territorial constitutions and laws.
the routes of the underground railroad system are conjectural the surviving evidence mainly identifies the stations and the destinations of the system not the tracks that connected them.
statistics indicating the percentage of slaves in each county come from the u s census of 1850 la.
fla gulf of mexico s.
ky arkansas red r w virginia io oh r pa ohio ind.
missouri texas mexico e.
l michigan york ie er n vt hudson r unorg.
territory n u ro new mexico territory r kansas nsas r territory illinois missou i ri o onta new l mich iowa r arka ss wis i ipp most fugitives fled from such states as maryland kentucky and missouri that bordered free territory.
however a significant number of slaves escaped from the lower south on boats engaged in the coastal trade.
maine l mi ssi h nebraska territory st la wr en ce r canada 500 miles 500 kilometers free states slave states areas with slave populations of 50 or more in 1850 routes of the underground railroad map 11 3 the underground railroad in the 1850s before 1840 most african americans who fled slavery did so on their own or with the help of family and friends.
thereafter they could count on support from members of the underground railroad.
provided with food and directions by free blacks in the south fugitive slaves crossed into free states.
there they received protection and shelter from abolitionists who arranged for their transportation to canada or to safe american cities and towns.
a political campaign was the final element of the abolitionists program.
between 1835 and 1838 the american anti slavery society bombarded congress with petitions containing nearly 500 000 signatures.
they demanded the abolition of slavery in the district of columbia an end to the interstate slave trade and a ban on admission of new slave states.
thousands of deeply religious farmers and smalltown proprietors supported these efforts.
the number of local abolitionist societies grew from two hundred in 1835 to two thousand by 1840 with nearly 200 000 members including many transcendentalists.
emerson condemned americans for supporting slavery and thoreau viewing the mexican war as a naked scheme to extend slavery refused to pay taxes and submitted to arrest.
in 1848 he published resistance to civil government an essay urging individuals to follow a higher moral law.
the black abolitionist henry highland garnet went further his address to the slaves of the united states of america 1841 called for liberty or death and urged slave resistance.
resistance.
resistance opposition and internal conflict still abolitionists remained a minority even among churchgoers.
perhaps 10 percent of northerners and midwesterners strongly supported the movement and only another 20 percent were sympathetic to its goals.
attacks on abolitionism slaverys proponents were more numerous and equally aggressive.
the part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 the negro in his own country versus the negro in america slave owners and their intellectual and religious allies responded to abolitionists attacks by defending slavery as a positive good these two images from josiah priests bible defence of slavery 1852 support the argument that enslavement saved africans from a savage war ridden life note the skeleton in the top image and exposed them to the civilized world.
such publications achieved wide circulation and popularity among the planter classes.
chicago history museum.
abolitionists agitation ministers warned risked embroiling neighborhoods and families setting friend against friend overthrowing churches and institutions of learning embittering one portion of the land against the other wealthy men feared that the attack on slave property might become an assault on all property rights conservative clergymen condemned the public roles understand assumed by abolitionist women points of view and northern wage earners feared which groups of americans opposed the abolitionists that freed blacks would work for and why did they do so.
lower wages and take their jobs.
underlining the national reach of slavery northern merchants and textile manufacturers supported the southern planters who supplied them with cotton as did hog farmers in ohio indiana and illinois and pork packers in cincinnati and chicago who profited from lucrative sales to slave plantations.
finally whites almost universally opposed amalgamation the racial mixing and intermarriage that garrison seemed to support by holding meetings of blacks and whites of both sexes.
racial fears and hatreds led to violent mob actions.
white workers in northern towns laid waste to taverns and brothels where blacks and whites mixed and they vandalized respectable african american churches temperance halls and orphanages.
in 1833 a mob of 1 500 new yorkers stormed a church in search of garrison and arthur tappan.
another white mob swept through philadelphias african american neighborhoods clubbing and stoning residents and destroying homes and churches.
in 1835 gentlemen of property and standing lawyers merchants and bankers broke up an abolitionist convention in utica new chapters by answering these questions.
did the era of reform 1820 1860 increase or diminish the extent of social and cultural freedom that existed during the revolutionary era 1770 1820.
across time and place compare the cheerful depiction of the young woman in the watercolor depicting night life in philadelphia on page 355 visual evidence more to explore thematic understanding review the with the thoughtful or intense expression on the faces of the social reformers depicted in this chapter 12 more to explore chapter 13 this process of expansion and state building combined with the arrival of millions of immigrants created new systems of racial and ethnic conflict.
in the east irish catholics and german speaking migrants organized politically to protect their churches saloons and cultural identity prompting a sharp reaction among native born protestants.
in the west the u s government fought wars against cheyennes sioux and comanches on the great plains as it sought to integrate the region into the national economy.
in the conquered mexican territories newly arriving whites jostled uneasily with hispanic residents and despised chinese immigrants.
in an era of rapid economic development western disputes often centered on access to land jobs and natural resources.
for these conflicts see chapters 13 and 16 the mexican war prompted a decade long debate over the expansion of slavery into the newly acquired lands.
this bitter struggle led to the compromise of 1850 a complex legislative agreement that won little support either in the north or in the south and divided the whig party.
as southern whigs became democrats and northern whigs turned into republicans or know nothings the parties split along sectional lines.
the kansas nebraska act of 1854 began a downward spiral of political conflict that ended in the election of republican abraham lincoln in 1860 and the secession of thirteen southern states.
in 1850 these nativist societies banded together as the order of the starspangled banner the following year they formed the american party.
when questioned the partys secrecyconscious members often replied i know nothing hence the nickname.
the american or knownothing party program was far from secret however party supporters wanted to mobilize native born protestants against the alien menace of irish and german catholics prohibit further immigration and institute literacy tests for voting.
northern members of the party had a strong antislavery outlook.
in 1854 voters elected dozens of american party candidates to the house of representatives and gave the party control of the state governments of massachusetts and pennsylvania.
the emergence of a protestant based nativist party to replace the whigs became a real possibility.
bleeding kansas meanwhile thousands of settlers rushed into the kansas territory putting douglass armed abolitionists in kansas the confrontation between north and south in kansas took many forms.
in the spring of 1859 dr john doy seated slipped across the border into missouri and tried to lead thirteen escaped slaves to freedom in kansas only to be captured and jailed in st joseph missouri.
the serious looking men standing behind doy well armed with guns and bowie knives attacked the jail and carried doy back to kansas.
the photograph celebrated and memorialized their successful exploit.
kansas state historical society.
chapter we examined four related themes the ideology of manifest destiny and the westward movement of americans in the 1840s the impact of american traders and settlers on the indian peoples of the great plains and california the causes and consequences of the mexican war 1846 1848 and the disintegration of the second party system during the 1850s.
c h a p t e r we saw that the determination of presidents john tyler and james polk to add territory and slave states to the union pushed the united states into the mexican war and into a new debate over the expansion of slavery.
to resolve the resulting crisis henry clay daniel webster and stephen douglas devised the compromise of 1850 their efforts were in vain antislavery northerners defied the fugitive slave act and expansionistminded southerners sought new slave states in the caribbean.
ideology the pursuit of absolutes replaced politics the art of compromise as the ruling principle of american political life.
the second party system rapidly disintegrated.
the whig party vanished and two issue oriented parties the nativist american party and the antislavery republican party competed for its members.
as the republicans gained strength the democratic party splintered into sectional factions over bleeding kansas and other slavery related issues.
the stage was set for lincolns victory in the climactic election of 1860 r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events manifest destiny p 412 californios p 415 fifty four forty or fight p 418 conscience whigs p 421 wilmot proviso p 421 free soil movement p 421 squatter sovereignty p 424 forty niners p 425 slavery follows the flag p 428 key people compromise of 1850 p 429 personal liberty laws p 431 gadsden purchase p 431 ostend manifesto p 431 kansas nebraska act p 432 american or know nothing party p 432 bleeding kansas p 433 dred scott v sandford p 433 freeport doctrine p 438 james k polk p 418 frederick douglass p 421 zachary taylor p 424 lewis cass p 424 stephen douglas p 431 harriet beecher stowe p 431 john brown p 433 abraham lincoln p 437 chapter.
eric foner free soil free labor free men 1970.
still offers the best analysis of the ideology of the republican party.
leonard l richards the slave power the free north and southern domination 1780 1860 2000.
offers a broad cultural analysis.
patricia nelson limerick the legacy of conquest 1989.
highlights social conflicts in the west.
the pbs documentary the west and its web site pbs org weta thewest offer a comprehensive history of the west and the pbs web site on the u s mexican war 1846 1848 pbs org usmexicanwar covers both american and mexican perspectives of this pivotal event.
william a link roots of secession 2003.
a good state focused study about the causes of secession.
stephen oates with malice toward none 1977.
a classic biography about lincoln.
part 5 chapter 14 chapter review ask yourself why this chapter 16 but their arguments helped roll back reconstruction.
unable to block grants renomination for the presidency in 1872 the dissidents broke away and formed a new party under the name liberal republican.
their candidate was horace greeley longtime publisher of the new york tribune and veteran reformer and abolitionist.
the democrats still in disarray also nominated greeley notwithstanding his editorial diatribes against them.
a poor campaigner greeley was assailed so severely that as he said i hardly knew whether i was running for the presidency or the penitentiary grant won reelection overwhelmingly capturing 56 percent of the popular vote and every electoral vote.
yet liberal republicans had shifted the terms of debate.
the agenda they advanced smaller government restricted voting rights and reconciliation with ex confederates resonated with democrats who had long advocated limited government and were working to reclaim their status as a legitimate national party.
liberalism thus crossed party lines uniting disillusioned conservative republicans understand with democrats who denounced points of view government activism.
e l godkin how did ex confederates of the nation and other classical freedpeople republicans liberal editors played key roles and classical liberals view in turning northern public opinthe end of reconstruction.
ion against reconstruction.
with unabashed elitism godkin and others claimed that freedmen were unfit to vote.
they denounced universal suffrage which can only mean in plain english the government of ignorance and vice the second grant administration gave liberals plenty of ammunition.
the most notorious scandal involved crdit mobilier a sham corporation set up by shareholders in the union pacific railroad to secure government grants at an enormous profit.
organizers of the scheme protected it from investigation by providing gifts of crdit mobilier stock to powerful members of congress.
another scandal involved the whiskey ring a network of liquor distillers and treasury agents who defrauded the government of millions of dollars of excise taxes on whiskey.
the ringleader was grants private secretary orville babcock.
others went to prison but grant stood by babcock possibly perjuring himself to save his secretary from jail.
the stench of scandal permeated the white house.
counterrevolution in the south while northerners became preoccupied with scandals and the shock of economic depression ex confederates seized power in the south.
most believed as northern liberals had also begun to argue that southern reconstruction governments were illegitimate regimes led by the planters ex confederates staged a massive insurgency to take back the south.
when they could win at the ballot box southern democrats took that route.
they got ex confederate voting rights restored and campaigned against negro rule but when force was necessary southern democrats used it.
present day americans witnessing political violence in other countries seldom remember that our own history includes the overthrow of elected governments by paramilitary groups.
but this is exactly how reconstruction ended in many parts of the south.
ex confederates terrorized republicans especially in districts with large proportions of black voters.
black political leaders were shot hanged beaten to death and in one case even beheaded.
many republicans both black and white went into hiding or fled for their lives.
southern democrats called this violent process redemption a heroic name that still sticks today even though this seizure of power was murderous and undemocratic.
no one looms larger in this bloody story than nathan bedford forrest a decorated confederate general.
born in poverty in 1821 forrest had risen to become a big time slave trader and mississippi planter.
a fiery secessionist forrest had formed a tennessee chapter 15 confederate cavalry regiment fought bravely at the battle of shiloh and won fame as a daring raider.
on april 12 1864 his troops perpetrated one of the wars worst atrocities the massacre at fort pillow tennessee of black union soldiers who were trying to surrender.
after the civil war forrests determination to uphold white supremacy altered the course of reconstruction.
william g brownlow elected as tennessees republican governor in 1865 was a tough man a former prisoner of the confederates who was not shy about calling his enemies to account.
ex confederates struck back with a campaign of terror targeting especially brownlows black supporters.
amid the mayhem ex confederates formed the first ku klux klan group in late 1865 or early 1866 as it proliferated across the state the klan turned to forrest who had been trying unsuccessfully to rebuild his prewar fortune.
late in 1866 at a secret meeting in nashville forrest donned the robes of grand wizard.
his activities are mostly cloaked in mystery but there is no mistake about his goals the klan would strike blows against the despised republican government of tennessee.
in many towns the klan became virtually identical to the democratic party.
klan members including forrest dominated tennessees delegation to the democratic national convention of 1868 at home the klan unleashed a murderous campaign of terror and though governor brownlow responded resolutely in the end republicans cracked.
the klan and similar groups organized under such names as the white league and knights of the white camelia arose in other states.
vigilantes burned freedmens schools beat teachers attacked republican gatherings and murdered political opponents.
by 1870 democrats had seized power in georgia and north carolina and were making headway across the south.
once they took power they slashed property taxes and passed other laws favorable to landowners.
they terminated reconstruction programs and cut funding for schools especially those teaching black students.
in responding to the klan between 1869 and 1871 the federal government showed it could still exert power effectively in the south.
determined to end klan violence congress held extensive hearings and in 1870 passed laws designed to protect freedmens rights under the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
these so called enforcement laws authorized federal prosecutions military intervention and martial law to suppress terrorist activity.
grants administration made full use of these new powers.
in south carolina where the klan was deeply entrenched u s troops occupied reconstruction 1865 1877 ku klux klan mask white supremacists of the 1870s organized under many names and wore many costumes not simply or often the white cone shaped hats that were made famous later in the 1920s when the klan underwent a nationwide resurgence.
few masks from the 1870s have survived.
the horns and fangs on this one from north carolina suggest how klan members sought to strike terror in their victims while also hiding their own identities.
north carolina museum of history.
nine counties made hundreds of arrests and drove as many as 2 000 klansmen from the state.
this assault on the klan while raising the spirits of southern republicans revealed how dependent they were on washington.
no such law could be enforced by state authority one mississippi republican observed the local power being too weak but northern republicans were growing disillusioned with reconstruction while in the south prosecuting klansmen was an uphill battle against all white juries and unsympathetic federal judges.
after 1872 prosecutions dropped off.
in the meantime the texas government fell to the democrats in 1873 and alabama and arkansas in 1874 reconstruction rolled back as divided republicans debated how to respond voters in the congressional election of 1874 handed them one of the most stunning defeats of the nineteenth century.
responding especially to the severe depression that gripped the nation they removed almost half of the partys 199 representatives in the house.
democrats who had held 88 seats now commanded an overwhelming majority of 182.
the election is not merely part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 a victory but a revolution exulted a democratic newspaper in new york.
after 1874 with democrats in control of the house republicans who tried to shore up their southern wing had limited options.
bowing to election results the grant administration began to reject southern republicans appeals for aid.
events in mississippi showed the outcome.
as state elections neared there in 1875 paramilitary groups such as the red shirts operated openly.
mississippis republican governor adelbert ames a union veteran from maine appealed for u s troops but grant refused.
the whole public are tired out with these annual autumnal outbreaks in the south complained a grant official who told southern republicans that they were responsible for their own fate.
facing a rising tide of brutal murders governor ames realizing that only further bloodshed could result urged his allies to give up the fight.
brandishing guns and stuffing ballot boxes democratic redeemers swept the 1875 elections and took control of mississippi.
by 1876 reconstruction was largely over.
republican governments backed by token u s military units remained in only three southern states louisiana south carolina and florida.
elsewhere former confederates and their allies took power.
the supreme court rejects equal rights though ex confederates seized power in southern states new landmark constitutional amendments and federal laws remained in force.
if the supreme court had left these intact subsequent generations of civil rights advocates could have used the federal courts to combat racial discrimination and violence.
instead the court closed off this avenue for the pursuit of justice just as it dashed the hopes of womens rights advocates.
as early as 1873 in a group of decisions known collectively as the slaughter house cases the court began to undercut the power of the fourteenth amendment.
in this case and a related ruling u s v cruikshank 1876 the justices argued that the fourteenth amendment offered only a few rather trivial federal protections to citizens such as access to navigable waterways.
in cruikshank a case that emerged from a gruesome killing of african american farmers by ex confederates in colfax louisiana followed by a democratic political coup the court ruled that voting rights remained a state matter unless the state itself violated those rights.
if former slaves rights were violated by individuals or private groups including the klan that lay beyond federal jurisdiction.
the fourteenth amendment did not protect citizens from armed vigilantes even when those vigilantes seized political power.
the court thus gutted the fourteenth amendment.
in the civil rights cases 1883 the justices also struck down the civil rights act of 1875 paving the way for later decisions that sanctioned segregation.
the impact of these decisions endured well into the twentieth century.
the political crisis of 1877 after the grim election results of 1874 republicans faced a major battle in the presidential election of 1876 abandoning grant they nominated rutherford b hayes a former union general who was untainted by corruption and even more important hailed from the key swing state of ohio.
hayess democratic opponent was new york governor samuel j tilden a wall street lawyer with a reform reputation.
tilden favored home rule for the south but so more discreetly did hayes.
with enforcement on the wane reconstruction did not figure prominently in the campaign and little was said about the states still led by reconstruction governments florida south carolina and louisiana.
once returns started coming in on election night however those states loomed large.
tilden led in the popular vote and seemed headed for victory until sleepless politicians at republican headquarters realized that the electoral vote stood at 184 to 165 with the 20 votes from florida south carolina and louisiana still uncertain.
if hayes took those votes he would win by a margin of 1 citing ample evidence of democratic fraud and intimidation republican officials certified all three states for hayes.
redeemer democrats who had taken over the states governments submitted their own electoral votes for tilden.
when congress met in early 1877 it confronted two sets of electoral votes from those states.
the constitution does not provide for such a contingency.
all it says is that the president of the senate in 1877 a republican opens the electoral certificates before the house democratic and the senate republican and the votes shall then be counted article 2 section 1.
suspense gripped the country.
there was talk of inside deals or a new election even a violent coup.
finally congress appointed an electoral commission to settle the question.
the commission included seven republicans seven democrats and as the deciding member david davis a supreme court justice not known to have fixed party loyalties.
davis however disqualified himself by accepting an illinois senate seat.
he was replaced by republican justice joseph p bradley and by a vote of 8 to 7 on party lines the commission awarded the election to hayes.
in the house of representatives outraged democrats vowed to stall the final count of electoral votes so chapters are so liberal and our plans for raising funds are so effective as to obviate the necessity of either waiting or worrying.
during the last three or four years we have sold confederate monuments to thirty seven of your sister chapter 16 conquering a continent 1854 1890 an american merchant ship in yokohama harbor 1861 after the united states forcibly opened japan to foreign trade in 1854 american and european ships and visitors became a familiar sight in the port of yokohama.
in these 1861 prints two panels of a five panel series artist hashimoto sadahide meticulously details activity in yokohama harbor.
on the left goods are carried onto an american merchant ship on the right two women dressed in western style watch the arrival of another boat.
in the background a steamship flies the dutch flag a rowboat heading to or from another unseen ship carries the flag of france.
library of congress.
united states would one day claim the philippines and build a panama canal.
sewards short term achievements were modest.
exhausted by civil war americans had little enthusiasm for further military exploits.
seward achieved only two significant victories.
in 1868 he secured congressional approval for the burlingame treaty with china which guaranteed the rights of u s missionaries in china and set official terms for the emigration of chinese laborers some of whom were already clearing farmland and building railroads in the west.
that same year seward negotiated the purchase of alaska from russia.
after the senate approved the deal seward waxed poetic our nation with united interests blest not now content to poise shall sway the rest abroad our empire shall no limits know but like the sea in endless circles flow.
many americans scoffed at the purchase of alaska a frigid arctic tract that skeptics nicknamed sewards icebox but the secretary of state mapped out a path his republican successors would follow thirty years later in an aggressive bid for global power.
integrating the national economy closer to home republicans focused on transportation infrastructure.
railroad development in the united states began well before the civil war with the first locomotives arriving from britain in the early 1830s.
unlike canals or roads railroads offered the promise of year round all weather service.
locomotives could run in the dark and never needed to rest except to take on coal and water.
steam engines crossed high mountains and rocky gorges where pack animals could find no fodder and canals could never reach.
west of the mississippi railroads opened vast regions for farming trade and tourism.
a transcontinental railroad executive was only half joking when he said the west is purely a railroad enterprise governments could choose to build and operate railroads themselves or promote construction by part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 building the central pacific railroad in 1865 chinese workers had labored to build the 1 100 foot long 90 foothigh trestle over the divide between the american and bear rivers at secret town in the sierra nevada mountains.
in 1877 the chinese workers shown in this photograph by carleton watkins were again at work on the site burying the trestle to avoid replacement of the aging timbers which had become a fire hazard.
university of california at berkeley bancroft library.
private companies.
unlike most european countries the united states chose the private approach.
the federal government however provided essential loans subsidies and grants of public land.
states and localities also lured railroads with offers of financial aid mainly by buying railroad bonds.
without this aid rail networks would have grown much more slowly and would probably have concentrated in urban regions.
with it railroads enjoyed an enormous and reckless boom.
by 1900 virtually no corner of the country lacked rail service map 16 1.
at the same time u s railroads built across the border into mexico america compared p 514.
railroad companies transformed american capitalism.
they adopted a legal form of organization the corporation that enabled them to raise private capital in prodigious amounts.
in earlier decades state legislatures had chartered corporations for specific public purposes binding these creations to government goals and oversight.
but over the course of the nineteenth century legislatures gradually began to allow any business to become a corporation by simply applying for a state charter.
among the first corporations to become large interstate enterprises private railroads were much freer than earlier companies to do as they pleased.
after the civil war they received lavish public aid with few strings attached.
their position was like that of american banks in late 2008 after the big federal bailout even critics acknowledged that public aid to these giant companies was good for the economy but they observed that it also lent government support to fabulous accumulations of private wealth.
tariffs and economic growth along with the transformative power of railroads republicans protective tariffs helped build other u s industries including textiles and steel in the northeast and midwest and through tariffs on imported sugar and wool sugar beet farming and sheep ranching in the west.
tariffs also funded government itself.
in an era when the united states did chapter 16 pacific time zone mountain time zone seattle c a n a d a central time zone eastern time zone uperior l s portland l boston i nt a r l obuffalo o l michigan chicago ron hu minneapolisst.
paul salt lake city conquering a continent 1854 1890 detroit l ie er cleveland new york pittsburgh omaha denver san francisco cincinnati kansas city washington d c st louis memphis los angeles atlanta atlantic ocean charleston dallas pacific ocean n el paso new orleans railroad growth between 1870 1890 major rail lines in 1870 major rail lines added 1870 1890 e w gulf of me x i co mexico 400 miles 400 kilometers map 16 1 expansion of the railroad system 1870 1890 in 1860 the nation had 30 000 miles of rail track by 1890 it had 167 000 miles.
the tremendous burst of construction during the last twenty years of that period essentially completed the nations rail network although there would be additional expansion for the next two decades.
the main areas of growth were in the south and in lands west of the mississippi.
time zones introduced by the railroad companies in 1883 are marked by the gray lines.
not levy income taxes tariffs provided the bulk of treasury revenue.
the civil war had left the union with a staggering debt of 2 8 billion.
tariff income erased that debt and by the 1880s generated huge budget surpluses a circumstance hard to imagine today.
as reconstruction faltered tariffs came under political fire.
democrats argued that tariffs taxed american consumers by denying them access to lowcost imported goods and forcing them to pay subsidies to u s manufacturers.
republicans claimed conversely that tariffs benefitted workers because they created jobs blocked low wage foreign competition and safeguarded america from the kind of industrial poverty that had arisen in europe.
according to this argument tariffs helped american men earn enough to support their families wives could devote themselves to homemaking and children could go to school not the factory.
for protectionist republicans high tariffs were akin to the abolition of slavery they protected and uplifted the most vulnerable workers.
in these fierce debates both sides were partly right.
protective tariffs did play a powerful role in economic growth.
they helped transform the united states into a global industrial power.
eventually though even protectionist republicans had to admit that democrats had a point tariffs had not prevented industrial poverty in the united states.
corporations accumulated massive benefits from tariffs but failed to pass them along to workers who often toiled long hours for low wages.
furthermore tariffs helped foster trusts corporations that dominated whole sectors of the economy and wielded near monopoly power.
the rise of large private corporations and trusts generated enduring political problems.
s america c o m pa r e d this map based on an 1885 travelers guide published by the atchison topeka and santa fe railroad includes the companys u s lines and also those of its mexican central railroad an atsf subsidiary that crossed the border and terminated at guaymas and mexico city mexico.
the dots represent the many stops that the trains made along the routes between major cities.
most mexican railroads in this era were built and operated by u s companies.
as you analyze this map consider how residents of the two countries may have experienced the railroads arrival in different ways.
the santa fe railroad in mexico and the united states map 16 2 the santa fe railroad system 1885 questions for analysis ogden reno salt lake city sacramento denver pueblo grand junction san visalia francisco kansas city dodge city winslow los angeles las vegas nm san diego united states tucson 1 in what directions could passengers and freight travel on atsf lines in each country.
what does this suggest about the objectives of railroad companies like this one.
2 based on this evidence how might mexicans have experienced the arrival of railroads differently from residents of the western united states.
el paso pacific ocean chihuahua guaymas mexico n w e gulf of mexico s lines of the sante fe railroad with selected stops railroad stop 300 miles 300 kilometers mexico city the role of courts while fostering growth most historians agree republicans did not give government enough regulatory power over the new corporations.
state legislatures did pass hundreds of regulatory laws after the civil war but interstate companies challenged them in federal courts.
in munn v illinois 1877 the supreme court affirmed that states could regulate key businesses such as railroads and grain elevators that were clothed in the public interest however the justices feared that too many state and local regulations would impede business and fragment the national marketplace.
starting in the 1870s they interpreted the due process clause of the new fourteenth amendment which dictated that no state could deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law as shielding corporations from excessive regulation.
ironically the court refused to use the same amendment to protect the rights of african americans.
chapter 16 conquering a continent 1854 1890 enclosed dakota camp at fort snelling minnesota 1862 during the trial of dakota warriors involved in the 1862 rebellion and through the harsh minnesota winter that followed more than a thousand members of the tribe were imprisoned in an enormous enclosure on pike island near st paul.
a measles epidemic broke out in the crowded camp and dozens died especially children.
though u s soldiers were often unfriendly toward their captives local sentiment was even more hostile troops regularly marched through the camp in part to protect the dakotas from vigilante violence.
in 1863 all members of the tribe were forcibly removed from the state.
in november 1862 photographer benjamin franklin upton captured this image of dakota tents in the pike island enclosure.
minnesota historical society.
minnesotans ferocious response to the uprising set the stage for further conflict.
a hastily appointed military court bent on revenge sentenced 307 dakotas to death making it clear that rebellious indians would be treated as criminals rather than warriors.
president abraham lincoln reviewed the trial records and commuted most of the sentences but authorized the deaths of 38 dakota men.
they were hanged just after christmas 1862 in the largest mass execution in u s history.
two months later congress canceled all treaties with the dakotas revoked their annuities and expelled them from minnesota.
the scattered bands fled west to join nonreservation allies.
as the uprising showed the civil war created two dangerous conditions in the west compounding the problems already caused by corruption.
with the union army fighting the confederacy western whites felt vulnerable to indian attacks.
they also discovered they could fight indians with minimal federal oversight.
in the wake of the dakota uprising worried coloradans favored a military campaign against the cheyennes allies of the sioux even though the cheyennes had shown little evidence of hostility.
colorado militia leader john m chivington an aspiring politician determined to quell public anxiety and make his career.
in may 1864 cheyenne chief identify causes black kettle fearing his band what factors led to would be attacked consulted with warfare between whites u s agents who instructed him and native peoples on the to settle along sand creek in east plains.
ern colorado until a treaty could be signed.
on november 29 1864 chivingtons colorado militia attacked the camp while most of the men were out hunting slaughtering more than a hundred women and children.
i killed all i could one officer testified later.
i think and earnestly believe the indian to be an obstacle to civilization and should be exterminated captain silas soule who served under chivington but refused to give his men the order to fire dissented.
it was hard to see little children on their knees he wrote later having their brains beat out by men professing to be civilized chivingtons men rode back for a celebration in denver where they hung cheyenne scalps and womens genitals from the rafters of the apollo theater.
the northern plains exploded in conflict.
infuriated by the sand creek massacre cheyennes carried war pipes to the arapahos and sioux who attacked and burned white settlements along the south platte river.
ordered to subdue these peoples the u s army failed part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 miserably officers could not even locate the enemy who traveled rapidly in small bands and knew the country well.
a further shock occurred in december 1866 when 1 500 sioux warriors executed a perfect ambush luring captain william fetterman and 80 soldiers from a wyoming fort and wiping them out.
with the fetterman massacre the sioux succeeded in closing the bozeman trail a private road under army protection that had served as the main route into montana.
general william tecumseh sherman now commanding the army in the west swore to defeat defiant indians.
but the union hero met his match on the plains.
another year of fighting proved expensive and inconclusive.
in 1868 the sioux led by the oglala band under chief red cloud told a peace commission they would not sign any treaty unless the united states pledged to abandon all its forts along the bozeman trail.
the commission agreed.
red cloud had won.
in the wake of these events eastern public opinion turned against the indian wars which seemed at best ineffective at worst brutal.
congress held hearings on the slaughter at sand creek.
though chivington now a civilian was never prosecuted the massacre became an infamous example of western vigilantism.
by the time ulysses grant entered the white house in 1869 the authors of reconstruction in the south also began to seek solutions to what they called the indian problem grants peace policy grant inherited an indian policy in disarray.
federal incompetence was highlighted by yet another mass killing of friendly indians in january 1870 this time on the marias river in montana by an army detachment that shot and burned to death 173 piegans blackfeet.
having run out of other options grant introduced a peace policy based on recommendations from christian advisors.
he offered selected appointments to the reformers including many former abolitionists who had created such groups as the indian rights association and the womens national indian association.
rejecting the virulent anti indian stance of many westerners reformers argued that native peoples had the innate capacity to become equal with whites.
they believed however that indians could achieve this only if they embraced christianity and white ways.
reformers thus aimed to destroy native languages cultures and religions.
despite humane intentions their condescension was obvious.
they ignored dissenters like dr thomas bland of the national indian defense association who suggested that instead of an indian problem there might be a white problem refusal to permit indians to follow their own lifeways.
to most nineteenth century americans such a notion was shocking and uncivilized.
increasingly dismissive of blacks capacity for citizenship and hostile toward heathen chinese immigrants white americans were even less willing to understand and respect indian cultures.
they believed that in the modern world native peoples were fated for extinction thinking like a historian p 530.
indian boarding schools reformers focused their greatest energy on educating the next generation.
realizing that acculturation adoption of white ways was difficult when children lived at home agents and missionaries created off reservation schools.
native families were exhorted bullied and bribed into sending their children to these schools where in addition to school lessons boys learned farming skills and girls practiced housekeeping.
english only was the rule students were punished if they spoke their own languages.
mourning dove a salish girl from what is now washington state remembered that her school ran strictly.
we never talked during meals without permission given only on sunday or special holidays.
otherwise there was silence a terrible silent silence.
i was used to the freedom of the forest and it was hard to learn this strict discipline.
i was punished many times before i learned the lakota boy plenty kill who at boarding school received the new name luther remembered his loneliness and fear upon arrival the big boys would sing brave songs and that would start the girls to crying.
the girls quarters were about a hundred and fifty yards from ours so we could hear them after having his hair cut short plenty kill felt a profound change in his identity.
none of us slept well that night he recalled.
i felt that i was no more indian but would be an imitation of a white man to see a longer excerpt of mourning doves autobiography along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
even in the first flush of reform zeal grants policies faced major hurdles.
most indians had been pushed off traditional lands and assigned to barren ground that would have defeated the most enterprising farmer.
poverty and dislocation left indians especially vulnerable to the ravages of infectious diseases like measles and scarlet fever.
at the same time quaker presbyterian and methodist reformers fought turf chapter 16 western myths and realities the post civil war frontier produced mythic figures who have played starring roles in americas national folklore ever since savage indians brave pioneers rugged cowboys and gun slinging sheriffs.
far from being invented by hollywood in the twentieth century these oversimplified characters emerged in the era when the nation incorporated the west.
pioneers helped develop the mythic ideal.
as one montana woman claimed they had come west at peril of their lives and faced down scalp dances and other terrors in the end they conquered the wilderness and transformed it into a land of peace and plenty some former cowboys capitalizing on the popularity of dime novel westerns spiced up their memoirs for sale.
eastern readers were eager for stories like the life and adventures of nat love 1907 written by a texas cowhand who had been born in slavery in tennessee and who as a rodeo star in the 1870s had won the nickname deadwood dick no myth maker proved more influential than buffalo bill cody.
unlike those who saw the west as free or empty bill understood that the united states had taken it by conquest.
ironically his famous wild west which he insisted was not a show but an authentic representation of frontier experience provided one of the few employment options for plains indians.
to escape harsh reservation conditions sioux and cheyenne men signed on with bill and demonstrated their riding skills for cheering audiences across the united states and europe chasing buffalo and attacking u s soldiers and pioneer wagons in the arena.
buffalo bill proved to be a good employer.
black elk a sioux man who joined codys operation recalled that bill was generous and had a strong heart but black elk had a mixed reaction to the wild west.
i liked the part of the show we made he told an interviewer but not the part the wasichus white people made as he observed the wild west of the 1880s was at its heart a celebration of u s military conquest.
at this same moment of transition a young historian named frederick jackson turner reviewed recent census data and proclaimed the end of the frontier.
up to 1890 he wrote a clear westward moving line had existed between civilization and savagery the frontier experience turner argued shaped americans national character.
it left them a heritage of coarseness and strength combined with acuteness and inquisitiveness as well as restless nervous energy today historians reject turners depiction of indian savagery and his contradictory idea that white conquering a continent 1854 1890 pioneers in the west claimed empty free land many scholars have noted that frontier conquest was both violent and incomplete.
the dust bowl of the 1930s as well as more recent cycles of drought have repeated late nineteenth century patterns of hardship and depopulation on the plains.
during the 1950s and 1960s also uranium mining rushes in the west mimicked earlier patterns of boom and bust leaving ghost towns in their wake.
turner himself acknowledged that the frontier had both good and evil elements.
he noted that in the west frontier liberty was sometimes confused with absence of all effective government but in 1893 when turner first published the significance of the frontier in american history eager listeners heard only the positives.
they saw pioneering in the west as evidence of american exceptionalism of the nations unique history and destiny.
they claimed that peaceful american expansion was the opposite of european empires ignoring the many military and economic similarities.
although politically the american west became a set of states rather than a colony historians today emphasize the legacy of conquest that is central to its and americas history.
less than two months after the massacre at wounded knee general william t sherman died in new york.
as the nation marked his passing with pomp and oratory commentators noted that his career reflected a great era of conquest and consolidation of national power.
known primarily for his role in defeating the confederacy shermans first military exploits had been against seminoles in florida.
later during the mexican war 1846 1848 he had gone west with the u s army to help claim california.
after the civil war the general went west again supervising the forced removal of sioux and cheyennes to reservations.
when sherman graduated from west point in 1840 the united states had counted twenty six states none of them west of missouri.
at his death in 1891 the nation boasted forty four states stretching to the pacific coast.
the united states now rivaled britain and germany as an industrial giant and its dynamic economy was drawing immigrants from around the world.
over the span of shermans career the united states had become a major player on the world stage.
it had done so through the kind of fierce military conquest that sherman made famous as well as through bold expansions of federal authority to foster economic expansion.
from the wars and policies of shermans lifetime the children and grandchildren of civil war heroes inherited a vast empire.
in the coming decades it would be up to them to decide how they would use the nations new power.
part 5 chapter review key turning points the military political and economic events of the civil war years 1861 1865 are often treated as largely occurring in the northeast and south at places such as shiloh gettysburg and washington d c what impact did these developments have on the west and what were their legacies.
p a r t c h a p t e r 17 industrial america corporations and conflicts 1877 1911 c h a p t e r 18 the victorians make the modern 1880 1917 c h a p t e r 19 civilizations inferno the rise and reform of industrial cities 1880 1917 c h a p t e r 20 whose government.
politics populists and progressives 1880 1917 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 touring the united states around 1900 a hungarian catholic abbot named count pter vay visited the steel mills of pittsburgh.
fourteenthousand tall chimneys.
discharge their burning sparks and smoke incessantly he reported.
he was moved by the plight of fellow hungarians laboring wherever the heat is most insupportable the flames most scorching one worker had just been killed in a foundry accident.
vay attending the funeral worried that immigration was of no use except to help fill the moneybags of the insatiable millionaires vay witnessed americas emergence as an industrial power and the consequences of that transformation.
in 1877 the united states was overwhelmingly rural and dependent on foreign capital.
by 1917 its landscapes population and ways of life were forever altered.
industrialization brought millions of immigrants from around the globe and built immense cities whose governance and social relations offered unaccustomed rewards and challenges.
it sharpened class divisions and led to the rise of national labor movements while prompting americans to redefine mens and womens roles.
industrialization also created pressure for political innovation.
as ex president theodore roosevelt declared in 1910 american citizens needed to control the mighty commercial forces which they have called into being workers farmers and urban reformers sought to regulate corporations fight poverty and clean up politics and the environment.
in their creative responses to the problems of the industrial age such reformers gave their name to the progressive era.
corporations and conflicts a diverse urban society in the post civil war decades giant corporations developed national and even global networks of production marketing and finance.
in many fields vertical integration enabled corporate managers to control production from the harvesting of raw materials through the sale of finished products.
nationwide marketing networks developed through innovative use of railroads and through ruthless competitive tactics such as predatory pricing.
corporations complex structures opened career opportunities for middle managers and salesmen.
women filling new niches as telephone operators and department store clerks also played an important role in the expanding service sector.
at the same time traditional craftsmen found themselves displaced as deskilled wage work steadily expanded.
factory workers and miners endured dangerous conditions health hazards low pay and frequent bouts of unemployment.
the most dangerous low wage work was often allotted to african americans and immigrants from europe mexico and asia.
workers organized to protest these conditions.
in addition to creating labor unions they forged political alliances with farmers who also found their livelihoods at risk in the changing global economy.
native born workers and european immigrants successfully agitated for the legal exclusion of chinese workers.
these events are covered in chapter 17 1871 1880 200 400 miles 1901 1910 200 400 miles 0 200 400 kilometers 0 200 400 kilometers n n w w e a tl a n tic oc ea n norway scotland north sea denmark ireland netherlands england germany belgium norway sweden scotland north sea denmark ireland netherlands england germany belgium sweden russia caspian sea austriafrance hungary switzerland portugal e s s atlan tic ocean industrial america corporations and conflicts 1877 1911 russia caspian sea austriafrance switzerland hungary black sea italy portugal spain spain ottoman empire italy romania black sea bulgaria serbia ottoman empire greece m e d i t e r r a n e a n se a m e d i t e rra n e a n s e a number of immigrants per decade to the united states to 10 000 100 000 500 000 500 000 1 000 000 1 000 000 2 000 000 over 2 000 000 approximate area of immigrants to the united states claiming polish ancestry.
poland was not an independent country at this time.
map 17 2 sources of european immigration to the united states 1871 1910 around 1900 americans began to speak of the new immigration.
they meant the large numbers of immigrants arriving from eastern and southern europe poles slovaks and other slavic peoples yiddish speaking jews italians who overwhelmed the still substantial number of immigrants from the british isles and northern europe.
canadians moved to new england in search of textile jobs many families with hopes of scraping together enough savings to return to quebec and buy a farm.
thousands of men came alone especially from ireland italy and greece.
many single irishwomen also immigrated.
but some would be sojourners ended up staying a lifetime while immigrants who had expected to settle permanently found themselves forced to leave by an accident or sudden economic depression.
one historian has estimated that a third of immigrants to the united states in this era returned to their home countries.
along with italians and greeks eastern european jews were among the most numerous arrivals.
the first american jews who numbered around 50 000 in 1880 had been mostly of german jewish descent.
in the next four decades more than 3 million poverty stricken jews arrived from russia ukraine poland and other parts of eastern europe transforming the jewish presence in the united states.
like other immigrants they sought economic opportunity but they also came to escape religious repression american voices p 562.
wherever they came from immigrants took a considerable gamble in traveling to the united states.
some prospered quickly especially if they came with education money or well placed business contacts.
others by toiling many years in harsh conditions succeeded in securing a better life for their children or grandchildren.
still others met with catastrophe or early death.
one polish man who came with his parents in 1908 summed up his life over the next thirty years as a mere struggle for bread he added sometimes i think life isnt worth a damn for a man america c o m pa r e d emigrants and destinations 1881 1915 the united states received more new residents than any other nation during the era of industrialization but it was not the only place where emigrants those departing became immigrants those arriving.
the graph below shows six major destinations for emigrants from four european countries.
british emigrants excluding ireland united states 57 german emigrants canada 22 united states 95 oceania 13 africa 1 oceania 1 africa 8 italian emigrants united states 55 brazil 2 canada 1 argentina 1 swedish emigrants argentina 23 united states 100 brazil 16 oceania 1 africa 3 canada 2 primarily to australia and new zealand figure 17 2 major destinations for emigrants 1881 1915 questions for analysis 1 what might account for the different emigration patterns shown here.
2 what choices and limitations might each group of emigrants have faced in choosing the country to which they like me.
look at my wife and kids undernourished seldom have a square meal but an orthodox russian jewish woman told an interviewer that she thanked god for america where she had married raised three children and made a good life.
she liked everything about this country especially its leniency toward the jews emigrated.
do these figures suggest anything about the conditions various groups may have encountered in different countries upon arrival.
asian americans and exclusion compared with europeans newcomers from asia faced even harsher treatment.
the first chinese immigrants had arrived in the late 1840s during the california gold rush.
after the civil war the burlingame treaty between the united states and china opened chapter as well as the documents above explain why immigrants sent to the south might have faced more difficulties on average than those sent to other parts of the country.
part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 would be built in the 1920s and after chapter 17 industrial america corporations and conflicts 1877 1911 sought to address.
founded in texas during the depression of the 1870s the farmers alliance spread across the plains states and the south becoming by the late 1880s the largest farmer based movement in american history.
a separate colored farmers alliance arose to represent rural african americans.
the harsh conditions farmers were enduring including drought in the west and plunging global prices for corn cotton and wheat intensified the movements appeal.
traveling alliance lecturers exhorted farmers to stand as a great conservative body against.
the growing corruption of wealth and power like earlier movements alliance leaders pinned their initial hopes on cooperative stores and exchanges that would circumvent middlemen.
cooperatives gathered farmers orders and bought in bulk at wholesale prices passing the savings along.
alliance cooperatives achieved notable victories in the late 1880s.
the dakota alliance for example offered members cheap hail insurance and low prices on machinery and farm supplies.
the texas alliance established a huge cooperative enterprise to market cotton and provide farmers with cheap loans.
when cotton prices fell further in 1891 however the texas exchange failed.
other cooperatives also suffered from chronic underfunding and lack of credit and they faced hostility from merchants and lenders they tried to circumvent.
the texas farmers alliance thus proposed a federal price support system for farm products modeled on the national banks.
under this plan the federal government would hold crops in public warehouses and issue loans on their value until they could be profitably sold.
when democrats still wary of big government schemes declared the idea too radical alliances in texas kansas south dakota and elsewhere decided to create a new political party the populists see chapter review the united states though they often endured harsh conditions after they arrived.
asian immigrants by contrast faced severe discrimination.
the chinese exclusion act blocked all chinese laborers from coming to the united states it was later extended to other asians and it built the legal framework for broader forms of exclusion.
nationwide movements for workers rights arose in response to industrialization.
during the 1870s and 1880s coalitions of workers and farmers notably the knights of labor and the farmers alliance sought political solutions to what they saw as large corporations exploitation of working people.
pressure from such movements led to the first major attempts to regulate corporations such as the federal interstate commerce act.
radical protest movements were weakened however after public condemnation of anarchist violence in 1886 at chicagos haymarket square.
meanwhile trade unions such as the american federation of labor organized skilled workers and negotiated directly with employers becoming the most popular form of labor organization in the early twentieth century.
c h a p t e r r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events homestead lockout p 544 management revolution p 546 vertical integration p 547 horizontal integration p 548 trust p 548 deskilling p 551 mass production p 551 scientific management p 552 chinese exclusion act p 561 great railroad strike of 1877 p 565 key people greenback labor party p 565 producerism p 566 granger laws p 566 knights of labor p 567 anarchism p 568 haymarket square p 568 farmers alliance p 568 interstate commerce act p 569 closed shop p 570 american federation of labor p 570 andrew carnegie p 544 gustavus swift p 547 john d rockefeller p 547 henry george p 565 terence powderly p 567 leonora barry p 567 samuel gompers p 570 part 6 chapteropening photograph p 545 taken in the aftermath visual evidence more to explore 4 this chapter explores the impact of industrializa of a terrible mining accident in pennsylvania.
imagine first that the young man in the middle of the picture facing the camera is the nephew of an irish immigrant miner who was killed in the explosion.
in the voice of this young man write a letter to the editor of the local paper explaining what lessons americans should take from the disaster.
now imagine instead that the young man has enrolled in business school to become a manager he is the son of a scottish born executive in the mining company and andrew carnegie is his hero.
in the voice of this young man write a letter to the editor explaining what lessons americans should take from the disaster.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapters founded soup kitchens and free libraries.
they introduced a german educational innovation the kindergarten.
they investigated prison conditions.
though she did not persuade most prohibitionists to follow her a plea for temperance 1874 the origins of the womans christian temperance union lay in spontaneous prayer meetings held by women outside local saloons where they appealed for men to stop drinking and liquor sellers to destroy their product.
a string of such meetings in ohio won national attention as in this image from a popular magazine the daily graphic.
who will win asked the artist.
the answers varied.
a few saloon owners struck with remorse over the damage caused by alcohol abuse smashed their beer kegs and poured their liquor into the gutters.
far more refused but in the 1880s temperance women succeeded in organizing the largest grassroots movement of their day to build support for outlawing liquor sales.
the granger collection new york.
chapter 18 the victorians make the modern 1880 1917 john french sloan a womans work 1912 the subject of this painting a woman hanging out laundry behind a city apartment building is typical of the subjects chosen by american artist john sloan 1871 1951.
sloan and a group of his allies became famous as realists critics derided them as the ash can school because they did not paint rural landscapes or other conventional subjects considered worthy of painting.
sloan though warned against seeing his paintings as simple representations of reality even if he described his work as based on a creative impulse derived out of a consciousness of life looks like is not the test of a good painting he wrote even the scientist is interested in effects only as phenomena from which to deduce order in life cleveland museum of art.
gift of amelia elizabeth white.
soon afterward clemens was devastated by the loss of his wife and two daughters as well as by failed investments and bankruptcy.
an outspoken critic of imperialism and foreign missions twain eventually denounced christianity itself as a hypocritical delusion.
like his friend the industrialist andrew carnegie clemens got rid of theology by the time clemens died in 1910 realist and naturalist writers had laid the groundwork for modernism which rejected traditional canons of literary taste.
questioning the whole idea of progress and order modernists focused on the subconscious and primitive mind.
above all they sought to overturn convention and tradition.
poet ezra pound exhorted make it new modernism became the first great literary and artistic movement of the twentieth century.
in the visual arts new technologies influenced aesthetics.
by 1900 some photographers argued that their true representations made painting obsolete.
but painters invented their own forms of realism.
nebraskaborn artist robert henri became fascinated with life in the great cities.
the backs of tenement houses are living documents he declared and he set out to put them on canvas.
henri and his followers notably john sloan and george bellows called themselves the new york realists.
critics derided them as the ash can school because they explain chose subjects that were not con consequences what effect did technolventionally beautiful.
ogy and scientific ideas in 1913 realists participated have on literature and the in one of the most controversial arts.
events in american art history american voices three interpretations of social darwinism the idea that human society advanced through survival of the fittest was a popular doctrine referred to by historians as social darwinism many americans agreed with harvard sociologist william graham sumner who argued that the poor and weak were a burden a dead weight on the society in all its struggles such views prompted a range of responses ranging from enthusiastic endorsement to uneasy accommodation to impassioned opposition.
theodore dreiser the financier theodore dreiser 1871 1945 was an american literary naturalist.
his novel the financier 1912 traces the rise of frank cowperwood a young man who during the last years of the nineteenth century becomes a powerful banker.
dreiser loosely based the character on the life of financier charles yerkes.
in this excerpt the narrator describes a transformative moment in cowperwoods youth.
cowperwood could not figure out how this thing he had come into this life was organized.
how did all these people get into the world.
what were they doing here.
who started things anyhow.
his mother told him the story of adam and eve but he didnt believe it.
one day he saw a squid and a lobster put in a tank and in connection with them was witness to a tragedy which stayed with him all his life and cleared things up considerably intellectually.
the lobster it appeared from the talk of the idle bystanders was offered no food as the squid was considered his rightful prey.
he lay at the bottom of the clear glass tank.
apparently seeing nothing you could not tell in which way his beady black buttons of eyes were looking but apparently they were never off the body of the squid.
the latter pale and waxy in texture looking very much like pork fat or jade moved about in torpedo fashion but his movements were apparently never out of the eyes of his enemy for by degrees small portions of his body began to disappear snapped off by the relentless claws of his pursuer.
one day only a portion of the squid remained.
in the corner of the tank sat the lobster poised apparently for action.
the boy stayed as long as he could the bitter struggle fascinating him.
now maybe or in an hour or a day the squid might die slain by the lobster and the lobster would eat him.
he looked again at the greenishcopperish engine of destruction in the corner and wondered when this would be.
he returned that night and lo.
the expected had happened.
there was a little crowd around the tank.
the lobster was in the corner.
before him was the squid cut in two and partially devoured.
the incident made a great impression on him.
it answered in a rough way that riddle which had been annoying him so much in the past how is life organized things lived on each other that was it.
lobsters lived on squids and other things.
what lived on lobsters.
men of course.
and what lived on men.
he asked himself.
was it other men.
wild animals lived on men.
and there were indians and cannibals.
and some men were killed by storms and accidents.
he wasnt so sure about men living on men but men did kill each other.
how about wars and street fights and mobs.
frank thought of this and of the life he was tossed into for he was already pondering on what he should be in this world and how he should get along.
from seeing his father count money he was sure that he would like banking and third street where his fathers office was seemed to him the cleanest most fascinating street in the world.
source theodore dreiser the financier new york harper and brothers 1912 10 15.
lyman abbott the evolution of christianity liberal congregationalist lyman abbott 1835 1922 was a noted advocate of the social gospel.
in the evolution of christianity 1892 abbott sought to reconcile the theory of evolution with the development of christianity.
the doctrine of evolution is not a doctrine of harmonious and uninterrupted progress.
the most common if not the most accurate formula of evolution is struggle for existence survival of the fittest the doctrine of evolution assumes that there are forces in the world seemingly hostile to progress that life is a perpetual battle and progress a perpetual victory.
the christian evolutionist will then expect to find christianity a warfare in church in society in the individual.
he will remember that the divine life is resident in undivine humanity.
he will not be surprised to find the waters of the stream disturbed for he will reflect that the divine purity has come into a turbid stream and that it can purify only by being itself indistinguishably combined with the impure.
when he is told that modern christianity is only a civilized paganism he will reply that is exactly what i supposed it to be and it will continue to be a civilized paganism until civilization has entirely eliminated paganism he will not be surprised to find pagan ceremonies in the ritual ignorance and superstition in the church and even errors and partialisms in the bible.
for he will remember that the divine life which is bringing all life into harmony with itself is a life resident in man.
he will remember that the bible does not claim to be the absolute word of god that on the contrary.
it claims to be the word of god.
as spoken to men and understood and interpreted by men which saw it in part as we still see it and reflected it as from a mirror in enigmas.
he will remember that the church is not yet the bride of christ but the plebeian daughter whom christ is educating to be his bride.
he will remember that christianity is not the absolutely divine but the divine in humanity the divine force resident in man and transforming man into the likeness of the divine.
christianity is the light struggling with the darkness life battling with death the spiritual overcoming the animal.
we judge christianity as the scientist judges the embryo as the gardener the bud as the teacher the pupil not by what it is but by what it promises to be.
all the definitions.
art is the antithesis of nature.
if we call one the natural method we must call the other the artificial method.
if natures process is rightly named natural selection mans process is artificial selection.
the survival of the fittest is simply the survival of the strong which implies and might as well be called the destruction of the weak.
and if nature progresses through the destruction of the weak man progresses through the protection of the weak.
man through his intelligence has labored successfully to resist the law of nature.
his success is conclusively demonstrated by a comparison of his condition with that of other species of animals.
no other cause can be assigned for his superiority.
how can the naturalistic philosophers shut their eyes to such obvious facts.
yet what is their attitude.
they condemn all attempts to protect the weak whether by private or public methods.
they claim that it deteriorates the race by enabling the unfit to survive and transmit their inferiority.
nothing is easier than to show that the unrestricted competition of nature does not secure the survival of the fittest possible but only of the actually fittest and in every attempt man makes to obtain something fitter than this actual fittest he succeeds as witness improved breeds of animals and grafts of fruits.
now the human method of protecting the weak deals in such way with men.
it not only increases the number but improves the quality.
source lester frank ward glimpses of the cosmos new york harper 1913 371 374 source lyman abbott the evolution of christianity boston houghton mifflin 1892 8 10.
lester frank ward glimpses of the cosmos lester frank ward 1841 1913 helped establish sociology in the united states.
following french philosopher auguste comte he held that the social sciences should develop methods of improving society.
in his autobiography glimpses of the cosmos 1913 1918 ward rejected social darwinism.
how shall we distinguish this human or anthropic method from the method of nature.
simply by reversing questions for analysis 1 by telling the squid and lobster story what message was dreiser conveying to readers about men such as cowperwood.
if abbott and ward had read the financier how might they have responded.
2 historians sometimes claim that american thinkers of this era endorsing social darwinism and survival of the fittest opposed social reform.
how do abbott and ward complicate that view.
part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 the armory show.
housed in an enormous national guard building in new york the exhibit introduced america to modern art.
some painters whose work appeared at the show were experimenting with cubism characterized by abstract geometric forms.
along with works by henri sloan and bellows organizers featured paintings by european rebels such as pablo picasso.
americas academic art world was shocked.
one critic called cubism the total destruction of the art of painting but as the exhibition went on to boston and chicago more than 250 000 people crowded to see it.
a striking feature of both realism and modernism as they developed was that many leading writers and artists were men.
in making their work strong and modern they also strove to assert their masculinity.
paralleling theodore roosevelts call for manly sports they denounced nineteenth century culture as hopelessly feminized.
stephen crane called for virility in literature.
jack london described himself as a mans man.
lustfully roving and conquering artist robert henri banned small brushes as too feminine in their own ways these writers and artists contributed to a broad movement to masculinize american culture.
religion diversity and innovation by the turn of the twentieth century emerging scientific and cultural paradigms posed a significant challenge to religious faith.
some americans argued that science and modernity would sweep away religion altogether.
contrary to such predictions american religious practice remained vibrant.
protestants developed creative new responses to the challenges of industrialization while millions of newcomers built institutions for worship and religious education.
immigrant faiths arriving in the united states in large numbers catholics and jews wrestled with similar questions.
to what degree should they adapt to protestant dominated american society.
should the education of clergy be changed.
should children attend arthur b davies dancers 1914 1915 artist arthur davies 1862 1928 was one of the primary organizers of new yorks 1913 armory show which introduced americans to modernist art.
an associate of john sloan and other new york realists davies experimented with an array of painting styles as well as printmaking and tapestry making.
this painting dates from a three year period just after the armory show in which davies experimented with cubist techniques.
dancers 1914 1915 oil on canvas detroit institute of arts usa gift of ralph harman booth the bridgeman art library.
chapter 19 civilizations inferno the rise and reform of industrial cities 1880 1917 yorks tenement house law of 1901 which required interior courts indoor toilets and fire safeguards for new structures.
the law however had no effect on the 44 000 tenements that already existed in manhattan and the bronx.
reformers were thwarted by the economic facts of urban development.
industrial workers could not afford transportation and had to live near their jobs commercial development pushed up land values.
only high density cheaply built housing earned landlords a significant profit.
city cultures despite their dangers and problems industrial cities could be exciting places to live.
in the nineteenth century white middle class protestants had set the cultural standard immigrants and the poor were expected to follow cues from their betters seeking uplift and respectability.
but in the cities new mass based entertainments emerged among the working classes especially youth.
these entertainments spread from the working class to the middle class much to the distress of many middle class parents.
at the same time cities became stimulating centers for intellectual life.
the atlanta race riot seen from france the cover of this paris newsmagazine depicts the atlanta race riot of 1906 while the artist had almost certainly never visited atlanta his dramatic illustration shows that from this early date racial violence could be a source of embarrassment to the united states in its relations with other countries.
picture research consultants archives.
in new yorks eleventh ward an average of 986 persons occupied each acre.
one investigator in philadelphia described twenty six people living in nine rooms of a tenement.
the bathroom at the rear of the house was used as a kitchen she reported.
one privy compartment in the yard was the sole toilet accommodation for the five families living in the house african americans often suffered most.
a study of albany syracuse and troy new york noted the colored people are relegated to the least healthful buildings denouncing these conditions reformers called for model tenements financed by public spirited citizens willing to accept a limited return on their investment.
when private philanthropy failed to make a dent cities turned to housing codes.
the most advanced was new urban amusements one enticing attraction was vaudeville theater which arose in the 1880s and 1890s.
vaudeville customers could walk in anytime and watch a continuous sequence of musical acts skits magic shows and other entertainment.
first popular among the working class vaudeville quickly broadened its appeal to include middle class audiences.
by the early 1900s vaudeville faced competition from early movie theaters or nickelodeons which offered short films for a nickel entry fee.
with distaste one reporter described a typical movie audience as mothers of bawling infants and newsboys bootblacks and smudgy urchins by the 1910s even working girls who refrained from less respectable amusements might indulge in a movie once or twice a week.
more spectacular were the great amusement parks that appeared around 1900 most famously at new yorks coney island.
these parks had their origins in worlds fairs whose paid entertainment areas had offered giant ferris wheels and camel rides through a street in cairo entrepreneurs found that such attractions were compare and big business.
between 1895 and contrast how did working class and 1904 they installed them at sevelite city residents differ eral rival amusement parks near in how they spent their coney islands popular beaches.
money and leisure time.
the parks offered new yorkers a part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 map 19 2 the expansion of chicago 1865 1902 city limits the residential areas of the city tended to spread out along elevated lightrail railroad lines and streetcar tracks.
these new forms of mass transit enabled people living in distant neighborhoods to reach the central business district and other places of employment.
in 1865 chicagoans depended on horsecar lines to get around town.
by 1900 the city limits had expanded enormously and so had the streetcar service which was by then electrified.
elevated trains eased the congestion on downtown streets.
ongoing extension of the streetcar lines some beyond the city limits ensured that suburban development would continue as well.
n e w s lake michigan note that the number of square miles within chicagos city limits increased more than 300 percent between 1865 and 1902 central business district horsecar lines 1865 note that some areas of the old city were not used for either residence or industry.
most of these were large regional parks or undeveloped land.
city limits 3 miles central business district industrial area residential area parks and undeveloped land elevated lines 1902 streetcar lines 1902 lake calumet figure 19 1 floor plan of a dumbbell tenement air shaft toilets kitchen bed room public parlor kitchen bed room 10 bed room kitchen parlor bed room kitchen parlor hall bed room air shaft 50 0 fire escape parlor bed room in a contest for a design that met an 1879 requirement for every room to have a window the dumbbell tenement won.
the interior indentation which created an airshaft between adjoining buildings gave the tenement its dumbbell shape.
but what was touted as a model tenement demonstrated instead the futility of trying to reconcile maximum land usage with decent housing.
each floor contained four apartments of three or four rooms the largest only 10 by 11 feet.
the two toilets in the hall became filthy or broke down under daily use by forty or more people.
the narrow airshaft provided almost no light for the interior rooms and served mainly as a dumping ground for garbage.
so deplorable were these tenements that they became the stimulus for the next wave of new york housing reform.
chapter 17.
putting it all together write a brief essay in which you explain the ways in which the rise of mass market newspapers might have contributed to and helped to publicize calls for progressive reform.
part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 families after their apartments burned fix ing them up until they get things runnin again plunkitt was an irishman and so were most tammany hall leaders.
but by the 1890s plunkitts fifteenth district was filling up with italians and russian jews.
on a given day as recorded in his diary he might attend an italian funeral in the afternoon and a jewish wedding in the evening.
wherever he went he brought gifts listened to his constituents troubles and offered a helping hand.
the favors dispensed by men like plunkitt came via a system of boss control that was as lincoln steffens charged corrupt.
though rural state and national politics were hardly immune to such problems cities offered flagrant opportunities for bribes and kickbacks.
the level of corruption as plunkitt observed was greater in cities accordin to the opportunities when politicians made contracts for city services some of the money ended up in their pockets.
in the 1860s william marcy tweed known as boss tweed had made tammany hall a byword for corruption until he was brought down in 1871 by flagrant overpricing of contracts for a lavish city courthouse.
thereafter machine corruption became more surreptitious.
plunkitt declared that he had no need for outright bribes.
he favored what he called honest graft the profits that came to savvy insiders who knew where and when to buy land.
plunkitt made most of his money building wharves on manhattans waterfront.
middle class reformers condemned immigrants for supporting machines.
but urban immigrants believed that few middle class americans cared about the plight of poor city folk like themselves.
machines were hardly perfect but immigrants could rely on them for jobs emergency aid and the only public services they could hope to obtain.
astute commentators saw that bosses dominated city government because they provided what was needed with no condescending moral judgments.
as reformer jane addams put it the ward boss was a stalking survival of village kindness voters knew he was corrupt but on election day they might say ah well he has a big irish heart.
he is good to the widow and the fatherless or he knows the poor addams concluded that middle class reformexplain ers would only make headway if consequences they set aside their prejudices why given that everyone learned to stand by and for and agreed machines were with the people and did a betcorrupt did urban voters ter job of it than the machine support them.
bosses did.
to see a longer excerpt of the jane addams essay along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
machine style governments achieved some notable successes.
they arranged at a profit for companies to operate streetcars bring clean water and gaslight and remove garbage.
nowhere in the world were there more massive public projects aqueducts sewage systems bridges and spacious parks than in the great cities of the united states.
the nature of this achievement can be grasped by comparing chicago illinois with berlin the capital of germany in 1900 at that time chicagos waterworks pumped 500 million gallons of water a day providing 139 gallons per resident berliners made do with 18 gallons each.
flush toilets a rarity in berlin could be found in 60 percent of chicago homes.
chicago lit its streets with electricity while berlin still relied mostly on gaslight.
chicago had twice as many parks as the german capital and it had just completed an ambitious sanitation project that reversed the course of the chicago river carrying sewage into lake michigan away from city residents.
these achievements were remarkable because american municipal governments labored under severe political constraints.
judges did grant cities some authority in 1897 for example new yorks state supreme court ruled that new york city was entirely within its rights to operate a municipally owned subway.
use of private land was also subject to whatever regulations a city might impose.
but starting with an 1868 ruling in iowa the american legal system largely classified the city as a corporate entity subject to state control.
in contrast to state governments cities had only a limited police power which they could use for example to stop crime but not to pass more ambitious measures for public welfare.
states not cities held most taxation power and received most public revenues.
machines and their private allies flourished in part because cities were starved for legitimate cash.
thus money talked powerful economic interests warped city government.
working class residents even those loyal to their local machines knew that the newest electric lights and best trolley lines served affluent neighborhoods where citizens had the most clout.
hilda satt a polish immigrant who moved into a poor chicago neighborhood in 1893 recalled garbagestrewn streets and filthy backyard privies.
the streets were paved with wooden blocks she later wrote and after a heavy rainfall the blocks would become loose and float about in the street she remembered that on one such occasion local pranksters posted a sign chapter 18 and urban settlements chapter 20 whose government.
politics populists and progressives 1880 1917 riding to a populist rally dickinson county kansas 1890s farm families in wagons carry their banners to a local meeting of the peoples party.
men women and children often traveled together to campaign events which included not only stump speeches but also picnics glee club music and other family entertainments.
kansas state historical society.
took up some of the farmers demands forestalling creation of a separate farmer labor party in that state.
but other politicians listened to alliance pleas and did nothing.
it was a response they came to regret.
republicans utterly dominated kansas a state chock full of union veterans and railroad boosters.
but politicians there treated the kansas farmers alliance with contempt.
in 1890 the kansas alliance joined with the knights of labor to create a peoples party.
they then stunned the nation by capturing four fifths of the lower house of the kansas legislature and most of the states congressional seats.
the victory electrified labor and agrarian radicals nationwide.
in july 1892 delegates from these groups met at omaha nebraska and formally created the national peoples party.
nominating former union genunderstand eral and greenback labor leader points of view james b weaver for president the how did the political goals populists as they became known of populists differ in this captured a million votes in period from those of demnovember and carried four west ocrats and republicans.
ern states map 20 2.
in recognizing an irrepressible conflict between capital and labor populists split from the mainstream parties calling for stronger government to protect ordinary americans.
we believe declared their omaha platform 1892 that the power of government in other words of the people should be expanded as rapidly and as far as the good sense of an intelligent people and the teachings of experience shall justify to map 20 2 c a na da the heyday of western populism 1892 this map shows the percentage of the popular vote won by james b weaver the peoples party candidate in the presidential election of 1892 except in california and montana the populists won broad support across the west and genuinely threatened the established parties in that region.
wash 23 ore 44 idaho 53 nevada 64 calif 9 pacific ocean n dak.
47 utah terr.
colo 55 s dak.
45 kan 50 03 okla terr.
populist party victory populist party wins 20 50 of popular vote populist party gains less than 20 of vote territories ineligible to vote minn wis iowa ill mo.
texas 24 la.
n e w m e xic o gulf of mexico s part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 the end that oppression injustice and poverty should eventually cease populists called for public ownership of railroad and telegraph systems protection of land from monopoly and foreign ownership a federal income tax on the rich and a looser monetary policy to help borrowers.
some populist allies went further to make their point in new mexico the gorras blancas a vigilante group of small scale mexican american farmers protested exploitative railroads and land grabbers by intimidating railroad workers and cutting fences on large anglo farms.
to see a longer excerpt of the omaha platform along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
populist leaders represented a grassroots uprising of ordinary farmers and some won colorful nicknames.
after a devastating debate triumph james h davis of texas became known as cyclone mary e lease was derided as yellin mary ellen her fellow kansan jerry simpson was called sockless jerry after he ridiculed a wealthy opponent for wearing fine silk hosiery boasting that he himself wore no socks at all.
the national press based in northeastern cities ridiculed such hayseed politicians but farmers insisted on being taken seriously.
in the run up to one election a populist writer encouraged party members to sing these lyrics to the tune of an old gospel hymn i once was a tool of oppression as green as a sucker could be and monopolies banded together to beat a poor hayseed like me.
but now ive roused up a little and their greed and corruption i see and the ticket we vote next november will be made up of hayseeds like me.
driven by farmers votes the peoples party had mixed success in attracting other constituencies.
its labor planks won support among alabama steelworkers and rocky mountain miners but not among many other industrial workers who stuck with the major parties.
prohibitionist and womens suffrage leaders attended populist conventions hoping their issues would be taken up but they were disappointed.
the legacies of the civil war also hampered the party.
southern democrats warned that populists were really radical republicans in disguise while northeastern republicans claimed the southern pops were ex confederates plotting another round of treason.
amid these heated debates the political system suddenly confronted an economic crisis.
the political earthquakes of the 1890s in 1893 a severe economic depression hit the united states.
though it was a global shock and the agriculture sector had already lagged for years republicans blamed grover cleveland who had just reentered the white house.
on every hand can be seen evidences of democratic times declared one republican.
the deserted farm the silent factory apparently receptive to such appeals voters outside the south abandoned the democrats in 1894 and 1896 republicans promising prosperity gained control of the white house and both chambers of congress for the next fifteen years.
this development created both opportunities and challenges for progressive reformers.
a different pattern emerged in the south democrats deployed fraud violence and race based appeals for white solidarity to defeat the populist revolt.
depression and reaction when cleveland took the oath of office in march 1893 hard times were prompting european investors to pull money out of the united states farm foreclosures and railroad bankruptcies signaled economic trouble.
a few weeks later a pennsylvania railroad went bankrupt followed by several other companies.
investors panicked the stock market crashed.
by july major banks had drained their reserves and suspended unable to give depositors access to their money.
by years end five hundred banks and thousands of other businesses had gone under.
boston one man remembered grew suddenly old haggard and thin the unemployment rate in industrial cities soared above 20 percent.
for americans who had lived through the terrible 1870s conditions looked grimly familiar.
even fresher in the public mind were recent labor uprisings including the 1886 haymarket violence and the 1892 showdown at homestead followed during the depressions first year by a massive pennsylvania coal strike and a pullman railroad boycott that ended with bloody clashes between angry crowds and the u s army.
prosperous americans fearful of populism were even more terrified that workers would embrace socialism or marxism.
reminding americans of upheavals such as the paris commune of 1871 and its bloody aftermath conservative commentators of the 1890s launched americas first red scare a precursor to similar episodes of hysteria in the 1920s chapter 20 whose government.
politics populists and progressives 1880 1917 lynching in texas lynchings peaked between 1890 and 1910 while most common in the south they occurred in almost every state from oregon to minnesota to new york.
after many lynchings such as this one in the town of center texas in 1920 crowds posed to have their pictures taken.
commercial photographers often as in this case produced photographic postcards to sell as souvenirs.
what do we make of these gruesome rituals.
who is in the crowd and who is not.
what do we learn from the fact that this group of white men some of whom may have been responsible for the lynching felt comfortable having their photographs recorded with the body.
the victim in this photograph a young man named lige daniels was seized from the local jail by a mob that broke down the prison door to kidnap and kill him.
the inscription on the back of the postcard includes information about the killing along with the instructions give this to bud from aunt myrtle private collection.
president a young nebraska congressman free silver advocate william jennings bryan who passionately defended farmers and attacked the gold standard.
burn down your cities and leave our farms bryan declared in his famous convention speech and your cities will spring up again as if by magic but destroy our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country he ended with a vow you shall not crucify mankind on a cross of gold cheering delegates endorsed a platform calling for free silver and a federal income tax on the wealthy that would replace tariffs as a source of revenue.
democrats long defenders of limited government were moving toward a more activist stance.
populists reeling from recent defeats endorsed bryan in the campaign but their power was waning.
populist leader tom watson who wanted a separate program more radical than bryans observed that democrats in 1896 had cast the populists as jonah while they play whale the peoples party never recovered from its electoral losses in 1894 and from democrats ruthless opposition in the south.
by 1900 rural voters pursued reform elsewhere particularly through the new bryan wing of the democratic party.
meanwhile horrified republicans denounced bryans platform as anarchistic.
their nominee the ohio congressman and tariff advocate william mckinley chose a brilliant campaign manager ohio coal and shipping magnate marcus hanna who orchestrated an unprecedented corporate fund raising campaign.
under his guidance the party backed away from moral issues such as prohibition of liquor and reached out to new immigrants.
though the popular vote was closer mckinley won big 271 electoral votes to bryans 176 map 20 4.
nationwide as in the south the realignment of the 1890s prompted new measures to exclude voters.
influenced by classical liberals denunciations of unfit part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 1 1 1 24 15 electoral vote popular vote percent of popular vote grover cleveland democrat 5 555 426 46 1 benjamin harrison republican 5 182 690 43 0 james b weaver populist 1 029 846 8 5 285 297 2 3 candidate minor parties voters many northern states imposed literacy tests and restrictions on immigrant voting.
leaders of both major parties determined to prevent future populiststyle threats made it more difficult for new parties to get candidates listed on the ballot.
in the wake of such laws voter turnout declined and the electorate narrowed in ways that favored the native born and wealthy.
antidemocratic restrictions on voting helped paradoxically to foster certain democratic innovations.
6 12 24 15 this 1896 campaign poster emphasizes the youth of the thirty six year old nebraska democrat and includes portraits of his wife mary and their three young children.
the full text of his famous cross of gold speech appears flanked by silver coins and overlaid with 16 to 1 representing the chicago platforms proposal to mint u s silver coins at a 16 to 1 ratio with gold increasing the money supply to stimulate the economy and aid borrowers.
at the bottom stand a farmer and industrial workingman primary bases of democratic support.
many farmers and workers voted for mckinley however especially in the industrial heartland of the northeast and midwest.
though bryan secured the electoral votes of the south and a substantial majority of western states mckinley won the election.
library of congress.
william jennings bryan 6 12 electoral vote popular vote percent of popular vote william mckinley republican 7 102 246 51 1 william j bryan democrat 6 492 559 47 7 candidate map 20 4 the presidential elections of 1892 and 1896 in the 1890s the age of political stalemate came to an end.
students should compare the 1892 map with map 20 1 p 639 and note especially clevelands breakthrough in the normally republican states of the upper midwest.
in 1896 the pendulum swung in the opposite direction with mckinleys consolidation of republican control over the northeast and midwest far overbalancing the democratic advances in the thinly populated western states.
the 1896 election marked the beginning of sixteen years of republican dominance in national politics.
having excluded or reduced the number of poor african american and immigrant voters elite and middle class reformers felt more comfortable increasing the power of the voters who remained.
both major chapter 20 whose government.
politics populists and progressives 1880 1917 the finishing touch november 2 1912 three days before the election harpers weekly which endorsed woodrow wilson suggested in this cartoon some of the reasons why he would win.
roosevelt supported protective tariffs while wilson called for tariff reform democrats also claimed that roosevelts antitrust proposals were not sufficiently aggressive and that in 1904 he had taken a large campaign contribution from standard oil.
such controversies showed the nations accelerating momentum for reform.
the man in the middle is wilsons campaign manager william mcadoo.
harpers weekly november 2 1912 p 26 male wageworkers might expect to make 800 per year the tax affected less than 5 percent of households.
three years later congress followed this with an inheritance tax.
these measures created an entirely new way to fund the federal government replacing republicans high tariff as the chief source of revenue.
over subsequent decades especially between the 1930s and the 1970s the income tax system markedly reduced americas extremes of wealth and poverty.
wilson also reorganized the financial system to address the absence of a central bank.
at the time the main function of national central banks was to back up commercial banks in case they could not meet their obligations.
in the united states the great private banks of new york such as j p morgans assumed this role if they weakened the entire system could collapse.
this had nearly happened in 1907 when the knickerbocker trust company failed precipitating a panic.
the federal reserve act 1913 gave the nation a banking system more resistant to such crises.
it created twelve district reserve banks funded and controlled by their member banks with a central federal reserve board to impose regulation.
the federal reserve could issue currency paper money based on assets held in the system and set the interest rate that district reserve banks charged to their members.
it thereby reg trace change ulated the flow of credit to the over time general public.
the act strength to what degree did ened the banking system and to a reforms of the wilson era modest degree discouraged risky fulfill goals that various agrarian labor advocates speculation on wall street.
wilson and the democratic and progressives had congress turned next to the sought.
in doing so wilson relied heavily on louis d brandeis the celebrated peoples lawyer.
brandeis denied that monopolies were efficient.
on the contrary he believed the best source of part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 table 20 1 major federal progressive measures 1883 1921 before 1900 pendleton civil service act 1883 hatch act 1887 chapter 17 interstate commerce act 1887 chapter 19 hepburn act 1906 first white house conference on dependent children 1909 during william howard tafts presidency 1909 1913 mann act preventing interstate prostitution 1910 chapter.
charles calhoun conceiving a new republic 2006.
an excellent account of post reconstruction politics emphasizing issues of race and republicans dilemma in the south.
john milton cooper the warrior and the priest 1983.
a provocative dual biography of theodore roosevelt and woodrow wilson.
maureen flanagan america reformed 2007.
a readable introduction and guide to further sources on progressive movements.
michael kazin a godly hero 2006.
this biography of william jennings bryan is a good starting point on the eras democrats and their charismatic leader.
robert c mcmath american populism 1993.
a lively history of the farmers alliance and peoples party.
nancy woloch ed muller v oregon 1996.
an excellent analysis and collection of primary documents on this critical legal decision.
chapter 23 wartime measures went even further as the government mobilized the entire economy and tens of millions of citizens to fight the axis powers.
the welfare state became a warfare state and congress gave the president broad powers to fight the war abroad and reorganize the economy at home.
under the government directed wartime economy business boomed and productivity grew but other policies such as the internment of japanese immigrants and japanese americans violated fragile civil liberties leaving a mixed legacy.
on americas roles in world war ii see chapter 21 held a majority in the senate.
one group called the irreconcilables consisted of western progressive republicans such as hiram johnson of california and robert la follette of wisconsin who opposed u s involvement in european affairs.
another group led by senator henry cabot lodge of massachusetts worried that article x the provision for collective security would prevent the united states from pursuing an independent foreign policy.
was the nation lodge asked willing to have the youth of america ordered to war by an international body.
wilson refused to accept any amendments especially to placate lodge a hated rival.
i shall consent to nothing the president told the french ambassador.
the senate must take its medicine to mobilize support wilson embarked on an exhausting speaking tour.
his impassioned defense of the league of nations brought audiences to tears but the strain proved too much for the president.
while visiting colorado in september 1919 wilson collapsed.
a week later back in washington he suffered a stroke that left one side of his body paralyzed.
wilson still urged democratic senators to reject all republican amendments.
when the treaty came up for a vote in november 1919 it failed to win the required two thirds majority.
a second attempt in march 1920 fell seven votes short.
the treaty was dead and so was wilsons leadership.
the president never fully recovered from his stroke.
during the last eighteen months of his administration the government drifted as wilsons physician his wife and various cabinet heads secretly took charge.
the united states never ratified the versailles treaty or joined the league of nations.
in turn the league was weak.
when wilson died in 1924 his dream of a just and peaceful international order lay in ruins.
the impact of world war i can hardly be overstated.
despite bids for power by britain and france europes hold on its colonial empires never recovered.
the united states now a major world power appeared to turn its back on the world when it rejected the versailles treaty.
but in laying claim to hawaii and the philippines asserting power in latin america and intervening in asia the united states had entangled itself deeply in global politics.
by 1918 the nation had gained too much diplomatic clout and was too dependent on overseas trade for isolation to be a realistic long term option.
on the home front the effects of world war i were no less dramatic.
wartime jobs and prosperity ushered in an era of exuberant consumerism while the an emerging world power 1890 1918 achievements of womens voting rights seemed to presage a new progressive era.
but as peace returned it became clear that the war had not advanced reform.
rather than embracing government activism americans of the 1920s proved eager to relinquish it.
summary between 1877 and 1918 the united states rose as a major economic and military power.
justifications for overseas expansion emphasized access to global markets the importance of sea power and the need to police international misconduct and trade.
these justifications shaped u s policy toward european powers in latin america and victory in the war of 1898 enabled the united states to take control of former spanish colonies in the caribbean and pacific.
victory however also led to bloody conflict in the philippines as the united states struggled to suppress filipino resistance to american rule.
after 1899 the united states aggressively asserted its interests in asia and latin america.
in china the united states used the so called boxer rebellion to make good its claim to an open door to chinese markets.
later president theodore roosevelt strengthened relations with japan and his successor william howard taft supported u s business interests in china.
in the caribbean the united states constructed the panama canal and regularly exercised the right claimed under the roosevelt corollary to intervene in the affairs of states in the region.
president woodrow wilson publicly disparaged the imperialism of his predecessors but repeatedly used the u s military to police mexico.
at the outbreak of world war i the united states asserted neutrality but its economic ties to the allies rapidly undercut that claim.
in 1917 german submarine attacks drew the united states into the war on the side of britain and france.
involvement in the war profoundly transformed the economy politics and society of the nation resulting in an economic boom mass migrations of workers to industrial centers and the achievement of national voting rights.
at the paris peace conference wilson attempted to implement his fourteen points.
however the designs of the allies in europe undermined the treaty of versailles while republican resistance at home prevented ratification of the treaty.
although wilsons dream of a just international order failed the united states had taken its place as a major world power.
part 7 chapter 22 hand.
he set up an antiradicalism division in the justice department and appointed his assistant j edgar hoover to direct it shortly afterward it became the federal bureau of investigation fbi.
in november 1919 palmers agents stormed the headquarters of radical organizations.
the dragnet captured thousands of aliens who had committed no crimes but who held anarchist or revolutionary beliefs.
lacking the protection of u s citizenship many were deported without indictment or trial.
the palmer raids peaked on a notorious night in january 1920 when federal agents invaded homes and meeting halls arrested six thousand citizens and aliens and denied the prisoners access to legal counsel.
then palmer who had presidential ambitions overreached.
he predicted that on may 1 a radical conspiracy would attempt to overthrow the u s government.
state militia and police went on twenty four hour alert to guard against the alleged threat but not a single incident occurred.
as the summer of 1920 passed without major strikes or renewed bombings the red scare began to abate.
like other postwar legacies however antiradicalism had broad long lasting effects.
in may 1920 at the height of the red scare police arrested nicola sacco a shoemaker and bartolomeo vanzetti a fish peddler for the murder of two men during a robbery of a shoe company in south braintree massachusetts.
sacco and vanzetti were italian aliens and self proclaimed anarchists who had evaded the draft.
convicted of the murders sacco and vanzetti sat in jail for six years while supporters appealed their verdicts.
in 1927 judge webster thayer denied a motion for a new trial and sentenced them to death.
scholars still debate their guilt or innocence.
but the case was clearly biased by prosecutors emphasis on their ties to radical groups.
the execution of sacco and vanzetti was one of the ugly scars left by the ethnic and political hostilities of the great war.
politics in the 1920s as the plight of labor suggested the 1920s were a tough decade for progressives who had gained ground before world war i after a few early reform victories including achievement of national womens suffrage the dominant motif of the 1920s was limited government.
native born white protestants rallied against what they saw as big city values and advocated such goals as immigration restriction.
a series of republican presidents placed responsibility for the nations well being cultural conflict bubble and bust 1919 1932 in the hands of business.
president calvin coolidge declared the man who builds a factory builds a temple.
the man who works there worships there the same theme prevailed in continued u s interventions in latin america and elsewhere american business needs were the top priority.
women in politics at the start of the 1920s many progressives hoped the attainment of womens voting rights would offer new leverage to tackle poverty.
they created organizations like the womens joint congressional committee a washington based advocacy group.
the committees greatest accomplishment was the first federally funded health care legislation the sheppard towner federal maternity and infancy act 1921.
sheppard towner provided federal funds for medical clinics prenatal education programs and visiting nurses.
though opponents warned that the act would lead to socialized medicine sheppard towner improved health care for the poor and significantly lowered infant mortality rates.
it also marked the first time that congress designated federal funds for the states to encourage them to administer a social welfare program.
in 1923 alice paul founder explain of the national womans party consequences also persuaded congressional allies before world war i to consider an equal rights women didnt have full amendment era to the u s voting rights but they had constitution.
it stated simply considerable success as men and women shall have equal reformers.
after the war rights throughout the united they could vote but their states advocates were hopeful proposals met defeat.
how wisconsin had passed a similar might we account for this law two years earlier and it helped apparent contradiction.
women fight gender discrimination.
but opponents pointed out that the era would threaten recent labor laws that protected women from workplace abuses.
such laws recognized womens vulnerable place in a heavily sex segregated labor market.
would a theoretical statement of equality help poor and working women more than existing protections did.
this question divided womens rights advocates.
introduced repeatedly in congress over the next five decades but rarely making it out of committee the era was debated again and again until the bitter ratification struggle of the 1970s chapter 22 many poor and affluent families shared one thing in common they stretched their incomes small or large through new forms of borrowing such as auto loans and installment plans.
buy now pay later said the ads and millions did.
anyone no matter how rich could get into debt but consumer credit was particularly perilous for those living on the economic margins.
in chicago one lithuanian man described his neighbors situation she aint got no money.
sure she buys on credit clothes for the children and everything such borrowing turned out to be a factor in the bust of 1929 the automobile no possession proved more popular than the automobile a showpiece of modern consumer capitalism that revolutionized american life.
car sales played a major role in the decades economic boom in one year 1929 americans spent 2 58 billion on automobiles.
by the end of the decade they owned 23 million cars about 80 percent of the worlds automobiles or an average of one for every six people.
the auto industrys exuberant expansion rippled through the economy with both positive and negative results.
it stimulated steel petroleum chemical rubber and glass production and directly or indirectly created 3 7 million jobs.
highway construction became cultural conflict bubble and bust 1919 1932 a billion dollar a year enterprise place events financed by federal subsidies and in context state gasoline taxes.
car owner how did the radio autoship spurred urban sprawl and in mobile and hollywood 1924 the first suburban shopping movies exemplify the center country club plaza out opportunities and the side kansas city missouri.
but risks of 1920s consumer cars were expensive and most culture.
americans bought them on credit.
this created risks not only for buyers but for the whole economy.
borrowers who could not pay off car loans lost their entire investment in the vehicle if they defaulted banks were left holding unpaid loans.
amid the boom of the 1920s however few worried about this result.
cars changed the way americans spent their leisure time as proud drivers took their machines on the road.
an infrastructure of gas stations motels and drive in restaurants soon catered to drivers.
railroad travel faltered.
the american automobile association founded in 1902 estimated that by 1929 almost a third of the population took vacations by car.
as early as 1923 colorado had 247 autocamps.
i had a few days after i got my wheat cut reported one kansas farmer so i just loaded my family.
and lit out an elite californian complained that automobile travel was no automobiles at jacksonville beach florida 1923 the automobile transformed americans leisure pursuits.
as proud car owners took to the road in ever larger numbers the vacation became a summer staple.
auto travel created a booming business in gas stations roadside motels campgrounds and sightseeing destinations.
a florida vacation once reserved for wealthy northeasterners who had traveled to miamis exclusive hotels by first class rail car became an attainable luxury for middle class and even some working class families.
curt teich postcard archives lake county museum.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 charlie chaplin and jackie coogan charlie chaplin left and jackie coogan starred together in the kid 1921 a silent comedy that also included sentimental and dramatic moments promising viewers a smile.
and perhaps a tear chaplin born in london in 1889 moved to the united states in 1912 and over the next two decades reigned as one of hollywoods most famous silent film stars.
in 1919 he joined with d w griffith mary pickford and other american directors and stars to create the independent studio united artists.
the kid made the los angeles born coogan discovered by chaplin on the vaudeville stage into americas first child star.
library of congress.
longer aristocratic the clerks and their wives and sweethearts observed a reporter driving through the wisconsin lake country camping at niagara scattering tin cans and pop bottles over the rockies made those places taboo for bankers hollywood movies formed a second centerpiece of consumer culture.
in the 1910s the moviemaking industry had begun moving to southern california to take advantage of cheap land sunshine and varied scenery within easy reach.
the large studios united artists paramount and metro goldwyn mayer were run mainly by eastern european jewish immigrants like adolph zukor who arrived from hungary in the 1880s.
starting with fur sales zukor and a partner then set up five cent theaters in manhattan.
i spent a good deal of time watching the faces of the audience zukor recalled.
with a little experience i could see hear and feel the reaction to each melodrama and comedy founding paramount pictures zukor signed emerging stars and produced successful feature length films.
by 1920 hollywood reigned as the worlds movie capital producing nearly 90 percent of all films.
large ornate movie palaces attracted both middle class and working class audiences.
idols such as rudolph valentino mary pickford and douglas fairbanks set national trends in style.
thousands of young women followed the lead of actress clara bow hollywoods famous flapper who flaunted her boyish figure.
decked out in knee length skirts flappers shocked the older generation by smoking and wearing makeup.
flappers represented only a tiny minority of women but thanks to the movies and advertising they became influential symbols of womens sexual and social emancipation.
in cities young immigrant women eagerly bought makeup and the latest flapper fashions and went dancing to jazz.
jazz stars helped popularize the style among working class african americans.
mexican american teenagers joined the trend though they usually found themselves under the watchful eyes of la duea the chaperone.
politicians quickly grasped the publicity value of american radio and film to foreign relations.
in 1919 with government support general electric spearheaded the creation of radio corporation of america rca to expand u s presence in foreign radio markets.
rca which had a federal appointee on its board of directors emerged as a major provider of radio transmission in latin america and east asia.
meanwhile by 1925 american films made up 95 percent of the movies screened in britain 80 percent in latin america and 70 percent in france america compared p 727.
the united states was experimenting with what historians call soft power the exercise of popular cultural influence as radio and film exports celebrated the american dream.
the coming of the great depression by 1927 strains on the economy began to show.
consumer lending had become the tenth largest business in the country topping 7 billion that year.
increasing numbers of americans bought into the stock market often with unrealistic expectations.
one yale professor proclaimed that stocks had reached a permanently high plateau corporate profits were so high that some companies fully invested in their own operations plowed excess earnings into the stock america c o m pa r e d hollywood in europe european film studios struggled after world war i to reach audiences who had fallen in love with american movies.
working class europeans in particular preferred hollywoods offerings to the films produced in europe.
in this 1928 article from a cinematography journal german expressionist filmmaker erich pommer suggested new strategies for expanding an audience for european films.
expressionists influenced by romanticism and modernism explored dark themes such as spiritual crisis and insanity.
a famous example of expressionist painting is edvard munchs the scream.
pommer worked for american studios and later fled to the united states after the rise of hitler.
the towering importance of the american motion picture on the worlds markets cannot be safely explained by the unlimited financial resources at the disposal of the american producers.
its main reason is the mentality of the american picture which notwithstanding all attacks and claims to the contrary apparently comes nearest to the taste of international cinema audiences.
the specific and unique element of the american film is the fact of its being absolutely uncomplicated.
being what is called nave it knows no problems.
universal appeal.
it is really preferable to have a picture too light rather than too heavy because in the latter case there is a danger that the public will not understand the story.
this is the worst thing that can happen with a picture.
spectacular appeal.
the international appeal of a picture has its foundation in a story.
it is totally independent of the capital invested and of the splendor and luxury used in its production.
the fact that in most cases the supers and monumental pictures have proved to be such international successes does not disprove this claim.
other market players compounded risk by purchasing on margin.
an investor might for example spend 20 of his own money and borrow 80 to buy a 100 share of stock expecting to pay back the loan as the stock rose quickly in value.
this worked as long as the economy grew and the stock market climbed.
but those conditions did not last.
yet when the stock market fell in a series of plunges between october 25 and november 13 1929 few onlookers understood the magnitude of the crisis.
cyclical downturns had been a familiar part of the industrializing economy since the panic of the 1830s they tended to follow periods of rapid growth and speculation.
a sharp recent recession in 1921 had not such productions always have a simple story of universal appeal because it is simply impossible to use spiritual thoughts and impressions of the soul in a picture deluxe.
the splendour in such production is not merely created for decoration it is its outstanding purpose.
but splendour means show and a show is always and everywhere easy to understand.
source excerpt from the international picture a lesson on simplicity by erich pommer from film europe and film america cinema commerce and cultural exchange 1920 1939 edited by andrew higson and richard maltby 1999 isbn 978 0 85989 546 0 used by permission of exeter university press.
questions for analysis 1 how does pommer characterize the attraction of popular american films for european audiences.
what does he mean when he calls those films nave.
2 how does pommer propose to produce german films that will compete with hollywood.
what constraints and challenges did he face.
triggered disaster.
the market identify causes rose again in late 1929 and early what domestic and global 1930 and while a great deal factors helped cause the of money had been lost most great depression.
americans hoped the aftermath of the crash would be brief.
in fact the nation had entered the great depression.
over the next four years industrial production fell 37 percent.
construction plunged 78 percent.
prices for crops and other raw materials already low fell by half.
by 1932 unemployment had reached a staggering 24 percent figure 22 1.
a precipitous drop in consumer spending deepened the crisis.
facing hard times and unemployment americans cut back dramatically creating a part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 24 9 23 6 21 7 20 1 19 0 16 9 percent unemployed 17 2 15 9 14 3 14 6 11 7 9 9 8 7 8 5 6 7 5 1 5 2 4 6 5 0 2 4 1 4 1 4 4 7 4 2 3 3 3 2 3 2 1 9 1 8 1 2 1 9 figure 22 1 unemployment 1915 1945 during the 1920s business prosperity and low rates of immigration resulted in historically low unemployment levels.
the great depression threw millions of people out of work by 1933 one in four american workers was unemployed and the rate remained high until 1941 when the nation mobilized for world war ii.
vicious cycle of falling demand and forfeited loans.
in late 1930 several major banks went under victims of overextended credit and reckless management.
the following year as industrial production slowed a much larger wave of bank failures occurred causing an even greater shock.
since the government did not insure bank deposits accounts in failed banks simply vanished.
some people who had had steady jobs and comfortable savings found themselves broke and out of work.
not all americans were devastated by the depression the middle class did not disappear and the rich lived in accustomed luxury.
but incomes plummeted even among workers who kept their jobs.
salt lake city went bankrupt in 1931 barter systems developed as barbers traded haircuts for onions and potatoes and laborers worked for payment in eggs or pork.
we do not dare to use even a little soap reported one jobless oregonian when it will pay for an extra egg a few more carrots for our children i would be only too glad to dig ditches to keep my family from going hungry wrote a north carolina man.
where did desperate people turn for aid.
their first hope lay in private charity especially churches and synagogues.
but by the winter of 1931 these institutions were overwhelmed unable to keep pace with the extraordinary need.
only eight states provided even minimal unemployment insurance.
there was no public support for the elderly statistically among the poorest citizens.
few americans had any retirement savings and many who had saved watched their accounts erased by failing banks.
even those who were not wiped out had to adapt to depression conditions.
couples delayed marriage and reduced the number of children they conceived.
as a result the marriage rate fell to a historical low and by 1933 the birthrate dropped from 97 births per 1 000 women to 75 often the responsibility for birth control fell to women.
it was one of the worst problems of women whose husbands were out of work a californian told a reporter.
campaigns against hiring married women were common on the theory that available jobs should go to male breadwinners.
three quarters of the nations school districts banned married women chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place the ku klux klan of the reconstruction era chapter.
lynn dumenil the modern temper 1995.
a readable overview of events in the 1920s.
david levering lewis when harlem was in vogue 1979.
a wonderful account of politics arts and culture in the vibrant negro capital of the world daniel okrent last call the rise and fall of prohibition 2010.
a lively recent history of the movement to ban liquor.
martha l olney buy now pay later 1991.
explores the rise and impact of consumer credit.
mary a renda taking haiti 2001.
a compelling exploration of u s occupation of haiti and its impact on haiti and especially the united states.
the pbs series american experience has produced an excellent documentary on the scopes trial information and documents are available at pbs org wgbh amex monkeytrial.
for a broad view of the 1929 crash and its impact see pbs org wgbh amex crash.
part 7 chapter 22 chapter 23 managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 united auto workers strike trade unions were among the most active and vocal organizations of the 1930s.
organized labor led a number of major strikes between 1934 and 1936 in various industries.
none was more important to the future of trade unions than the sit down strikes at major automobile plants including general motors and chevrolet in flint michigan in 1936 and 1937 these strikes in which workers stopped the assembly lines but refused to leave the factories compelled gm to recognize the united auto workers uaw which became one of the strongest trade unions in american history.
bettmann corbis.
families with dependent children afdc enrolled 14 1 million americans.
a minor program during the new deal afdc grew enormously in the 1960s and remained an often maligned cornerstone of the welfare state until it was eliminated under president clinton in 1996 new deal liberalism the second new deal created what historians call new deal liberalism.
classical liberalism held individual liberty to be the foundation of a democratic society and the word liberal had traditionally denoted support for freemarket policies and weak government.
roosevelt and his advisors along with intellectuals such as british economist john maynard keynes disagreed.
they countered that to preserve individual liberty government must assist the needy and guarantee the basic welfare of citizens.
this liberal welfare state was opposed by inheritors of the nineteenth century ideology of laissez faire capitalism who gradually became known as conservatives.
these two visions of liberty and government with liberals on one side and conservatives on the other would shape american politics for the next half century.
from reform to stalemate roosevelts first term had seen an extraordinary expansion of the federal state.
the great burst of government action between 1933 and 1935 was unequaled in the nations history though congress and president lyndon johnson nearly matched it in 1965 1966 see chapter 23 managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 if roosevelt lost the battle he went on to win the war.
swayed in part by the presidents overwhelming electoral victory in the 1936 election the court upheld the wagner and social security acts.
moreover a series of timely resignations allowed roosevelt to reshape the supreme court after all.
his new appointees who included the liberal leaning and generally pro new deal hugo black felix frankfurter and william o douglas viewed the constitution as a living document that had to be interpreted in the light of present conditions.
the so called roosevelt recession of 1937 1938 dealt another blow to the president.
from 1933 to 1937 gross domestic product had grown at a yearly rate of about 10 percent bringing industrial output back to 1929 levels.
unemployment had declined from 25 percent to 14 percent.
the emergency has passed declared senator james f byrnes of south carolina.
acting on this assumption roosevelt slashed the federal budget.
following the presidents lead congress cut the wpas funding in half causing layoffs of about 1 5 million workers and the federal reserve fearing inflation raised interest rates.
these measures halted recovery.
the stock market responded by dropping sharply and unemployment jumped to 19 percent.
quickly reversing course roosevelt began once again to spend his way out of the recession by boosting funding for the wpa and resuming public works projects.
although improvised this spending program accorded with the theories of john maynard keynes a visionary british economist.
keynes transformed economic thinking in capitalist societies in the 1920s by arguing that government intervention could smooth out the highs and lows of the business cycle through deficit spending and the manipulation of interest rates which determined the money supply.
this view was sharply criticized by republicans and conservative democrats in the 1930s who disliked government intervention in the economy.
but keynesian economics gradually won wider acceptance as world war ii defense spending finally ended the great depression.
a reformer rather than a revolutionary roosevelt had preserved capitalism and liberal individualism even as he transformed them in significant ways.
at the same time conservatives had reclaimed a measure of power in congress and those who believed the new deal had created an intrusive federal bureaucracy kept reform in check after 1937 throughout roosevelts second term a conservative coalition of southern democrats rural republicans and industrial interests in both parties worked to block or impede social legislation.
by 1939 the era of change was over.
the new deals impact on society whatever its limits the new deal had a tremendous impact.
its ideology of social welfare liberalism fundamentally altered americans relationship to their government and provided assistance to a wide range of ordinary people the unemployed the elderly workers and the poor.
in doing so new dealers created a sizable federal bureaucracy the number of civilian federal employees increased by 80 percent between 1929 and 1940 reaching a total of 1 million.
the expenditures and deficits of the federal government grew at an even faster rate.
in 1930 the hoover administration spent 3 1 billion and had a surplus of almost 1 billion in 1939 new dealers expended 9 4 billion and ran a deficit of nearly 3 billion still small by later standards.
but the new deal represented more than figures on a balance sheet.
across the country the new era in government inspired democratic visions among ordinary citizens thinking like a historian p 752.
a peoples democracy in 1939 writer john la touche and musician earl robinson produced ballad for americans a patriotic song it called for uniting everybody whos nobody.
irish negro jewish italian french and english spanish russian chinese polish scotch hungarian litvak swedish finnish canadian greek and turk and czech and double czech american the song captured the democratic aspirations that the new deal had awakened.
millions of ordinary people believed that the nation could and should become more egalitarian.
influenced by the liberal spirit of the new deal americans from all walks of life seized the opportunity to push for change in the nations social and political institutions.
organized labor demoralized and shrinking during the 1920s labor unions increased their numbers and clout during the new deal thanks to the wagner act.
the era of privilege and predatory individuals is over labor leader john l lewis declared.
by the end of the decade the number of unionized workers had tripled to 23 percent of the nonagricultural workforce.
a new union movement led by the congress of industrial organizations cio promoted industrial unionism organizing all the workers in an industry from skilled machinists to unskilled janitors into a single union.
the american federation of labor afl thinking like a historian the new deal and public works more than half a dozen new deal programs were devoted to building up the physical and cultural infrastructure of the country.
the former included roads bridges dams trails and national parks.
the latter included artwork murals plays and other forms of literary expression.
examine the following documents and use them collectively to analyze the new deals relationship to infrastructure art culture and politics.
1 harold l ickes secretary of the interior the new democracy 1934 our government is no longer a laissez faire government exercising traditional and more or less impersonal powers.
there exists in washington a sense of responsibility for the health safety and well being of the people.
i believe that we are at the dawn of a day when the average man woman and child in the united states will have an opportunity for a happier and richer life.
and it is just and desirable that this should be so.
we are not here merely to endure a purgatorial existence in anticipation of a beatific eternity after the grave closes on us.
we are here with hopes and aspirations and legitimate desires that we are entitled to have satisfied to at least a reasonable degree.
nor will such a social program as we are discussing cause a strain on our economic system.
2 herbert johnson cartoon saturday evening post 1935 the granger collection new york.
3 federal writers project interview with a wpa draftsman newburyport massachusetts june 25 1939 one reason people here dont like the wpa is because they dont understand its not all bums and drunks and aliens.
nobody ever explains to them that theyd never have had the new high school theyre so.
proud of if it hadnt been for the wpa.
they dont stop to figure that new brick sidewalks wouldnt be there the shade trees wouldnt be all dressed up to look at along high street and all around town if it werent for wpa projects.
to most in this town and i guess its not much different in this than any other new england place wpas just a racket set up to give a bunch of loafers and drunks steady pay to indulge in their vices.
they dont stop to consider that on wpa are men and women who have traveled places and seen things been educated and found their jobs folded up and nothing to replace them with.
4 ben shahn wpa mural 1938 this is part of a three panel mural commissioned by the works progress administration wpa and painted at a public school in roosevelt new jersey by the well known artist ben shahn.
courtesy of roosevelt arts project picture research consultants archives 5 david e lilienthal tva democracy on the march 1944 written by the former chairman of the tennessee valley authority.
analyzing the evidence i believe men may learn to work in harmony with the forces of nature neither despoiling what god has given nor helpless to put them to use.
i believe in the great potentialities for well being of the machine and technology and science and though they do hold a real threat of enslavement and frustration for the human spirit i believe those dangers can be averted.
i believe that through the practice of democracy the world of technology holds out the greatest opportunity in all history for the development of the individual according to his own talents aspirations and willingness to carry the responsibilities of a free man.
such are the things that have happened in the tennessee valley.
here men and science and organizational skills applied to the resources of waters land forests and minerals have yielded great benefits for the people.
and it is just such fruits of technology and resources that people all over the world will more and more demand for themselves.
that people believe these things can be theirs this it is that constitutes the real revolution of our time the dominant political fact of the generation that lies ahead.
putting it all together 1 what sorts of reasons do the authors of sources 1 and 5 give for supporting new deal programs.
what does the good life look like in their view and how is it connected to the new deal.
2 what do sources 2 and 3 suggest about possible opposition to new deal programs.
what sorts of public burdens do new deal opponents envision.
3 consider source 4 what can we learn from a mural about the spirit of the new deal.
identity specific elements of the mural and think about what they might signify about the society the muralist envisioned.
what kind of faith in the federal government does the mural reveal.
using evidence from the sources in this feature alongside material from the chapter 23 managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 indian new deal commissioner of indian affairs john collier poses with chiefs of the blackfoot indian tribe in 1934 collier helped reform the way the u s federal government treated native americans.
as part of what many called the indian new deal collier lobbied congress to pass the indian reorganization act.
the act gave indian tribes greater control over their own affairs and ended many of the most atrocious federal practices such as forcing indian children into white run boarding schools and dividing up and selling reservation land.
the legislations long term results were mixed but it signaled the beginning of greater autonomy for indian tribes across the country.
bettmann corbis.
representative and they made no linguistic distinctions among law rule charter and constitution.
in another case the nations largest tribe the navajos rejected the bias new policy largely because the government was simultaneously reducing navajo livestock to protect the boulder dam project.
in theory the new policy gave indians a much greater degree of self determination.
in practice however although some tribes did benefit the bia and congress continued to interfere in internal indian affairs and retained financial control over reservation governments.
struggles in the west by the 1920s agriculture in california had become a big business intensive diversified and export oriented.
large scale corporateowned farms produced specialty crops lettuce tomatoes peaches grapes and cotton whose staggered harvests allowed the use of transient laborers.
thousands of workers immigrants from mexico and asia and white migrants from the midwestern states trooped from farm to farm and from crop to crop during the long picking season.
some migrants settled in the rapidly growing cities along the west coast especially the sprawling metropolis of los angeles.
under both hoover and fdr the federal government promoted the repatriation of mexican citizens their deportation to mexico.
between 1929 and 1937 approximately half a million people of mexican descent were deported.
but historians estimate that more than 60 percent of these were legal u s citizens making the governments actions constitutionally questionable.
despite the deportations many mexican americans benefitted from the new deal and generally held roosevelt and the democratic party in high regard.
people of mexican descent like other americans took jobs with the wpa and the ccc or received relief in the worst years of the depression.
the national youth administration nya which employed young people from families on relief and sponsored a variety of school programs was especially important in part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 mexican american farm workers among the most hard pressed workers during the great depression were those who labored in the nations agricultural field orchards and processing plants.
agriculture was a big time corporate business by the 1930s and in california and other parts of the southwest it employed hundreds of thousands of poor mexican americans and mexican immigrants.
seizing on the spirit of social protest sweeping the country in the early 1930s many of these workers went on strike for better wages and working conditions.
here women from mexican american communities are heading to the cotton fields near corcoran california to urge workers to join a major strike of cotton pickers.
though the workers in corcoran won some wage improvements in this 1933 strike the fierce battle between employers and workers in american agriculture was far from over and continues to this day.
library of congress.
southwestern cities.
in california the mexican american movement mam a youth focused organization received assistance from liberal new dealers.
new deal programs did not fundamentally improve the migrant farm labor system under which so many people of mexican descent labored but mexicans joined the new deal coalition in large numbers because of the democrats commitment to ordinary americans.
franklin d roosevelts name was the spark that started thousands of spanish speaking persons to the polls noted one los angeles activist.
men and women of asian descent mostly from china japan and the philippines formed a small minority of the american population but were a significant presence in some western cities.
immigrants from japan and china had long faced discrimination.
a 1913 california law prohibited them from owning land.
japanese farmers who specialized in fruit and vegetable crops circumvented this restriction by putting land titles in the names of their american born children.
as the depression cut farm prices and racial discrimination excluded young japanese americans from nonfarm jobs about 20 percent of the immigrants returned to japan.
chinese americans were less prosperous than their japanese counterparts.
only 3 percent of chinese americans worked in professional and technical positions and discrimination barred them from most industrial jobs.
in san francisco the majority of chinese worked in small businesses restaurants laundries and firms that imported textiles and ceramics.
during the depression they turned for assistance to chinese social organizations such as huiguan district associations and to the city government in 1931 about one sixth of san franciscos chinese population was receiving public aid.
but few chinese benefitted from the new deal.
until the repeal of the exclusion act in 1943 chinese immigrants were classified as aliens ineligible for citizenship and therefore were excluded from most federal programs.
because filipino immigrants came from a u s territory they were not affected by the ban on asian chapter 24 military expenditures by raising taxes and borrowing money.
the revenue act of 1942 expanded the number of people paying income taxes from 3 9 million to 42 6 million.
taxes on personal incomes and business profits paid half the cost of the war.
the government borrowed the rest both from wealthy americans and from ordinary citizens who invested in long term treasury bonds known as war bonds.
financing and coordinating the war effort required far reaching cooperation between government and private business.
the number of civilians employed by the government increased almost fourfold to 3 8 million a far higher rate of growth than that during the new deal.
the powerful war production board wpb awarded defense contracts allocated scarce resources such as rubber copper and oil for military uses and persuaded businesses to convert to military production.
for example it encouraged ford and general motors to build tanks rather than cars by granting generous tax advantages for re equipping existing factories and building new ones.
in other instances the board approved cost plus contracts which guaranteed corporations a profit and allowed them to keep new steel mills factories and shipyards after the war.
such government subsidies of defense shipyards in wartime the shipyard workers shown here are laying the keel of the joseph n teal a 10 500 ton liberty freighter bound for the war in the pacific in 1942 amidst scaffolding tools and wires these workers at henry j kaisers shipyard in portland oregon constructed the entire ship in just ten days after the keel was laid to shatter all previous shipbuilding records.
kaiser was the king of shipbuilding on the west coast with massive yards in portland and the san francisco bay area.
in all kaisers workers built nearly 1 500 ships in three years one quarter of the total constructed during the war.
bettmann corbis.
the world at war 1937 1945 industries would intensify during the cold war and continue to this day.
to secure maximum production the wpb preferred to deal with major enterprises rather than with small businesses.
the nations fifty six largest corporations received three fourths of the war contracts the top ten received one third.
the best known contractor was henry j kaiser.
already highly successful from building roads in california and the hoover and grand coulee dams kaiser went from government construction work to trace change navy shipbuilding.
at his ship over time yard in richmond california he how did the war affect the revolutionized ship construction relationship between priby applying henry fords tech vate corporations and the niques of mass production.
to federal government.
meet wartime production schedules kaiser broke the work process down into small specialized tasks that newly trained workers could do easily.
soon each of his work crews was building a liberty ship a large vessel to carry cargo and troops to the war zone every two weeks.
the press dubbed him the miracle man.
central to kaisers success were his close ties to federal agencies.
the government financed the great part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 dams that he built during the depression and the reconstruction finance corporation lent him 300 million to build shipyards and manufacturing plants during the war.
working together in this way american business and government turned out a prodigious supply of military hardware 86 000 tanks 296 000 airplanes 15 million rifles and machine guns 64 000 landing craft and 6 500 cargo ships and naval vessels.
the american way of war wrote the scottish historian d w brogan in 1944 was mechanized like the american farm and kitchen americas productive industrial economy as much as or more than its troops proved the decisive factor in winning world war ii.
the system of allotting contracts along with the suspension of antitrust prosecutions during the war created giant corporate enterprises.
by 1945 the largest one hundred american companies produced 70 percent of the nations industrial output.
these corporations would form the core of what became known as the nations military industrial complex during the cold war chapter 25.
mobilizing the american fighting force the expanding federal bureaucracy also had a human face.
to fight the war the government mobilized tens of millions of soldiers civilians and workers coordinated on a scale unprecedented in u s history.
during world war ii the armed forces of the united states enlisted more than fifteen million men and women.
in no other military conflict have so many american citizens served in the armed services.
they came from every region and economic station black sharecroppers from alabama white farmers from the midwest the sons and daughters of european mexican and caribbean immigrants native men from navajo and choctaw reservations and other tribal communities women from every state in the nation even hollywood celebrities.
from urban rural and suburban areas from working class and middle class backgrounds they all served in the military.
in contrast to its otherwise democratic character the american army segregated the nearly one million african americans in uniform.
the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp and other civil rights groups reprimanded the government saying a jim crow army cannot fight for a free world but the military continued to separate african americans and assign them menial duties.
the poet langston hughes observed the irony we are elevator boys janitors red caps maids a race in uniform the military uniform hughes implied was not assigned to african americans so readily.
native americans and mexican americans on the other hand were never officially segregated they rubbed elbows with the sons of european immigrants and native born soldiers from all regions of the country.
among the most instrumental soldiers were the native american code talkers in the pacific theater native navajo speakers communicated orders to fleet commanders.
japanese intelligence could not decipher the code because it was based on the navajo language which fewer than fifty non navajos in the world understood.
at the battle of iwo jima for instance one of the wars fiercest navajo code talkers working around the clock sent and received more than eight hundred messages without error.
in the european theater army commanders used comanche choctaw and cherokee speakers to thwart the nazis and exchange crucial military commands on the battlefield.
no axis nation ever broke these native american codes.
approximately 350 000 american women enlisted in the military.
about 140 000 served in the womens army corps wac and 100 000 served in the navys women accepted for volunteer emergency service waves.
one third of the nations registered nurses almost 75 000 overall volunteered for military duty.
in addition about 1 000 womens airforce service pilots wasps ferried planes and supplies in noncombat areas.
the armed forces limited the duties assigned to women however.
female officers could not command men and wacs and waves were barred from combat duty although nurses of both sexes served close to the front lines risking capture or death.
most of the jobs that women did in the military clerical work communications and health care resembled womens jobs in civilian life.
historians still debate how to characterize the world war ii american military.
as an army of citizen soldiers it represented a wide stratum of society.
military service gave a generation of men a noble purpose following a decade of economic depression.
and its ethic of patriotism further advanced the children of immigrants into mainstream american life.
yet the military embodied the tensions and contradictions of american society as well.
the draft revealed appalling levels of health fitness and education among millions of americans spurring reformers to call for improved literacy and nutrition.
womens integration into the military was marked by deep anxieties about their potentially negative effects on male soldiers as well as the threat to womanhood posed by service.
the american army was like the nation itself.
chapter 24 timeline chapter 22.
loyalty security program to insulate his administration against charges of communist infiltration truman issued executive order 9835 on march 21 1947 which created the loyalty security program.
the order permitted officials to investigate any employee of the federal government some 2 5 million people for subversive activities.
representing a profound centralization of power the order sent shock waves through every federal agency.
truman intended the order to apply principally to actions designed to harm the united states sabotage treason etc.
but it was broad enough to allow anyone to be accused of subversion for the slightest reason for marching in a communistled demonstration in the 1930s for instance or signing a petition calling for public housing.
along with suspected political subversives more than a thousand gay men and lesbians were dismissed from federal employment in the 1950s victims of an obsessive search for anyone deemed unfit for government work.
following trumans lead many state and local governments universities political organizations churches and businesses undertook their own antisubversion campaigns which often included loyalty oaths.
in the labor movement charges of communist domination led to the expulsion of a number of unions by the congress of industrial organizations cio in 1949 civil rights organizations such as the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp and the national urban league also expelled communists and fellow travelers or communist sympathizers.
thus the red scare spread from the federal government to the farthest reaches of american organizational economic and cultural life.
cold war america 1945 1963 huac the truman administration had legitimized the vague and malleable concept of disloyalty others proved willing to stretch the concept even further beginning with the house un american activities committee huac which congressman martin dies of texas and other conservatives had launched in 1938 after the war huac helped spark the red scare by holding widely publicized hearings in 1947 on alleged communist infiltration in the movie industry.
a group of writers and directors dubbed the hollywood ten went to jail for contempt of congress after they refused to testify about their past associations.
hundreds of other actors directors and writers whose names had been mentioned in the huac investigation were unable to get work victims of an unacknowledged but very real blacklist honored by industry executives.
other huac investigations had greater legitimacy.
one that intensified the anticommunist crusade in 1948 involved alger hiss a former new dealer and state department official who had accompanied franklin roosevelt to yalta.
a former communist whitaker identify causes chambers claimed that hiss was what factors led to the a member of a secret communist postwar red scare and cell operating in the government what were its ramifications and had passed him classified for civil liberties in the documents in the 1930s.
hiss united states.
denied the allegations but california republican congressman richard nixon doggedly pursued the case against him.
in early 1950 hiss was found guilty not of spying but of lying to congress about his communist affiliations and was sentenced to five years in federal prison.
many americans doubted at the time that hiss was a spy.
but the venona transcripts in the 1990s corroborated a great deal of chamberss testimony and though no definitive proof has emerged many historians now recognize the strong circumstantial evidence against hiss.
mccarthyism the meteoric career of senator joseph mccarthy of wisconsin marked first the apex and then the finale of the red scare.
in february 1950 mccarthy delivered a bombshell during a speech in wheeling west virginia i have here in my hand a list of 205.
a list of names that were made known to the secretary of state as being members of the communist party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the state department mccarthy later reduced his numbers gave different figures in different speeches and never released any names or proof.
but he had gained the attention he sought american voices p 822.
american voices hunting communists and liberals the onset of the cold war created an opportunity for some conservatives to use anticommunism as a weapon to attack the truman administration.
in senator joseph mccarthys case the charge was that the u s government was harboring soviet spies.
there was also a broader more amorphous attack on people accused not of spying but of having communist sympathies such fellow travelers were considered security risks and thus unsuitable for government positions.
the basis of suspicion for this targeted group was generally membership in organizations that supported policies that either overlapped with or seemed similar to policies supported by the communist party.
senator joseph mccarthy fulton lewis jr speech delivered in wheeling west virginia february 9 1950 radio address january 13 1949 though senator mccarthy was actually late getting on board the anticommunist rocket ship this was the speech that launched him into orbit.
no one else ever saw the piece of paper he waved about during this speech with the names of 57 spies in the state department.
over time the numbers he cited fluctuated in early versions of this speech he claimed to have a list of 205 names and never materialized into a single indictment for espionage.
still mccarthy had an extraordinary talent for whipping up anticommunist hysteria.
his downfall came in 1954 when the u s senate formally censured him for his conduct three years later he died of alcoholism at the age of forty eight.
today we are engaged in a final all out battle between communistic atheism and christianity.
the modern champions of communism have selected this as the time.
and ladies and gentlemen the chips are down they are truly down.
the reason why we find ourselves in a position of impotency is not because our only powerful potential enemy has sent men to invade our shores but rather because of the traitorous actions of those who have been treated so well by this nation.
it has not been the less fortunate or members of minority groups who have been selling this nation out but rather those who have had all the benefits that the wealthiest nation on earth has had to offer the finest homes the finest college education and the finest jobs in government we can give.
i have in my hand 57 cases of individuals who would appear to be either card carrying members or certainly loyal to the communist party but who nevertheless are still helping to shape our foreign policy.
the groundwork for mccarthys anticommunist crusade was laid by the house un american activities committee huac which had been formed in 1938 by conservative southern democrats seeking to investigate alleged communist influence around the country.
one of its early targets had been dr frank p graham the distinguished president of the university of north carolina.
a committed southern liberal graham was a leading figure in the southern conference on human welfare the most prominent southern organization supporting the new deal free speech organized labor and greater rights for southern blacks causes that some in the south saw as pathways for communist subversion.
after the war huac stepped up its activities and kept a close eye on graham.
among grahams duties was to serve as the head of the oak ridge institute of nuclear studies a consortium of fourteen southern universities designed to undertake joint research with the federal governments atomic energy facility at oak ridge tennessee.
to enable him to carry on his duties the atomic energy commission aec granted graham a security clearance overriding the negative recommendation of the aecs security advisory board.
that was the occasion for the following statement by fulton lewis jr a conservative radio commentator with a nationwide following.
about dr frank p graham president of the university of north carolina and the action of the atomic energy commission giving him complete clearance for all atomic secrets despite the fact that the security officer of the commission flatly rejected him.
president truman was asked to comment on the matter today at his press and radio conference and his reply was that he has complete confidence in dr graham.
the defenders of dr graham today offered the apology that during the time he joined the various subversive and communist front organizations like the southern conference for human welfare organizations so listed by the attorney general of the united states this country was a co belligerent with soviet russia and numerous people joined such groups and causes.
that argument is going to sound very thin to most american citizens because the overwhelming majority of us would have no part of any communist or communist front connections at any time.
frank porter graham telegram to fulton lewis jr january 13 one can imagine grahams shock at hearing himself pilloried on national radio.
he had not even been aware of the aecs investigation of him.
the following is from his response to lewis.
in view of your questions and implications i hope you will use my statement to provide for my answers.
i have always been opposed to communism and all totalitarian dictatorships.
i opposed both nazi and communist aggression against czechoslovakia and the earlier russian aggression against finland and later communist aggression against other countries.
during the period of my active participation the overwhelming number of members of the southern conference were to my knowledge anti communists.
there were several isolationist stands of the conference with which i disagreed.
the stands which i supported as the main business of the conference were such as the following federal aid to the states for schools abolition of freight rate discrimination against southern commerce agriculture and industry anti poll tax bill anti lynching bill equal right of qualified negroes to vote in both primaries and general elections the unhampered lawful right of labor to organize and bargain collectively in our region.
minimum wages and social security in the southern and american tradition.
i have been called a communist by some sincere people.
i have been called a spokesman of american capitalism by communists and repeatedly called a tool of imperialism by the radio from moscow.
i shall simply continue to oppose ku kluxism imperialism fascism and communism whether in america.
or behind the iron curtain house un american activities committee report on frank graham february 4 1949 because of the controversy huac released a report on graham.
a check of the files records and publications of the committee on un american activities has revealed the following information letterheads dated september 22 1939 january 17 1940 and may 26 1940 as well as the daily worker of march 18 1939.
reveal that frank p graham was a member of the american committee for democracy and intellectual freedom.
in report 2277 dated june 25 1942 the special committee on un american activities found that the line of the american committee for democracy and intellectual freedom has fluctuated in complete harmony with the line of the communist party the organization was again cited by the special committee.
as a communist front which defended communist teachers.
a letterhead of february 7 1946 a letterhead of june 4 1947.
and an announcement of the third meeting april 19 21 1942 at nashville tennessee reveal that frank p graham was honorary president of the southern conference for human welfare.
in a report on the southern conference for human welfare dated june 16 1947 the committee on unamerican activities found the most conclusive proof of communist domination of the southern conference for human welfare is to be found in the organizations strict and unvarying conformance to the line of the communist party in the field of foreign policy.
it is also a clear indication of the fact that the real purpose of the organization was not human welfare in the south but rather to serve as a convenient vehicle in support of the current communist party line source 1819 frank porter graham papers.
courtesy of the southern historical collection wilson library the university of north carolina at chapel hill.
questions for analysis 1 on what grounds did fulton lewis jr and huac assert that frank graham was a security risk.
did they charge that he was a communist.
is there any evidence in these documents that graham might have been a security risk.
2 how did graham defend himself.
are you persuaded by his argument.
3 compare mccarthys famous speech at wheeling west virginia and the suspicions voiced against graham by lewis and huac a year earlier.
what similarities do you see.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 for the next four years from his position as chair of the senate permanent subcommittee on investigations mccarthy waged a virulent smear campaign.
critics who disagreed with him exposed themselves to charges of being soft on communism.
truman called mccarthys charges slander lies and character assassination but could do nothing to curb him.
republicans for their part refrained from publicly challenging their most outspoken senator and on the whole were content to reap the political benefits.
mccarthys charges almost always targeted democrats.
despite mccarthys failure to identify a single communist in government several national developments gave his charges credibility with the public.
the dramatic 1951 espionage trial of julius and ethel rosenberg followed around the world fueled mccarthys allegations.
convicted of passing atomic secrets to the soviet union the rosenbergs were executed in 1953 as in the hiss case documents released decades later provided some evidence of julius rosenbergs guilt though not ethels.
their execution nevertheless remains controversial in part because some felt that antisemitism played a role in their sentencing.
also fueling mccarthys charges were a series of trials of american communists between 1949 and 1955 for violation of the 1940 smith act which prohibited americans from advocating the violent overthrow of the government.
though civil libertarians and two supreme court justices vigorously objected dozens of communist party members were convicted.
mccarthy was not involved in either the rosenberg trial or the smith act convictions but these sensational events gave his wild charges some credence.
in early 1954 mccarthy overreached by launching an investigation into subversive activities in the u s army.
when lengthy hearings the first of their kind the army mccarthy hearings these 1954 hearings contributed to the downfall of senator joseph mccarthy by exposing his reckless accusations and bullying tactics to the huge television audience that tuned in each day.
some of the most heated exchanges took place between mccarthy center and joseph welch seated left the lawyer representing the army.
when the gentlemanly welch finally asked have you no sense of decency sir at long last.
have you left no sense of decency he fatally punctured mccarthys armor.
the audience broke into applause because someone had finally had the courage to stand up to the senator from wisconsin.
bettmann corbis.
triumph of the middle class 1945 1963 c h a p t e r postwar prosperity and the affluent society economy from recovery to dominance a nation of consumers youth culture religion and the middle class the american family in the era of containment the baby boom women work and family challenging middle class morality a suburban nation the postwar housing boom rise of the sunbelt two nations urban and suburban a t the height of the cold war in identify the big idea 1959 u s vice president richard why did consumer culture become nixon debated soviet premier such a fixture of american life in nikita khrushchev on the merits of pepsithe postwar decades and how did it cola tv dinners and electric ovens.
faceaffect politics and society.
to face at the opening of an american exhibition in moscow nixon and khrushchev strolled through a model american home assembled to demonstrate the consumer products available to the typical citizen of the united states.
nixon explained to khrushchev that although the soviet union may have had superior rockets the united states was ahead in other areas such as color television.
this was cold war politics by other means a symbolic contest over which countrys standard of living was higher.
what was so striking about the so called kitchen debate was nixons insistence to a disbelieving khrushchev that a modern home filled with shiny new toasters televisions and other consumer products was accessible to the average american worker.
any steelworker could buy this house nixon told the soviet leader.
the kitchen debate settled little in the geopolitical rivalry between the united states and the soviet union.
but it speaks to us across the decades because it reveals how americans had come to see themselves by the late 1950s as home owners and consumers as a people for whom the middle class american dream was a commercial aspiration.
the real story of the postwar period was the growing number of americans who embraced that aspiration.
in the two decades following the end of world war ii a new middle class was born in the united states.
fortune magazine estimated that in the 1950s the middle class which fortune defined as families with more than 5 000 in annual earnings after taxes about 40 000 today was increasing at the rate of 1 1 million people per year.
riding a wave of rising incomes american dominance in the global economy and cold war federal spending the postwar middle class enjoyed the highest standard of living in the world.
however the success of the middle class could not hide deeper troubles.
this was an era of neither universal conformity nor diminishing social strife.
jim crow laws contradictions in womens lives a rebellious youth culture and changing sexual mores were only the most obvious sources of social tension.
suburban growth came at the expense of cities hastening urban decay and exacerbating racial segregation.
nor was prosperity ever as widespread as the moscow exhibit implied.
the suburban lifestyle was beyond the reach of the working poor the elderly immigrants mexican americans and most african americans indeed the majority of the country.
the middle class family ideal a family eats breakfast at a campground in zion national park utah.
americans embraced a middle class nuclear family ideal in the postwar decades.
photo by justin locke national geographic getty images.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 postwar prosperity and the affluent society the united states enjoyed enormous economic advantages at the close of world war ii.
while the europeans and japanese were still clearing the wars rubble america stood poised to enter a postwar boom.
as the only major industrial nation not devastated by war the united states held an unprecedented global position.
the american economy also benefitted from an expanding internal market and heavy investment in research and development.
two additional developments stood out first for the first time in the nations history employers generally accepted collective bargaining which for workers translated into rising wages expanding benefits and an increasing rate of home ownership.
second the federal governments outlays for military and domestic programs gave a huge boost to the economy.
economy from recovery to dominance u s corporations banks and manufacturers so dominated the global economy that the postwar period has been called the pax americana a latin term meaning american peace and harking back to the pax romana of the first and second centuries a d.
life magazine publisher henry luce was so confident in the nations growing power that during world war ii he had predicted the dawning of the american century the preponderance of american economic power in the postwar decades however was not simply an artifact of the world war it was not an inevitable development.
several key elements came together internationally and at home to propel three decades of unprecedented economic growth.
the bretton woods system american global supremacy rested partly on the economic institutions created at an international conference in bretton woods new hampshire in july 1944 the first of those institutions was the world bank created to provide loans for the reconstruction of war torn europe as well as for the development of former colonized nations the so called third world or developing world.
a second institution the international monetary fund imf was set up to stabilize currencies and provide a predictable monetary environment for trade with the u s dollar serving as the benchmark.
the world bank and the imf formed the cornerstones of the bretton woods system which guided the global economy after the war.
the bretton woods system was joined in 1947 by the first general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt which established an international framework for overseeing trade rules and practices.
together the bretton woods system and gatt served americas conception of an open market global economy and complemented the nations ambitious diplomatic aims in the cold war.
the chief idea of the bretton woods system was to make american capital available on cheap terms to nations that adopted free trade capitalist economies.
critics charged rightly that bretton woods and gatt favored the united states at the the kitchen debate at the american national exhibition in moscow in 1959 the united states put on display the technological wonders of american home life.
when vice president richard nixon visited he and soviet premier nikita khrushchev got into a heated debate over the relative merits of their rival systems with the up to date american kitchen as a case in point.
this photograph shows the debate in progress.
khrushchev is the bald man pointing his finger at nixon.
to nixons left stands leonid brezhnev who would be khrushchevs successor.
getty images.
chapters 18 19 22 24.
how had the american family changed by the 1950s.
what aspects of family life remained similar across many decades.
for example how did the working class immigrant family of the 1890s differ from the middle class family of the 1950s.
more to explore thematic understanding review the visual evidence examine the motorola tv advertisement featured on page 847 what different types of appeals does this advertisement make and what do they suggest about family and gender roles in this period.
how many distinct themes from the chapter 27 walking into freedom land the civil rights movement 1941 1973 bracero worker card in the southwest mexican immigrants and many mexican americans encountered a caste system not unlike jim crow segregation.
most of the hardest lowest paying work in states such as texas arizona and california was performed by people of mexican descent.
under a government program braceros or migrant mexican workers were allowed into the united states for a limited time to harvest a variety of fruit and vegetable crops.
a worker card issued to one such bracero is pictured here.
national museum of american history smithsonian institution behring center.
more than 400 000 mexican americans also served in world war ii.
having fought for their country many returned to the united states determined to challenge their second class citizenship.
additionally a new mexican american middle class began to take shape in major cities such as los angeles san antonio el paso and chicago which like the african american middle class gave leaders and resources to the cause.
in texas and california mexican americans created new civil rights organizations in the postwar years.
in corpus christi texas world war ii veterans founded the american gi forum in 1948 to protest the poor treatment of mexican american soldiers and veterans.
activists in los angeles created the community service organization cso the same year.
both groups arose to address compare and specific local injustices such as contrast the segregation of military ceme how were the circumteries but they quickly broad stances facing mexican ened their scope to encompass and japanese americans political and economic justice for similar to those facing the larger community.
among the african americans.
how first young activists to work for were they different.
the cso were cesar chavez and dolores huerta who would later found the united farm workers ufw and inspire the chicano movement of the 1960s.
activists also pushed for legal change.
in 1947 five mexican american fathers in california sued a local school district for placing their children in separate mexican schools.
the case mendez v westminster school district never made it to the u s supreme court.
but the ninth circuit court ruled such segregation unconstitutional laying the legal groundwork for broader challenges to racial inequality.
among those filing briefs in the case was the naacps thurgood marshall who was then developing the legal strategy to strike at racial segregation in the south.
in another significant legal victory the supreme court ruled in 1954 just two weeks before the landmark brown v board of education decision that mexican americans constituted a distinct class that could claim protection from discrimination.
also on the west coast japanese americans accelerated their legal challenge to discrimination.
undeterred by rulings in the hirabayashi 1943 and korematsu 1944 cases upholding wartime imprisonment chapter 27 walking into freedom land the civil rights movement 1941 1973 on interstate bus lines throughout the south.
the aim was to call attention to blatant violations of recent supreme court rulings against segregation in interstate commerce.
the activists who signed on mostly young both black and white knew that they were taking their lives in their hands.
they found courage in song as civil rights activists had begun to do across the country with lyrics such as im taking a ride on the greyhound bus line.
hallelujah im traveling down freedoms main line courage they needed.
club wielding klansmen attacked the buses when they stopped in small towns.
outside anniston alabama one bus was firebombed the freedom riders escaped only moments before it exploded.
some riders were then brutally beaten.
freedom riders and news reporters were also viciously attacked by klansmen in birmingham and montgomery.
despite the violence state authorities refused to intervene.
i cannot guarantee protection for this bunch of rabble rousers declared governor john patterson of alabama.
once again local officials refusal to enforce the law left the fate of the freedom riders in washingtons hands.
the new president john f kennedy was cautious about civil rights.
despite a campaign commitment he failed to deliver on a civil rights bill.
elected by a thin margin kennedy believed that he could ill afford to lose the support of powerful southern senators.
but civil rights was unlike other domestic issues.
its fate was going to be decided not in the halls of congress but on the streets of southern cities.
although president kennedy discouraged the freedom rides beatings shown on the nightly news forced attorney general robert kennedy to dispatch federal marshals.
civil rights activists thus learned the value of nonviolent protest that provoked violent white resistance.
the victories so far had been limited but the groundwork had been laid for a civil rights offensive that would transform the nation.
the naacps legal strategy had been followed closely by the emergence of a major protest movement.
and now civil rights leaders focused their attention on congress.
legislating civil rights 1963 1965 the first civil rights law in the nations history came in 1866 just after the civil war.
its provisions were long ignored chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter analyze the documents above to construct an essay in which you explore the vietnam wars causes and effects both domestic and international.
choose at least one domestic and one international theme and use the documents to providence evidence for your conclusions.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 to diminish order and liberty the yaf the largest student political organization in the country defended free enterprise and supported the war in vietnam.
its founding principles were outlined in the sharon statement drafted in sharon connecticut two years before the port huron statement and inspired young conservatives many of whom would play important roles in the reagan administration in the 1980s.
the counterculture while the new left organized against the political and economic system and the yaf defended it many other young americans embarked on a general revolt against authority and middle class respectability.
the hippie identified by ragged blue jeans or army fatigues tie dyed t shirts beads and long unkempt hair symbolized the new counterculture.
with roots in the 1950s beat culture of new yorks greenwich village and san franciscos north beach the 1960s counterculture initially turned to folk music for its inspiration.
pete seeger set the tone for the eras idealism with songs such as the 1961 antiwar ballad where have all the flowers gone in 1963 the year of the civil rights demonstrations in birmingham and president kennedys assassination bob dylans blowin in the wind reflected the impatience of people whose faith in america was wearing thin.
joan baez emerged alongside dylan and pioneered a folk sound that inspired a generation of female musicians.
by the mid 1960s other winds of change in popular music came from the beatles four working class brits whose awe inspiring music by turns lyrical and driving spawned a commercial and cultural phenomenon known as beatlemania.
american youths embrace of the beatles as well as even more rebellious bands such as the rolling stones the who and the doors deepened the generational divide between young people and their elders.
so did the recreational the counterculture the three day outdoor woodstock concert in august 1969 was a defining moment in the rise of the counterculture.
the event attracted 400 000 young people like those pictured here to bethel new york for a weekend of music drugs and sex.
the counterculture was distinct from the new left and was less a political movement than a shifting set of cultural styles attitudes and practices.
it rejected conformity of all kinds and placed rebellion and contrariness among its highest values.
another concept held dear by the counterculture was simply love in an era of military violence abroad and police violence at home many in the counterculture hoped that peace and love would prevail instead.
bill eppridge time life pictures getty images.
chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place in what ways was the great society an extension of the new deal.
in what ways was it different.
what factors made the period between 1932 and 1972 a liberal era in american politics.
what events and developments would you use to explain your answer.
more to explore 4 in what ways was the vietnam war part of the cold compare the photographs of the prowar rally p 928 and the counterculture p 918.
why did clothing and appearance become so important to many social movements in the 1960s the womens movement the black power movement the antiwar movement and others.
how are these visual images historical evidence.
visual evidence start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter 29 midnight cowboy in the mid 1970s the movie industry embraced the sexual revolution and pushed the boundaries of middle class taste.
movies such as midnight cowboy 1975 starring dustin hoffman and jon voight were part of a larger shift in american culture in which frank sexual discussions and the portrayal of sexual situations in various media grew more acceptable.
john springer collection corbis.
advertising revenue moderated the portrayal of sex in the early 1970s.
however in the second half of the decade networks both exploited and criticized the new sexual ethic.
in frivolous lighthearted shows such as the popular charlies angels threes company and the love boat heterosexual couples explored the often confusing and usually comical landscape of sexual morality.
at the same time between 1974 and 1981 the major networks produced more than a dozen madefor tv movies about children in sexual danger a sensationalized warning to parents of the potential threats to children posed by a less strict sexual morality.
middle class marriage many americans worried that the sexual revolution threatened marriage itself.
the notion of marriage as romantic companionship had defined middle class norms since the late nineteenth century.
it was also quite common throughout most of the twentieth century for americans to see sexual satisfaction as a healthy part of the marriage bond.
the search for order in an era of limits 1973 1980 but what defined a healthy marriage in an age of rising divorce rates changing sexual values and feminist critiques of the nuclear family.
only a small minority of americans rejected marriage outright most continued to create monogamous relationships codified in marriage.
but many came to believe that they needed help as marriage came under a variety of economic and psychological stresses.
a therapeutic industry arose in response.
churches and secular groups alike established marriage seminars and counseling services to assist couples in sustaining a healthy marriage.
a popular form of 1960s psychotherapy the encounter group was adapted to marriage counseling couples met in large groups to explore new methods of communicating.
one of the most successful of these organizations marriage encounter was founded by the catholic church.
it expanded into protestant and jewish communities in the 1970s and became one of the nations largest counseling organizations.
such groups embodied another long term shift in how middle class americans understood marriage.
spurred by both feminism and psychotherapeutic models that stressed self improvement americans increasingly defined marriage not simply by companionship and sexual fidelity but also by the deeply felt emotional connection between two people.
religion in the 1970s the fourth great awakening for three centuries american society has been punctuated by intense periods of religious revival what historians have called great awakenings chapter 29 he continued to travel relentlessly conducting oldfashioned revival meetings he called crusades.
a massive sixteen week 1957 crusade held in new york citys madison square garden made graham along with the conservative catholic priest fulton sheen one of the nations most visible religious leaders.
graham and other evangelicals in the 1950s and 1960s laid the groundwork for the fourth great awakening.
but it was a startling combination of events in the late 1960s and early 1970s that sparked the evangelical revival.
first rising divorce rates social unrest and challenges to prevailing values led people to seek the stability of faith.
second many americans regarded feminism the counterculture sexual freedom homosexuality pornography and legalized abortion not as distinct issues but as a collective sign of moral decay in society.
to seek answers and find order more and more people turned to evangelical ministries especially southern baptist pentecostal and assemblies of god churches.
numbers tell part of the story.
as mainline churches lost about 15 percent of their membership between 1970 and 1985 evangelical church membership soared.
the southern baptist convention the largest protestant denomination grew by 23 percent while the assemblies of god grew by an astounding 300 percent.
newsweek magazine declared 1976 the year of the evangelical and that november the nation made jimmy carter the nations first evangelical president.
in a national gallup poll 34 percent of americans answered yes when asked would you describe yourself as a born again or evangelical christian much of this astonishing growth came from the creative use of television.
graham had pounded the pavement and worn out shoe leather to reach his converts.
but a new generation of preachers brought religious conversion directly into americans living rooms through television.
these so called televangelists built huge media empires through small donations from millions of avid viewers not to mention advertising.
jerry falwells old time gospel hour pat robertsons 700 club and jim and tammy bakkers ptl praise the lord club were the leading pioneers in this televised race for american souls but another half dozen including oral roberts and jimmy swaggart followed them onto the airwaves.
together they made the 1970s and 1980s the era of christian broadcasting.
religion and the family of primary concern to evangelical christians was the family.
drawing on selected bible passages evangelicals believed that the the search for order in an era of limits 1973 1980 nuclear family and not the individual represented the fundamental unit of society.
the family itself was organized along paternalist lines father was breadwinner and disciplinarian mother was nurturer and supporter.
motherhood is the highest form of femininity the evangelical author beverly lahaye wrote in an influential book on christian women.
another popular christian author declared a church a family a nation is only as strong as its men evangelicals spread their message about the christian family through more than the pulpit and television.
they founded publishing houses wrote books established foundations and offered seminars.
helen b andelin for instance a california housewife produced a homemade book called fascinating womanhood that eventually sold more than 2 million copies.
she used the book as the basis for her classes which by the early 1970s had been attended by 400 000 women and boasted 11 000 trained teachers.
fascinating womanhood led evangelical women in the opposite direction of feminism.
whereas the latter encouraged women to be independent and to seek equality with men andelin taught that submissiveness will bring a strange but righteous power over your man andelin was but one of dozens of evangelical authors and educators who encouraged women to defer to men.
evangelical christians held that strict gender roles in the family would ward off the influences of an immoral society.
christian activists were especially concerned with sex education in public schools the proliferation of pornography legalized abortion and the rising divorce rate.
for them the answer was to strengthen what they called traditional family structures.
by the early 1980s christians could choose from among hundreds of evangelical books take classes on how to save a marriage or how to be a christian parent attend evangelical churches and bible study courses watch evangelical ministers on television and donate to foundations that promoted christian values in state legislatures and the u s congress.
wherever one looked in the 1970s and early 1980s american families were under strain.
nearly everyone agreed that the waves of social liberalism and economic transformation that swept over the nation in the 1960s and 1970s had destabilized society and especially family relationships.
but americans did not agree about how to restabilize families.
indeed different approaches to the family would further divide the country in the 1980s and 1990s as the new right would increasingly make family values a political issue.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 family values during the 1980 presidential campaign the reverend jerry falwell pictured here with phyllis schlafly supported ronald reagan and the republican party with i love america rallies around the country.
falwell head of the moral majority helped to bring a new focus on family values to american politics in the late 1970s.
this was a conservative version of the emphasis on male breadwinner nuclear families that had long been characteristic of american values.
ap wide world photos.
summary for much of the 1970s americans struggled with economic problems including inflation energy shortages income stagnation and deindustrialization.
these challenges highlighted the limits of postwar prosperity and forced americans to consider lowering their economic expectations.
a movement for environmental protection widely supported led to new laws and an awareness of natures limits and the energy crisis highlighted the nations dependence on resources from abroad especially oil.
in the midst of this gloomy economic climate americans also sought political and cultural resolutions to the upheavals of the 1960s.
in politics the watergate scandal led to a brief period of political reform.
meanwhile the battle for civil rights entered a second stage expanding to encompass womens rights gay rights and the rights of alleged criminals and prisoners and in the realm of racial justice focusing on the problem of producing concrete results rather than legislation.
many liberals cheered these developments but another effect was to strengthen a new more conservative social mood that began to challenge liberal values in politics and society more generally.
finally we considered the multiple challenges faced by the american family in the 1970s and how a perception that the family was in trouble helped to spur an evangelical religious revival that would shape american society for decades to come.
chapter review r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events organization of petroleum exporting countries opec p 938 energy crisis p 939 environmentalism p 939 silent spring p 939 earth day p 939 environmental protection agency epa p 939 three mile island p 942 stagflation p 942 deindustrialization p 944 rust belt p 944 tax revolt p 946 proposition 13 p 947 key people watergate p 947 war powers act p 948 freedom of information act p 948 ethics in government act p 948 deregulation p 950 affirmative action p 950 bakke v university of california p 951 equal rights amendment era p 952 stop era p 953 roe v wade p 956 evangelicalism p 962 rachel carson p 939 gerald ford p 947 howard jarvis p 947 jimmy carter p 949 phyllis schlafly p 953 harvey milk p 956 billy graham p 962 review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter 29 timeline chapter 30 conservative america in the ascent 1980 1991 c h a p t e r 31 confronting global and national dilemmas 1989 to the present global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present for historians the recent past can be a challenge to evaluate and assess.
insufficient time has passed for scholars to weigh the significance of events and to determine which developments will have a lasting effect and which are more fleeting.
nevertheless the period between the early 1980s and our own day has begun to emerge in the minds of historians with some clarity.
scholars generally agree on the eras three most significant developments the resurgence of political conservatism the end of the cold war and the globalization of communications and the economy.
what time magazine publisher henry luce had named the american century in his call for the united states to assume global leadership in the decades after world war ii came decisively to an end in the last quarter of the twentieth century and the first decade of the twenty first.
the united states lost its role as the worlds dominant economy faced rising competition from a united europe and a surging china and experienced a wide ranging and divisive internal debate over its own values and priorities.
part 9 remains necessarily a work in progress as events continue to unfold however through equal parts conflict struggle and ingenuity americans collectively created a new era in national history after the 1980s which we consider in terms of the aforementioned three developments conservative ascendancy end of the cold war and rising conflict in the middle east the 1980s constituted a crucial period in which the forthright conservatism of ronald reagan and the new right was consolidated in the republican party and challenged the aggressive liberalism of lyndon johnsons great society.
under reagan the conservative agenda reduced the regulatory power of the federal government shrank the welfare state created by liberal democrats during the new deal and the great society and expanded the military.
evangelical christians and conservative lawmakers challenged abortion rights feminism and gay rights setting off a culture war that sharply divided americans.
even as the reagan coalition brought an end to decades of liberal government activism much of the legacy of the new deal was preserved and in some instances expanded.
medicare medicaid and social security survived and grew as a proportion of the federal budget.
conservatives put a stamp on u s foreign policy however dramatically increasing the defense budget and under george w bush asserting a new doctrine of preemptive war that led to a decades long war in iraq.
by the presidential election of 2012 national politics seemed as divided as ever.
americans reelected barack obama but returned a conservative majority to the house of representatives.
polls showed that americans embraced a moderate liberalism on such issues as gay rights and taxes but the national political system remained mired in stalemate.
under ronald reagan between 1981 and 1989 the united states increased government military spending and returned to the sharp cold war rhetoric of earlier decades.
yet during the second half of the 1980s as internal reforms swept through the soviet union reagan softened his stance measuredly and engaged in productive dialogue with the soviet leader mikhail gorbachev.
then between 1989 and 1991 the four decade cold war came to a stunning halt.
the soviet union and its satellite communist regimes in eastern europe collapsed.
the result was in the words of president george h w bush a new world order without a credible rival the united states emerged in the 1990s as the lone military superpower in the world.
in the absence of a clear cold war enemy it intervened in civil wars worked to disrupt terrorist activities and provided humanitarian aid but on a case by case basis guided more by pragmatism than by principle.
the foremost region that occupied u s attention was the middle east where strategic interest in oil supplies remained paramount.
between 1991 and 2011 u s armed forces fought three wars in the region two in iraq and one in afghanistan and became even more deeply embedded in its politics.
the end of the cold war thus brought a dramatic expansion of the u s role in the middle east and renewed debates at home about the proper american role in the world.
part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present globalization and increasing social inequality thematic understanding the post world war ii expansion of the american economy had ended by the early 1970s.
wages stagnated.
inflation skyrocketed.
in the 1980s and 1990s however productivity increased military spending boosted production and new industries such as computer technology emerged.
these developments led to renewed economic growth.
more and more though the economy produced services rather than goods which americans increasingly bought from overseas.
the fall of communism and the end of the cold war had made possible this global expansion of capitalism as multinational corporations moved production to low wage countries and international trade increased.
governments across the world facilitated this process by deregulating financial markets and by creating new trading zones such as the european union eu and the north american free trade agreement nafta.
conservative tax policies deindustrialization the decline of unions and globalization all contributed to a widening inequality between the wealthiest americans and the middle class and poor.
between 2007 and 2010 the negative side of global market deregulation became apparent as europe and much of north america suffered the worst economic downturn since the great depression.
globalization thus brought new economic opportunities and interconnections as well as the potential for renewed economic insecurity.
this timeline arranges some of the important events of this period into themes.
consider the entries under ideas beliefs and culture and peopling what were the major events of the culture wars and how did american attitudes and public policy change over the decades between the 1980s and the 2010s.
america in the world ronald reagan begins arms buildup united states arms contras in nicaragua berlin wall comes down 1989 new right helps elect ronald reagan president hiv aids crisis prompts national conversation about homosexuality iran contra scandal 1985 1987 renewed emphasis on material success and the rich and famous george h w bush elected president 1988 peopling rise in latino and asian immigration californians vote to establish english as official language 1986 webster v reproductive health services 1989 work exchange and technology recession 1981 1982 followed by strong growth 1982 1987 reagan tax cut 1981 apple personal computer introduced 1983 national debt triples 1981 1989 bill clinton elected president 1992 pat buchanan declares culture war 1992 backlash against multiculturalism internet gains in popularity ussr breaks apart end of cold war republican resurgence 1994 welfare reform 1996 california bans bilingual education in public schools 1998 recession 1990 1991 al qaeda bombs world trade center 1993 proposition 209 ends affirmative action in california universities clinton impeached and acquitted 1998 1999 george w bush wins presidency in contested election 2000 united states and allies invade afghanistan 2002 usa patriot act 2002 barack obama elected first african american president 2008 arab spring 2010 2012 health care reform 2010 osama bin laden killed 2011 tea party helps republicans regain control of house of representatives last combat troops withdrawn from iraq 2011 nafta ratified 1993 debt reduction under bill clinton defense of marriage act 1998 wto protests in seattle 1999 al qaeda attacks world trade center and pentagon 2001 united states invades iraq 2004 ideas beliefs and culture persian gulf war 1990 1991 un peacekeeping forces in bosnia 1992 1995 politics and power lawrence v texas 2003 new scrutiny of airport passengers after 9 11 crisis in newspaper industry massachusetts becomes first state to legalize same sex marriage 2004 nine states follow by 2012 california texas hawaii and new mexico become majority minority states where the majority of the population is composed of minorities great recession 2007 2010 obamas 2012 electoral coalition heavily african american hispanic asian american female and young financial industry accounts for largest share of gdp among all industry sectors war on terror becomes fixture in american discourse congress and president obama end dont ask dont tell policy in u s military 2011 president bush asks for and receives bank bailout from congress 2008 unemployment hits 10 percent barack obama reelected president 2012 part 1 part 9 thematic timeline 1980 to the present transformations of north america 1450 1700 conservative america in the ascent 1980 1991 c h a p t e r the rise of the new right barry goldwater and ronald reagan champions of the right free market economics and religious conservatism the carter presidency the dawning of the conservative age the reagan coalition conservatives in power morning in america the end of the cold war u s soviet relations in a new era a new political order at home and abroad t he decade of the 1970s saw identify the big idea americans divided by the vietnam what factors made the rise of the war wearied by social unrest and new right possible and what ideas unmoored by economic drift.
as a result about freedom and citizenship did many ordinary citizens developed a deep conservatives articulate in the 1980s.
distrust of the muscular great society liberalism of the 1960s.
seizing political advantage amid the trauma and divisions a revived republican party led by the new right offered the nation a fresh way forward economic deregulation low taxes christian morality and a reenergized cold war foreign policy.
the election of president ronald reagan in 1980 symbolized the ascendance of this new political formula and the president himself helped shape the era.
the new right revived confidence in free markets and called for a smaller government role in economic regulation and social welfare.
reagan famously said government is not the solution to our problem government is the problem like the new right generally reagan was profoundly skeptical of the liberal ideology that had informed american public policy since franklin d roosevelts new deal.
his presidency combined an economically conservative domestic agenda with aggressive anticommunism abroad.
reagans foreign policy brought an end to dtente a lessening of tensions with the soviet union which had begun with richard nixon and then unexpectedly a sudden thawing of u s soviet relations laying the groundwork for the end of the cold war.
reagan defined the conservative ascendancy of the 1980s but he did not create the new right groundswell that brought him into office.
grassroots conservative activists in the 1960s and 1970s built a formidable right wing movement that awaited an opportune political moment to challenge for national power.
that moment came in 1980 when democratic president jimmy carters popularity plummeted as a result of his mismanagement of two national crises.
raging inflation and the iranian seizure of u s hostages in tehran undid carter and provided an opening for the new right which would shape the nations politics for the remainder of the twentieth century and the first decade of the twenty first.
1984 republican national convention ronald reagan delivers his acceptance speech in this photo from the 1984 republican national convention.
reagans political rise captured the spirit of conservative politics in the late 1970s and 1980s.
ronald reagan presidential library.
part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present the rise of the new right the great depression and world war ii discredited the traditional conservative program of limited government at home and diplomatic isolationism abroad.
nevertheless a right wing faction survived within the republican party.
its adherents continued to oppose the new deal but reversed their earlier isolationism.
in the postwar decades conservatives pushed for military interventions against communism in europe asia and the developing world while calling for the broadest possible investigation of subversives at home chapter 25.
however conservatives failed to devise policies that could win the allegiance of american voters in the two decades after world war ii.
republicans by and large continued to favor party moderates such as dwight eisenhower thomas dewey and nelson rockefeller.
these were politicians often called liberal republicans who supported much of the new deal endorsed the containment policy overseas and steered a middle course through the volatile social and political changes of the postwar era.
the conservative faction held out hope however that it might one day win the loyalty of a majority of republicans and remake the party in its image.
in the 1960s and 1970s these conservatives invested their hopes for national resurgence in two dynamic figures barry goldwater and ronald reagan.
together the two carried the conservative banner until the national mood grew more receptive to right wing appeals.
barry goldwater and ronald reagan champions of the right the personal odyssey of ronald reagan embodies the story of new right republican conservatism.
before world war ii reagan was a well known movie actor as well as a new deal democrat and admirer of roosevelt.
however he turned away from liberalism partly from self interest he disliked paying high taxes and partly on principle.
as head of the screen actors guild from 1947 to 1952 reagan had to deal with its communist members who formed the understand extreme left wing of the american points of view labor movement.
dismayed by why was the new right their hard line tactics and goals disappointed with the he became a militant anticommrepublican party in the unist.
after nearly a decade as a decades after world spokesperson for the general elecwar ii.
tric corporation reagan joined barry goldwater barry goldwater was a three term senator from arizona before he ran for the presidency in 1964 this photo was taken during the campaign.
goldwaters conservative influence on the republican party was considerable and laid the political groundwork for the rise of ronald reagan a decade and a half later.
everett collection inc alamy.
the republican party in the early 1960s and began speaking for conservative causes and candidates.
one of those candidates was archconservative barry goldwater a republican senator from arizona.
confident in their power centrist republicans did not anticipate that grassroots conservatives could challenge the partys old guard and nominate one of their own for president goldwater himself.
understanding how they did so in 1964 brings us closer to comprehending the forces that propelled reagan to the presidency a decade and a half later.
indeed reagan the politician came to national attention in 1964 with a televised speech at the republican convention supporting goldwater for the presidency.
in a dramatic speech titled a time for choosing reagan warned that if we trade our freedom for the soup kitchen of the welfare state the nation would take the first step into a thousand years of darkness the conscience of a conservative like reagan goldwater came from the sunbelt where citizens chapter 25.
it was he complained a policy of timidly refusing to draw our own lines against aggression.
unmarked by pride or the prospect of victory here was a politician saying exactly what conservatives wanted to hear.
grassroots conservatives because moderates dominated the republican party leadership winning the 1964 nomination for goldwater required conservative activists to build their campaign from the bottom up.
they found thousands upon thousands of americans willing to wear down shoe leather for their political hero.
organizations such as the john birch society young americans for freedom and the liberty lobby supplied an army of eager volunteers.
they came from such conservative strongholds as orange county california and the fast growing suburbs of phoenix dallas houston atlanta and other sunbelt metropolises.
a critical boost came in the early spring of 1964 when conservatives outmaneuvered moderates at the state convention of the california republican party which then enthusiastically endorsed goldwater.
the fight had been bruising and one moderate republican warned that sinister forces are at work to take over the whole republican apparatus in california another spur to goldwater backers was the appearance of a book by phyllis schlafly who was then a relatively unknown conservative activist from the midwest.
like goldwaters own book schlaflys a choice not an echo accused moderate republicans of being conservative america in the ascent 1980 1991 democrats in disguise that is an echo of democrats.
schlafly who reappeared in the national spotlight in the early 1970s to help halt the ratification of the equal rights amendment denounced the rockefeller republicans of the northeast and encouraged the party to embrace a defiant conservatism.
contrasting goldwaters grassroots republicans with rockefellers kingmakers schlafly hoped to forestall another defeat like 1940 1944 1948 and 1960 democratic victories all.
the conservative groundswell won the republican nomination for goldwater.
however his strident tone and militarist foreign policy were too much for a nation mourning the death of john f kennedy and still committed to liberalism.
democrat lyndon b johnson defeated goldwater in a historic landslide chapter 28.
many believed that goldwater conservatism would wither and die but instead the nearly four million volunteers who had campaigned for the arizona senator swung their support to ronald reagan and built toward the future.
skilled conservative political operatives such as richard viguerie a louisiana born catholic and antiabortion activist applied new computer technology to political campaigning.
viguerie took a list of 12 000 goldwater contributors and used computerized mailing lists to solicit campaign funds rally support for conservative causes and get out the vote on election day.
conservatism was down but not out.
backed financially by wealthy southern californians and supported by goldwaterites reagan won californias governorship in 1966 and again in 1970 his impassioned rhetoric supporting limited government and law and order he vowed to clean up the mess in berkeley referring to campus radicals won broad support among citizens of the nations most populous state.
more significantly it made him a force in national politics.
his supporters believed that he was in line to succeed nixon as the next republican president.
the watergate scandal intervened however discrediting nixon and making gerald ford the incumbent.
after narrowly losing a campaign against ford for the republican presidential nomination in 1976 reagan was forced to bide his time.
when ford lost to carter in that years election as the partys brightest star reagan was a near lock to be the nominee in 1980 free market economics and religious conservatism the last phase of reagans rise was the product of several additional developments within the new right.
the burgeoning conservative movement increasingly part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present resembled a three legged stool.
each leg represented an ideological position and a popular conwhat was the threestituency anticommunism freelegged stool of the new market economics and religious right and how did each traditionalism.
uniting all three leg develop within the in a political coalition was no context of the cold war.
religious traditionalists demanded strong government action to implement their faith based agenda while economic conservatives favored limited government and free markets.
both groups however were ardent anticommunists free marketeers loathed the state directed soviet economy and religious conservatives despised the godless secularism of the soviet state.
in the end the success of the new right would come to depend on balancing the interests of economic and moral conservatives.
since the 1950s william f buckley the founder and editor of the conservative magazine national review and milton friedman the nobel prize winning economist at the university of chicago had been the most prominent conservative intellectuals.
convinced that the growth of government must be fought relentlessly buckley used the national review to criticize liberal policy.
for his part friedman became a national conservative icon with the publication of capitalism and freedom 1962 in which he argued that economic freedom is.
an indispensable means toward the achievement of political freedom friedmans free market ideology along with that of friedrich von hayek another university of chicago economist was taken up by wealthy conservatives who funded think tanks during the 1980s to disseminate market based public policy ideas.
the heritage foundation the american enterprise institute and the cato institute issued policy proposals and attacked liberal legislation and the stranglehold of economic regulation they believed it exerted.
followers of buckley and friedman envisioned themselves as crusaders working against what one conservative called the despotic aspects of egalitarianism the most striking addition to the conservative coalition was the religious right.
until the 1970s politics was an earthly concern of secondary interest to most fundamentalist and evangelical protestants.
but the perception that american society had become immoral combined with the influence of a new generation of popular ministers made politics relevant.
conservative protestants and catholics joined together in a tentative alliance as the religious right condemned divorce abortion premarital sex and feminism.
the route to a moral life and to peace pardon place events in context purpose and power as one evangelical activist said was to plug yourself into the one the only one god charismatic televangelists such as pat robertson and jerry falwell emerged as the champions of a morality based political agenda during the late 1970s.
falwell founder of liberty university and host of the old time gospel hour television program established the moral majority in 1979 with 400 000 members and 1 5 million in contributions in its first year it would be the organizational vehicle for transforming the fourth great awakening into a religious political movement.
falwell made no secret of his views if you want to know where i am politically he told reporters i thought goldwater was too liberal falwell was not alone.
phyllis schlaflys stop era which became eagle forum in 1975 continued to advocate for conservative public policy focus on the family was jerry falwell the resurgence of evangelical religion in the 1970s was accompanied by a conservative movement in politics known as the religious right.
founded in 1979 by televangelist jerry falwell the moral majority was one of the earliest religious right groups committed to promoting family values and as the title to the record album he is holding in this photo suggests patriotism in american society and politics.
wally mcnamee corbis.
chapter 30 spectacular emergence of the european union as a massive united trading bloc economic engine and global political force.
another was the equally spectacular economic growth in china which was just beginning to take off in the early 1990s.
the post cold war world promised to be a multipolar one with great centers of power in europe the united states and east asia and seemingly intractable conflict in the middle east.
summary this chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place compare the two major periods of liberal legislative accomplishment the new deal in the 1930s chapter 31 confronting global and national dilemmas 1989 to the present figure 31 1 productivity family income and wages 1970 2004 this chart tells a complex and not altogether happy story.
the median hourly wages of american workers adjusted for inflation stagnated between 1970 and 1995 the rise in median family income reflected the increasing proportion of two earner families as more married women entered the workforce.
the dramatic increases in productivity did not lead to higher wages for workers.
rather businesses used those gains either to cut prices to compete in the global marketplace or to reward owners shareholders and particularly corporate executives.
1973 100 76 80 84 88 92 96 00 indexes of productivity median family income median hourly wages average annual changes 1973 95 3 8 2000 04 1995 2000 2 5 2 2 1 4 1 5 1 0 0 5 median hourly wages productivity median family income 0 9 family income through 2003 people to one another in ways unimaginable a generation earlier thinking like a historian p 1006.
suddenly the united states faced a dizzying array of opportunities and challenges both at home and abroad.
profound and powerful forces are shaking and remaking our world said a young president bill clinton in his first inaugural address in 1993.
the urgent question of our time is whether we can make change our friend and not our enemy an additional question remained however.
in whose interest was the global economy structured.
many of the seattle activists took inspiration from the five point declaration for global democracy issued by the human rights organization global exchange during the wtos seattle meeting.
global trade and investment the declaration demanded must not be ends in themselves but rather the instruments for achieving equitable and sustainable development including protections for workers and the environment the declaration also addressed inequality among nations calling attention to who benefitted from globalization and who did not.
the rise of the european union and china during the cold war the united states and the soviet union dominated the global balance of power.
these two superpowers oversaw what observers called a bipolar world two powerful poles one capitalist and the other communist around which global geopolitics were organized.
since the early 1990s however a multipolar world has emerged with centers of power in europe japan china and the united states along with rising regional powers such as india and brazil america compared p 1008.
in 1992 the nations of western europe created the european union eu and moved toward the creation of a single federal state somewhat like the united states.
by the end of the 1990s the european union embraced more than twenty countries and 450 million people the third largest population in the world behind china and india and accounted for a fifth of all global imports and exports.
in 2002 the eu introduced a single currency the euro which soon rivaled 04 thinking like a historian globalization its proponents and its discontents globalization is perhaps one of the most commonly used yet least understood concepts in our modern vocabulary.
this chapter 31 confronting global and national dilemmas 1989 to the present eastern and southern europe northwestern and central europe latin america and caribbean asia figure 31 5 american immigration 1920 2000 legislation inspired by nativism slowed the influx of immigrants after 1920 as did the dislocations brought on by economic depression and war in the 1930s and 1940s.
note the high rate of noneuropean immigration since the 1970s the result of new eligibility rules in the immigration act of 1965 chapter 31 confronting global and national dilemmas 1989 to the present bill clinton president william bill clinton returned the democratic party to the white house after twelve years under ronald reagan and george h w bush.
clinton was best known politically for what he called the third way a phrase that described his efforts to craft policies that appealed to both liberals and moderates in his party.
here he signs the welfare reform act of 1996 officially the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act which brought an end to the federal afdc program that democrats had created in 1935 ap images.
gave him historic opportunities.
the 1990s was a decade of stunning change in europe and central asia.
a great arc of newly independent states emerged as the soviet empire collapsed.
the majority of the 142 million people living in the former soviet states were poor but the region had a sizable middle class and was rich in natural resources especially oil and natural gas.
among the challenges for the united states was the question of whether to support the admission of some of the new states into the north atlantic treaty organization nato chapter 31 timeline.

chapters in the long histories of both freedom and slavery.
there was a vast human diversity among the peoples thrown into contact with one another in the new world.
exploration and settlement took place in an era of almost constant warfare among european nations each racked by internal religious political and regional conflicts.
native americans and africans consisted of numerous groups with their own languages and cultures.
they were as likely to fight one another as to unite against the european newcomers.
all these peoples were changed by their integration into the new atlantic economy.
the complex interactions of europeans american indians and africans would shape american history during the colonial era.
the first americans the settling of the americas the residents of the americas were no more a single group than europeans or africans.
they spoke hundreds of different languages and lived in numerous kinds of societies.
most however were descended from bands of hunters and fishers who had crossed the bering strait via a land bridge at various times between 15 000 and 60 000 years ago the exact dates are hotly debated by archaeologists.
others may have arrived by sea from asia or pacific islands.
around 14 000 years ago when glaciers began to melt at the end of the last ice age the land link became submerged under water once again separating the western hemisphere from asia.
history in north and south america did not begin with the coming of europeans.
the new world was new to europeans but an ancient homeland to those who already lived there.
the hemisphere had witnessed many changes during its human history.
first the early inhabitants and their descendants spread across the two continents reaching the tip of south america perhaps 11 000 years ago.
as the climate warmed they faced a food crisis as the immense animals they hunted including woolly mammoths and giant bison became extinct.
around 9 000 years ago at the same time that agriculture was being developed in the near east it also emerged in modern day mexico and the andes and then spread to other parts of the americas making settled civilizations possible.
throughout the hemisphere maize corn squash and beans formed the basis of agriculture.
the absence of livestock in the western hemisphere however limited farming by preventing the plowing of fields and the application of natural fertilizer.
w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
the first americans c hukchi peninsula be r in gs t ra i t ale ut ia n isl an ds north america mohawk oneida onondaga cayuga seneca ve r pa c i f i c o ce an i io r oh cherokee chaco canyon hopi pueblo zuni ssi mi ssippi r cahokia chickasaw poverty point a t l an t i c o c ea n choctaw gulf of mexico chichen itz az tec tenochtitln s monte alban ce nt 1000 miles 1000 kilometers s an yu ca t n may pe n i n s u la palenque ral caribbean sea am eric a south america possible migration routes i nc a s indian societies of the americas north and south america were hardly an empty wilderness when europeans arrived.
the hemisphere contained cities roads irrigation systems extensive trade networks and large structures such as the pyramidtemples whose beauty still inspires wonder.
with a population close to a map illustrating the probable routes by which the first americans settled the western hemisphere at various times between 15 000 and 60 000 years ago.
1 a new world map of the aztec capital tenochtitln and the gulf of mexico probably produced by a spanish conquistador and published in 1524 in an edition of the letters of hernn corts.
the map shows the citys complex system of canals bridges and dams with the great temple at the center.
gardens and a zoo are also visible.
the first americans 250 000 tenochtitln the capital of the aztec empire in what is now mexico was one of the worlds largest cities.
its great temple splendid royal palace and a central market comparable to that of european capitals made the city seem like an enchanted vision according to one of the first europeans to encounter it.
further south lay the inca kingdom centered in modern day peru.
its population of perhaps 12 million was linked by a complex system of roads and bridges that extended 2 000 miles along the andes mountain chain.
when europeans arrived a wide variety of native peoples lived within the present borders of the united states.
indian civilizations in north america had not developed the scale grandeur or centralized organization of the aztec and inca societies to their south.
north american indians lacked the technologies europeans had mastered such as metal tools and machines gunpowder and the scientific knowledge necessary for longdistance navigation.
no society north of mexico had achieved literacy although some made maps on bark and animal hides.
they also lacked wheeled vehicles since they had no domestic animals like horses or oxen to pull them.
their backwardness became a central justification for european conquest.
but over time indian societies had perfected techniques of farming hunting and fishing developed structures of political power and religious belief and engaged in far reaching networks of trade and communication.
w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
mound builders mississippi of river the valley remarkable physical remains still exist from some of the early civilizations in north america.
around 3 500 years ago before egyptians built the pyramids native americans constructed a large community centered on a series of giant semicircular mounds on a bluff overlooking the mississippi river in present day louisiana.
known today as poverty point it was a commercial and governmental center whose residents established trade routes throughout the mississippi and ohio river valleys.
archaeologists have found there copper from present day minnesota and canada and flint mined in indiana.
more than a thousand years before columbus sailed indians of the ohio river valley called mound builders by eighteenth century settlers who encountered the large earthen burial mounds they created had traded across half the continent.
after their decline another culture flourished in the mississippi river valley centered on the city of cahokia near presentday st louis a fortified community with between 10 000 and 30 000 inhabitants in the year 1200 its residents too built giant mounds the largest of which stood 100 feet high and was topped by a temple.
little is known of cahokias political and economic structure.
but it stood as the largest settled community in what is now the united states until surpassed in population by new york and philadelphia around 1800 western a modern aerial photograph of the ruins of pueblo bonita in chaco canyon in present day new mexico.
the rectangular structures are the foundations of dwellings and the circular ones are kivas or places of religious worship.
indians in the arid northeastern area of present day arizona the hopi and zuni and their ancestors engaged in settled village life for over 3 000 years.
during the peak of the regions culture between the years 900 and 1200 these peoples built great planned towns with large multiple family dwellings in local canyons constructed dams and canals to gather and distribute water and conducted trade with groups as far away as central mexico and the mississippi river valley.
the largest of their structures pueblo bonita in chaco canyon new mexico stood five stories high and had over 600 rooms.
not until the 1880s was a dwelling of comparable size constructed in the united states.
after the decline of these communities probably because of drought survivors moved to the south and east where they established villages and perfected the techniques of desert farming complete with irrigation systems to provide water for crops of corn beans and cotton.
these were the people spanish explorers called the pueblo indians because they lived in small villages or pueblos when the spanish first encountered them in the sixteenth century.
cliff dwellings in caon de chelly in the area of modern day arizona built sometime between 300 and 1300 and photographed in 1873 c h.
1 a new world the first americans another drawing by the artist john white shows ten male and seven female native americans dancing around a circle of posts in a religious ritual.
white was a careful observer of their clothing body markings and objects used in the ceremony.
on the pacific coast another densely populated region hundreds of distinct groups resided in independent villages and lived primarily by fishing hunting sea mammals and gathering wild plants and nuts.
as many as 25 million salmon swam up the columbia river each year providing indians with abundant food.
on the great plains with its herds of buffalo descendants of the prehistoric giant bison many indians were hunters who tracked animals on foot before the arrival of horses with the spanish but others lived in agricultural communities.
indians of eastern north america in eastern north america hundreds of tribes inhabited towns and villages scattered from the gulf of mexico to present day canada.
they lived on corn squash and beans supplemented by fishing and hunting deer turkeys and other animals.
indian trade routes crisscrossed the eastern part of the continent.
tribes frequently warred with one another to obtain goods seize captives or take revenge for the killing of relatives.
they conducted diplomacy and made peace.
little in the way of centralized authority existed until in the fifteenth century various leagues or confederations emerged in an effort to bring order to local regions.
in the southeast the choctaw cherokee and chickasaw each united dozens of towns in loose alliances.
in present day new york and pennsylvania five iroquois peoples the mohawk oneida cayuga seneca and onondaga formed a great league of peace bringing a period of stability to the area.
each year a great council with representatives from the five groupings met to coordinate behavior toward outsiders.
the most striking feature of native american society at the time europeans arrived was its sheer diversity.
each group had its own political system and set of religious beliefs and north america was home to literally hundreds of mutually unintelligible languages.
indians had no sense of w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
native ways of life tlingit ca.
inuit hudson bay inuit tshimshian ro n thin l michig hu an thinly kwakiutls micmac populated shuswap cree penobscot nootkin abenaki kootenay chippewa blackfeet assiniboine algonquian perior skagit l su cheyenne sioux walla walla l chinook flathead chippewa nez wampanoag hidatsa huron ontario mohegan perce cayuse.
ottowa l sioux pequot menominee tillamook mandan neutral iroquois arapaho narragansett klamath ie r kiowa winnebago l e pomo modoc iowa susquehannock pawnee shoshone potawatomi erie mosopelea maidu sauk shawnee costano kickapoo te d illinois pamlico ute kaskaskia wichita cherokee tuscarora southern chemehuevi paiute chumash chickasaw serrano comanche luiseno hopi zuni tewa creek cahuilla caddo yamasee diegueno mescalero timucua choctaw apalachee natchez jumano ly po pu la concho yachi pa c i f i c oc ea n kabankawa gulf of mexico coahuiltec ways of life in north america ad 1515 arctic hunter gatherers subarctic hunter fisher gatherers northwest coast marine economy plains hunter gatherers plains horticulturalists calusa laguerno 500 miles arawak 500 kilometers non horticultural rancherian peoples rancherian peoples with low intensity horticulture rancherian peoples with intensive horticulture pueblos with intensive horticulture seacoast foragers america as a continent or hemisphere.
they did not think of themselves as a single unified people an idea invented by europeans and only many years later adopted by indians themselves.
indian identity centered on the immediate social group a tribe village chiefdom or confederacy.
when europeans first arrived many indians saw them as simply one group among many.
their first thought was how to use the newcomers to marginal horticultural hunters river based horticultural chiefdoms orchard growing alligator hunters tidewater horticulturalists fishers and wild rice gatherers the native population of north america at the time of first contact with europeans consisted of numerous tribes with their own languages religious beliefs and economic and social structures.
this map suggests the numerous ways of life existing at the time.
1 a new world the first americans enhance their standing in relation to other native peoples rather than to unite against them.
the sharp dichotomy between indians and white persons did not emerge until later in the colonial era.
native american religion nonetheless the diverse indian societies of north america did share certain common characteristics.
their lives were steeped in religious ceremonies often directly related to farming and hunting.
spiritual power they believed suffused the world and sacred spirits could be found in all kinds of living and inanimate things animals plants trees water and wind.
through religious ceremonies they aimed to harness the aid of powerful supernatural forces to serve the interests of man.
in some tribes hunters performed rituals to placate the spirits of animals they had killed.
other religious ceremonies sought to engage the spiritual power of nature to secure abundant crops or fend off evil spirits.
indian villages also held elaborate religious rites participation in which helped to define the boundaries of community membership.
in all indian societies those who seemed to possess special abilities to invoke supernatural powers shamans medicine men and other religious leaders held positions of respect and authority.
indian religion did not pose a sharp distinction between the natural and the supernatural or secular and religious activities.
in some respects however indian religion was not that different from popular spiritual beliefs in europe.
most indians held that a single creator stood atop the spiritual hierarchy.
nonetheless nearly all europeans arriving in the new world quickly concluded that indians were in dire need of being converted to a true christian faith.
land and property equally alien in european eyes were indian attitudes toward property.
numerous land systems existed among native americans.
generally however village leaders assigned plots of land to individual families to use for a season or more and tribes claimed specific areas for hunting.
unclaimed land remained free for anyone to use.
families owned the right to use land but they did not own the land itself.
indians saw land the basis of economic life for both hunting and farming societies as a common resource not an economic commodity.
in the nineteenth century the indian leader black hawk would explain why in his view land could not be bought and sold the great spirit gave it to his children to live upon and cultivate as far as necessary for their subsistence and so long as they occupy and cultivate it they have a right to the soil few if any indian societies were familiar with the idea of a fenced off piece of land belonging forever to a single individual or family.
there was no market in real estate before the coming of europeans.
nor were indians devoted to the accumulation of wealth and material goods.
especially east of the mississippi river where villages moved every few years when soil or game became depleted acquiring numerous possessions made little sense.
however status certainly mattered in indian societies.
tribal leaders tended to come from a small number of families and chiefs lived more splendidly than average members of society.
but their w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
a catawba map illustrates the differences between indian and european conceptions of landed property.
the map depicts not possession of a specific territory but trade and diplomatic connections between various native groups and with the colony of virginia represented by the rectangle on the lower right.
reputation often rested on their willingness to share goods with others rather than hoarding them for themselves.
a few indian societies had rigid social distinctions.
among the natchez descendants of the mound building mississippian culture a chief or great sun occupied the top of the social order with nobles or lesser suns below him and below them the common people.
in general however wealth mattered far less in indian society than in european society at the time.
generosity was among the most valued social qualities and gift giving was essential to indian society.
trade for example meant more than a commercial transaction it was accompanied by elaborate ceremonies of gift exchange.
a central part of indian economies gift giving bound different groups in webs of mutual obligation.
although indians had no experience of the wealth enjoyed at the top of european society under normal circumstances no one in indian societies went hungry or experienced the extreme inequalities of europe.
there are no beggars among them reported the english colonial leader roger williams of new englands indians.
gender relations the system of gender relations in most indian societies also differed markedly from that of europe.
membership in a family defined womens lives but they openly engaged in premarital sexual relations and could even choose to divorce their husbands.
most although not all indian societies were matrilineal that is centered on clans or kinship groups in which children became members of the mothers family not the fathers.
tribal leaders were almost always men but women played an important role in certain religious ceremonies and female elders often helped to select male village leaders and took part in tribal meetings.
under english law a married man controlled the familys property and a wife had no independent c h.
1 a new world indians fishing in a 1585 drawing by john white.
the canoe is filled with fish while two men harpoon others in the background.
among the wildlife illustrated are hammerhead sharks and catfish.
the first americans legal identity.
in contrast indian women owned dwellings and tools and a husband generally moved to live with the family of his wife.
in indian societies men contributed to the communitys well being and demonstrated their masculinity by success in hunting or in the pacific northwest by catching fish with nets and harpoons.
because men were frequently away on the hunt women took responsibility not only for household duties but for most agricultural work as well.
among the pueblo of the southwest however where there was less hunting than in the east men were the primary cultivators.
european views of the indians europeans tended to view indians in extreme terms.
they were regarded either as noble savages gentle friendly and superior in some ways to europeans or as uncivilized and brutal savages.
giovanni da verrazano a florentine navigator who sailed up and down the eastern coast of north america in 1524 described indians he encountered as beautiful of stature and build for their part many indians whose diet was probably more nutritious than that of most europeans initially found the newcomers weak and ugly.
over time however negative images of indians came to overshadow positive ones.
early european descriptions of north american indians as barbaric centered on three areas religion land use and gender relations.
whatever their country of origin european newcomers concluded that indians lacked genuine religion or in fact worshiped the devil.
their shamans and herb healers were called witch doctors their numerous ceremonies and rituals at best a form of superstition their belief in a world alive with spiritual power a worship of false gods christianity presented w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
no obstacle to the commercial use of the land and indeed in some ways encouraged it since true religion was thought to promote the progress of civilization.
whereas the indians saw nature as a world of spirits and souls the europeans viewed it as a collection of potential commodities a source of economic opportunity.
europeans invoked the indians distinctive pattern of land use and ideas about property to answer the awkward question raised by a british minister at an early stage of englands colonization by what right or warrant can we enter into the land of these savages take away their rightful inheritance from them and plant ourselves in their places while the spanish claimed title to land in america by right of conquest and papal authority the english french and dutch came to rely on the idea that indians had not actually used the land and thus had no claim to it.
despite the indians highly developed agriculture and well established towns europeans frequently described them as nomads without settled communities.
the land was thus deemed to be a vacant wilderness ready to be claimed by newcomers who would cultivate and improve it.
european settlers believed that mixing ones labor with the earth which indians supposedly had failed to do gave one title to the soil.
in the indians gender division of labor and matrilineal family structures europeans saw weak men and mistreated women.
hunting and fishing the primary occupations of indian men were considered leisure activities in much of europe not real work.
because indian women worked in the fields europeans often described them as lacking freedom.
they were not much better than slaves in the words of one english commentator.
europeans considered indian men unmanly too weak to exercise authority within their families and restrain their wives open sexuality and so lazy that they forced their wives to do most of the productive labor.
throughout north america europeans promoted the ideas that women should confine themselves to household work and that men ought to exercise greater authority within their families.
europeans insisted that by subduing the indians they were actually bringing them freedom the freedom of true religion private property and the liberation of both men and women from uncivilized and unchristian gender roles.
indian freedom european freedom indian freedom and what of liberty as the native inhabitants of the new world understood it.
many europeans saw indians as embodying freedom.
the iroquois wrote one colonial official held such absolute notions of liberty that they allow of no kind of superiority of one over another and banish all servitude from their territories but most colonizers quickly concluded that the notion of freedom was alien to indian societies.
early english and french dictionaries of indian languages contained no entry for freedom or libert.
nor wrote one early trader did indians have words to express despotic power arbitrary kings oppressed or obedient subjects indeed europeans considered indians barbaric in part because they did not appear to live under established governments or fixed laws and had no indian women planting crops while men break the sod.
an engraving by theodor de bry based on a painting by jacques le moyne de morgues.
morgues was part of an expedition of french huguenots to florida in 1564 he escaped when the spanish destroyed the outpost in the following year.
a seventeenth century engraving by a french jesuit priest illustrates many europeans view of indian religion.
a demon hovers over an iroquois longhouse suggesting that indians worship the devil.
1 a new world indian freedom european freedom respect for authority.
they are born live and die in a liberty without restraint wrote one religious missionary.
in a sense they were too free lacking the order and discipline that europeans considered the hallmarks of civilization.
even slavery wrote richard eden an english writer of the mid sixteenth century was preferable to the indians condition before european contact which he described as rather a horrible licentiousness than a liberty when giovanni da verrazano described the indians as living in absolute freedom he did not intend this as a compliment.
the familiar modern understanding of freedom as personal independence often based on ownership of private property had little meaning in most indian societies.
but indians certainly had their own ideas of freedom.
while the buying and selling of slaves was unknown small scale slavery existed in some indian societies.
so too did the idea of personal liberty as the opposite of being held as a slave.
indians would bitterly resent the efforts of some europeans to reduce them to slavery.
although individuals were expected to think for themselves and did not always have to go along with collective decision making indian men and women judged one another according to their ability to live up to widely understood ideas of appropriate behavior.
far more important than individual autonomy were kinship ties the ability to follow ones spiritual values and the well being and security of ones community.
in indian culture group autonomy and self determination and the mutual obligations that came with a sense of belonging and connectedness took precedence over individual freedom.
ironically the coming of europeans armed with their own language of liberty would make freedom a preoccupation of american indians as part and parcel of the very process by which they were reduced to dependence on the colonizers.
christian liberty on the eve of colonization europeans held numerous ideas of freedom.
some were as old as the city states of ancient greece others arose during the political struggles of the early modern era.
some laid the foundations for modern conceptions of freedom others are quite unfamiliar today.
freedom was not a single idea but a collection of distinct rights and privileges many enjoyed by only a small portion of the population.
one conception common throughout europe understood freedom less as a political or social status than as a moral or spiritual condition.
freedom meant abandoning the life of sin to embrace the teachings of christ.
where the spirit of the lord is declares the new testament there is liberty in this definition servitude and freedom were mutually reinforcing not contradictory states since those who accepted the teachings of christ simultaneously became free from sin and servants to god christian liberty had no connection to later ideas of religious toleration a notion that scarcely existed anywhere on the eve of colonization.
every nation in europe had an established church that decreed what forms of religious worship and belief were acceptable.
dissenters faced persecution by the state as well as condemnation by church authorities.
religious uniformity was thought to be essential to public order the modern idea that a persons religious beliefs and practices are a matter of private choice not legal obligation was almost unknown.
the religious wars that racked how did indian and european ideas of freedom differ on the eve of contact.
europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries centered on which religion would predominate in a kingdom or region not the right of individuals to choose which church in which to worship.
freedom and authority in its secular form the equating of liberty with obedience to a higher authority suggested that freedom meant not anarchy but obedience to law.
aristotle had described the law as libertys salvation not its enemy.
the identification of freedom with the rule of law did not however mean that all subjects of the crown enjoyed the same degree of freedom.
early modern european societies were extremely hierarchical with marked gradations of social status ranging from the king and hereditary aristocracy down to the urban and rural poor.
inequality was built into virtually every social relationship.
the king claimed to rule by the authority of god.
persons of high rank demanded deference from those below them.
less than 5 percent of the population monopolized english economic wealth and political power.
within families men exercised authority over their wives and children.
according to the widespread legal doctrine known as coverture when a woman married she surrendered her legal identity which became covered by that of her husband.
she could not own property or sign contracts in her own name control her wages if she worked write a separate will or except in the rarest of circumstances go to court seeking a divorce.
the husband conducted business and testified in court for the entire family.
he had the exclusive right to his wifes company including domestic labor and sexual relations.
everywhere in europe family life depended on male dominance and female submission.
indeed political writers of the sixteenth century explicitly compared the kings authority over his subjects with the husbands over his family.
both were ordained by god.
to justify this argument they referred to a passage in the new testament as the man is the head of the woman so is christ the head of the church neither kind of authority could be challenged without threatening the fabric of social order.
liberty and liberties in this hierarchical society liberty came from knowing ones social place and fulfilling the duties appropriate to ones rank.
most men lacked the freedom that came with economic independence.
property qualifications and other restrictions limited the electorate to a minuscule part of the adult male population.
the law required strict obedience of employees and breaches of labor contracts carried criminal penalties.
european ideas of freedom still bore the imprint of the middle ages when liberties meant formal specific privileges such as self government exemption from taxation or the right to practice a particular trade granted to individuals or groups by contract royal decree or purchase.
one legal dictionary defined a liberty as a privilege.
by which men may enjoy some benefit beyond the ordinary subject only those who enjoyed the freedom of the city for example could engage in certain economic activities.
1 a new world the expansion of europe numerous modern civil liberties did not exist.
the law decreed acceptable forms of religious worship.
the government regularly suppressed publications it did not like and criticism of authority could lead to imprisonment.
in england members of the house of commons enjoyed freedom of speech during parliamentary sessions but the right did not extend to ordinary citizens.
personal independence was reserved for a small part of the population and this was one reason why authorities found masterless men those without regular jobs or otherwise outside the control of their social superiors so threatening.
nonetheless every european country that colonized the new world claimed to be spreading freedom for its own population and for native americans.
t h e e x pa n s i o n o f e u r o p e it is fitting that the second epochal event that adam smith linked to columbuss voyage of 1492 was the discovery by portuguese navigators of a sea route from europe to asia around the southern tip of africa.
the european conquest of america began as an offshoot of the quest for a sea route to india china and the islands of the east indies the source of the silk tea spices porcelain and other luxury goods on which international trade in the early modern era centered.
for centuries this commerce had been conducted across land from china and south asia to the middle east and the mediterranean region.
profit and piety the desire to eliminate islamic middlemen and win control of the lucrative trade for christian western europe combined to inspire the quest for a direct route to asia.
chinese and portuguese navigation at the beginning of the fifteenth century one might have predicted that china would establish the worlds first global empire.
between 1405 and 1433 admiral zheng he led seven large naval expeditions in the indian ocean.
the first convoy consisted of 62 ships that were larger than those of any european nation along with 225 support vessels and more than 25 000 men.
on his sixth voyage zheng explored the coast of east africa.
china was already the worlds most important trading economy with trade routes dotting the indian ocean.
zhengs purpose was not discovery but to impress other peoples with chinas might.
had his ships continued westward they could easily have reached north and south america.
but as a wealthy land based empire china did not feel the need for overseas expansion and after 1433 the government ended support for long distance maritime expeditions.
it fell to portugal situated on the western corner of the iberian peninsula far removed from the overland route to asia to take advantage of new techniques of sailing and navigation to begin exploring the atlantic.
the development of the caravel a ship capable of long distance travel and of the compass and quadrant devices that enabled sailors to determine their location and direction with greater accuracy than in the past made it possible to sail down the coast of africa and return to portugal.
portuguese seafarers initially hoped to locate the source of gold that for centuries had been transported in caravans across the sahara desert to north africa and what impelled european explorers to look west across the atlantic.
the old world on the eve colonization ca.
1500 of american scotland ireland england netherlands holy roman empire france genoa portugal spain az o re s lisbon ma d e i ra i s.
me d venice iter ot tom a ca na ry i s.
rane cre t e ottoman empire an sea cypru s persia china n empire s ah ar a d e s e rt cap e verde is.
india pacific ocean mali d ag am a benin da g ama dias east indies ind i an o cean at la nt ic oce a n ca pe of g ood hope europe.
this commerce which passed through the african kingdom of mali on the southern edge of the sahara provided europe with most of its gold.
around 1400 it rivaled trade with the east in economic importance.
and like trade with asia it was controlled by muslim merchants.
portugal and west africa today africa is the worlds poorest continent.
in the fifteenth century it was known for its wealth.
mansa musa the ruler of mali had literally put his realm on the map in 1324 when he led a great pilgrimage to mecca distributing so much gold along the way that its price was depressed for a decade.
until 1434 however no european sailor had seen the coast of africa below the sahara or the forest kingdoms south of mali that contained the actual gold fields.
but in that year a portuguese ship brought a sprig of rosemary from west africa proof that one could sail beyond 1 000 1 000 2 000 miles 2 000 kilometers in the fifteenth century the world known to europeans was limited to europe parts of africa and asia.
explorers from portugal sought to find a sea route to the east in order to circumvent the italian city states and middle eastern rulers who controlled the overland trade.
1 a new world the expansion of europe an engraving published in 1668 of a procession of the oba king outside benin on the western coast of africa.
the image suggests the extent of the city a center of government trade and the arts.
the desert and return.
little by little portuguese ships moved farther down the coast.
in 1485 they reached benin an imposing city whose craftsmen produced bronze sculptures that still inspire admiration for their artistic beauty and superb casting techniques.
the portuguese established fortified trading posts on the western coast of africa.
the profits reaped by these portuguese factories so named because merchants were known as factors inspired other european powers to follow in their footsteps.
portugal also began to colonize madeira the azores and the canary and cape verde islands which lie in the atlantic off the african coast.
sugar plantations worked by muslim captives and slaves from slavic areas of eastern europe had flourished in the middle ages on mediterranean islands like cyprus malta and crete.
now the portuguese established plantations on the atlantic islands eventually replacing the native populations with thousands of slaves shipped from africa an ominous precedent for the new world.
soon the center of sugar production would shift again to the western hemisphere.
freedom and slavery in africa slavery in africa long predated the coming of europeans.
traditionally african slaves tended to be criminals debtors and captives in war.
they worked within the households of their owners and had well defined rights such as possessing property and marrying free persons.
it was not uncommon for african slaves to acquire their freedom.
slavery was one of several forms of labor not the basis of the economy as it would become in large parts of the new world.
the coming of the portuguese soon followed by traders from other european nations accelerated the buying and selling of slaves within africa.
at least 100 000 african slaves were transported to what impelled european explorers to look west across the atlantic.
spain and portugal between 1450 and 1500 in 1502 the first african slaves were transported to islands in the caribbean.
the transatlantic slave trade and its impact on africa will be discussed in chapter 4 by the mideighteenth century dissenting protestants in most colonies had gained the right to worship as they pleased and own their churches although many places still barred them from holding public office and taxed them to support the official church.
a visitor to pennsylvania in 1750 described the colonys religious diversity we find there lutherans reformed catholics quakers menonists or anabaptists herrnhuters or moravian brethren pietists seventh day baptists dunkers presbyterians.
jews mohammedans pagans liberty of conscience wrote a german newcomer in 1739 was the chief virtue of british north america and on this score i do not repent my immigration equally important to eighteenth century immigrants however were other elements of freedom especially the availability of land the lack of a military draft and the absence of restraints on economic opportunity common in europe.
skilled workers were in great demand.
they earn what they want one emigrant wrote to his brother in switzerland in 1733 letters home by immigrants spoke of low taxes the right to enter trades and professions without paying exorbitant fees and freedom of movement.
in this country one wrote there are abundant liberties in just about all matters baptists were among the numerous religious denominations in the eigthteenthcentury colonies.
in this engraving from a history of american baptists published in 1770 a minister baptizes a new member in the schuylkill river in pennsylvania while members of the congregation look on.
voices of freedom f r o m l e t t e r b y a fe m a l e i n d e n t u r e d s e r v a n t september 22 1756 only a minority of emigrants from europe to british north america were fully free.
indentured servants were men and women who surrendered their freedom for a specified period the probability of you in england to conceive.
let it suffice that i am one of the unhappy number am letter by elizabeth sprigs of maryland to her toiling almost day and night and very often in the horses drudgery with only this comfort that you bitch you do not do half enough and then tied up father in england expresses complaints voiced and whipped to that degree that you now serve an of time in exchange for passage to america.
this by many indentured servants.
honored father my being forever banished from your sight will i hope pardon the boldness i now take of troubling you with these.
my long silence has been purely owing to my undutifulness to you and well knowing i had offended in the highest degree put a tie on my tongue and pen for fear i should be extinct from your good graces and add a further trouble to you.
o dear father believe what i am going to relate the words of truth and sincerity and balance my former bad conduct to my sufferings here and then i am sure youll pity your distressed daughter.
what we unfortunate english people suffer here is beyond animal.
scarce any thing but indian corn and salt to eat and that even begrudged nay many negroes are better used almost naked no shoes nor stockings to wear and the comfort after slaving during masters pleasure what rest we can get is to wrap ourselves up in a blanket and lie upon the ground.
this is the deplorable condition your poor betty endures and now i beg if you have any bowels of compassion left show it by sending me some relief.
clothing is the principal thing wanting which if you should condescend to may easily send them to me by any of the ships bound to baltimore town patapsco river maryland.
and give me leave to conclude in duty to you and uncles and aunts and respect to all friends.
elizabeth sprigs f r o m l e t t e r b y a s w i s s g e r m a n i m m i g r a n t t o pe n n s y l v a n i a august 23 1769 germans were among the most numerous pennsylvania shillings.
i think that with gods immigrants to the eighteenth century colonies.
help i will obtain land.
i am not pushing for it until i am in a better position.
i would like for my brother to come.
and it will then be even nicer in the country.
i assume that many wrote letters to family members at home relating their experiences and impressions.
dearest father brother and sister and brother in law i have told you quite fully about the trip and i will tell you what will not surprise you that we have a free country.
of the sundry craftsmen one may do whatever one wants.
nor does the land require payment of tithes taxes to support a local landlord typical in europe.
the land is very big from canada to the east of us to carolina in the south and to the spanish border in the west.
one can settle wherever one wants without asking anyone when he buys or leases something.
i have always enough to do and we have no shortage of food.
bread is plentiful.
if i work for two days i earn more bread than in eight days at home.
also i can buy many things so reasonably for example a pair of shoes for roughly seven the land has been described to you sufficiently by various people and it is not surprising that the immigrant agents demand payment.
for the journey is long and it costs much to stay away for one year.
johannes hnner questions 1 why does elizabeth sprigs compare her condition unfavorably to that of blacks.
2 what does johannes hnner have in mind when he calls america a free country.
3 what factors might explain the different experiences of these two emigrants to british north america.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 indian the growth of colonial america life in transition the tide of newcomers who equated liberty with secure possession of land threatened to engulf the surviving indian populations.
by the eighteenth century indian communities were well integrated into the british imperial system.
indian warriors did much of the fighting in the centurys imperial wars.
their cultures were now quite different from what they had been at the time of first contact.
indian societies that had existed for centuries had disappeared the victims of disease and warfare.
new tribes like the catawba of south carolina and the creek confederacy which united dozens of indian towns in south carolina and georgia had been created from their remnants.
few indians chose to live among whites rather than in their own communities.
but they had become well accustomed to using european products like knives hatchets needles kettles and firearms.
alcohol introduced by traders created social chaos in many indian communities.
one cherokee told the governor of south carolina in 1753 the clothes we wear we cannot make ourselves they are made to us.
we use their ammunition with which we kill deer.
every necessary thing we must have from the white people while traders saw in indian villages potential profits and british officials saw allies against france and spain farmers and planters viewed indians as little more than an obstruction to their desire for land.
they expected indians to give way to white settlers.
the native population of the virginia and south carolina frontier had already been displaced when large numbers of settlers arrived.
in pennsylvania however the flood of german and scotch irish settlers into the backcountry upset the relatively peaceful indian white relations constructed by william penn.
at a 1721 conference a group of colonial and indian leaders reaffirmed penns chain of friendship.
but conflicts over land soon multiplied.
the infamous walking purchase of 1737 brought the fraudulent dealing so common in other colonies to pennsylvania.
the lenni lanape indians agreed to an arrangement to cede a tract of land bounded by the distance a man could walk in thirty six hours.
to their amazement governor james logan hired a team of swift runners who marked out an area far in excess of what the indians had anticipated.
by 1760 when pennsylvanias population a mere 20 000 in 1700 had grown to 220 000 indian colonist relations initially the most harmonious in british north america had become poisoned by suspicion and hostility.
one group of susquehanna indians declared that the white people had abused them and taken their lands from them and therefore they had no reason to think that they were now concerned for their happiness they longed for the days when old william penn treated them with fairness and respect.
regional diversity by the mid eighteenth century the different regions of the british colonies had developed distinct economic and social orders.
small farms tilled by family labor and geared primarily to production for local consumption predominated in new england and the new settlements of the backcountry the area stretching from central pennsylvania southward through the what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenth century colonies.
shenandoah valley of virginia and into upland north and south carolina.
the backcountry was the most rapidly growing region in north america.
in 1730 the only white residents in what was then called indian country were the occasional hunter and trader.
by the eve of the american revolution the region contained one quarter of virginias population and half of south carolinas.
most were farm families raising grain and livestock but slaveowning planters seeking fertile soil for tobacco farming also entered the area.
in the older portions of the middle colonies of new york new jersey and pennsylvania farmers were more oriented to commerce than on the frontier growing grain both for their own use and for sale abroad and supplementing the work of family members by employing wage laborers tenants and in some instances slaves.
because large landlords had engrossed so much desirable land new yorks growth lagged behind that of neighboring colonies.
what man will be such a fool as to become a base tenant wondered richard coote new yorks governor at the beginning of the eighteenth century when by crossing the hudson river that man can for a song purchase a good freehold with its fertile soil favorable climate initially peaceful indian relations generous governmental land distribution policy and rivers that facilitated long distance trading pennsylvania came to be known as the best poor mans country ordinary colonists there enjoyed a standard of living unimaginable in europe.
the consumer revolution during the eighteenth century great britain eclipsed the dutch as the leading producer and trader of inexpensive consumer goods including colonial william penns treaty with the indians.
penns grandson thomas the proprietor of pennsylvania commissioned this romanticized painting from the artist benjamin west in 1771 by which time harmony between indians and colonists had long since turned to hostility.
in the nineteenth century many reproductions of this image circulated reminding americans that indians had once been central figures in their history.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 the growth of colonial america products like coffee and tea and such manufactured goods as linen metalware pins ribbons glassware ceramics and clothing.
trade integrated the british empire.
as the american colonies were drawn more and more fully into the system of atlantic commerce they shared in the eras consumer revolution.
in port cities and small inland towns shops proliferated and american newspapers were filled with advertisements for british goods.
british merchants supplied american traders with loans to enable them to import these products and traveling peddlers carried them into remote frontier areas.
consumerism in a modern sense the mass production advertising and sale of consumer goods did not exist in colonial america.
nonetheless eighteenth century estate inventories records of peoples possessions at the time of death revealed the wide dispersal in american homes of english and even asian products.
in the seventeenth century most colonists had lived in a pioneer world of homespun clothing and homemade goods.
now even modest farmers and artisans owned books ceramic plates metal cutlery and items made of imported silk and cotton.
tea once a luxury enjoyed only by the wealthy became virtually a necessity of life.
people that are least able to go to the expense one new yorker noted must have their tea though their families want bread this 1772 broadside offers a rare view of the interior of a philadelphia shop and lists some of the many european and west indian goods on sale including rum tea spices and gun powder a sign of the ongoing consumer revolution linked to international trade.
colonial cities britains mainland colonies were overwhelmingly agricultural.
nine tenths of the population resided in rural areas and made their livelihood from farming.
colonial cities like boston new york philadelphia and charleston were quite small by the standards of europe or spanish america.
in 1700 when the population of mexico city stood at 100 000 boston had 6 000 residents and new york 4 500 as late as 1750 eight cities in spanish america exceeded in size any in english north america.
english american cities served mainly as gathering places for agricultural goods and for imported items to be distributed to the countryside.
nonetheless the expansion of trade encouraged the rise of port cities home to a growing population of colonial merchants and artisans skilled craftsmen as well as an increasing number of poor.
in 1770 with some 30 000 inhabitants philadelphia was the capital of the new world at least its british component and after london and liverpool the empires third busiest port.
the financial commercial and cultural center of british america its growth rested on economic integration with the rich agricultural region nearby.
philadelphia merchants organized the collection of farm goods supplied rural storekeepers and extended credit to consumers.
they exported flour bread and meat to the west indies and europe.
colonial artisans the city was also home to a large population of furniture makers jewelers and silversmiths serving wealthier citizens and hundreds of lesser artisans like weavers blacksmiths coopers and construction workers.
the typical artisan owned his own tools and labored in a small workshop often his home assisted by family members and young journeymen and apprentices what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenth century colonies.
learning the trade.
the artisans skill which set him apart from the common laborers below him in the social scale was the key to his existence and it gave him a far greater degree of economic freedom than those dependent on others for a livelihood.
he that hath a trade hath an estate wrote benjamin franklin who had worked as a printer before achieving renown as a scientist and statesman.
despite the influx of british goods american craftsmen benefited from the expanding consumer market.
most journeymen enjoyed a reasonable chance of rising to the status of master and establishing a workshop of their own.
some achieved remarkable success.
born in new york city in 1723 myer myers a jewish silversmith of dutch ancestry became one of the citys most prominent artisans.
myers produced jewelry candlesticks coffeepots tableware and other gold and silver objects for the colonys elite as well as religious ornaments for both synagogues and protestant churches in new york and nearby colonies.
he used some of his profits to acquire land in new hampshire and connecticut.
myerss career reflected the opportunities colonial cities offered to skilled men of diverse ethnic and religious backgrounds.
an atlantic world people ideas and goods flowed back and forth across the atlantic knitting together the empire and its diverse populations british merchants and consumers american colonists african slaves and surviving indians and creating webs of interdependence among the european empires.
sugar tobacco and other products of the western hemisphere were marketed as far away as eastern europe.
london bankers financed the slave trade between africa and portugese brazil.
spain spent its gold and silver importing goods from other countries.
as trade expanded the north american and west indian colonies became the major overseas market for british manufactured goods.
although most colonial output was consumed at this piece of china made in england and exported to new england celebrates the coronation of james ii in 1685 it is an example of the growing colonial demand for english consumer goods.
as atlantic trade expanded shipbuilding became a major enterprise in the colonies.
this painting from around 1750 by an unknown artist depicts vessels under construction at the greys inn creek shipyard in maryland.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 social classes in the colonies home north americans shipped farm products to britain the west indies and with the exception of goods like tobacco enumerated under the navigation acts outside the empire.
virtually the entire chesapeake tobacco crop was marketed in britain with most of it then re exported to europe by british merchants.
most of the bread and flour exported from the colonies was destined for the west indies.
african slaves there grew sugar that could be distilled into rum a product increasingly popular among both north american colonists and indians who obtained it by trading furs and deerskins that were then shipped to europe.
the mainland colonies carried on a flourishing trade in fish and grains with southern europe.
ships built in new england made up one third of the british empires trading fleet.
membership in the empire had many advantages for the colonists.
most americans did not complain about british regulation of their trade because commerce enriched the colonies as well as the mother country and lax enforcement of the navigation acts allowed smuggling to flourish.
in a dangerous world moreover the royal navy protected american shipping.
and despite the many differences between life in england and its colonies eighteenth century english america drew closer and closer to and in some ways became more and more similar to the mother country across the atlantic.
social classes in the colonies the a 1732 portrait of daniel peter and andrew oliver sons of a wealthy boston merchant.
the prominent display of their delicate hands tells the viewer that they have never had to do manual labor.
colonial elite most free americans benefited from economic growth but as colonial society matured an elite emerged that while neither as powerful or wealthy as the aristocracy of england increasingly dominated politics and society.
indeed the gap between rich and poor probably grew more rapidly in the eighteenth century than in any other period of american history.
in new england and the middle colonies expanding trade made possible the emergence of a powerful upper class of merchants often linked by family or commercial ties to great trading firms in london.
there were no banks in colonial america.
credit and money were in short supply and mercantile success depended on personal connections as much as business talent.
by 1750 the colonies of the chesapeake and lower south were dominated by slave plantations producing staple crops especially tobacco and rice for the world market.
here great planters accumulated enormous wealth.
the colonial elite also included the rulers of proprietary colonies like pennsylvania and maryland.
how did patterns of class and gender roles change in eighteenth century america.
america had no titled aristocracy as in britain.
it had no system of legally established social ranks or family pedigrees stretching back to medieval times.
apart from the de lanceys livingstons and van rensselaers of new york the penn family in pennsylvania and a few southern planters it had no one whose landholdings in monetary value rivaled those of the british aristocracy.
but throughout british america men of prominence controlled colonial government.
in virginia the upper class was so tightknit and intermarried so often that the colony was said to be governed by a cousinocracy members of the gentry controlled the vestries or local governing bodies of the established anglican church dominated the county courts political as well as judicial institutions that levied taxes and enacted local ordinances and were prominent in virginias legislature.
in the 1750s seven members of the same generation of the lee family sat in the house of burgesses.
eighteenth century virginia was a far healthier environment than in the early days of settlement.
planters could expect to pass their wealth down to the next generation providing estates for their sons and establishing family dynasties.
nearly every virginian of note achieved prominence through family connections.
the days when self made men could rise into the virginia gentry were long gone by 1770 nearly all upper class virginians had inherited their wealth.
thomas jeffersons grandfather was a justice of the peace an important local official militia captain and sheriff and his father was a member of the house of burgesses.
george washingtons father grandfather and great grandfather had been justices of the peace.
the virginia gentry used its control of provincial government to gain possession of large tracts of land as western areas opened for settlement.
grants of 20 000 to 40 000 acres were not uncommon.
robert king carter a speaker of the house of burgesses acquired 300 000 acres of land and 1 000 slaves by the time of his death in 1732 anglicization for much of the eighteenth century the american colonies had more regular trade and communications with britain than among themselves.
elites in different regions slowly developed a common lifestyle and sense of common interests.
but rather than thinking of themselves as distinctively american they became more and more english a process historians call anglicization wealthy americans tried to model their lives on british etiquette and behavior.
somewhat resentful at living in provincial isolation at the end of the world as one virginia aristocrat put it they sought to demonstrate their status and legitimacy by importing the latest london fashions and literature sending their sons to britain for education and building homes equipped with fashionable furnishings modeled on the country estates and town houses of the english gentry.
their residences included large rooms for entertainment display cases for imported luxury goods and elaborate formal gardens.
some members of the colonial elite like george washington even had coats of arms designed for their families in imitation of english upper class practice.
desperate to follow an aristocratic lifestyle many planters fell into debt.
william byrd iii lived so extravagantly that by 1770 he had accumulated a portrait of elijah boardman a merchant in new milford massachusetts.
boardman wears the attire of a gentleman and rests his arm on his counting desk.
in the rear bolts of cloth are visible.
but boardman chose to emphasize his learning not his wealth by posing with books including two plays of shakespeare john miltons paradise lost and the london magazine.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 built in the 1750s by carter burwell grandson of the original robert king carter carters grove near williamsburg virginia was a grand plantation mansion with large formal gardens in imitation of english landscape design.
social classes in the colonies a debt of 100 000 an amount almost unheard of in england or america.
but so long as the world market for tobacco thrived so did virginias gentry.
the south carolina aristocracy the richest group of mainland colonists were south carolina planters although planters in jamaica far outstripped them in wealth.
elite south carolinians often traveled north to enjoy summer vacations in the cooler climate of newport rhode island and they spent much of the remainder of their time in charleston the only real urban center south of philadelphia and the richest city in british north america.
here aristocratic social life flourished centered on theaters literary societies and social events.
like their virginia counterparts south carolina grandees lived a lavish lifestyle amid imported furniture fine wines silk clothing and other items from england.
they surrounded themselves with house slaves dressed in specially designed uniforms.
in 1774 the per capita wealth in the charleston district was 2 300 more than four times that of tobacco areas in virginia and eight times the figure for philadelphia or boston.
but wealth in south carolina was highly concentrated.
the richest 10 percent of the colony owned half the wealth in 1770 the poorest quarter less than 2 percent.
throughout the colonies elites emulated what they saw as englands balanced stable social order.
liberty in their eyes meant in part the power to rule the right of those blessed with wealth and prominence to dominate over others.
they viewed society as a hierarchical structure in which some men were endowed with greater talents than others and destined to rule.
the social order they believed was held together by webs of influence how did patterns of class and gender roles change in eighteenth century america.
that linked patrons and those dependent on them.
each place in the hierarchy carried with it different responsibilities and ones status was revealed in dress manners and the splendor of ones home.
superiority and dependence as one colonial newspaper put it were natural elements of any society.
an image of refinement served to legitimate wealth and political power.
colonial elites prided themselves on developing aristocratic manners cultivating the arts and making productive use of leisure.
indeed on both sides of the atlantic elites viewed work as something reserved for common folk and slaves.
freedom from labor was the mark of the gentleman.
poverty in the colonies at the other end of the social scale poverty emerged as a visible feature of eighteenth century colonial life.
although not considered by most colonists part of their society the growing number of slaves lived in impoverished conditions.
among free americans poverty was hardly as widespread as in britain where in the early part of the century between onequarter and one half of the people regularly required public assistance.
but as the colonial population expanded access to land diminished rapidly especially in long settled areas.
in new england which received few immigrants the high birthrate fueled population growth.
with the supply of land limited sons who could not hope to inherit farms were forced to move to other colonies or to try their hand at a trade in the regions towns.
by mid century tenants and wage laborers were a growing presence on farms in the middle colonies.
in colonial cities the number of propertyless wage earners subsisting at the poverty line steadily increased.
in boston one third of the population in 1771 owned no property at all.
in rural augusta county carved out of virginias shenandoah river valley in 1738 land was quickly engrossed by planters and speculators.
by the 1760s two thirds of the countys white men owned no land and had little prospect of obtaining it unless they migrated further west.
taking the colonies as a whole half of the wealth at mid century was concentrated in the hands of the richest 10 percent of the population.
attitudes and policies toward poverty in colonial america mirrored british precedents.
the better off colonists generally viewed the poor as lazy shiftless and responsible for their own plight.
both rural communities and cities did accept responsibility for assisting their own.
but to minimize the burden on taxpayers poor persons were frequently set to labor in workhouses where they produced goods that reimbursed authorities for part of their upkeep.
their children were sent to work as apprentices in local homes or workshops.
and most communities adopted stringent measures to warn out unemployed and propertyless newcomers who might become dependent on local poor relief.
this involved town authorities either expelling the unwanted poor from an area or formally declaring certain persons ineligible for assistance.
in essex county massachusetts the number of poor persons warned out each year rose from 200 in the 1730s to 1 700 in the 1760s.
many were members of families headed by widowed or abandoned women.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 the middle social classes in the colonies ranks the large majority of free americans lived between the extremes of wealth and poverty.
along with racial and ethnic diversity what distinguished the mainland colonies from europe was the wide distribution of land and the economic autonomy of most ordinary free families.
the anonymous author of the book american husbandry published in 1775 reported that little freeholders who live upon their own property made up the most considerable part of the people especially in the northern colonies and the nonplantation parts of the south.
altogether perhaps two thirds of the free male population were farmers who owned their own land.
england to be sure had no class of laborers as exploited as american slaves but threefifths of its people owned no property at all.
by the eighteenth century colonial farm families viewed landownership almost as a right the social precondition of freedom.
they strongly resented efforts whether by native americans great landlords or colonial governments to limit their access to land.
a dislike of personal dependence and an understanding of freedom as not relying on others for a livelihood sank deep roots in british north america.
these beliefs after all accorded with social reality a wide distribution of property that made economic independence part of the lived experience of large numbers of white colonists.
women and the household economy in the household economy of eighteenth century america the family was the center of economic life.
most work revolved around the home and all members men women and children contributed to the familys livelihood.
the independence of the small farmer depended in considerable measure on the labor of dependent women and children.
he that hath an industrious family shall soon be rich declared one colonial saying and the high birthrate in part reflected the need for as many hands as possible on colonial farms.
most farmers concentrated first on growing food for their own consumption and acquiring enough land to pass it along to their sons.
but the consumer revolution and expanding networks of atlantic trade drew increasing numbers of farmers into production for the market as well.
as the population grew and the death rate declined family life stabilized and more marriages became lifetime commitments.
free women were expected to devote their lives to being good wives and mothers.
already enshrined in law and property relations male domination took on greater and greater social reality.
in several colonies the law mandated primogeniture meaning that estates must be passed intact to the oldest son.
as colonial society became more structured opportunities that had existed for women in the early period receded.
in connecticut for example the courts were informal and unorganized in the seventeenth century and women often represented themselves.
in the eighteenth century it became necessary to hire a lawyer as ones spokesman in court.
women barred from practicing as attorneys disappeared from judicial proceedings.
because of the desperate need for labor men and women in the seventeenth century both did various kinds of work.
in the eighteenth century the division of labor visions of freedom the van bergen overmantel.
the opportunity to achieve economic independence was central to american colonists idea of freedom.
this section is part of a sevenfoot long painting by john heaten from around 1773 probably designed to hang above a wide fireplace in the home of marten van bergen a dutch farmer in colonial new york.
the house and farm buildings are in dutch style.
the painting offers a rare contemporary view of a prosperous colonial farm with its full granary and livestock.
native americans and african american slaves as well as workers who probably were indentured servants are among the individuals depicted by the artist.
questions 1 what does the painting suggest about gradations of freedom at the time it was created.
2 what indications of prosperty are evident in the painting.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 this portrait of the cheney family by an unknown late eighteenth century artist illustrates the high birthrate in colonial america and suggests how many years of a womans life were spent bearing and raising children.
social classes in the colonies along gender lines solidified.
womens work was clearly defined including cooking cleaning sewing making butter and assisting with agricultural chores.
the work of farmers wives and daughters often spelled the difference between a familys self sufficiency and poverty.
womens work is never done this popular adage was literally true.
even as the consumer revolution reduced the demands on many women by making available store bought goods previously produced at home womens work seemed to increase.
lower infant mortality meant more time spent in child care and domestic chores.
the demand for new goods increased the need for all family members to contribute to family income.
for most women work was incessant and exhausting.
i am dirty and distressed almost wearied to death wrote mary cooper a long island woman in her diary in 1769.
this day she continued is forty years since i left my fathers house and come here and here have i seen little else but hard labor and sorrow north america at mid century by the mid eighteenth century the area that would become the united states was home to a remarkable diversity of peoples and different kinds of social organization from pueblo villages of the southwest to tobacco plantations of the chesapeake towns and small farms of new england landholdings in the hudson valley that resembled feudal estates and fur trading outposts of the northern and western frontier.
elites tied to imperial centers of power dominated the political and economic life of nearly every colony.
but large numbers of colonists enjoyed far greater opportunities for freedom access to the vote prospects of acquiring land the right to worship as they pleased and an escape from oppressive government than existed in europe.
free colonists probably enjoyed the highest per capita income in the world.
the colonies economic growth contributed to a high birthrate long life expectancy and expanding demand for consumer goods.
in the british colonies writes one historian lived thousands of the freest individuals the western world has ever known yet many others found themselves confined to the partial freedom of indentured servitude or to the complete absence of freedom in slavery.
both timeless longings for freedom and new and unprecedented forms of unfreedom had been essential to the north american colonies remarkable development.
suggested reading suggested reading books bailyn bernard.
the peopling of british north america 1986.
a brief survey of the movement of peoples across the atlantic.
berlin ira.
many thousands gone the first two centuries of slavery in north america 1998.
the most extensive study of the origins and development of colonial slavery.
bushman richard.
the refinement of america persons houses cities 1992.
a study of how a more refined lifestyle emerged in the eighteenth century colonies.
dayton cornelia h women before the bar gender law and society in connecticut 1639 1789 1995.
examines the changing legal status of women in one american colony.
jordan winthrop d white over black american attitudes toward the negro 1550 1812 1968.
a detailed look at how ideas about race developed over time in england and the american colonies.
kidd thomas s the great awakening 2007.
an account of the religious movement that swept the american colonies in the eighteenth century.
kulikoff allan.
tobacco and slaves the development of southern cultures in the chesapeake 1680 1800 1986.
explores how the rise of slave grown tobacco affected society in the chesapeake.
lemon james t the best poor mans country a geographical study of early southeastern pennsylvania 1972.
a study of agriculture and the environment in one of the most successful farming areas of colonial america.
lepore jill.
the name of war king philips war and the origin of american identity 1998.
an examination not only of the war itself but also of its long term consequences for indian white relations.
lovejoy david s the glorious revolution in america 1972.
explores how the revolution in england in 1689 affected the american colonies.
mintz sidney.
sweetness and power the place of sugar in modern history 1985.
a global history of the significance of sugar in the making of the modern world.
morgan edmund s american slavery american freedom the ordeal of colonial virginia 1975.
an influential study of the slow development of slavery in seventeenth century virginia.
norton mary beth.
in the devils snare the salem witchcraft crisis of 1692 2002.
a study of the witch trials that places them in the context of anxieties over indian warfare on the massachusetts frontier.
saxton martha.
being good womens moral values in early america 2003.
examines social standards for womens behavior and how women tried to live up to them.
websites the atlantic slave trade and slave life in the americas virginia edu slavery index php afro louisiana history and genealogy c hapter r eview review questions 1 both the puritans and william penn viewed their colonies as holy experiments how did they differ.
2 the textbook states prejudice by itself did not create american slavery examine the forces and events that led to slavery in north america and the role that racial prejudice played.
3 how were the actions of king james ii toward new england perceived as threats to colonial liberty.
4 how did king philips war bacons rebellion and the salem witch trials illustrate a widespread crisis in british north america in the late seventeenth century.
5 the social structure of the eighteenth century colonies was growing more open for some but not for others.
for whom was there more opportunity and for whom not.
6 by the end of the seventeenth century commerce was the foundation of empire and the leading cause of competition between european empires.
explain how the north american colonies were directly linked to atlantic commerce by laws and trade.
7 if you traveled outside of eighteenth century new england you might agree with fellow travelers that the colonies were demonstrating greater diversity in many ways.
how would you support this claim.
8 despite their lack of rights hard working women and children were often the key to the success of independent family farmers.
demonstrate the truth of this statement.
freedom questions 1 english settlers insisted that true freedom for native americans meant they must abandon their traditions and accept english ways.
examine the changes to native american life by the mid eighteenth century and discuss whether native american freedom increased by any standards.
2 freedom and lack of freedom existed side by side in the english colonies.
using examples from pennsylvania and elsewhere demonstrate how greater freedom for some colonists in one area meant less freedom for others.
3 british citizens connected freedom and liberty to land ownership and not having to work for wages.
why did they make these connections and what were the consequences for the social structure.
4 some historians have argued that the freedoms and prosperity of the british empire were all based on slavery.
examine this statement using specific examples.
5 many british settlers in north america believed it was the best poor mans country and that they were the freest people in the world.
what factors would lead to such a claim.
study and review at key terms metacom p 94 r e v i e w ta b l e colonial crises in the late seventeenth century king philips war p 95 crisis origins of dates conflict action resolution mercantilist system p 95 navigation acts p 96 king philips war 1675 white settlers encroachment on indian land philips forces attack fortyfive new england towns settlers counterattack breaking indians power bacons rebellion corruption of virginias government bacon burns jamestown and takes power virginias ruling elite undertake reforms james ii threatens to restore catholicism to england a bloodless coup to overthrow james ii colonists overthrow dominion of new england protestants william and mary of orange are crowned amidst political and social tensions young girls begin to experiment with magic hundreds governor accused of dissolves the witchcraft and salem court nineteen people are hanged covenant chain p 98 yamasee uprising p 99 society of friends quakers p 100 sugar p 103 glorious revolution las siete partidas p 105 bacons rebellion p 106 slave code p 108 anglicanism p 109 glorious revolution p 109 english bill of rights p 109 salem witch trials 1691 lords of trade p 110 dominion of new england p 110 english toleration act p 111 salem witch trials p 112 redemptioners p 116 walking purchase p 120 backcountry p 120 artisans p 122 cousinocracy p 125 c hapter 4 two treatises of government act of union creating great britain slave uprising in new york city treaty of utrecht 1720 catos letters junto club founded by benjamin franklin pennsylvania gazette established 1730s great awakening georgia colony founded john peter zenger put on trial for libel stono rebellion ohio company awarded land from virginia 1754 seven years war albany plan of union drafted by benjamin franklin william pitt sits as british prime minister pontiacs rebellion british government issues proclamation of 1763 father serra establishes first mission in california slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 slavery and empire atlantic trade africa and the slave trade the middle passage chesapeake slavery freedom and slavery in the chesapeake indian slavery in early carolina the rice kingdom the georgia experiment slavery in the north slave cultures and slave resistance colonial government the rise of the assemblies politics in public the colonial press freedom of expression and its limits the trial of zenger the american enlightenment the great awakening religious revivals the preaching of whitefield the awakenings impact becoming african american african american cultures resistance to slavery the crisis of 1739 1741 imperial rivalries an empire of freedom battle for the continent british patriotism the british constitution the language of liberty republican liberty liberal freedom the middle ground the seven years war a world transformed pontiacs rebellion the proclamation line pennsylvania and the indians colonial identities the public sphere spanish north america the spanish in california the french empire the right to vote political cultures the old plantation a late eighteenth century watercolor by an unknown artist depicts slaves dancing in a plantations slave quarters perhaps at a wedding.
the scene may take place in south carolina where the painting was found.
the musical instruments and pottery are african in origin while much of the clothing is of european manufacture indicating the mixing of african and white cultures among the eras slaves.
f ocus q uestions how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
what factors led to distinct african american cultures in the eighteenth century.
what were the meanings of british liberty in the eighteenth century.
what concepts and institutions dominated colonial politics in the eighteenth century.
how did the great awakening challenge the religious and social structure of british north america.
how did the spanish and french empires in america develop in the eighteenth century.
what was the impact of the seven years war on imperial and indian white relations.
l s ometime in the mid 1750s olaudah equiano the eleven year old son of a west african village chief was kidnapped by slave traders.
he soon found himself on a ship headed for barbados.
after a short stay on that caribbean island equiano was sold to a plantation owner in virginia and then purchased by a british sea captain who renamed him gustavus vassa.
he accompanied his owner on numerous voyages on atlantic trading vessels.
while still a slave he enrolled in a school in england where he learned to read and write and then enlisted in the royal navy.
he fought in canada under general james wolfe in 1758 during the seven years war.
in 1763 however equiano was sold once again and returned to the caribbean.
three years later he was able to purchase his freedom.
equiano went on to live through shipwrecks took part in an english colonizing venture in central america and even participated in an expedition to the arctic circle.
equiano eventually settled in london and in 1789 he published the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano or gustavus vassa the african which he described as a history of neither a saint a hero nor a tyrant but of a victim of slavery who through luck or fate ended up more fortunate than most of his people.
he condemned the idea that africans were inferior to europeans and therefore deserved to be slaves.
he urged the european reader to recall that his ancestors were once like the africans uncivilized and asked did nature make them inferior.
and should they too have been made slaves persons of all races he insisted were capable of intellectual improvement.
the book became the eras most widely read account by a slave of his own experiences.
equiano died in 1797 recent scholars have suggested that equiano may actually have been born in the new world rather than africa.
in either case while his rich variety of experience was no doubt unusual his life illuminates broad patterns of eighteenth century american history.
as noted in the previous chapter some 5 000 slaves fought for american independence and many thereby gained their freedom.
yet far more slaves obtained liberty from the british.
lord dunmores proclamation of 1775 and the phillipsburgh proclamation of general henry clinton issued four years later offered sanctuary to slaves who escaped to british lines.
numerous signers of the declaration of independence lost slaves as a result.
thirty of thomas jeffersons slaves ran away to the british as did slaves owned by patrick henry and james madison.
all told nearly 100 000 slaves including one quarter of all the slaves in south carolina and onethird of those in georgia deserted their owners and fled to british lines.
this was by far the largest exodus from the plantations until the outbreak of the civil war.
some of these escaped slaves were recaptured as the tide of battle turned in the patriots favor.
but at the wars end some 20 000 were living in three enclaves of british control new york charleston and savannah.
george washington insisted they must be returned.
sir guy carleton the british commander in new york replied that to do so would be a dishonorable violation of the public faith since they had been promised their freedom.
in the end more than 15 000 black men women and children accompanied the british out of the country.
they ended up in nova scotia england and sierra leone a settlement for former slaves from the united states established by the british on the coast of west africa.
some were re enslaved in the west indies.
a number of their stories were indeed remarkable.
harry washington an african born slave of george washington had run away from mount vernon in 1771 but was recaptured.
in 1775 he fled to join lord dunmore and eventually became a corporal in a black british regiment the black pioneers.
he eventually ended up in sierra leone where in 1800 he took part in an unsuccessful uprising by black settlers against the british appointed government.
the issue of compensation for the slaves who departed with the british poisoned relations between britain and the new united states for decades to come.
finally in 1827 britain agreed to make payments to 1 100 americans who claimed they had been improperly deprived of their slave property.
what was the impact of the revolution on slavery.
the book of negroes compiled by british commanders when they evacuated new york city in 1783 lists some 3 000 african americans who had sought their freedom behind british lines and departed with the british army.
many ended up in nova scotia some eventually made their way to sierra leone in west africa.
this page includes an entry for deborah formerly a slave of george washington sixth from bottom.
voluntary emancipations for a brief moment the revolutionary upheaval appeared to threaten the continued existence of slavery.
during the war of independence nearly every state prohibited or discouraged the further importation of slaves recent h1 voices of freedom from abigail adams to john adams braintree mass.
march 31 1776 from their home in massachusetts abigail adams maintained a lively correspondence with her husband while he was in philadelphia serving in the continental congress.
in this letter she suggests some of the limits of the patriots commitment to liberty.
which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands.
remember all men would be tyrants if they could.
if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion and will not hold ourselves i wish you would write me a letter half as long as i write you and tell me if you may where your fleet have gone.
what sort of defense virginia can make against our common enemy.
whether it is so situated as to make an able defense.
i have sometimes been ready to think that the passion for liberty cannot be equally strong in the breasts of those who have been accustomed to deprive their fellow creatures of theirs.
of this i am certain that it is not founded upon that generous and christian principle of doing to others as we would that others should do unto us.
i long to hear that you have declared an independency and by the way in the new code of laws bound by any such laws in which we have no voice or representation.
that your sex are naturally tyrannical is a truth so thoroughly established as to admit of no dispute but such of you as wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of master for the more tender and endearing one of friend.
why then not put it out of the power of the vicious and the lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity.
men of sense in all ages abhor those customs which treat us only as the vassals of your sex.
regard us then as beings placed by providence under your protection and in imitation of the supreme being make use of that power only for our happiness.
f r o m pe t i t i o n s o f s l a v e s t o the massachusetts legislature 1773 and 1777 many slaves saw the struggle for independence as an opportunity to assert their own claims to freedom.
among the first efforts toward abolition were petitions by massachusetts slaves to their legislature.
the efforts made by the legislative of this province in their last sessions to free themselves from slavery gave us who are in that deplorable state a high degree of satisfaction.
we expect great things from men who have made such a noble stand against the designs of their fellow men to enslave them.
we cannot but wish and hope sir that you will have the same grand object we mean civil and religious liberty in view in your next session.
the divine spirit of freedom seems to fire every breast on this continent.
your petitioners apprehend that they have in common with all other men a natural and unalienable right to that freedom which the great parent of the universe hath bestowed equally on all mankind and which they have never forfeited by any compact or agreement whatever but they were unjustly dragged by the hand of cruel power from their dearest friends and.
from a populous pleasant and plentiful country and in violation of laws of nature and of nations and in defiance of all the tender feelings of humanity brought here.
to be sold like beast s of burden.
among a people professing the mild religion of jesus.
in imitation of the laudable example of the good people of these states your petitioners have long and patiently waited the event of petition after petition by them presented to the legislative body.
they cannot but express their astonishment that it has never been considered that every principle from which america has acted in the course of their unhappy difficulties with great britain pleads stronger than a thousand arguments in favor of your petitioners and their desire to be restored to the enjoyment of that which is the natural right of all men.
questions 1 what does abigail adams have in mind when she refers to the unlimited power husbands exercise over their wives.
2 how do the slaves employ the principles of the revolution for their own aims.
3 what do these documents suggest about the boundaries of freedom in the era of the american revolution.
6 the revolution within slavery and the revolution from africa.
the war left much of the plantation south in ruins.
during the 1780s a considerable number of slaveholders especially in virginia and maryland voluntarily emancipated their slaves.
in 1796 robert carter iii a member of one of virginias wealthiest families provided for the gradual emancipation of the more than 400 slaves he owned.
in the same year richard randolph a member of another prominent virginia family drafted a will that condemned slavery as an infamous practice provided for the freedom of about 90 slaves and set aside part of his land for them to own.
farther south however the abolition process never got under way.
when the british invaded south carolina during the war john laurens whose father henry was charlestons leading merchant and revolutionaryera statesman proposed to lead a corps of emancipated blacks in the defense of liberty south carolinas leaders rejected the idea.
they would rather lose the war than lose their slaves.
however black soldiers from the colony of saint domingue some free and some slave fought on the american side as part of a french contingent in the unsuccessful defense of savannah georgia in 1778.
abolition an engraving from a commemorative pitcher presented to the abolitionist joseph curtis by the new york manumission society in 1819 depicts liberty releasing slaves from bondage.
curtis holds aloft a mirror reflecting the rising sun.
founded in 1785 by alexander hamilton john jay and others the society was instrumental in the passage of new yorks 1799 law providing for the gradual abolition of slavery.
in the north between 1777 when vermont drew up a constitution that banned slavery and 1804 when new jersey acted every state north of maryland took steps toward emancipation the first time in recorded history that legislative power had been invoked to eradicate slavery.
but even here where slavery was peripheral to the economy the method of abolition reflected how property rights impeded emancipation.
generally abolition laws did not free living slaves.
instead they provided for the liberty of any child born in the future to a slave mother but only after he or she had served the mothers master until adulthood as compensation for the owners future economic loss.
children born to slave mothers in pennsylvania after passage of the states emancipation act of 1780 had to serve the owner for twenty eight years far longer than had been customary for white indentured servants.
these laws gave indentured servitude rapidly declining among whites a new lease on life in the case of northern blacks.
abolition in the north was a slow drawn out process.
for slaves alive when the northern laws were passed hopes for freedom rested on their own ability to escape and the voluntary actions of their owners.
and many northern slaveholders proved reluctant indeed when it came to liberating their slaves.
new york city where one fifth of the white families owned at least one slave in 1790 recorded only seventy six such voluntary acts between 1783 and 1800 the first national census in 1790 recorded 21 000 slaves still living in new york and 11 000 in new jersey.
new yorker john jay chief justice of the united states owned five slaves in 1800 as late as 1830 the census revealed that there were still 3 500 slaves in the north.
the last slaves in connecticut did not become free until 1848 in 1860 eighteen elderly slaves still resided in new jersey.
free black communities all in all the revolution had a contradictory impact on american slavery and therefore on american freedom.
gradual as it was the abolition of slav visions of freedom liberty displaying the arts and sciences.
this 1792 painting by samuel jennings is one of the few visual images of the early republic explicitly to link slavery with tyranny and liberty with abolition.
the female figure offers books to newly freed slaves.
other forms of knowledge depicted include a globe an artists palette and the top of a column evoking the republic of ancient rome.
beneath her left foot lies a broken chain.
in the background free slaves enjoy some leisure time.
painted at the same time as the haitian revolution was spreading fear of a slave rebellion the work celebrates emancipation rather than seeing it as threatening.
questions 1 what attributes of freedom does the artist emphasize most strongly in the painting.
2 how do the figures in the painting convey ideas about race.
6 the revolution within a tray painted by an unknown artist in the early nineteenth century portrays lemuel haynes a celebrated black preacher and critic of slavery.
daughters of liberty ery in the north drew a line across the new nation creating the dangerous division between free and slave states.
abolition in the north voluntary emancipation in the upper south and the escape of thousands from bondage created for the first time in american history a sizable free black population many of whose members took new family names like freeman or freeland.
on the eve of independence virtually every black person in america had been a slave.
now free communities with their own churches schools and leaders came into existence.
they formed a standing challenge to the logic of slavery a haven for fugitives and a springboard for further efforts at abolition.
in 1776 fewer than 10 000 free blacks resided in the united states.
by 1810 their numbers had grown to nearly 200 000 most of them living in maryland and virginia.
in all the states except virginia south carolina and georgia free black men who met taxpaying or property qualifications enjoyed the right to vote under new state constitutions.
as the widespread use of the term citizens of color suggests the first generation of free blacks at least in the north formed part of the political nation.
for many americans white as well as black the existence of slavery would henceforth be recognized as a standing affront to the ideal of american freedom a disgrace to a free government as a group of new yorkers put it.
in 1792 when samuel jennings of philadelphia painted liberty displaying the arts and sciences he included among the symbols of freedom a slaves broken chain graphically illustrating how freedom had become identified not simply with political independence but with emancipation.
nonetheless the stark fact is that slavery survived the war of independence and thanks to the natural increase of the slave population continued to grow.
the national census of 1790 revealed that despite all those who had become free through state laws voluntary emancipation and escape the number of slaves in the united states had grown to 700 000 200 000 more than in 1776 daughters of liberty revolutionary women the revolutionary generation included numerous women who contributed to the struggle for independence.
deborah sampson the daughter of a poor massachusetts farmer disguised herself as a man and in 1782 at age twenty one enlisted in the continental army.
sampson displayed remarkable courage participating in several battles and extracting a bullet from her own leg so as not to have a doctor discover her identity.
ultimately her commanding officer discovered her secret but kept it to himself and she was honorably discharged at the end of the war.
years later congress how did the revolution affect the status of women.
awarded her a soldiers pension.
other patriotic women participated in crowd actions against merchants accused of seeking profits by holding goods off the market until their prices rose contributed homespun goods to the army and passed along information about british army movements.
in philadelphia esther reed the wife of patriot leader joseph reed and sarah franklin bache the daughter of benjamin franklin organized a ladies association to raise funds to assist american soldiers.
they issued public broadsides calling for the women of america to name a treasuress in each county in the united states who would collect funds and forward them to the governors wife or if he were unmarried to mistress washington referring to themselves as brave americans who had been born for liberty the ladies association illustrated how the revolution was propelling women into new forms of public activism.
within american households women participated in the political discussions unleashed by independence.
was not every fireside john adams later recalled a theater of politics adamss own wife abigail adams as has been mentioned was a shrewd analyst of public affairs.
mercy otis warren the sister of james otis and husband of james warren a founder of the boston committee of correspondence was another commentator on politics.
she promoted the revolutionary cause in poems and dramas and later published a history of the struggle for independence.
gender and in this painting from 1797 deborah sampson who donned mens clothes to fight in the war of independence is portrayed in genteel female attire.
politics gender nonetheless formed a boundary limiting those entitled to the full blessings of american freedom.
lucy knox the wife of general henry knox wrote her husband during the war that when he returned home he should not consider himself commander in chief of your own house but be convinced that there is such a thing as equal command but the winning of independence did not alter the family law inherited from britain.
the principle of coverture described in chapter 6 northern free blacks were the last large group to experience indentured servitude since the terms of emancipation generally required children of slave mothers to work for their owners before being freed.
at the time of abolition because of widespread slave ownership among eighteenth century artisans a considerable number of northern blacks possessed craft skills.
but it became more and more difficult for blacks to utilize these skills once they became free.
although many white artisans criticized slavery most viewed the freed slaves as low wage competitors and sought to bar them from skilled employment.
they are leaders in the cause of equal rights for themselves a black editor commented of new york citys artisans in the 1830s.
hostility from white craftsmen however was only one of many obstacles that kept blacks confined to the lowest ranks of the labor market.
white juliann jane tillman a preacher in the african methodist episcopal church in an 1844 engraving.
many protestant denominations allowed women to preach although their presence also aroused much criticism.
9 the market revolution 1800 1840 the crowning of flora a painting from 1816 depicts idealized women of virtue and modesty.
these were the qualities the nineteenth centurys cult of domesticity emphasized as essential to proper womanhood.
the limits of prosperity employers refused to hire them in anything but menial positions and white customers did not wish to be served by them.
the result was a rapid decline in economic status until by mid century the vast majority of northern blacks labored for wages in unskilled jobs and as domestic servants.
the state census of 1855 revealed 122 black barbers and 808 black servants in new york city but only 1 lawyer and 6 doctors.
nor could free blacks take advantage of the opening of the west to improve their economic status a central component of american freedom.
federal law barred them from access to public land and by 1860 four states indiana illinois iowa and oregon prohibited them from entering their territory altogether.
the c u lt of domesticity women too found many of the opportunities opened by the market revolution closed to them.
as the household declined as a center of economic production many women saw their traditional roles undermined by the availability of mass produced goods previously made at home.
some women as noted above followed work as it moved from household to factory.
others embraced a new definition of femininity which glorified not a womans contribution to the familys economic well being but her ability to create a private environment shielded from the competitive tensions of the market economy.
womans place was in the home a site increasingly emptied of economically productive functions as work moved from the household to workshops and factories.
her role was to sustain nonmarket values like love friendship and mutual obligation providing men with a shelter from the competitive marketplace.
the earlier ideology of republican motherhood which allowed how did the market revolution affect the lives of workers women and african americans.
women a kind of public role as mothers of future citizens subtly evolved into the mid nineteenth century cult of domesticity virtue which in the eighteenth century was a political characteristic of men essential to the success of republican government came to be redefined as a personal moral quality associated more and more closely with women.
virtue for a woman meant not only sexual innocence but beauty frailty and dependence on men.
in whatever situation of life a woman is placed from her cradle to her grave declared the young ladys book one of numerous popular magazines addressed to female audiences of the 1820s and 1830s a spirit of obedience and submission pliability of temper and humility of mind are required from her these magazines carried articles such as woman a source of comfort woman a being to come home to and woman mans best friend with more and more men leaving the home for work women did exercise considerable power over personal affairs within the family.
the rapid decline in the american birthrate during the nineteenth century from an average of seven children per woman in 1800 to four in 1900 cannot be explained except by the conscious decision of millions of women to limit the number of children they bore.
but the idea of domesticity minimized womens even indirect participation in the outside world.
for both sexes freedom meant fulfilling their respective inborn qualities.
men were rational aggressive and domineering while women were nurturing selfless ruled by the emotions and thus less fitted for public life.
if submission to the will of another increasingly seemed inadmissible for free men it remained a condition natural to women and expected of them.
men moved freely between the public and private spheres women were supposed to remain cloistered in the private realm of the family.
women and work prevailing ideas concerning gender bore little relation to the experience of those women who worked for wages at least some time in their lives.
they did so despite severe disadvantages.
women could not compete freely for employment since only low paying jobs were available to them.
married women still could not sign independent contracts or sue in their own name and not until after the civil war did they not their husbands control the wages they earned.
nonetheless for poor city dwellers and farm families the labor of all family members was essential to economic survival.
thousands of poor women found jobs as domestic servants factory workers and seamstresses.
early industrialization enhanced the availability of paid work for northern women as the spread of the putting out system in such indus a woman with a sewing machine in an undated photograph.
it is not clear if she is sewing for herself and family or for income as a seamstress.
an image from a female infants 1830 birth and baptismal certificate depicts a domestic scene with women at work while men relax.
9 the market revolution 1800 1840 the limits of prosperity tries as shoemaking hatmaking and clothing manufacture allowed women laboring at home to contribute to family income even as they retained responsibility for domestic chores.
for the expanding middle class however it became a badge of respectability for wives to remain at home outside the disorderly new market economy while husbands conducted business in their offices shops and factories.
in larger cities where families of different social classes had previously lived alongside one another fashionable middle class neighborhoods populated by merchants factory owners and professionals like lawyers and doctors began to develop.
work in middle class homes was done by domestic servants the largest employment category for women in nineteenth century america.
the freedom of the middle class woman defined in part as freedom from labor rested on the employment of other women within her household.
even though most women were anything but idle in a market economy where labor increasingly meant work that created monetary value it became more and more difficult to think of labor as encompassing anyone but men.
lydia maria child wrote a popular book the frugal housewife published in 1829 that sought to prepare women for the ups and downs of the market revolution one chapter from full participation in the market revolution.
the principle of universal suffrage declared the united states magazine and democratic review in 1851 meant that white males of age constituted the political nation how could the word universal be reconciled with barring blacks and women from political participation.
as democracy triumphed the intellectual grounds for exclusion shifted from economic dependency to natural incapacity.
gender and racial differences were widely understood as part of a single natural hierarchy of innate endowments.
a boundary drawn by nature itself was not really exclusion at all.
how did woman first become subject to man as she now is all over the world asked the new york herald in 1852.
by her nature her sex just as the negro is and always will be to the end of time inferior to the white race and therefore doomed to subjection paradoxically therefore while freedom for white men involved an open ended process of personal transformation developing to the fullest the potential inherent within each human being the limits of american democracy rested on the belief that the character and abilities of non whites and women were forever fixed by nature.
the debate over which people are and are not qualified to take part in american democracy lasted well into the twentieth century.
not until 1920 was the constitution amended to require states to allow women to vote.
the voting rights act of 1965 swept away restrictions on black voting imposed by many southern states.
even today controversy persists over the voting rights of immigrants persons who have served prison terms and the poor.
the political world of the nineteenth century so crucial an arena for the exercise of american freedom was in part defined in contrast to the feminine sphere of the home.
freedom in the public realm in no way implied freedom in private life.
the most rabid radical ralph waldo emerson remarked in his journal in 1841 was likely to be conservative in relation to the theory of marriage beyond the right to decent treatment by her husband and to whatever property the law allowed her to control declared what were the social bases for the flourishing democracy of the early mid nineteenth century.
the new york herald a woman had no rights.
with which the public have any concern a racial democracy if the exclusion of women from political freedom continued a long standing practice the increasing identification of democracy and whiteness marked something of a departure.
tocqueville noted that by the 1830s equality had become an american obsession.
in contrast to the highly stratified societies of europe white americans of all social classes dressed the same traveled in the same stagecoaches and railroad cars and stayed in the same hotels.
yet at the same time blacks were increasingly considered a group apart.
racist imagery became the stock in trade of popular theatrical presentations like minstrel shows in which white actors in blackface entertained the audience by portraying african americans as stupid dishonest and altogether ridiculous.
with the exception of herman melville who portrayed complex sometimes heroic black characters in works like moby dick and benito cereno the latter a fictionalized account of a shipboard slave rebellion american authors either ignored blacks entirely or presented them as stereotypes happy slaves prone to superstition or long suffering but devout christians.
meanwhile the somewhat tentative thinking of the revolutionary era about the status of non whites flowered into an elaborate ideology of racial superiority and inferiority complete with scientific underpinnings.
these developments affected the boundaries of the political nation.
in the revolutionary era only virginia south carolina and georgia explicitly confined the vote to whites although elsewhere custom often made it difficult for free blacks to exercise the franchise.
as late as 1800 no northern state barred blacks from voting.
but every state that entered the union after that year with the single exception of maine limited the right to vote to white males.
and beginning with kentucky in 1799 and maryland two years later states that had allowed blacks to vote rescinded the privilege.
race and class in 1821 the same new york constitutional convention that removed property qualifications for white voters raised the requirement for blacks to 250 a sum beyond the reach of nearly all of the states black residents.
north carolina disenfranchised free blacks in 1835 and pennsylvania home of an articulate economically successful black community in philadelphia did the same three years later.
one delegate to the pennsylvania constitutional convention refused to sign the completed document because of its provision limiting suffrage to whites.
this was thaddeus stevens who would later become a leader in the drive for equal rights for african americans after the civil war.
by 1860 blacks could vote on the same basis as whites in only five new england states which contained only 4 percent of the nations free black population.
a delegate to the pennsylvania convention of 1837 described the united states as a political community of white persons dandy jim a piece of sheet music from 1843 minstrel shows were a form of nineteenth century entertainment in which white actors impersonated blacks.
here the actor makes fun of a black man attempting to adopt the style of middleclass white americans.
10 democracy in america 1815 1840 nationalism and its discontents despite racial inequalities many whites of the revolutionary generation had thought of african americans as citizens of color potential members of the body politic.
but in the nineteenth century the definition of the political nation became more and more associated with race.
the federal government barred free blacks from service in state militias and the army although the navy did enroll some black sailors.
no state accorded free blacks what today would be considered full equality before the law.
in illinois for example blacks could not vote testify or sue in court serve in the militia or attend public schools.
blacks were aliens not americans intruders among us declared a political leader in minnesota.
in effect race had replaced class as the boundary between those american men who were entitled to enjoy political freedom and those who were not.
even as this focus on race limited americas political community as a whole it helped to solidify a sense of national identity among the diverse groups of european origin.
in a country where the right to vote had become central to the meaning of freedom it is difficult to overstate the importance of the fact that white male immigrants could vote in some states almost from the moment they landed in america while nearly all free blacks and of course slaves whose ancestors had lived in the country for centuries could not vote at all.
n at i o n a l i s m a n d i t s d i s c o n t e n t s an image from a broadside from the campaign of 1824 promoting the american system of governmentsponsored economic development.
the illustrations represent industry commerce and agriculture.
the ship at the center is named the john quincy adams.
its flag no colonial subjection suggests that without a balanced economy the united states will remain economically dependent on great britain.
the american system the war of 1812 which the united states and great britain the worlds foremost military power fought to a draw inspired an outburst of nationalist pride.
but the war also revealed how far the united states still was from being a truly integrated nation.
with the bank of the united states having gone out of existence when its charter expired in 1811 the country lacked a uniform currency and found it almost impossible to raise funds for the war effort.
given the primitive state of transportation it proved very difficult to move men and goods around the country.
one shipment of supplies from new england had taken seventy five days to reach new orleans.
with the coming of peace the manufacturing enterprises that sprang up while trade with britain had been suspended faced intense competition from low cost imported goods.
a younger generation of republicans led by henry clay and john c calhoun believed these infant industries deserved national protection.
while retaining their jeffersonian belief in an agrarian republic they insisted that agriculture must be complemented by a manufacturing sector if the country were to become economically independent of britain.
in 1806 congress as noted in the previous chapter many northern women before the civil war became part of a thriving female culture centered on voluntary religious and reform organizations.
few parallels existed in the south and plantation mistresses often complained of loneliness and isolation.
the proslavery argument some southerners worried about their standing in the eyes of the world especially how others viewed the intellectual life of their region.
we of the south one wrote must to europe continue to appear inferior to the north in intellectual cultivation the free states outstripped the slave states in public education the number of colleges and in newspapers literary journals and other publications.
nonetheless the life of the mind flourished in the old south and the region did not lack for novelists political philosophers scientists and the like.
how did slavery shape social and economic relations in the old south.
in the thirty years before the outbreak of the civil war however even as northern criticism of the peculiar institution began to deepen proslavery thought came to dominate southern public life.
fewer and fewer white southerners shared the view common among the founding fathers that slavery was at best a necessary evil many in the south john c calhoun proclaimed in 1837 once believed that slavery was a moral and political evil.
that folly and delusion are gone we see it now in its true light and regard it as the most safe and stable basis for free institutions in the world even those who had no direct stake in slavery shared with planters a deep commitment to white supremacy.
indeed racism the belief that blacks were innately inferior to whites and unsuited for life in any condition other than slavery formed one pillar of the proslavery ideology.
most slaveholders also found legitimation for slavery in biblical passages such as the injunction that servants should obey their masters.
others argued that slavery was essential to human progress.
had not the ancient republics of greece and rome and the great european empires of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries rested on slave labor.
without slavery planters would be unable to cultivate the arts sciences and other civilized pursuits.
still other defenders of slavery insisted that the institution guaranteed equality for whites by preventing the growth of a class doomed to a life of unskilled labor.
like northerners they claimed to be committed to the ideal of freedom.
slavery for blacks they declared was the surest guarantee of perfect equality among whites liberating them from the low menial jobs like factory labor and domestic service performed by wage laborers in the north.
slavery made possible the considerable degree of economic autonomy the social condition of freedom enjoyed not only by planters but by non slaveholding whites.
because of slavery claimed one congressman white southerners were as independent as the bird which cleaves the air and because independence was necessary for citizenship slavery was the cornerstone of our republican edifice abolition in the americas american slaveowners were well aware of developments in slave systems elsewhere in the western hemisphere.
as noted in chapter suggested that american slavery faced enemies both within and outside the south.
the proslavery argument increasingly permeated southern intellectual and political life while dissenting opinions were suppressed.
some states made membership in an abolitionist society a criminal offense while mobs drove critics of slavery from their homes.
the souths great reaction produced one of the most thoroughgoing suppressions of freedom of speech in american history.
even as reform movements arose in the north that condemned slavery as contrary to christianity and to basic american values and national debate over the peculiar institution intensified southern society closed in defense of slavery.
suggested reading books aptheker herbert.
american negro slave revolts 1943.
still the fullest account of slave rebellions in the united states.
suggested reading berlin ira.
slaves without masters the free negro in the antebellum south 1974.
a careful study of the status of free blacks stressing differences between the upper and lower south.
clinton catherine.
the plantation mistress womans world in the old south 1982.
explores how the institution of slavery affected the lives of planters wives and daughters.
davis david brion.
inhuman bondage the rise and fall of slavery in the new world 2006.
places the history of slavery in the united states firmly in a hemispheric context.
genovese eugene d roll jordan roll the world the slaves made 1974.
a classic study of the paternalist ethos and the culture that developed under slavery.
gutman herbert g the black family in slavery and freedom 1976.
a pioneering examination of how slaves created and sustained families under the harsh conditions of slavery.
johnson walter.
soul by soul life inside the antebellum slave market 1999.
considers the operations of the new orleans slave market as a window into slavery as a whole.
joyner charles d down by the riverside a south carolina slave community 1984.
studies slave communities in coastal south carolina emphasizing the blend of african and american influences.
kolchin peter.
american slavery 1619 1877 rev.
a careful up to date survey of the history of slavery in north america from its beginning through emancipation.
mccurry stephanie.
masters of small worlds yeoman households gender relations and the political culture of antebellum south carolina 1995.
studies the lives of men and women in non slaveholding families to explore their links with the planter class.
obrien michael.
conjectures of order intellectual life and the american south 2004.
a comprehensive study of intellectual life in the old south.
rugemer edward b the problem of emancipation the caribbean roots of the american civil war 2008.
explores how developments in the west indies affected the outlook of american slaveholders.
stevenson brenda.
life in black and white family and community in the slave south 1996.
focusing on virginia an examination of how slaves adapted to the rise of the interstate slave trade.
wade richard.
slavery in the cities the south 1820 1860 1964.
an examination of slavery in southern cities and growing white fears of lack of control of the urban slave population.
wright gavin.
the political economy of the cotton south households markets and wealth in the nineteenth century 1978.
presents the economic development and structure of the cotton south by a prominent economic historian.
websites born in slavery slave narratives from the federal writers project lcweb2 loc.
gov ammem snhtml snhome html documenting the american south gilder lehrman center for the study of slavery resistance and abolition slaves and the courts 1740 1860 html c hapter r eview review questions 1 given that by 1860 the economic investment represented by the slave population exceeded the value of the nations factories railroads and banks combined explain how important slavery was to the national economy and the emergence of the united states as a great power.
2 while some poor southern whites resented the dominance of the slavocracy most supported the institution and accepted the power of the planter class.
why did the plain folk continue to support slavery.
3 describe the paternalistic ethos the planters embraced and explain how it both masked and justified the brutal realities of slavery.
4 identify the basic elements of the proslavery defense and those points aimed especially at non southern audiences.
5 compare slaves in the old south with those elsewhere in the world focusing on health diet and opportunities for freedom.
6 describe the difference between gang labor and task labor for slaves and explain how slaves tasks varied by region across the old south.
7 enslaved african americans developed their own culture.
what were the different sources of this culture and how did it vary by region.
8 identify the different types of resistance to slavery.
which ones were the most common the most effective and the most demonstrative.
freedom questions 1 in frederick douglasss view how were slaves in their desire for freedom closer to the founding ideals than the whites who celebrated the fourth of july but preserved slavery.
2 how did slavery affect the lives and freedoms of both black and white americans.
3 how did the defenders of slavery handle the founding ideas that freedom and equality were natural rights.
4 what constraints were there on the rights of free blacks in the antebellum south.
5 how did slaves think of freedom and what were the sources for their beliefs.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e the peculiar institution p 417 slave rebellions and the old south cotton is king p 417 lords of the loom and lords of the lash p 419 rebellion date result gabriels rebellion virginia prohibits blacks from congregating on sundays without white supervision and restricts masters voluntarily freeing their slaves denmark veseys conspiracy vesey is executed in south carolina and the state increases restrictions on free blacks nat turners rebellion the only large scale rebellion in the south it causes virginia to further tighten its grip on slavery amistad slaves aboard the ship win their freedom increasing southern fear of federal power to attack slavery plain folk p 422 southern paternalism p 423 the proslavery argument p 424 slave religion p 441 silent sabotage p 443 underground railroad p 445 runaways p 445 harriet tubman p 445 denmark veseys conspiracy p 446 nat turners rebellion p 447 c hapter 12 first shaker community established in upstate new york american colonization society founded owenite community established at new harmony the american temperance society founded first black newspaper established in the united states freedoms journal david walkers an appeal to the coloured citizens of the world william lloyd garrisons the liberator debuts american anti slavery society founded lydia maria childs an appeal in favor of that class of americans called africans female moral reform society organized harriet martineaus society in america elijah lovejoy killed theodore weldss slavery as it is new england transcendentalists establish brook farm margaret fullers woman in the nineteenth century john humphrey noyes founds oneida new york seneca falls convention held harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin frederick douglasss speech what to the slave is the fourth of july tax supported school systems established in all northern states an age of reform 1820 1840 the reform impulse utopian communities the shakers the mormons trek oneida worldly communities the owenites religion and reform the temperance movement critics of reform reformers and freedom the invention of the asylum the common school abolitionists and the idea of freedom a new vision of america black and white abolitionism black abolitionists abolitionism and race slavery and american freedom gentlemen of property and standing slavery and civil liberties the origins of feminism the crusade against slavery colonization blacks and colonization militant abolitionism the emergence of garrison spreading the abolitionist message slavery and moral suasion the rise of the public woman women and free speech womens rights feminism and freedom women and work the slavery of sex social freedom the abolitionist schism an abolitionist banner.
antislavery organizations adopted the liberty bell as a symbol of their campaign to extend freedom to black americans.
previously the bell forged in philadelphia in the eighteenth century had simply been known as the old state house bell.
f ocus q uestions what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
what were the different varieties of abolitionism.
how did abolitionism challenge barriers to racial equality and free speech.
what were the diverse sources of the antebellum womens rights movement and its significance.
l a mong the many americans who devoted their lives to the crusade against slavery few were as selfless or courageous as abby kelley.
born in massachusetts in 1811 she was educated at a quaker boarding school in rhode island.
as a teacher in lynn massachusetts she joined the female anti slavery society and like thousands of other northern women threw herself into the abolitionist movement.
in 1838 kelley began to give public speeches about slavery.
her first lecture outside of lynn was literally a baptism of fire.
enraged by reports that abolitionists favored amalgamation of the races that is sexual relations between whites and blacks residents of philadelphia stormed the meeting hall and burned it to the ground.
for two decades kelley traveled throughout the north speaking almost daily in churches public halls and antislavery homes on the holy cause of human rights her career illustrated the interconnections of the eras reform movements.
in addition to abolitionism she was active in pacifist organizations which opposed the use of force including war to settle disputes and was a pioneer in the early struggle for womens rights.
in striving to strike the slaves irons off she wrote women found most surely that we were manacled ourselves kelley was not the first american woman to speak in public.
but she covered more miles and gave more speeches than any other female orator.
she forthrightly challenged her eras assumption that womans place was in the home.
more than any other individual remarked lucy stone another womens rights advocate kelley earned for us all the right of free speech abby kelleys private life was as unconventional as her public career.
she enjoyed a long and happy marriage to stephen s foster a strongwilled abolitionist given to interrupting sunday sermons to denounce ministers who failed to condemn slavery.
she gave birth to a daughter in 1847 but soon returned to lecturing.
when criticized for not devoting herself to the care of her infant kelley replied i have done it for the sake of the mothers whose babies are sold away from them.
the most precious legacy i can leave my child is a free country the reform impulse in the history of the world wrote ralph waldo emerson in 1841 the doctrine of reform has never such hope as at the present hour abolitionism was only one of the eras numerous efforts to improve american society.
during his visit in the early 1830s alexis de tocqueville noted how in the absence of a powerful national government americans political and what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
a rare photograph of an abolitionist meeting in new york state around 1850 the woman at the center wearing a bonnet may be abby kelley.
frederick douglass sits immediately to her right.
social activities were organized through voluntary associations churches fraternal orders political clubs and the like.
the reform impulse was part of this proliferation of voluntary groups.
americans established organizations that worked to prevent the manufacture and sale of liquor end public entertainments and the delivery of the mail on sunday improve conditions in prisons expand public education uplift the condition of wage laborers and reorganize society on the basis of cooperation rather than competitive individualism.
nearly all these groups worked to convert public opinion to their cause.
they sent out speakers gathered signatures on petitions and published pamphlets.
like abby kelley many reformers were active in more than one crusade.
some reform movements like restraining the consumption of liquor and alleviating the plight of the blind and insane flourished throughout the nation.
others including womens rights labor unionism and educational reform were weak or nonexistent in the south where they were widely associated with antislavery sentiment.
reform was an international crusade.
peace temperance womens rights and antislavery advocates regularly crisscrossed the atlantic to promote their cause.
reformers adopted a wide variety of tactics to bring about social change.
some relied on moral suasion to convert people to their cause.
others like opponents of the demon rum sought to use the power of the government to force sinners to change their ways.
some reformers decided to withdraw altogether from the larger society and establish their own cooperative settlements.
they hoped to change american life by creating heavens on earth where they could demonstrate by example the superiority of a collective way of life.
reformers never amounted to anything like a majority of the population even in the north but they had a profound impact on both politics and society.
12 an age of reform 1820 1840 utopian communities unorganized territory l a k e supe r i the reform impulse mid nineteenth century or british canada maine la lake m ichi on hur ga n ke wisconsin vermont lake ontar michigan putney oneida brook farm new york iowa l ak ee atlantic o cean rhode island rie illinois pennsylvania ohio zoar indiana maryland utopia missouri new harmony virginia kentucky in the first half of the nineteenth century dozens of utopian communities were established in the united states where small groups of men and women attempted to establish a more perfect social order within the larger society.
new hampshire massachusetts io utopian new jersey modern times connecticut delaware 200 miles 200 kilometers brook farm fourierist rappite oneidan mormon shaker owenite pietistic others mainly new englander settlement communities about 100 reform communities were established in the decades before the civil war.
historians call them utopian after thomas mores sixteenthcentury novel utopia an outline of a perfect society.
the word has also come to imply that such plans are impractical and impossible to realize.
these communities differed greatly in structure and motivation.
some were subject to the iron discipline of a single leader while others operated in a democratic fashion.
most arose from religious conviction but others were inspired by the secular desire to counteract the social and economic changes set in motion by the market revolution.
nearly all the communities set out to reorganize society on a cooperative basis hoping to restore social harmony to a world of excessive individualism and to narrow the widening gap between rich and poor.
through their efforts the words socialism and communism meaning a social organization in which productive property is owned by the community rather than private individuals entered the language of politics.
most utopian communities also tried to find substitutes for conventional gender relations and marriage patterns.
some prohibited sexual relations between men and women altogether others allowed them to change partners at will.
but nearly all insisted that the abolition of private property must be accompanied by an end to mens property in women.
what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
the shakers religious communities attracted those who sought to find a retreat from a society permeated by sin a refuge from the evils of this sodom as the founders of zoar in ohio put it.
but the shakers the most successful of the religious communities also had a significant impact on the outside world.
at their peak during the 1840s cooperative shaker settlements which stretched from maine to kentucky included more than 5 000 members.
the shakers were founded in the late eighteenth century by mother ann lee the daughter of an english blacksmith who became a religious exhorter and claimed that christ had directed her to emigrate with her followers to america.
the first shaker community was established in upstate new york in 1787 god the shakers believed had a dual personality both male and female and thus the two sexes were spiritually equal.
their work was deemed equally important although each man was assigned a sister to take care of his washing and sewing.
virgin purity formed a pillar of the shakers faith.
they completely abandoned traditional family life.
men and women lived separately in large dormitory like structures and ate in communal dining rooms.
their numbers grew by attracting converts and adopting children from orphanages rather than through natural increase.
numerous outsiders visited shaker communities to observe the religious services that gave the group its name in which men and women separated by sex engaged in frenzied dancing.
although they rejected the individual accumulation of private property the shakers proved remarkably successful economically.
they were among the first to market vegetable and flower seeds and herbal medicines commercially and to breed cattle for profit.
their beautifully crafted furniture is still widely admired today.
an engraving of a shaker dance drawn by benson lossing an artist who visited a shaker community and reported on life there for harpers magazine in 1857 c h.
12 an age of reform 1820 1840 the mormons the reform impulse trek another migration brought thousands of members of the church of jesus christ of latter day saints or mormons to modern day utah.
one of the eras numerous religious sects that hoped to create a kingdom of god on earth the mormons had been founded in the 1820s by joseph smith a young farmer in upstate new york.
smith claimed to have been led by an angel to a set of golden plates covered with strange writing which he translated as the book of mormon.
it claimed that ancient hebrews had emigrated to the new world and become the ancestors of the american indians.
the absolute authority smith exercised over his followers as well as the refusal of the mormons to separate church and state alarmed many neighbors.
even more outrageous to the general community was the mormon practice of polygamy which allows one man to have more than one wife a repudiation of traditional christian teaching and nineteenthcentury morality.
mobs drove smith and his followers out of new york ohio and missouri before they settled in 1839 in nauvoo illinois where they hoped to await the second coming of christ.
there five years later smith was arrested on the charge of inciting a riot that destroyed an antimormon newspaper.
while in jail awaiting trial smith was murdered by a group of intruders.
his successor as mormon leader brigham young led more than 10 000 followers across the great plains and rocky mountains to the shores of the great salt lake in present day utah seeking a refuge where they could practice their faith undisturbed.
the mormons plight revealed the limits of religious toleration in nineteenthcentury america.
oneida another influential and controversial community was oneida founded in 1848 in upstate new york by john humphrey noyes the vermont born son of a u s congressman.
after graduating from dartmouth college noyes briefly studied law but soon experienced a conversion at a religious revival and decided to become a minister.
noyes took the revivalists message that man could achieve moral perfection to an atypical extreme.
he preached that he and his followers had become so perfect that they had achieved a state of complete purity of heart or sinlessness.
in 1836 noyes and his followers formed a small community in putney vermont.
like the shakers noyes did away with private property and abandoned traditional marriage.
but in contrast to shaker celibacy he taught that all members of his community formed a single holy family of equals.
his community became notorious for what noyes called complex marriage whereby any man could propose sexual relations to any woman who had the right to reject or accept his invitation which would then be registered in a public record book.
the great danger was exclusive affections which noyes felt destroyed the harmony of the community.
after being indicted for adultery by local officials noyes in 1848 moved his community to oneida where it survived until 1881 oneida was an extremely dictatorial environment.
to become a member of the community one had to demonstrate command of noyess religious teachings and what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
live according to his rules.
members carefully observed each others conduct and publicly criticized those who violated noyess regulations.
by the 1860s a committee was even determining which couples would be permitted to have children an early example of eugenics as the effort to improve the human race by regulating reproduction came to be known.
w o r l d ly communities to outside observers utopian communities like oneida seemed a case of voluntary slavery but because of their members selfless devotion to the teachings and rules laid down by their leader spiritually oriented communities often achieved remarkable longevity.
the shakers survived well into the twentieth century.
communities with a more worldly orientation tended to be beset by internal divisions and therefore lasted for much shorter periods.
in 1841 new england transcendentalists established brook farm not far from boston where they hoped to demonstrate that manual and intellectual labor could coexist harmoniously.
they modeled the community in part on the ideas of the french social reformer charles fourier who envisioned communal living and working arrangements while retaining private property.
fouriers blueprint for phalanxes as he called his settlements planned everything to the last detail from the number of residents 2 000 to how much income would be generated by charging admission to sightseers.
with leisure time devoted to music dancing dramatic readings and intellectual discussion brook farm was like an exciting miniature university.
but it attracted mostly writers teachers and ministers some of whom disliked farm labor.
the novelist nathaniel hawthorne a resident for a time complained about having to shovel manure.
brook farm disbanded after a few years and hawthorne offered a skeptical view of life there in his 1852 novel the blithedale romance.
the owenites the most important secular communitarian meaning a person who plans or lives in a cooperative community was robert owen a british factory owner.
appalled by the degradation of workers in the early industrial revolution owen created a model factory village at new lanark scotland which combined strict rules of work discipline with comfortable housing and free public education.
around 1815 its 1 500 employees made new lanark the largest center of cotton manufacturing in the world.
convinced that the rich and the poor the governors and the governed have really but one interest owen promoted communitarianism as a peaceful means of ensuring that workers received the full value of their labor.
in 1824 he purchased the harmony community in indiana originally founded by the german protestant religious leader george rapp who had emigrated to america with his followers at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
here owen established new harmony where he hoped to create a new moral world the character of man is without a single exception always formed for him owen declared.
individuals could be transformed by changing the the crisis a publication by the communitarian robert owen and his son robert dale owen.
the cover depicts owens vision of a planned socialist community.
12 an age of reform 1820 1840 the drunkards progress an 1826 anti liquor broadside illustrating how drinking leads a respectable man and his family to ruin.
the reform impulse circumstances in which they lived.
in owens scheme children would be removed at an early age from the care of their parents to be educated in schools where they would be trained to subordinate individual ambition to the common good.
owen also defended womens rights especially access to education and the right to divorce.
at new harmony he promised women would no longer be enslaved to their husbands and false notions about innate differences between the sexes would be abandoned.
harmony eluded the residents of new harmony.
they squabbled about everything from the communitys constitution to the distribution of property.
owens settlement survived for only a few years but it strongly influenced the labor movement educational reformers and womens rights advocates.
owens vision resonated with the widely held american belief that a community of equals could be created in the new world.
quite different from owens planned system were the short lived secular communities founded by josiah warren an early american anarchist one who believes that all institutions that exercise power over individuals including government are illegitimate.
at utopia ohio and modern times new york warren established totally unregulated voluntary settlements.
like other communitarians warren tried to address the sources of labor unrest and womens inequality.
in an attempt to solve the labor problem he created stores where goods were exchanged according to the amount of work that had gone into producing them thus preventing middlemen like bankers and merchants from sharing in the hard earned income of farmers laborers and manufacturers.
marriage in warrens communities was a purely voluntary arrangement since no laws regulated personal behavior.
in effect warren took american individualism to its logi what were the major movements and goals of antebellum reform.
cal extreme.
freedom he declared meant allowing each individual to be absolute despot or sovereign over himself.
religion and reform most americans saw the ownership of property as the key to economic independence and therefore to freedom and marriage as the foundation of the social order.
few were likely to join communities that required them to surrender both.
far more typical of the reform impulse were movements that aimed at liberating men and women either from restraints external to themselves such as slavery and war or from forms of internal servitude like drinking illiteracy and a tendency toward criminality.
drinkers proclaimed one reformer could not be considered free they were chained to alcohol bound to the demon rum many of these reform movements drew their inspiration from the religious revivalism of the second great awakening discussed in chapter 9 the term that became a shorthand for this expansionist spirit was manifest destiny a rare photograph of wagons on their way to oregon during the 1840s.
visions of freedom american progress.
this 1872 painting by john gast commissioned by the author of a travel guide to the pacific coast reflects the ebullient spirit of manifest destiny.
a female figure descended from earlier representations of the goddess of liberty wears the star of empire and leads the movement westward while indians retreat before her.
symbols of civilization abound the eastern city in the upper right corner railroads fenced animals stagecoaches and telegraph wires and a school book held by the central figure.
questions 1 how does gast explain the conquest of the west by white americans.
2 what elements of indian white relations does the artist leave out.
what were the major factors contributing to u s territorial expansion in the 1840s.
the mexican and california frontier new mexico settlement of oregon did not directly raise the issue of slavery.
but the nations acquisition of part of mexico did.
when mexico achieved its independence from spain in 1821 it was nearly as large as the united states and its population of 6 5 million was about two thirds that of its northern neighbor.
mexicos northern provinces california new mexico and texas however were isolated and sparsely settled outposts surrounded by indian country.
new mexicos population at the time of mexican independence consisted of around 30 000 persons of spanish origin 10 000 pueblo indians and an indeterminate number of wild indians nomadic bands of apaches comanches navajos and utes.
with the opening in 1821 of the santa fe trail linking that city with independence missouri new mexicos commerce with the united states eclipsed trade with the rest of mexico.
californias non indian population in 1821 some 3 200 missionaries soldiers and settlers was vastly outnumbered by about 20 000 indians living and working on land owned by religious missions and by 150 000 members of unsubdued tribes in the interior.
in 1834 in the hope of reducing the power of the catholic church and attracting mexican and foreign settlers to california the mexican government dissolved the great mission landholdings and emancipated indians working for the friars.
most of the land ended up in the hands of a new class of mexican cattle ranchers the californios who defined their own identity in large measure against the surrounding indian population.
californios referred to themselves as gente de razn people capable of reason as opposed to the indios whom they called gente sin razn people without reason.
for the common good indians were required to continue to work for the new landholders.
a watercolor of a scene on a ranch near monterey california in 1849 depicts californios supervising the work of native americans.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 the trans mississippi portland fruits of manifest destiny w e s t 1830s 1840s oregon country unorganized territory iowa territory wisconsin territory michigan ohio salt lake city nauvoo indiana illinois san francisco independence monterey kentucky missouri tennessee santa fe san diego indian territory arkansas mexico mississippi alabama pacific ocean texas independent 1836 1845 louisiana san jacinto the alamo battle mormon trek oregon trail boundaries disputed with united states mexico after independence from spain 1821 westward migration in the early and mid 1840s took american settlers across indian country into the oregon territory ownership of which was disputed with great britain.
the mormons migrated west to salt lake city then part of mexico.
gulf of mexico 400 miles 400 kilometers by 1840 california was already linked commercially with the united states.
new england ships were trading with the region as illustrated in richard henry danas popular novel two years before the mast 1840 an account of a young mans voyage to california and his experiences there.
california also attracted a small number of american newcomers.
in 1846 alfred robinson who had moved from boston published life in california.
in this age of annexation he wondered why not extend the area of freedom by the annexation of california the texas r e v o lt the first part of mexico to be settled by significant numbers of americans was texas whose non indian population of spanish origin called tejanos numbered only about 2 000 when mexico became independent.
in order to develop the region the mexican government accepted an offer by moses austin a connecticut born farmer to colonize it with americans.
in 1820 austin received a large land grant.
he died soon afterward and his son what were the major factors contributing to u s territorial expansion in the 1840s.
stephen continued the plan reselling land in smaller plots to american settlers at twelve cents per acre.
by 1830 the population of american origin had reached around 7 000 considerably exceeding the number of tejanos.
alarmed that its grip on the area was weakening the mexican government in 1830 annulled existing land contracts and barred future emigration from the united states.
led by stephen austin american settlers demanded greater autonomy within mexico.
part of the areas tiny tejano elite joined them.
mostly ranchers and large farmers they had welcomed the economic boom that accompanied the settlers and had formed economic alliances with american traders.
the issue of slavery further exacerbated matters.
mexico had abolished slavery but local authorities allowed american settlers to bring slaves with them.
when mexicos ruler general antonio lpez de santa anna sent an army in 1835 to impose central authority a local committee charged that his purpose was to give liberty to our slaves and make slaves of ourselves the appearance of santa annas army sparked a chaotic revolt in texas.
the rebels formed a provisional government that soon called for texan independence.
on march 13 1836 santa annas army stormed the alamo a mission compound in san antonio killing its 187 american and tejano defenders.
remember the alamo became the texans rallying cry.
in april forces under sam houston a former governor of tennessee routed santa annas army at the battle of san jacinto and forced him to recognize texan independence.
houston was soon elected the first president of the republic of texas.
in 1837 the texas congress called for union with the united states.
but fearing the political disputes certain to result from an attempt to add another slave state to the union presidents andrew jackson and martin van a flag carried at the battle of san jacinto during the texas revolt of 1836 portrays a female figure displaying the rallying cry liberty or death c h.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 fruits of manifest destiny the plaza in san antonio not long after the united states annexed texas in 1845 buren shelved the question.
settlers from the united states nonetheless poured into the region many of them slaveowners taking up fertile cotton land.
by 1845 the population of texas had reached nearly 150 000 the election of texas annexation remained on the political back burner until president john tyler revived it in the hope of rescuing his failed administration and securing southern support for renomination in 1844 in april 1844 a letter by john c calhoun whom tyler had appointed secretary of state was leaked to the press.
it linked the idea of absorbing texas directly to the goal of strengthening slavery in the united states.
some southern leaders indeed hoped that texas could be divided into several states thus further enhancing the souths power in congress.
late that month henry clay and former president van buren the prospective whig and democratic candidates for president and two of the party systems most venerable leaders met at clays kentucky plantation.
they agreed to issue letters rejecting immediate annexation on the grounds that it might provoke war with mexico.
clay and van buren were reacting to the slavery issue in the traditional manner by trying to keep it out of national politics.
clay went on to receive the whig nomination but for van buren the letters proved to be a disaster.
at the democratic convention southerners bent on annexation deserted van burens cause and he failed to receive the two thirds majority necessary for nomination.
the delegates then turned to the little known james k polk a former governor of tennessee whose main assets were his support for annexation and his close association with andrew jackson still the partys most popular figure.
like nearly all the presidents before him polk was a slaveholder.
he owned substantial cotton plantations in tennessee and mississippi where conditions were so brutal that only half of the slave children lived to the age of fifteen and adults frequently ran away.
to soothe injured feelings among northern democrats over the rejection of van buren the party platform called not only for the what were the major factors contributing to u s territorial expansion in the 1840s.
reannexation of texas implying that texas had been part of the louisiana purchase and therefore once belonged to the united states but also the reoccupation of all of oregon.
fifty four forty or fight american control of oregon all the way to its northern boundary at north latitude 5440 became a popular campaign slogan.
but the bitterness of the northern van burenites over what they considered to be a betrayal on the part of the south would affect american politics for years to come.
polk was the first dark horse candidate for president that is one whose nomination was completely unexpected.
in the fall he defeated clay in an extremely close election.
polks margin in the popular vote was less than 2 percent.
had not james g birney running again as the liberty party candidate received 16 000 votes in new york mostly from antislavery whigs clay would have been elected.
in march 1845 only days before polks inauguration congress declared texas part of the united states.
the road to war james k polk may have been virtually unknown but he assumed the presidency with a clearly defined set of goals to reduce the tariff reestablish the independent treasury system settle the dispute over ownership of oregon and bring california into the union.
congress soon enacted the first two goals and the third was accomplished in an agreement with great britain dividing oregon at the forty ninth parallel.
many northerners were bitterly disappointed by this compromise considering it a betrayal of polks campaign promise not to give up any part of oregon without a fight.
but the president secured his main objectives the willamette valley and the magnificent harbor of puget sound.
acquiring california proved more difficult.
polk dispatched an emissary to mexico offering to purchase the region but the mexican government refused to negotiate.
by the spring of 1846 polk was planning for military action.
in april american soldiers under zachary taylor moved into the region between the nueces river and the rio grande land claimed by both countries on the disputed border between texas and mexico.
this action made conflict with mexican forces inevitable.
when fighting broke out polk claimed that the mexicans had shed blood upon american soil and called for a declaration of war.
the war and its critics the mexican war was the first american conflict to be fought primarily on foreign soil and the first in which american troops occupied a foreign capital.
inspired by the expansionist fervor of manifest destiny a majority of americans supported the war.
they were convinced as herman melville put it in his novel white jacket 1850 that since americans bear the ark of liberties for all mankind national war news from mexico an 1848 painting by richard c woodville shows how americans received war news through the popular press.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 fruits of manifest destiny selfishness is unbounded philanthropy.
to the world but a significant minority in the north dissented fearing that far from expanding the great empire of liberty the administrations real aim was to acquire new land for the expansion of slavery.
ulysses s grant who served with distinction in mexico later called the war one of the most unjust ever waged by a stronger nation against a weaker nation an indication that the united states was beginning to behave like european monarchies not a democratic republic.
henry david thoreau was jailed in massachusetts in 1846 for refusing to pay taxes as a protest against the war.
defending his action thoreau wrote an important essay on civil disobedience which inspired such later advocates of nonviolent resistance to unjust laws as martin luther king jr under a government which imprisons any unjustly wrote thoreau the true place of a just man is also a prison among the wars critics was abraham lincoln who had been elected to congress in 1846 from illinois.
like many whigs lincoln questioned whether the mexicans had actually inflicted casualties on american soil as polk claimed and in 1847 he introduced a resolution asking the president to specify the precise spot where blood had first been shed.
but lincoln was also disturbed by polks claiming the right to initiate an invasion of mexico.
allow the president to invade a neighboring country whenever he shall deem it necessary to repel an invasion he declared and you allow him to make war at pleasure.
if today he should choose to say he thinks it necessary to invade canada to prevent the british from invading us how could you stop him lincolns stance proved unpopular in illinois.
he had already agreed to serve only one term in congress but when democrats captured his seat in 1848 many blamed the result on lincolns criticism of the war.
but the concerns he raised regarding the presidents power to make war at pleasure would continue to echo in the twentieth and twenty first centuries.
combat in mexico more than 60 000 volunteers enlisted and did most of the fighting.
combat took place on three fronts.
in june 1846 a band of american insurrectionists proclaimed california freed from mexican control and named captain john c frmont head of a small scientific expedition in the west its ruler.
their aim was californias incorporation into the united states but for the moment they adopted a flag depicting a large bear as the symbol of the areas independence.
a month later the u s navy sailed into monterey and san francisco harbors raised the american flag and put an end to the bear flag republic at almost the same time 1 600 american troops under general stephen w kearney occupied sante fe without resistance and then set out for southern california where they helped to put down a mexican uprising against american rule.
the bulk of the fighting occurred in central mexico.
in february 1847 taylor defeated santa annas army at the battle of buena vista.
when the mexican government still refused to negotiate polk ordered american forces under winfield scott to march inland from the port of vera cruz toward mexico city.
scotts forces routed mexican defenders and in september occupied the countrys capital.
in february 1848 the two governments agreed to the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo which confirmed the annexation of texas and ceded california and present day new mexico what were the major factors contributing to u s territorial expansion in the 1840s.
war 1846 1848 m o nt platte r frm ont unorganized territory sonoma santa fe vy na u s santa barbara los angeles san pasqual san diego rk an las vegas albuquerque s.
u s nuece r.
corpus christi vy na lor tay 300 miles san lucas san jose mazatln san luis potos 300 kilometers gulf of mexico tampico mexico city avy arizona nevada and utah to the united states.
in exchange the united states paid mexico 15 million.
the mexican cession as the land annexed from mexico was called established the present territorial boundaries on the north american continent except for the gadsden purchase a parcel of additional land bought from mexico in 1853 and alaska acquired from russia in 1867 the mexican war is only a footnote in most americans historical memory.
unlike other wars few public monuments celebrate the conflict.
mexicans however regard the war or the dismemberment as it is called in that country as a central event of their national history and a source of continued resentment over a century and a half after it was fought.
as the palo alto ta yl santa n u s american victory mexican victory american forces american naval blockade mexican forces treaty of guadalupe hidalgo lands disputed by united states and mexico lands ceded by mexico tt sco or la paz santa anna buena vista pa c ific oc e a n new orleans san antonio chihuahua mississippi louisiana texas r e nd gra mexico r arkansas sabine r el paso rio sas red r os pec kearny united states indian territory disputed by texas and mexico gila r illinois.
missouri bent s fort kea rny c monterey olo missouri r a ceded by mexico ra do r san francisco fort leavenworth ont r f m y kearn sipp i r mexican missis fr the sco tt ann a scott veracruz pueblo cerro santa a nna gordo the mexican war was the first in which an american army invaded another country and occupied its capital.
as a result of the war the united states acquired a vast new area in the modernday southwest.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 a map of the united states from 1848 reveals how the size of the country had grown during the past four years texas its western boundary still unfixed had been annexed in 1845 the dispute with great britain over oregon was settled in 1846 and the mexican cession the area of present day arizona new mexico utah nevada and california was added in 1848 at the end of the mexican war.
fruits of manifest destiny mexican negotiators of 1848 complained it was unprecedented to launch a war because a country refused to sell part of its territory to a neighbor.
race and manifest destiny with the end of the mexican war the united states absorbed half a million square miles of mexicos territory one third of that nations total area.
a region that for centuries had been united was suddenly split in two dividing families and severing trade routes.
an estimated 75 000 to 100 000 spanish speaking mexicans and more than 150 000 indians inhabited the mexican cession.
the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo guaranteed to male citizens of the area the free enjoyment of their liberty and property and all the rights of americans a provision designed to protect the property of large mexican landowners in california.
as to indians whose homelands and hunting grounds suddenly became part of the united states the treaty referred to them only as savage tribes whom the united states must prevent from launching incursions into mexico across the new border.
the spirit of manifest destiny gave a new stridency to ideas about racial superiority.
during the 1840s territorial expansion came to be seen as proof of the innate superiority of the anglo saxon race a mythical construct defined largely by its opposites blacks indians hispanics and catholics.
race declared john l osullivans democratic review was the key to the history of nations and the rise and fall of empires.
what were the major factors contributing to u s territorial expansion in the 1840s.
race in the mid nineteenth century was an amorphous notion involving color culture national origin class and religion.
newspapers magazines and scholarly works popularized the link between american freedom and the supposedly innate liberty loving qualities of anglo saxon protestants.
the annexation of texas and conquest of much of mexico became triumphs of civilization progress and liberty over the tyranny of the catholic church and the innate incapacity of mongrel races indeed calls by some expansionists for the united states to annex all of mexico failed in part because of fear that the nation could not assimilate its large non white catholic population supposedly unfit for citizenship in a republic.
redefining race the imposition of the american system of race relations proved detrimental to many inhabitants of the newly acquired territories.
texas had already demonstrated as much.
mexico had abolished slavery and declared persons of spanish indian and african origin equal before the law.
the texas constitution adopted after independence not only included protections for slavery but also denied civil rights to indians and persons of african origin.
only whites were permitted to purchase land and the entrance of free blacks into the state was prohibited altogether.
every privilege dear to a free man is taken away one free black resident of texas complained.
local circumstances affected racial definitions in the former mexican territories.
texas defined spanish mexicans especially those who occupied important social positions as white.
gold r the residents of new mexico of both mexican and indian origin on the other hand were long deemed too mexican for democratic self government.
with white migration lagging congress did not allow new mexico to become a state until 1912 gold rush california ush california oregon territory eureka utah territory lassens ranch donner pass s i e 100 miles 50 100 kilometers carson pass n sacramento sutter s fort stockton san francisco a r r e v california had a non indian population of less than 15 000 when the mexican war ended.
for most of the 1840s ten times as many americans emigrated to oregon as to california.
but this changed dramatically after january 1848 when gold was discovered in the foothills of the sierra nevada mountains at a sawmill owned by the swiss immigrant johann a sutter.
a mania for gold spread throughout the world fanned by newspaper accounts of instant wealth acquired by early migrants.
by ship and land newcomers poured into california.
the non indian population rose to 200 000 by 1852 and more than 360 000 eight years later.
californias gold rush population was incredibly diverse.
experienced miners flooded in from mexico and south america.
tens of thousands of americans who had never seen a mine arrived from the east and from overseas came irish germans italians and australians.
nearly the gold rush brought thousands of fortune seekers from nearly every corner of the globe to california.
a monterey routes to gold fields gold bearing areas mother lode east gold belt west gold belt d a new mexico territory c h.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 fruits of manifest destiny a contemporary depiction of mining operations during the california gold rush shows native americans mexicans and numerous other miners all searching for gold.
25 000 chinese landed between 1849 and 1852 almost all of them young men who had signed long term labor contracts with chinese merchants who in turn leased them to mining and railroad companies and other employers.
san francisco a town of 1 000 in 1848 became the gateway to the el dorado of northern california.
by 1850 it had 30 000 residents and had become perhaps the worlds most racially and ethnically diverse city.
unlike farming frontiers settled by families most of the gold rush migrants were young men.
women played many roles in western mining communities running restaurants and boardinghouses and working as laundresses cooks and prostitutes.
but as late as 1860 californias male population outnumbered females by nearly three to one.
california and the boundaries of freedom as early surface mines quickly became exhausted they gave way to underground mining that required a large investment of capital.
this economic development worsened conflicts among californias many racial and ethnic groups engaged in fierce competition for gold.
the law was very fragile in gold rush california.
in 1851 and 1856 committees of vigilance took control of san francisco sweeping aside established courts to try and execute those accused of crimes.
white miners organized extralegal groups that expelled foreign miners mexicans chileans chinese french and american indians from areas with gold.
the state legislature imposed a tax of twenty dollars per month on foreign miners driving many of them from the state.
california would long remain in the american imagination a place of infinite opportunity where newcomers could start their lives anew.
but the boundaries of freedom there were tightly drawn.
the state constitution of 1850 limited voting and the right to testify in court to whites excluding indians asians and the states few blacks who numbered only 962 persons.
california landowners who claimed spanish descent or had inter what were the major factors contributing to u s territorial expansion in the 1840s.
married with american settlers were deemed to be white.
but with land titles derived from mexican days challenged in court many sold out to newcomers from the east.
for californias indians the gold rush and absorption into the united states proved to be disastrous.
gold seekers overran indian communities.
miners ranchers and vigilantes murdered thousands of indians.
determined to reduce the native population state officials paid millions in bounties to private militias that launched attacks on the states indians.
although california was a free state thousands of indian children declared orphans or vagrants by local courts were bought and sold as slaves.
by 1860 californias indian population nearly 150 000 when the mexican war ended had been reduced to around 30 000 the other gold rush in a remarkable coincidence the california gold rush took place almost simultaneously with another located halfway around the world.
in 1851 gold was discovered in australia then a collection of british colonies.
during the 1850s california and australia together produced 80 percent of the worlds gold.
like california australia attracted gold seekers from across the globe.
the population of victoria the colony where gold was found grew from 77 000 in 1851 to 411 000 six years later.
like san francisco the australian city of melbourne rose to prominence on the basis of its proximity to the gold fields.
as in california the gold rush was a disaster for the aboriginal peoples as native australians are called whose population already declining fell precipitously.
in australia like california significant numbers of chinese miners took part in the gold rush only to face persistent efforts by miners of european origin to drive them from the fields.
indeed australians frequently modeled anti chinese legislation especially their tax on foreign miners on measures that had been pioneered in california.
opening japan the mexican war ended with the united states in possession of the magnificent harbors of san diego and san francisco long seen as jumping off points for trade with the far east.
in the 1850s the united states took the lead in opening japan a country that had closed itself to nearly all foreign contact for more than two centuries.
in 1853 and 1854 american warships under the command of commodore matthew perry the younger brother of oliver perry a hero of the war of 1812 sailed into tokyo harbor.
perry who had been sent by president millard fillmore to negotiate a trade treaty demanded that the japanese deal with him.
alarmed by european intrusions into china and impressed by perrys armaments as well as a musical pageant he presented that included a blackface minstrel show japanese leaders agreed to do so.
in 1854 they opened two ports to american shipping.
two years later townsend harris a mer transportation of cargo by westerners at the port of yokohama 1861 by the japanese artist utagawa sadahide depicts ships in port including an american one on the left eight years after commodore perrys first voyage to japan.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 continental a dose of arsenic expansion through wa 1853 1889 mt nd 1864 1889 1861 1889 or me mn 1849 1858 1848 1859 id 1836 1848 sd wy 1861 1889 1868 1890 nv 1859 1867 ut 1850 1896 mi 1805 1837 il ks 1854 1861 az nm 1890 1907 1850 1912 1803 1816 mo 1805 1821 wv 1863 va ky nh ma ct ri nj de md 1792 nc tn ok 1863 1912 oh in 1818 1861 1876 1850 pa 1838 1846 co ca ny ia ne 1861 1864 vt wi 1863 1890 1796 ar 1819 1836 sc al ms 1819 1817 tx 1845 ga la 1804 1812 original 13 states 1783 great britain cession 1783 louisiana purchase 1803 acquired from great britain 1818 florida purchase 1819 1912 date of organization as territory 1912 by 1853 with the gadsden purchase the present boundaries of the united states in north america with the exception of alaska had been created.
acquired from great britain 1842 texas annexation 1845 oregon country 1846 mexican cession 1848 gadsden purchase 1853 date of statehood fl 1845 500 miles 500 kilometers borders represent present day state borders chant from new york city arrived as the first american consul and according to some accounts was the inspiration for puccinis great opera madame butterfly about an american who marries and then abandons a japanese woman.
harris persuaded the japanese to allow american ships into additional ports and to establish full diplomatic relations between the two countries.
as a result the united states acquired refueling places on the route to china seen as asias most important trading partner.
and japan soon launched a process of modernization that transformed it into the regions major military power.
a dose of arsenic victory over mexico added more than 1 million square miles to the united states an area larger than the louisiana purchase.
but the acquisition of this vast territory raised the fatal issue that would disrupt the political system and plunge the nation into civil war whether slavery should be allowed to expand into the west.
events soon confirmed ralph waldo emersons prediction that if the united states gobbled up part of mexico it will be as the man who swallows arsenic.
mexico will poison us why did the expansion of slavery become the most divisive political issue in the 1840s and 1850s.
the wilmot proviso before 1846 the status of slavery in all parts of the united states had been settled either by state law or by the missouri compromise which determined slaverys status in the louisiana purchase.
the acquisition of new land reopened the question of slaverys expansion.
the divisive potential of this issue became clear in 1846 when congressman david wilmot of pennsylvania proposed a resolution prohibiting slavery from all territory acquired from mexico.
party lines crumbled as every northerner democrat and whig alike supported what came to be known as the wilmot proviso while nearly all southerners opposed it.
the measure passed the house where the more populous north possessed a majority but failed in the senate with its even balance of free and slave states.
the proviso said one newspaper as if by magic brought to a head the great question that is about to divide the american people in 1848 opponents of slaverys expansion organized the free soil party and nominated martin van buren for president and charles francis adams the son of john quincy adams as his running mate.
democrats nominated lewis cass of michigan who proposed that the decision on whether to allow slavery should be left to settlers in the new territories an idea later given the name popular sovereignty.
van buren was motivated in part by revenge against the south for jettisoning him in 1844 but his campaign struck a chord among northerners opposed to the expansion of slavery and he polled some 300 000 votes 14 percent of the northern total.
victory in 1848 went to the whig candidate zachary taylor a hero of the mexican war and a louisiana sugar planter.
but the fact that a former president and the son of another abandoned their parties to run on a free soil platform showed that antislavery sentiment had spread far beyond abolitionist ranks.
antislavery commented senator william h seward of new york is at length a respectable element in politics the free soil appeal the free soil position had a popular appeal in the north that far exceeded the abolitionists demand for immediate emancipation and equal rights for blacks.
while congress possessed no constitutional power to abolish slavery within a state well known precedents existed for keeping territories areas that had not yet entered the union as states free from slavery.
congress had done this in 1787 in the northwest ordinance and again in the missouri compromise of 1820 1821.
many northerners had long resented what they considered southern domination of the federal government.
the idea of preventing the creation of new slave states appealed to those who favored policies such as the protective tariff and government aid to internal improvements that the majority of southern political leaders opposed.
for thousands of northerners moreover the ability to move to the new western territories held out the promise of economic betterment.
the depression of the early 1840s had reinforced the traditional equation of land ownership with economic freedom.
the labor movement promoted access to western land as a way of combating unemployment and low wages in the east.
freedom of the soil declared george henry evans the c h.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 a dose of arsenic editor of a pro labor newspaper offered the only alternative to permanent economic dependence for american workers.
such views merged easily with opposition to the expansion of slavery.
if slave plantations were to occupy the fertile lands of the west northern migration would be effectively blocked.
the term free soil had a double meaning.
the free soil platform of 1848 called both for barring slavery from western territories and for the federal government to provide free homesteads to settlers in the new territories.
unlike abolitionism the free soil idea also appealed to the racism so widespread in northern society.
wilmot himself insisted that his controversial proviso was motivated not by morbid sympathy for the slaves but to advance the cause and rights of the free white man in part by preventing him from having to compete with black labor to white southerners the idea of barring slavery from territory acquired from mexico seemed a violation of their equal rights as members of the union.
southerners had fought and died to win these territories surely they had a right to share in the fruits of victory.
to single out slavery as the one form of property barred from the west would be an affront to the south and its distinctive way of life.
a majority of slaves in 1848 lived in states that had not even existed when the constitution was adopted.
many older plantation areas already suffered from soil exhaustion.
just as northerners believed westward expansion essential to their economic wellbeing southern leaders became convinced that slavery must expand or die.
moreover the admission of new free states would overturn the delicate political balance between the sections and make the south a permanent minority.
southern interests would not be secure in a union dominated by non slaveholding states.
crisis senator daniel webster of massachusetts in a daguerreotype from 1850 the year his speech in support of the compromise of 1850 contributed to its passage.
and compromise in world history the year 1848 is remembered as the springtime of nations a time of democratic uprisings against the monarchies of europe and demands by ethnic minorities for national independence.
american principles of liberty and self government appeared to be triumphing in the old world.
the chartist movement in great britain organized massive demonstrations in support of a proposed charter that demanded democratic reforms.
the french replaced their monarchy with a republic.
hungarians proclaimed their independence from austrian rule.
patriots in italy and germany both divided into numerous states demanded national unification.
but the revolutionary tide receded.
chartism faded away.
in france the second republic was soon succeeded by the reign of emperor napoleon iii.
revolts in budapest rome and other cities were crushed.
would their own experiment in self government some americans wondered suffer the same fate as the failed revolutions of europe.
with the slavery issue appearing more and more ominous established party leaders moved to resolve differences between the sections.
some disputes were of long standing but the immediate source of controversy arose from the acquisition of new lands after the mexican war.
in 1850 california asked to be admitted to the union as a free state.
many southerners opposed the measure fearing that it would upset the sectional balance in congress.
senator henry clay offered a plan with four main provisions why did the expansion of slavery become the most divisive political issue in the 1840s and 1850s.
the compromise of british canada me oregon country minnesota territory vt wi ny mi utah territory unorganized territory pa ia il ca nc tn ar sc al mi ga la mexico unorganized territory free states and territories slave states open to slavery by popular sovereignty compromise of 1850 fl great 500 miles 500 kilometers that came to be known as the compromise of 1850 california would enter the union as a free state.
the slave trade but not slavery itself would be abolished in the nations capital.
a stringent new law would allow southerners to reclaim runaway slaves.
and the status of slavery in the remaining territories acquired from mexico would be left to the decision of the local white inhabitants.
the united states would also agree to pay off the massive debt texas had accumulated while independent.
the nj de md ri ct ky missouri compromise line 3630 n tx e dixon lin mason va mo new mexico territory oh in nh ma debate in the senate debate on the compromise the divergent sectional positions received eloquent expression.
powerful leaders spoke for and against compromise.
daniel webster of massachusetts announced his willingness to abandon the wilmot proviso and accept a new fugitive slave law if this were the price of sectional peace.
john c calhoun again representing south carolina was too ill to speak.
a colleague read his remarks rejecting the very idea of compromise.
slavery calhoun insisted must be protected by the national government and extended into all the new territories.
the north must yield or the union could not survive.
william h seward of new the compromise of 1850 attempted to settle issues arising from the acquisition of territory from mexico by admitting california as a free state and providing that the status of slavery in utah and new mexico would be determined by the settlers.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 a dose of arsenic york also opposed compromise.
to southerners talk of their constitutional rights seward responded that a higher law than the constitution condemned slavery the law of morality.
here was the voice of abolitionism now represented in the u s senate.
president zachary taylor like andrew jackson a southerner but a strong nationalist was alarmed by talk of disunion.
he accused southern leaders in congress of holding california hostage to their own legislative aims and insisted that all congress needed to do was admit california to the union.
but taylor died suddenly of an intestinal infection on july 9 1850 his successor millard fillmore of new york threw his support to clays proposals.
fillmore helped to break the impasse in congress and secure adoption of the compromise of 1850 the an 1855 broadside depicting the life of anthony burns a runaway slave captured in boston and returned to the south in 1854 by federal officials enforcing the fugitive slave act.
fugitive slave issue for one last time political leaders had removed the dangerous slavery question from congressional debate.
the new fugitive slave act however made further controversy inevitable.
the law allowed special federal commissioners to determine the fate of alleged fugitives without benefit of a jury trial or even testimony by the accused individual.
it prohibited local authorities from interfering with the capture of fugitives and required individual citizens to assist in such capture when called upon by federal agents.
thus southern leaders usually strong defenders of states rights and local autonomy supported a measure that brought federal agents into communities throughout the north armed with the power to override local law enforcement and judicial procedures to secure the return of runaway slaves.
the security of slavery was more important to them than states rights consistency.
the fugitive slave issue affected all the free states not just those that bordered on the south.
slave catchers for example entered california attempting to apprehend fugitives from texas and new mexico who hoped to reach freedom in british columbia.
the issue drew into politics individuals like ralph waldo emerson who although antislavery had previously remained aloof from the abolitionist crusade.
emerson and others influenced by transcendentalism viewed the fugitive slave act as a dangerous example of how a government doing the bidding of the south could override an individuals ability to act according to his conscience the foundation for emerson of genuine freedom.
during the 1850s federal tribunals heard more than 300 cases and ordered 157 fugitives returned to the south many at the governments expense.
but the law further widened sectional divisions.
in a series of dramatic confrontations fugitives aided by abolitionist allies violently resisted recapture.
a large crowd in 1851 rescued the escaped slave jerry from jail in syracuse new york and spirited him off to canada.
in the same year an owner who attempted to recapture a fugitive was killed in christiana pennsylvania.
later in the decade margaret garner a kentucky slave who had escaped with her family to ohio killed her own young daughter rather than see her returned to slavery by federal marshals.
at the end of the twentieth century this incident would become the basis for toni morrisons celebrated novel beloved.
in the north several thousand fugitives and free born blacks worried why did the expansion of slavery become the most divisive political issue in the 1840s and 1850s.
that they might be swept up in the stringent provisions of the fugitive slave act fled to safety in canada.
the sight of so many refugees seeking liberty in a foreign land challenged the familiar image of the united states as an asylum for freedom.
families are separating reported a toronto newspaper in october 1850 leaving their homes and flying in all directions to seek in canada under the british flag the protection denied to them in the free republic douglas and popular sovereignty at least temporarily the compromise of 1850 seemed to have restored sectional peace and party unity.
in the 1852 presidential election democrat franklin pierce won a sweeping victory over the whig winfield scott on a platform that recognized the compromise as a final settlement of the slavery controversy.
pierce received a broad popular mandate winning 254 electoral votes to scotts 42 yet his administration turned out to be one of the most disastrous in american history.
it witnessed the collapse of the party system inherited from the age of jackson.
in 1854 the old political order finally succumbed to the disruptive pressures of sectionalism.
early in that year illinois senator stephen a douglas introduced a bill to provide territorial governments for kansas and nebraska located within the louisiana purchase.
with calhoun clay and webster the great triumvirate all having died between 1850 and 1852 douglas although only forty one saw himself as the new leader of the senate.
a strong believer in western development he hoped that a transcontinental railroad could be constructed through kansas or nebraska.
but he feared that this could not be accomplished unless formal governments had been established in these territories.
southerners in congress however seemed adamant against allowing the organization of new free territories that might further upset the sectional balance.
douglas hoped to satisfy them by applying the principle of popular sovereignty whereby the status of slavery would be determined by the votes of local settlers not congress.
to douglas popular sovereignty embodied the idea of local self government and offered a middle ground between the extremes of north and south.
it was a principle on which all parts of the democratic party could unite and which might enable him to capture the presidential nomination in 1856 to succeed the ineffectual pierce.
the kansas nebraska act unlike the lands taken from mexico kansas and nebraska lay in the nations heartland directly in the path of westward migration.
slavery moreover was prohibited there under the terms of the missouri compromise which douglass bill repealed.
in response to douglass proposal a group of antislavery congressmen issued the appeal of the independent democrats.
written by two abolitionists from ohio congressman joshua giddings and senator salmon p chase the appeal proved to be one of the most effective pieces of political persuasion in american history.
it arraigned douglass bill as a gross violation of a sacred pledge part and parcel of an atrocious c h.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 the kansas nebraska a dose of arsenic a c t washington territory british canada me oregon territory minnesota territory nebraska territory vt wi ny mi pa ia ca utah territory il kansas territory see inset indian territory va ar sc the kansas nebraska act opened a vast area in the nations heartland to the possible spread of slavery by repealing the missouri compromise and providing that settlers would determine the status of slavery in these territories.
ga fl al la tx osawatomie nj de md nc tn bleeding kansas mexico atchison i r r leavenworth issou m lecompton lawrence missouri kansas pottawatomie massacre m ri ct ky mi territory oh in mo missouri compromise line 3630 n new mexico territory on line ason dix nh ma 500 miles 500 kilometers free states and territories slave states indian territory unorganized open to slavery by popular sovereignty under the compromise of 1850 open to slavery by popular sovereignty under the kansas nebraska act 1854 plot to convert free territory into a dreary region of despotism inhabited by masters and slaves it helped to convince millions of northerners that southern leaders aimed at nothing less than extending their peculiar institution throughout the west.
thanks to douglass energetic leadership the kansas nebraska act became law.
but it shattered the democratic partys unity.
even as congress debated protest meetings sprang up throughout the north.
fearing that the bills unpopularity among their constituents would harm their chances for reelection half the northern democrats in the house cast negative votes.
loyalty to pierce douglas and their party led the other half to support the measure.
it is difficult to think of a piece of legislation in american history that had a more profound impact on national life.
in the wake of the bills passage american politics underwent a profound reorganization.
during the next two years the whig party unable to develop a unified response to the political crisis collapsed.
from a region divided between the two parties the south became solidly democratic.
most northern whigs augmented by thousands of disgruntled democrats joined a new organization the republican party dedicated to preventing the further expansion of slavery.
why did the expansion of slavery become the most divisive political issue in the 1840s and 1850s.
t h e r i s e o f t h e r e p u b l i c a n pa r t y the northern economy the disruptive impact of slavery on the traditional parties was the immediate cause of political transformation in the mid 1850s.
but the rise of the republican party also reflected underlying economic and social changes notably the completion of the market revolution and the beginning of mass immigration from europe.
the period from 1843 when prosperity returned to 1857 when another economic downturn hit witnessed explosive economic growth especially in the north.
the catalyst was the completion of the railroad network.
from 5 000 miles in 1848 railroad track mileage grew to 30 000 by 1860 with most of the construction occurring in ohio illinois and other states of the old northwest.
four great trunk railroads now linked eastern cities with western farming and commercial centers.
the railroads completed the reorientation of the northwests trade from the south to the east.
as late as 1850 most western farmers still shipped their produce down the mississippi river.
ten years later however railroads transported nearly all their crops to the east at a fraction of the previous cost.
by 1860 for example 60 million bushels of wheat were passing through buffalo on their way to market in eastern cities and abroad.
the economic integration of the northwest and northeast created the groundwork for their political unification in the republican party.
by 1860 the north had become a complex integrated economy with eastern industrialists marketing manufactured goods to the commercial farmers of the west while residents of the regions growing cities consumed the food westerners produced.
northern society stood poised between old and new ways.
the majority of the population still lived not in large cities but in small towns and rural areas where the ideal of economic independence owning ones own farm or shop still lay within reach.
yet the majority of the northern workforce no longer labored in agriculture and the industrial revolution was spreading rapidly.
an 1853 broadside for one section of the illinois central railroad.
one of the most important new lines of the 1850s the illinois central opened parts of the old northwest to settlement and commercial agriculture and it helped to cement chicagos place as the regions foremost city.
the lackawanna valley an 1855 painting by george inness commissioned by the president of the delaware lackawanna and western railroad.
in the background is the roundhouse at scranton pennsylvania.
like the mill on the brandywine in chapters 21 and 25 respectively than to nineteenth century america.
bureau agents were supposed to establish schools provide aid to the poor and aged settle disputes between whites and blacks and among the freedpeople and secure for former slaves and white unionists equal treatment before the courts.
in your power to fulfill one tenth of the expectations of those who framed the bureau general william t sherman wrote to howard.
i fear you have hercules task the bureau lasted from 1865 to 1870 even at its peak there were fewer than 1 000 agents in the entire south.
nonetheless the bureaus achievements in some areas notably education and health care were striking.
while the bureau did not establish schools itself it coordinated and helped to finance the activities of northern societies committed to black education.
what visions of freedom did the former slaves and slaveholders pursue in the postwar south.
by 1869 nearly 3 000 schools serving more than 150 000 pupils in the south reported to the bureau.
bureau agents also assumed control of hospitals established by the army during the war and expanded the system into new communities.
they provided medical care and drugs to both black and white southerners.
in economic relations however the bureaus activities proved far more problematic.
the fa i lu r e of land the freedmens bureau an engraving from harpers weekly july 25 1868 depicts the bureau agent as a promoter of racial peace in the violent postwar south.
reform the idea of free labor wrote one bureau agent was the noblest principle on earth all that was required to harmonize race relations in the south was fair wages good working conditions and the opportunity to improve the laborers situation in life.
but blacks wanted land of their own not jobs on plantations.
one provision of the law establishing the bureau gave it the authority to divide abandoned and confiscated land into forty acre plots for rental and eventual sale to the former slaves.
in the summer of 1865 however president andrew johnson who had succeeded lincoln ordered nearly all land in federal hands returned to its former owners.
a series of confrontations followed notably in south carolina and georgia where the army forcibly evicted blacks who had settled on sherman land when o o howard head of the freedmens bureau traveled to the sea islands to inform blacks of the new policy he was greeted with disbelief and protest.
a committee of former slaves drew up petitions to howard and president johnson.
we want homesteads they declared we were promised homesteads by the government land the freedmen insisted was essential to the meaning of freedom.
without it they declared we have not bettered our condition from the days of slavery you will see this is not the condition of really free men because no land distribution took place the vast majority of rural freedpeople remained poor and without property during reconstruction.
they a black family in the cotton fields after the civil war photographed in 1867 c h.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 sharecropping in the south the meaning of freedom percentage of farms sharecropped by county 35 80 26 34 20 25 13 19 0 12 virginia north carolina tennessee arkansas south carolina mississippi texas alabama georgia atl an tic o cean louisiana gulf of mexico florida 200 miles 200 kilometers by 1880 sharecropping had become the dominant form of agricultural labor in large parts of the south.
the system involved both white and black farmers.
had no alternative but to work on white owned plantations often for their former owners.
far from being able to rise in the social scale through hard work black men were largely confined to farm work unskilled labor and service jobs and black women to positions in private homes as cooks and maids.
their wages remained too low to allow for any accumulation.
by the turn of the century a significant number of southern african americans had managed to acquire small parcels of land.
but the failure of land reform produced a deep sense of betrayal that survived among the former slaves and their descendants long after the end of reconstruction.
no sir mary gaffney an elderly ex slave recalled in the 1930s we were not given a thing but freedom toward a new south out of the conflict on the plantations new systems of labor emerged in the different regions of the south.
the task system under which workers were assigned daily tasks completion of which ended their responsibilities for that day survived in the rice kingdom of south carolina and georgia.
closely supervised wage labor predominated on the sugar plantations of southern louisiana.
sharecropping came to dominate the cotton belt and much of the tobacco belt of virginia and north carolina.
what visions of freedom did the former slaves and slaveholders pursue in the postwar south.
sharecropping initially arose as a compromise between blacks desire for land and planters demand for labor discipline.
the system allowed each black family to rent a part of a plantation with the crop divided between worker and owner at the end of the year.
sharecropping guaranteed the planters a stable resident labor force.
former slaves preferred it to gang labor because it offered them the prospect of working without day to day white supervision.
but as the years went on sharecropping became more and more oppressive.
sharecroppers economic opportunities were severely limited by a world market in which the price of farm products suffered a prolonged decline.
the white fa r m e r the plight of the small farmer was not confined to blacks in the postwar south.
wartime devastation set in motion a train of events that permanently altered the independent way of life of white yeomen leading to what they considered a loss of freedom.
before the war most small farmers had concentrated on raising food for their families and grew little cotton.
with much of their property destroyed many yeomen saw their economic condition worsened by successive crop failures after the war.
to obtain supplies from merchants farmers were forced to take up the growing of cotton and pledge a part of the crop as collateral property the creditor can seize if a debt is not paid.
this system became known as the crop lien since interest rates were extremely high and the price of cotton fell steadily many farmers found themselves still in debt after marketing their portion of the crop at years end.
they had no choice but to farmers with cotton in the courthouse square an 1880 photograph of marietta georgia.
after the civil war more and more white farmers began growing cotton to support their families permanently altering their formerly selfsufficient way of life.
recent h1 voices of freedom from pe t i t i o n o f c o m m i t t e e i n b e h a l f o f t h e fr e e d m e n to andrew johnson 1865 in the summer of 1865 president andrew johnson ordered land that had been distributed to freed slaves in south carolina and georgia returned to its former owners.
a committee of were we are the only true and loyal people that were found in possession of these lands.
we have been to obtain land.
johnson did not however change always ready to strike for liberty and humanity yea to fight if need be to preserve this glorious union.
shall not we who are freedmen and have his policy.
always been true to this union have the same rights we the freedmen of edisto island south carolina as are enjoyed by others.
are not our rights as a free people and good citizens of these united states to be considered before those who were freedmen drafted a petition asking for the right have learned from you through major general o o howard.
with deep sorrow and painful hearts of the possibility of the government restoring these lands to the former owners.
we are well aware of the many perplexing and trying questions that burden your mind and therefore pray to god the preserver of all and who has through our late and beloved president lincolns proclamation and the war made us a free people that he may guide you in making your decisions and give you that wisdom that cometh from above to settle these great and important questions for the best interests of the country and the colored race.
here is where secession was born and nurtured.
here is where we have toiled nearly all our lives as slaves and treated like dumb driven cattle.
this is our home we have made these lands what they found in rebellion against this good and just government.
are we who have been abused and oppressed for many long years not to be allowed the privilege of purchasing land but be subject to the will of these large land owners.
god forbid.
land monopoly is injurious to the advancement of the course of freedom and if government does not make some provision by which we as freedmen can obtain a homestead we have not bettered our condition.
we look to you.
for protection and equal rights with the privilege of purchasing a homestead a homestead right here in the heart of south carolina.
from a sharecropping contract 1866 few former slaves were able to acquire land in the post civil war south.
most ended up as sharecroppers working on white owned land for a share of the crop at the end of the growing season.
this contract typical of thousands of others originated in tennessee.
the laborers signed with an x as they were illiterate.
thomas j ross agrees to employ the freedmen to plant and raise a crop on his rosstown plantation.
on the following rules regulations and remunerations.
the said ross agrees to furnish the land to cultivate and a sufficient number of mules horses and feed them to make and house said crop and all necessary farming utensils to carry on the same and to give unto said freedmen whose names appear below one half of all the cotton corn and wheat that is raised on said place for the year 1866 after all the necessary expenses are deducted out that accrues on said crop.
outside of the freedmens labor in harvesting carrying to market and selling the same the said freedmen.
covenant and agrees to and with said thomas j ross that for and in consideration of one half of the crop before mentioned that they will plant cultivate and raise under the management control and superintendence of said ross in good faith a cotton corn and oat crop under his management for the year 1866 and we the said freedmen agrees to furnish ourselves families in provisions clothing medicine and medical bills and all and every kind of other expenses that we may incur on said plantation for the year 1866 free of charge to said ross.
should the said ross furnish us any of the above supplies or any other kind of expenses during said year are to settle and pay him out of the net proceeds of our part of the crop the retail price of the county at time of sale or any price we may agree upon the said ross shall keep a regular book account against each and every one or the head of every family to be adjusted and settled at the end of the year.
we furthermore bind ourselves to and with said ross that we will do good work and labor ten hours a day on an average winter and summer.
we further agree that we will lose all lost time or pay at the rate of one dollar per day rainy days excepted.
in sickness and women lying in childbed are to lose the time and account for it to the other hands out of his or her part of the crop.
we furthermore bind ourselves that we will obey the orders of said ross in all things in carrying out and managing said crop for said year and be docked for disobedience.
all is responsible for all farming utensils that is on hand or may be placed in care of said freedmen for the year 1866 to said ross and are also responsible to said ross if we carelessly maliciously maltreat any of his stock for said year to said ross for damages to be assessed out of our wages.
samuel x johnson thomas x richard tinny x fitch jessie x simmons sophe x pruden henry x pruden frances x pruden elijah x smith questions 1 why do the black petitioners believe that owning land is essential to the enjoyment of freedom.
2 in what ways does the contract limit the freedom of the laborers.
3 what do these documents suggest about competing definitions of black freedom in the aftermath of slavery.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the meaning of freedom continue to plant cotton to obtain new loans.
by the mid 1870s white farmers who cultivated only 10 percent of the souths cotton crop in 1860 were growing 40 percent and many who had owned their land had fallen into dependency as sharecroppers who now rented land owned by others.
both black and white farmers found themselves caught in the sharecropping and crop lien systems.
a far higher percentage of black than white farmers in the south rented land rather than owned it.
but every census from 1880 to 1940 counted more white than black sharecroppers.
the workings of sharecropping and the crop lien system are illustrated by the case of matt brown a mississippi farmer who borrowed money each year from a local merchant.
he began 1892 with a debt of 226 held over from the previous year.
by 1893 although he produced cotton worth 171 browns debt had increased to 402 because he had borrowed 33 for food 29 for clothing 173 for supplies and 112 for other items.
brown never succeeded in getting out of debt.
he died in 1905 the last entry under his name in the merchants account book is a coffin.
the urban south even as the rural south stagnated economically southern cities experienced remarkable growth after the civil war.
as railroads penetrated the interior they enabled merchants in market centers like atlanta to trade directly with the north bypassing coastal cities that had traditionally monopolized southern commerce.
a new urban middle class of merchants railroad promoters and bankers reaped the benefits of the spread of cotton production in the postwar south.
thus reconstruction brought about profound changes in the lives of southerners black and white rich and poor.
in place of the prewar world of master slave and self sufficient yeoman the postwar south was peopled by new social classes landowning employers black and white sharecroppers cotton producing white farmers wage earning black laborers and urban entrepreneurs.
each of these groups turned to reconstruction politics in an attempt to shape to its own advantage the aftermath of emancipation.
aftermaths of slavery the united states of course was not the only society to confront the problem of the transition from slavery to freedom.
indeed many parallels exist between the debates during reconstruction and struggles that followed slavery in other parts of the western hemisphere over the same issues of land control of labor and political power.
in every case former planters or in haiti where the planter class had been destroyed the government itself tried to encourage or require former slaves to go back to work on plantations to grow the same crops as under slavery.
planters elsewhere held the same stereotypical views of black laborers as were voiced by their counterparts in the united states former slaves were supposedly lazy lacking in ambition and thought that freedom meant an absence of labor.
what visions of freedom did the former slaves and slaveholders pursue in the postwar south.
for their part former slaves throughout the hemisphere tried to carve out as much independence as possible both in their daily lives and in their labor.
they attempted to reconstruct family life by withdrawing women and children from field labor in the west indies women turned to marketing their families crops to earn income.
wherever possible former slaves acquired land of their own and devoted more time to growing food for their families than crops for the international market.
on small caribbean islands like barbados where no unoccupied land existed former slaves had no alternative but to return to plantation labor.
elsewhere the plantations either fell to pieces as in haiti or continued operating with a new labor force composed of indentured servants from india and china as in jamaica trinidad and british guiana.
as slavery ended between the years 1838 and 1865 more than 100 000 indian laborers were introduced into the british caribbean a process that could not have taken place without the consolidation of british control over india as part of its nineteenth century empire.
southern planters in the united states brought in a few chinese laborers in an attempt to replace freedmen but since the federal government opposed such efforts the chinese remained only a tiny proportion of the southern workforce.
but if struggles over land and labor united its postemancipation experience with that of other societies in one respect the united states was unique.
only in the united states were former slaves within two years of the end of slavery granted the right to vote and thus given a major share of political power.
few anticipated this development when the civil war ended.
it came about as the result of one of the greatest political crises of american history the battle between president andrew johnson and congress over reconstruction.
the struggle resulted in profound changes in the nature of citizenship the structure of constitutional authority and the meaning of american freedom.
chinese laborers at work on a louisiana plantation during reconstruction.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the making of radical reconstruction the making of radical reconstruction andrew johnson to lincolns successor andrew johnson fell the task of overseeing the restoration of the union.
born in poverty in north carolina as a youth johnson worked as a tailors apprentice.
after moving to tennessee he achieved success through politics.
beginning as an alderman a town official he rose to serve in the state legislature the u s congress and for two terms as governor of tennessee.
johnson identified himself as the champion of his states honest yeomen and a foe of large planters whom he described as a bloated corrupted aristocracy a strong defender of the union he became the only senator from a seceding state to remain at his post in washington d c when the civil war began in 1861 when northern forces occupied tennessee abraham lincoln named him military governor.
in 1864 republicans nominated him to run for vice president as a symbol of the partys hope of extending its organization into the south.
in personality and outlook johnson proved unsuited for the responsibilities he shouldered after lincolns death.
a lonely stubborn man he was intolerant of criticism and unable to compromise.
he lacked lincolns political skills and keen sense of public opinion.
a fervent believer in states rights johnson insisted that since secession was illegal the southern states had never actually left the union or surrendered the right to govern their own affairs.
moreover while johnson had supported emancipation once lincoln made it a goal of the war effort he held deeply racist views.
africanamericans johnson believed had no role to play in reconstruction.
the fa i lu r e of presidential reconstruction a little over a month after lees surrender at appomattox and with congress out of session until december johnson in may 1865 outlined his plan for reuniting the nation.
he issued a series of proclamations that began the period of presidential reconstruction 1865 1867.
johnson offered a pardon which restored political and property rights except for slaves to nearly all white southerners who took an oath of allegiance.
he excluded confederate leaders and wealthy planters whose prewar property had been valued at more than 20 000.
this exemption suggested at first that johnson planned a more punitive reconstruction than lincoln had intended.
most of those exempted however soon received individual pardons from the president.
johnson also appointed provisional governors and ordered them to call state conventions elected by whites alone that would establish loyal governments in the south.
apart from the requirement that they abolish slavery repudiate secession and refuse to pay the confederate debt all unavoidable consequences of southern defeat he granted the new governments a free hand in managing local affairs.
at first most northerners believed johnsons policy deserved a chance to succeed.
the conduct of the southern governments elected under his program however turned most of the republican north against the president.
by and large white voters returned prominent confederates and members of the old elite to power.
reports of violence directed against former slaves and northern visitors in the south further alarmed republicans.
what were the sources goals and competing visions for reconstruction.
the black codes but what aroused the most opposition to johnsons reconstruction policy were the black codes laws passed by the new southern governments that attempted to regulate the lives of the former slaves.
these laws granted blacks certain rights such as legalized marriage ownership of property and limited access to the courts.
but they denied them the rights to testify against whites to serve on juries or in state militias or to vote.
and in response to planters demands that the freedpeople be required to work on the plantations the black codes declared that those who failed to sign yearly labor contracts could be arrested and hired out to white landowners.
some states limited the occupations open to blacks and barred them from acquiring land and others provided that judges could assign black children to work for their former owners without the consent of the parents.
we are not permitted to own the land whereon to build a schoolhouse or a church complained a black convention in mississippi.
where is justice.
where is freedom clearly the death of slavery did not automatically mean the birth of freedom.
but the black codes so completely violated free labor principles that they called forth a vigorous response from the republican north.
wars especially civil wars often generate hostility and bitterness.
but few groups of rebels in history have been treated more leniently than the defeated confederates.
a handful of southern leaders were arrested but most were quickly released.
only one was executed henry wirz the commander of andersonville prison where thousands of union prisoners of war had died.
most of the union army was swiftly demobilized.
what motivated the norths turn against johnsons policies was not a desire to punish the white south but the inability of the souths political leaders to accept the reality of emancipation.
we must see to it announced selling a freeman to pay his fine at monticello florida an engraving from frank leslies illustrated newspaper january 19 1867 under the black codes enacted by southern legislatures immediately after the civil war blacks convicted of vagrancy often because they refused to sign contracts to work on plantations were fined and if unable to pay auctioned off to work for the person who paid the fine.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the making of radical reconstruction republican senator william stewart of nevada that the man made free by the constitution of the united states is a freeman indeed the thaddeus stevens leader of the radical republicans in the house of representatives during reconstruction.
radical republicans when congress assembled in december 1865 johnson announced that with loyal governments functioning in all the southern states the nation had been reunited.
in response radical republicans who had grown increasingly disenchanted with johnson during the summer and fall called for the dissolution of these governments and the establishment of new ones with rebels excluded from power and black men guaranteed the right to vote.
radicals tended to represent constituencies in new england and the burned over districts of the rural north that had been home to religious revivalism abolitionism and other reform movements.
although they differed on many issues radicals shared the conviction that union victory created a golden opportunity to institutionalize the principle of equal rights for all regardless of race.
the radicals fully embraced the expanded powers of the federal government born during the civil war.
traditions of federalism and states rights they insisted must not obstruct a sweeping national effort to protect the rights of all americans.
the most prominent radicals in congress were charles sumner a senator from massachusetts and thaddeus stevens a lawyer and iron manufacturer who represented pennsylvania in the house of representatives.
before the civil war both had been outspoken foes of slavery and defenders of black rights.
early in the civil war both had urged lincoln to free and arm the slaves and both in 1865 favored black suffrage in the south.
the same national authority declared sumner that destroyed slavery must see that this other pretension racial inequality is not permitted to survive thaddeus stevenss most cherished aim was to confiscate the land of disloyal planters and divide it among former slaves and northern migrants to the south.
the whole fabric of southern society he declared must be changed.
without this this government can never be as it has never been a true republic but his plan to make small independent landholders of the former slaves proved too radical even for many of his radical colleagues.
congress to be sure had already offered free land to settlers in the west in the homestead act of 1862 but this land had been in the possession of the federal government not private individuals although originally of course it had been occupied by indians.
most congressmen believed too deeply in the sanctity of property rights to be willing to take land from one group of owners and distribute it to others.
stevenss proposal failed to pass.
the origins of civil rights with the south unrepresented republicans enjoyed an overwhelming majority in congress.
but the party was internally divided.
most republicans were moderates not radicals.
moderates believed that johnsons plan was flawed but they desired to work with the president to modify it.
they feared that neither northern nor southern whites would accept black suffrage.
moderates and radicals joined in refusing to seat the southerners recently what were the sources goals and competing visions for reconstruction.
elected to congress but moderates broke with the radicals by leaving the johnson governments in place.
early in 1866 senator lyman trumbull of illinois proposed two bills reflecting the moderates belief that johnsons policy required modification.
the first extended the life of the freedmens bureau which had originally been established for only one year.
the second the civil rights bill was described by one congressman as one of the most important bills ever presented to the house for its action it defined all persons born in the united states as citizens and spelled out rights they were to enjoy without regard to race.
equality before the law was central to the measure no longer could states enact laws like the black codes discriminating between white and black citizens.
so were free labor values.
according to the law no state could deprive any citizen of the right to make contracts bring lawsuits or enjoy equal protection of ones person and property.
these said trumbull were the fundamental rights belonging to every man as a free man the bill made no mention of the right to vote for blacks.
in constitutional terms the civil rights bill represented the first attempt to give concrete meaning to the thirteenth amendment which had abolished slavery to define in law the essence of freedom.
to the surprise of congress johnson vetoed both bills.
both he said would centralize power in the national government and deprive the states of the authority to regulate their own affairs.
moreover he argued blacks did not deserve the rights of citizenship.
by acting to secure their rights congress was discriminating against the white race the vetoes made a breach between the president and nearly the entire republican party inevitable.
congress failed by a single vote to muster the two thirds majority necessary to override the veto of the freedmens bureau bill although later in 1866 it did extend the bureaus life to 1870.
but in april 1866 the civil rights bill became the first major law in american history to be passed over a presidential veto.
the fourteenth amendment congress now proceeded to adopt its own plan of reconstruction.
in june it approved and sent to the states for ratification the fourteenth amendment which placed in the constitution the principle of citizenship for all persons born in the united states and which empowered the federal government to protect the rights of all americans.
the amendment prohibited the states from abridging the privileges and immunities of citizens or denying them the equal protection of the law this broad language opened the door for future congresses and the federal courts to breathe meaning into the guarantee of legal equality.
in a compromise between the radical and moderate positions on black suffrage the amendment did not grant blacks the right to vote.
but it did provide that if a state denied the vote to any group of men that states representation in congress would be reduced.
this provision did not apply when states barred women from voting.
the abolition of slavery threatened to increase southern political power since now all blacks not merely three fifths as in the case of slaves would be counted in determining a states representation in congress.
the fourteenth amendment offered the leaders of the white south a choice allow black men to vote and keep their president andrew johnson in an 1868 lithograph by currier and ives.
because of johnsons stubborn opposition to the congressional reconstruction policy one disgruntled citizen drew a crown on his head with the words i am king c h.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the making of radical reconstruction a democratic party broadside from the election of 1866 in pennsylvania uses racist imagery to argue that government assistance aids lazy former slaves at the expense of hardworking whites.
states full representation in the house of representatives or limit the vote to whites and sacrifice part of their political power.
the fourteenth amendment produced an intense division between the parties.
not a single democrat in congress voted in its favor and only 4 of 175 republicans were opposed.
radicals to be sure expressed their disappointment that the amendment did not guarantee black suffrage.
it was far from perfect stevens told the house but he intended to vote for it because i live among men and not among angels nonetheless by writing into the constitution the principle that equality before the law regardless of race is a fundamental right of all american citizens the amendment made the most important change in that document since the adoption of the bill of rights.
the reconstruction act the fourteenth amendment became the central issue of the political campaign of 1866 johnson embarked on a speaking tour of the north called by journalists the swing around the circle to urge voters to elect members of congress committed to his own reconstruction program.
denouncing his critics the president made wild accusations that the radicals were plotting to assassinate him.
his behavior further undermined public support for his policies as did riots that broke out in memphis and new orleans in which white policemen and citizens killed dozens of blacks.
in the northern congressional elections that fall republicans opposed to johnsons policies won a sweeping victory.
nonetheless at the presidents urging every southern state but tennessee refused to ratify the fourteenth amendment.
the intransigence of johnson and the bulk of the white south pushed moderate republicans toward the radicals.
in march 1867 over johnsons veto congress adopted the reconstruction act which temporar what were the sources goals and competing visions for reconstruction.
ily divided the south into five military districts and called for the creation of new state governments with black men given the right to vote.
thus began the period of radical reconstruction which lasted until 1877 a variety of motives combined to produce radical reconstruction demands by former slaves for the right to vote the radicals commitment to the idea of equality widespread disgust with johnsons policies the desire to fortify the republican party in the south and the determination to keep ex confederates from office.
but the conflict between president johnson and congress did not end with the passage of the reconstruction act.
impeachment and the election of grant in march 1867 congress adopted the tenure of office act barring the president from removing certain officeholders including cabinet members without the consent of the senate.
johnson considered this an unconstitutional restriction on his authority.
in february 1868 he removed secretary of war edwin m stanton an ally of the radicals.
the house of representatives responded by approving articles of impeachment that is it presented charges against johnson to the senate which had to decide whether to remove him from office.
that spring for the first time in american history a president was placed on trial before the senate for high crimes and misdemeanors by this a democratic ribbon from the election of point virtually all republicans considered johnson a failure as president.
1868 with horatio seymour and francis but some moderates disliked benjamin f wade a radical who as tempop.
blair jr the partys candidates for rary president of the senate would become president if johnson were president and vice president.
the ribbon removed.
others feared that conviction would damage the constitutional illustrates the explicit appeals to racism separation of powers between congress and the executive.
johnsons that marked the campaign.
lawyers assured moderate republicans that if acquitted he would stop interfering with reconstruction policy.
the final tally was 35 19 to convict johnson one vote short of the two thirds necessary to remove him.
seven republicans had joined the democrats in voting to acquit the president.
the presidential a few days after the vote republicans nominated election of 1868 ulysses s grant the unions most prominent military hero as their candidate for president.
grants democratic oppo5 5 7 nent was horatio seymour the former governor of new york.
reconstruction became the central issue of the bit4 terly fought 1868 campaign.
republicans identified their 26 7 6 opponents with secession and treason a tactic known as 16 13 waving the bloody shirt democrats denounced reconstruction as unconstitutional and condemned black suffrage as a violation of americas political traditions.
they appealed openly to racism.
seymours running mate francis p blair jr charged republicans with placing the south under the rule of a semi barbarous race who longed non voting territory to subject the white women to their unbridled lust the fifteenth amendment grant won the election of 1868 although by a margin 300 000 of 6 million votes cast that many republicans electoral vote popular vote party candidate share share republican grant 214 73 3 012 833 53 southern democrat seymour 80 27 2 703 249 47 not voting due to reconstruction state legislature cast the electoral votes for grant c h.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the fifteenth amendment an 1870 lithograph marking the ratification of the constitutional amendment prohibiting states from denying citizens the right to vote because of race.
surrounding an image of a celebration parade are portraits of abraham lincoln president ulysses s grant and his vice president schuyler colfax abolitionists john brown martin r delany and frederick douglass and hiram revels the first black to serve in the u s senate.
at the bottom are scenes of freedom education family political representation and church life.
the making of radical reconstruction found uncomfortably slim.
the result led congress to adopt the eras third and final amendment to the constitution.
in february 1869 it approved the fifteenth amendment which prohibited the federal and state governments from denying any citizen the right to vote because of race.
bitterly opposed by the democratic party it was ratified in 1870 although the fifteenth amendment opened the door to suffrage restrictions not explicitly based on race literacy tests property qualifications and poll taxes and did not extend the right to vote to women it marked the culmination of four decades of abolitionist agitation.
as late as 1868 even after congress had enfranchised black men in the south only eight northern states allowed african american men to vote.
with the fifteenth amendment the american anti slavery society disbanded its work its members believed now complete.
nothing in all history exclaimed veteran abolitionist william lloyd garrison equaled this wonderful quiet sudden transformation of four millions of human beings from.
the auction block to the ballot box the great constitutional revolution the laws and amendments of reconstruction reflected the intersection of two products of the civil war era a newly empowered national state and the idea of a national citizenry enjoying equality before the law.
what republican leader carl schurz called the great constitutional revolution of reconstruction transformed the federal system and with it the language of freedom so central to american political culture.
before the civil war american citizenship had been closely linked to race.
the first congress in 1790 had limited to whites the right to become a naturalized citizen when immigrating from abroad.
no black person free or slave the supreme court had declared in the dred scott decision of 1857 could be a what were the sources goals and competing visions for reconstruction.
citizen of the united states.
the laws and amendments of reconstruction repudiated the idea that citizenship was an entitlement of whites alone.
the principle of equality before the law moreover did not apply only to the south.
the reconstruction amendments voided many northern laws discriminating on the basis of race.
and as one congressman noted the amendments expanded the liberty of whites as well as blacks including the millions of people of foreign birth who will flock to our shores the new amendments also transformed the relationship between the federal government and the states.
the bill of rights had linked civil liberties to the autonomy of the states.
its language congress shall make no law reflected the belief that concentrated national power posed the greatest threat to freedom.
the authors of the reconstruction amendments assumed that rights required national power to enforce them.
rather than a threat to liberty the federal government in charles sumners words had become the custodian of freedom the reconstruction amendments transformed the constitution from a document primarily concerned with federal state relations and the rights of property into a vehicle through which members of vulnerable minorities could stake a claim to freedom and seek protection against misconduct by all levels of government.
in the twentieth century many of the supreme courts most important decisions expanding the rights of american citizens were based on the fourteenth amendment perhaps most notably the 1954 brown ruling that outlawed school segregation see chapter 24.
boundaries of freedom reconstruction redrew the boundaries of american freedom.
lines of exclusion that limited the privileges of citizenship to white men had long been central to the practice of american democracy.
only in an unparalleled crisis could they have been replaced even temporarily by the vision uncle sams thanksgiving dinner an engraving by thomas nast from harpers weekly november 20 1868 shortly after the election of ulysses s grant graphically illustrates how the boundaries of freedom had expanded during reconstruction.
the guests include among others african americans asianamericans and native americans men and women all enjoying a harmonious feast.
the tables centerpiece contains the slogan universal suffrage c h.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the making of radical reconstruction of a republic of equals embracing black americans as well as white.
that the united states was a white mans government had been a widespread belief before the civil war.
it is not difficult to understand why andrew johnson in one of his veto messages claimed that federal protection of blacks civil rights violated all our experience as a people reconstruction republicans belief in universal rights also had its limits.
in his remarkable composite nation speech of 1869 frederick douglass condemned prejudice against immigrants from china.
americas destiny he declared was to transcend race by serving as an asylum for people gathered here from all corners of the globe by a common aspiration for national liberty a year later charles sumner moved to strike the word white from naturalization requirements.
senators from the western states objected.
at their insistence the naturalization law was amended to make africans eligible to obtain citizenship when migrating from abroad.
but asians remained ineligible.
the racial boundaries of nationality had been redrawn but not eliminated.
the juxtaposition of the amended naturalization law and the fourteenth amendment created a significant division in the asian american community.
well into the twentieth century asian immigrants could not become citizens but their native born children automatically did so.
the a delegation of advocates of woman suffrage addressing the house judiciary committee an engraving from frank leslies illustrated newspaper february 4 1871 the group includes elizabeth cady stanton seated just to the right of the speaker and susan b anthony at the table on the extreme right.
rights of women the contest with the south that destroyed slavery wrote the philadelphia lawyer sidney george fisher in his diary has caused an immense increase in the popular passion for liberty and equality but advocates of womens rights encountered the limits of the reconstruction commitment to equality.
women activists saw reconstruction as the moment to claim their own emancipation.
no less than blacks proclaimed elizabeth cady stanton women had arrived at a transition period from slavery to freedom the rewriting of the constitution declared suffrage leader olympia brown offered the opportunity to sever the blessings of freedom from sex as well as race and to bury the black man and the woman in the citizen the destruction of slavery led feminists to search for ways to make the promise of free labor real for women.
every issue of the new womens rights journal the agitator edited by mary livermore who had led fund raising efforts for aid to union soldiers during the war carried stories complaining of the limited job opportunities and unequal pay for females who entered the labor market.
other feminists debated how to achieve liberty for married women demands for liberalizing divorce laws which generally required evidence of adultery desertion or extreme abuse to termi what were the sources goals and competing visions for reconstruction.
nate a marriage and for recognizing womans control over her own body including protection against domestic violence and access to what later generations would call birth control moved to the center of many feminists concerns.
our rotten marriage institution one ohio woman wrote is the main obstacle in the way of womans freedom feminists and radicals talk of woman suffrage and redesigning marriage found few sympathetic male listeners.
even radical republicans insisted that reconstruction was the negros hour the hour that is of the black male.
the fourteenth amendment for the first time introduced the word male into the constitution in its clause penalizing a state for denying any group of men the right to vote.
the fifteenth amendment outlawed discrimination in voting based on race but not gender.
these measures produced a bitter split both between feminists and radical republicans and within feminist circles.
some leaders like stanton and susan b anthony opposed the fifteenth amendment because it did nothing to enfranchise women.
they denounced their former abolitionist allies and moved to sever the womens rights movement from its earlier moorings in the antislavery tradition.
on occasion they appealed to racial and ethnic prejudices arguing that nativeborn white women deserved the vote more than non whites and immigrants.
patrick and sambo and hans and yung tung who do not know the difference between a monarchy and a republic declared stanton had no right to be making laws for feminist leader lucretia mott but other abolitionist feminists like abby kelley and lucy stone insisted that despite their limitations the reconstruction amendments represented steps in the direction of truly universal suffrage and should be supported.
the result was a split in the movement and the creation in 1869 of two hostile womens rights organizations the national woman suffrage association led by stanton and the american woman suffrage association with lucy stone as president.
they would not reunite until the 1890s.
thus even as it rejected the racial definition of freedom that had emerged in the first half of the nineteenth century reconstruction left the gender boundary largely intact.
when women tried to use the rewritten legal code and constitution to claim equal rights they found the courts unreceptive.
myra bradwell invoked the idea of free labor in challenging an illinois statute limiting the practice of law to men but the supreme court in 1873 rebuffed her claim.
free labor principles the justices declared did not apply to women since the law of the creator had assigned them to the domestic sphere despite their limitations the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments and the reconstruction act of 1867 marked a radical departure in american and world history.
alone among the nations that abolished slavery in the nineteenth century the united states within a few years of emancipation clothed its former slaves with citizenship rights equal to those of whites.
we have cut loose from the whole dead past wrote timothy howe a republican senator from wisconsin and have cast our anchor out a hundred years into the future.
the reconstruction act of 1867 inaugurated americas first real experiment in interracial democracy.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 radical reconstruction in the south electioneering at the south an engraving from harpers weekly july 25 1868 depicts a speaker at a political meeting in the rural south.
women as well as men took part in these grassroots gatherings.
radical reconstruction in the south the tocsin of freedom among the former slaves the passage of the reconstruction act inspired an outburst of political organization.
at mass political meetings community gatherings attended by men women and children africanamericans staked their claim to equal citizenship.
blacks declared an alabama meeting deserved exactly the same rights privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by white men.
we ask for nothing more and will be content with nothing less these gatherings inspired direct action to remedy long standing grievances.
hundreds took part in sit ins that integrated horse drawn public streetcars in cities across the south.
plantation workers organized strikes for higher wages.
speakers male and female fanned out across the south.
frances ellen watkins harper a black veteran of the abolitionist movement embarked on a two year tour lecturing on literacy land and liberation james d lynch a member of the group that met with general sherman in 1865 organized republican meetings.
he became known in the words of a white contemporary as a great orator fluid and graceful who stirred the emotions of his listeners as no other man could do determined to exercise their new rights as citizens thousands joined the union league an organization closely linked to the republican party and the vast majority of eligible african americans registered to vote.
james k green a former slave in hale county alabama and a league organizer went on to serve eight years in the alabama legislature.
in the 1880s green looked back on his political career.
before the war he declared i was entirely ignorant i knew nothing more than to obey my master and there were thousands of us in the same attitude.
but the tocsin warning bell of freedom sounded and knocked at the door and we walked out like free men and shouldered the responsibilities what were the social and political effects of radical reconstruction in the south.
by 1870 all the former confederate states had been readmitted to the union and in a region where the republican party had not existed before the war nearly all were under republican control.
their new state constitutions drafted in 1868 and 1869 by the first public bodies in american history with substantial black representation marked a considerable improvement over those they replaced.
the constitutions greatly expanded public responsibilities.
they established the regions first statefunded systems of free public education and they created new penitentiaries orphan asylums and homes for the insane.
the constitutions guaranteed equality of civil and political rights and abolished practices of the antebellum era such as whipping as a punishment for crime property qualifications for officeholding and imprisonment for debt.
a few states initially barred former confederates from voting but this policy was quickly abandoned by the new state governments.
the black officeholder throughout reconstruction black voters provided the bulk of the republican partys support.
but african americans did not control reconstruction politics as their opponents frequently charged.
the highest offices remained almost entirely in white hands and only in south carolina where blacks made up 60 percent of the population did they form a majority of the legislature.
nonetheless the fact that some 2 000 african americans occupied public offices during reconstruction represented a fundamental shift of power in the south and a radical departure in american government.
african americans were represented at every level of government.
fourteen were elected to the national house of representatives.
two blacks the first vote an engraving from harpers weekly november 16 1867 depicts the first biracial elections in southern history.
the voters represent key sources of the black political leadership that emerged during reconstruction the artisan carrying his tools the well dressed city person probably free before the war and the soldier.
black and white members of the mississippi senate 1874 1875 shortly before the end of reconstruction in the state.
the woman in the bottom row is a postmistress.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 radical reconstruction in the south the operations of the registration laws and negro suffrage in the south an engraving in frank leslies illustrated newspaper november 30 1867 shows blacks and whites for the first time serving together on a southern jury.
served in the u s senate during reconstruction both representing mississippi.
hiram revels who had been born free in north carolina was educated in illinois and served as a chaplain in the wartime union army in 1870 became the first black senator in american history.
the second blanche k bruce a former slave was elected in 1875 since then only four african americans edward w brooke of massachusetts who served 1967 1978 carol moseley braun of illinois 1993 1998 barack obama of illinois 2005 2008 and roland burris 2009 have held seats in the senate.
pinckney b s pinchback of louisiana the georgia born son of a white planter and a free black woman served briefly during the winter of 1872 1873 as americas first black governor.
more than a century would pass before l douglas wilder of virginia elected in 1989 became the second.
some 700 blacks sat in state legislatures during reconstruction and scores held local offices ranging from justice of the peace to sheriff tax assessor and policeman.
the presence of black officeholders and their white allies made a real difference in southern life ensuring that blacks accused of crimes would be tried before juries of their peers and enforcing fairness in such aspects of local government as road repair tax assessment and poor relief.
in south carolina and louisiana homes of the souths wealthiest and best educated free black communities most prominent reconstruction officeholders had never experienced slavery.
in addition a number of black reconstruction officials like pennsylvania born jonathan j wright who served on the south carolina supreme court had come from the north after the civil war.
the majority however were former slaves who had established their leadership in the black community by serving in the union army working as ministers teachers or skilled craftsmen or engaging in union league organizing.
among the most celebrated black officeholders was robert smalls who had worked as a slave on the charleston docks before the civil war and who won national fame in 1862 by secretly guiding the planter a confederate vessel out of the harbor and delivering it to union forces.
smalls became a powerful political leader on the south carolina sea islands and was elected to five terms in congress.
visions of freedom the shackle broken by the genius of freedom.
this 1874 lithograph depicts the progress of black freedom during the civil war and reconstruction.
at the center robert b elliott a black congressman from south carolina delivers a celebrated speech supporting the bill that became the civil rights act of 1875 questions 1 what does the artist suggest about the foundations of blacks claim to equal rights and what they anticipated as the results of freedom.
2 what aspects of freedom does the artist include that are absent in the visions of freedom image in chapter 16 the court created the first large breach in liberty of contract doctrine.
but the cost was high at the very time that women in unprecedented numbers were entering the labor market and earning college degrees brandeiss brief and the courts opinion solidified the view of women workers as weak dependent and incapable of enjoying the same economic rights as men.
by 1917 thirty states had enacted laws limiting the hours of labor of female workers.
many women derived great benefit from these laws others saw them as an infringement on their freedom.
while the maternalist agenda built gender inequality into the early foundations of the welfare state the very use of government to regulate working conditions called into question basic assumptions concerning liberty of contract.
although not all reformers were willing to take the step it was easy to extend the idea of protecting women and children to demand that government better the living and working conditions of men as well ch.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 the progressive presidents by insuring them against the impact of unemployment old age ill health and disability.
brandeis himself insisted that government should concern itself with the health income and future prospects of all its citizens.
the louis d brandeis progressive reformer and advocate of the labor movement was appointed to the supreme court in 1916 by president woodrow wilson.
idea of economic citizenship brandeis envisioned a different welfare state from that of the maternalist reformers one rooted less in the idea of healthy motherhood than in the notion of universal economic entitlements including the right to a decent income and protection against unemployment and work related accidents.
for him the right to assistance derived from citizenship itself not some special service to the nation as in the case of mothers or upstanding character which had long differentiated the deserving from the undeserving poor.
this vision too enjoyed considerable support in the progressive era.
by 1913 twenty two states had enacted workmens compensation laws to benefit workers male or female injured on the job.
this legislation was the first wedge that opened the way for broader programs of social insurance.
to avoid the stigma of depending on governmental assistance contributions from workers own wages funded these programs in part thus distinguishing them from charity dispensed by local authorities to the poor.
but state minimum wage laws and most laws regulating working hours applied only to women.
women and children may have needed protection but interference with the freedom of contract of adult male workers was still widely seen as degrading.
the establishment of a standard of living and working conditions beneath which no american should be allowed to fall would await the coming of the new deal.
the progressive presidents despite the ferment of progressivism on the city and state levels the most striking political development of the early twentieth century was the rise of the national state.
the process of nationalization was occurring throughout american life.
national corporations dominated the economy national organizations like the american medical association came into being to raise the incomes and respect of professions.
the process was even reflected in the consolidation of local baseball teams into the american and national leagues and the advent in 1903 of the world series.
only energetic national government progressives believed could create the social conditions of freedom.
despite creative experiments in social policy at the city and state levels the tradition of localism seemed to most progressives an impediment to a renewed sense of national purpose.
poverty economic insecurity and lack of industrial democracy were national problems that demanded national solutions.
the democratic national state wrote new republic editor herbert croly offered an alternative to control of americans lives by narrow interests that manipulated politics or by the all powerful corporations.
croly proposed a new synthesis of american political traditions.
to achieve the jeffersonian ends of democratic self determination and individual freedom he insisted the country needed to employ the hamiltonian means of government intervention in the economy.
each in his own way the how did the progressive presidents foster the rise of the nation state.
progressive presidents theodore roosevelt william howard taft and woodrow wilson tried to address this challenge.
theodore r o o s e v e lt in september 1901 the anarchist leon czolgosz assassinated william mckinley while the president visited the pan american exposition in buffalo new york.
at the age of forty two vice president theodore roosevelt became the youngest man ever to hold the office of president.
roosevelt was an impetuous energetic individual with a penchant for what he called the strenuous life of manly adventure.
in many ways he became the model for the twentieth century president an official actively and continuously engaged in domestic and foreign affairs.
the foreign policies of the progressive presidents will be discussed in the next chapter 19 had a long history of hostility toward the japanese.
now inspired by exaggerated fears of a japanese invasion of the west coast and pressured by whites who saw an opportunity to gain possession of japanese american property the military persuaded fdr to issue executive order 9066 promulgated in february 1942 this ordered the expulsion of all persons of japanese descent from the west coast.
that spring and summer authorities removed more than 110 000 men women and children nearly two thirds of them american citizens to internment camps far from their homes.
the order did not apply to persons of japanese descent living in hawaii where they represented nearly 40 percent of the population.
despite hawaiis vulnerability its economy could not function without japanese american labor.
but the treatment of mainland japanese americans provided ammunition for japans claim that its aggressions in asia were intended to defend the rights of non white peoples against colonial rule and a racist united states.
the internees were subjected to a quasi military discipline in the camps.
living in former horse stables makeshift shacks or barracks behind barbed wire fences they were awakened for roll call at 6 45 each morning and ate their meals which rarely included the japanese cooking to which they were accustomed in giant mess halls.
armed guards patrolled the camps and searchlights shone all night.
privacy was difficult to come by and medical facilities were often nonexistent.
nonetheless the internees did their best to create an atmosphere of home decorating their accommodations with pictures flowers and curtains planting vegetable gardens and setting up activities like sports clubs and art classes for themselves.
internment revealed how easily war can undermine basic freedoms.
there were no court hearings no due process and no writs of habeas corpus.
one searches the wartime record in vain for public protests among non japanese against the gravest violation of civil liberties since the end of slavery.
the press supported the policy almost unanimously.
in congress only senator robert taft of ohio spoke out against it.
groups publicly committed to fighting discrimination from the communist party to the naacp and the american jewish committee either defended the policy or remained silent.
the courts refused to intervene.
in 1944 in korematsu v united states the supreme court denied the appeal of fred korematsu a japanese american how did american minorities face threats to their freedom at home and abroad d u r i n g wo r l d wa r i i.
japanese american i n t e r n m e n t 1942 1945 seattle washington portland heart mountain 10 767 oregon cody idaho klamath falls tule lake twin falls 18 789 m i l i ta r y minidoka 9 397 minnesota wisconsin south dakota michigan wyoming iowa nebraska utah sacramento nevada nephi topaz 8 310 california are san francisco north dakota montana a manzanar 10 046 lone pine fresno illinois colorado lamar missouri kansas ohio kentucky amache 7 318 bakersfield los angeles indiana tennessee poston 17 814 arizona san diego pac ific oc ean gila bend gila river 13 348 oklahoma arkansas pine bluff rohwer jerome 8 475 8 497 new mexico alabama mississippi texas louisiana internment camps figures show highest number interned at each camp.
demarcates area from which japanese americans were excluded mexico citizen who had been arrested for refusing to present himself for internment.
speaking for a 6 3 majority justice hugo black usually an avid defender of civil liberties upheld the legality of the internment policy insisting that an order applying only to persons of japanese descent was not based on race.
the court has never overturned the korematsu decision.
as justice robert h jackson warned in his dissent it lies about like a loaded weapon ready for the hand of any authority that can bring forward a plausible claim of national security.
the government marketed war bonds to the internees.
it established a loyalty oath program expecting japanese americans to swear allegiance to the government that had imprisoned them and to enlist in the army.
some young men refused and about 200 were sent to prison for resisting the draft.
let us out and then maybe ill think about risking my skin for the land of the free one of the resisters remarked.
but 20 000 japaneseamericans joined the armed forces from the camps along with another 13 000 from hawaii.
a long campaign for acknowledgment of the injustice done to japanese americans followed the end of the war.
in 1988 congress gulf of mexico 400 miles 400 kilometers more than 100 000 japaneseamericans the majority american citizens were forcibly moved from their homes to internment camps during world war ii.
22 fighting for the four freedoms the american dilemma apologized for internment and provided 20 000 in compensation to each surviving victim.
president bill clinton subsequently awarded fred korematsu the presidential medal of freedom.
blacks and the war although the treatment of japanese americans revealed the stubborn hold of racism in american life the wartime message of freedom portended a major transformation in the status of blacks.
there never has been there isnt now and there never will be roosevelt declared any race of people on the earth fit to serve as masters over their fellow men yet nazi germany cited american practices as proof of its own race policies.
washington remained a rigidly segregated city and the red cross refused to mix blood from blacks and whites in its blood banks thereby critics charged in effect accepting nazi race theories.
charles drew the black scientist who pioneered the techniques of storing and shipping blood plasma a development of immense importance to the treatment of wounded soldiers protested bitterly against this policy pointing out that it had no scientific basis.
in 1940 and 1941 even as roosevelt called for aid to the free peoples of europe thirteen lynchings took place in the united states.
the war spurred a movement of black population from the rural south to the cities of the north and west that dwarfed the great migration of world war i and the 1920s.
about 700 000 black migrants poured out of the south on what they called liberty trains seeking jobs in the industrial heartland.
they encountered sometimes violent hostility nowhere more so than in detroit where angry white residents forced authorities to evict black tenants from a new housing project.
in 1943 a fight at a detroit city park spiraled into a race riot that left thirty four persons dead and a hate strike of 20 000 workers protested the upgrading of black employees in a plant manufacturing aircraft engines.
the war failed to end lynching.
isaac simmons a black minister was murdered in 1944 for refusing to sell his land to a white man who believed it might contain oil.
the criminals went unpunished.
this took place in liberty mississippi.
blacks during world war ii red cross blood banks separated blood from black and white americans one illustration of the persistence of racial segregation.
this 1943 poster by the naacp points out that the concept of negro and white blood has no scientific basis.
and military service when world war ii began the air force and marines had no black members.
the army restricted the number of black enlistees and contained only five black officers three of them chaplains.
the navy accepted blacks only as waiters and cooks.
during the war more than 1 million blacks served in the armed forces.
they did so in segregated units largely confined to construction transport and other noncombat tasks.
many northern black draftees were sent to the south for military training where they found themselves excluded from movie theaters and servicemens clubs on military bases and abused when they ventured into local towns.
black soldiers sometimes had to give up their seats on railroad cars to accommodate nazi prisoners of war.
nothing so lowers negro morale wrote the naacps magazine the crisis as the frequent preferential treatment of axis prisoners of war in contrast with army policy toward american troops who happen to be negro how did american minorities face threats to their freedom at home and abroad d u r i n g wo r l d wa r i i.
the segregated army recruits training with their rifles at the u s marine base at parris island south carolina in 1941 when southern black veterans returned home and sought benefits through the gi bill they encountered even more evidence of racial discrimination.
on the surface the gi bill contained no racial differentiation in offering benefits like health care college tuition assistance job training and loans to start a business or purchase a farm.
but local authorities who administered its provisions allowed southern black veterans to use its education benefits only at segregated colleges limited their job training to unskilled work and low wage service jobs and limited loans for farm purchase to white veterans.
birth of the civil rights movement in 1942 a public opinion survey sponsored by the armys bureau of intelligence found that the vast majority of white americans were unaware that there is any such thing as a negro problem and were convinced that blacks were satisfied with their social and economic conditions.
they would soon discover their mistake.
the war years witnessed the birth of the modern civil rights movement.
angered by the almost complete exclusion of african americans from jobs in the rapidly expanding war industries of 100 000 aircraft workers in 1940 fewer than 300 were blacks the black labor leader a philip randolph in july 1941 called for a march on washington.
his demands included access to defense employment an end to segregation and a national antilynching law.
randolph who as founder of the brotherhood of sleeping car porters had long battled racism among both employers and unions hurled roosevelts rhetoric back at the president.
he declared racial discrimination undemocratic un american and pro hitler the prospect of thousands of angry blacks descending on washington remarked one official scared the government half to death to persuade voices of freedom from henr y r luce the american centur y 1941 even before the united states entered world war ii some americans were thinking of a postwar world in which the united states would exert its influence throughout the globe.
one influential in postulating the indivisibility of the contemporary world one does not necessarily imagine that leadership was a short book by henry r luce anything like a world state a parliament of men must be brought about in this century.
nor need we assume that war can be abolished.
large sections the publisher of life and time magazines.
of the human family may be effectively organized in the field of national policy the fundamental into opposition to one another.
tyrannies may require a large amount of living space.
but freedom requires and will require far greater living space call for americans to accept the burden of world trouble with america has been and is that whereas their nation became in the 20th century the most powerful and the most vital nation in the world nevertheless americans were unable to accommodate themselves spiritually and practically to that fact.
hence they have failed to play their part as a world power a failure which has had disastrous consequences for themselves and for all mankind.
and the cure is this to accept wholeheartedly our duty and our opportunity as the most powerful and vital nation in the world and in consequence to exert upon the world the full impact of our influence for such purposes as we see fit and by such means as we see fit.
our world of 2 000 000 000 human beings is for the first time in history one world fundamentally indivisible.
our world again for the first time in human history is capable of producing all the material needs of the entire human family.
the world of the 20th century if it is to come to life in any nobility of health and vigor must be to a significant degree an american century.
than tyranny.
justice will come near to losing all meaning in the minds of men unless justice can have approximately the same fundamental meanings in many lands and among many peoples.
promise of adequate production for all mankind the more abundant life be it noted that this is characteristically an american promise.
what we must insist on is that the abundant life is predicated on freedom.
without freedom there will be no abundant life.
with freedom there can be.
and finally there is the belief shared let us remember by most men living that the 20th century must be to a significant degree an american century.
as america enters dynamically upon the world scene we need most of all to seek and to bring forth a vision of america as a world power and to bring forth a vision.
which will guide us to the authentic creation of the 20th century our century.
f r o m c h a r l e s h.
we s l e y t h e n e g r o h a s a l w a y s wa n t e d t h e fo u r fr e e d o m s i n w h a t t h e n e g r o wa n t s 1 9 4 4 in 1944 the university of north carolina press published what the negro wants a book of essays by fourteen prominent black leaders.
virtually every contributor called for the right to vote in the south the dismantling of segregation and access to the american standard of living several essays also linked the want.
however the negro has remained a marginal worker and the competition with white workers has left him in want in many localities of an economically sufficient nation.
they have wanted freedom from fear.
they have been cowed browbeaten or beaten as they have marched through the years of american life.
the negro wants democracy to begin at home.
when he read the manuscript w t couch the the future of our democratic life is insecure so long as the hatred disdain and disparagement of americans of african ancestry exist.
the negro wants not only to win the war but also director of the press was stunned.
if this is to win the peace.
he wants the peace to be free of what the negro wants he told the books editor race and color restrictions of imperialism and exploitation and inclusive of the participation of minorities all over the world in their own black struggle for racial justice with movements against european imperialism in africa and asia.
nothing could be clearer than what he needs and needs most urgently is to revise his wants in this excerpt the historian charles h wesley explains that blacks are denied each of the four freedoms and also illustrates how the war strengthened black internationalism.
negroes have wanted what other citizens of the united states have wanted.
they have wanted freedom and opportunity.
they have wanted the pursuit of the life vouchsafed to all citizens of the united states by our own liberty documents.
they have wanted freedom of speech but they were supposed to be silently acquiescent in all aspects of their life.
they have wanted freedom of religion for they had been compelled to steal away to jesus.
in order to worship god as they desired.
they have wanted freedom from governments.
when it is said that we are fighting for freedom the negro asks whose freedom is it the freedom of a peace to exploit suppress exclude debase and restrict colored peoples in india china africa malaya in the usual ways.
will great britain and the united states specifically omit from the four freedoms their minorities and subject peoples.
the negro does not want such a peace.
questions 1 what values does luce wish america to spread to the rest of the world.
2 why does wesley believe that black americans are denied the four freedoms.
3 do luce and wesley envision different roles for the united states in the postwar world.
22 fighting for the four freedoms the american dilemma randolph to call off the march roosevelt issued executive order 8802 which banned discrimination in defense jobs and established a fair employment practices commission fepc to monitor compliance.
the black press hailed the order as a new emancipation proclamation.
essentially an investigative agency the fepc lacked enforcement powers.
but its very existence marked a significant shift in public policy.
its hearings exposed patterns of racial exclusion so ingrained that firms at first freely admitted that their want ads asked for colored applicants for positions as porters and janitors and white ones for skilled jobs and that they allowed black women to work only as laundresses and cooks.
the first federal agency since reconstruction to campaign for equal opportunity for black americans the fepc played an important role in obtaining jobs for black workers in industrial plants and shipyards.
in southern california the aircraft manufacturer lockheed ran special buses into black neighborhoods to bring workers to its plants.
by 1944 more than 1 million blacks 300 000 of them women held manufacturing jobs.
my sister always said that hitler was the one that got us out of the white folks kitchen recalled one black woman.
this is the enemy a 1942 poster by victor ancona and karl koehler suggests a connection between nazism abroad and lynching at home.
the double v when the president said that we should have the four freedoms a black steelworker declared he meant to include all races during the war naacp membership grew from 50 000 to nearly 500 000 the congress of racial equality core founded by an interracial group of pacifists in 1942 held sit ins in northern cities to integrate restaurants and theaters.
after a firestone tire factory in memphis fired a black woman for trying to enter a city bus before white passengers had been seated black workers at the plant went on strike until she was reinstated.
in february 1942 the pittsburgh courier coined the phrase that came to symbolize black attitudes during the war the double v victory over germany and japan it insisted must be accompanied by victory over segregation at home.
while the roosevelt administration and the white press saw the war as an expression of american ideals black newspapers pointed to the gap between those ideals and reality.
side by side with ads for war bonds the crisis insisted that a segregated army cannot fight for a free world surveying wartime public opinion a political scientist concluded that symbols of national solidarity had very different meanings to white and black americans.
to blacks freedom from fear meant among other things an end to lynching and freedom from want included doing away with discrimination in getting jobs if in whites eyes freedom was a possession to be defended he observed to blacks and other racial minorities it remained a goal to be achieved our fight for freedom said a returning black veteran of the pacific war begins when we get to san francisco what the negro wants during the war a broad political coalition centered on the left but reaching well beyond it called for an end to racial inequality in america.
the naacp and american jewish congress cooperated closely in advocating how did american minorities face threats to their freedom at home and abroad d u r i n g wo r l d wa r i i.
laws to ban discrimination in employment and housing.
despite considerable resistance from rank and file white workers cio unions especially those with strong left liberal and communist influence made significant efforts to organize black workers and win them access to skilled positions.
afl craft unions by and large continued their long tradition of excluding black workers.
but during world war ii the cio was probably more racially integrated than any labor organization since the knights of labor in the 1880s.
the new black militancy created a crisis for moderate white southerners.
they now saw their middle ground evaporating as blacks demanded an end to segregation while southern politicians took up the cry of protecting white supremacy.
the latter also spoke the language of freedom.
defenders of the racial status quo interpreted freedom to mean the right to shape their regions institutions without outside interference.
the war emergency insisted governor frank dixon of alabama should not be used as a pretext to bring about the abolition of the color line even as the war gave birth to the modern civil rights movement it also planted the seeds for the souths massive resistance to desegregation during the 1950s.
in the rest of the country however the status of black americans assumed a place at the forefront of enlightened liberalism.
far more than in the 1930s federal officials spoke openly of the need for a dramatic change in race relations.
american democracy noted secretary of war stimson had not yet addressed the persistent legacy of the original crime of slavery progress came slowly.
but the national war labor board banned racial wage differentials.
in smith v allwright 1944 the supreme court outlawed all white primaries one of the mechanisms by which southern states deprived blacks of political rights.
in the same year the navy began assigning small numbers of black sailors to previously all white ships.
in this 1943 cartoon from the chicago defender a black newspaper questions whether non white peoples will be accorded the right to choose their own government as promised in the atlantic charter agreed to two years earlier by franklin d roosevelt and winston churchill.
churchill insisted the principle only applied to europeans.
22 fighting for the four freedoms the american dilemma the final months of the war it ended segregation altogether and the army established a few combat units that included black and white soldiers.
after a world tour in 1942 to rally support for the allies wendell willkie roosevelts opponent of 1940 published one world.
it sold 1 million copies faster than any nonfiction work in american history.
willkies travels persuaded him that asia africa and latin america would play a pivotal role in the postwar era.
but the books great surprise came in willkies attack on our imperialisms at home unless the united states addressed the mocking paradox of racism he insisted its claim to world leadership would lack moral authority.
if we want to talk about freedom willkie wrote we must mean freedom for everyone inside our frontiers an world war ii reinvigorated the movement for civil rights.
here african americans attempt to register to vote in birmingham alabama.
american dilemma no event reflected the new concern with the status of black americans more than the publication in 1944 of an american dilemma a sprawling account of the countrys racial past present and future written by the swedish social scientist gunnar myrdal.
the book offered an uncompromising portrait of how deeply racism was entrenched in law politics economics and social behavior.
but myrdal combined this sobering analysis with admiration for what he called the american creed belief in equality justice equal opportunity and freedom.
the war he argued had made americans more aware than ever of the contradiction between this creed and the reality of racial inequality.
he concluded that there is bound to be a redefinition of the negros status as a result of this war myrdals notion of a conflict between american values and american racial policies was hardly new frederick douglass and w e b du bois had said much the same thing.
but in the context of a worldwide struggle against nazism and rising black demands for equality at home his book struck a chord.
it identified a serious national problem and seemed to offer an almost painless path to peaceful change in which the federal government would take the lead in outlawing discrimination.
this coupling of an appeal to american principles with federal social engineering established a liberal position on race relations that would survive for many years.
by 1945 support for racial justice had finally taken its place on the liberal left agenda alongside full employment civil liberties and the expansion of the new deal welfare state.
roosevelt himself rarely spoke out on racial issues.
but many liberals insisted that racial discrimination must be confronted head on through federal antilynching legislation equal opportunity in the workplace an end to segregated housing and schools and the expansion of social security programs to cover agricultural and domestic workers.
this wartime vision of a racially integrated full employment economy formed a bridge between the new deal and the great society of the 1960s see chapter to obtain home mortgages set up small businesses and embark on college educations.
the majority of returning soldiers entered the labor force one reason why more than 2 million women workers lost their jobs.
the government abolished wartime agencies that regulated industrial production and labor relations and it dismantled wartime price controls leading to a sharp rise in prices.
in the immediate aftermath of world war ii president truman backed by party liberals and organized labor moved to revive the stalled momentum of the new deal.
trumans program which he announced in what were the major initiatives of trumans domestic policies.
september 1945 and would later call the fair deal focused on improving the social safety net and raising the standard of living of ordinary americans.
he called on congress to increase the minimum wage enact a program of national health insurance and expand public housing social security and aid to education.
truman complained one republican leader was out new dealing the new deal the postwar strike wave in 1946 a new wave of labor militancy swept the country.
the afl and cio launched operation dixie a campaign to bring unionization to the south and by so doing shatter the hold of anti labor conservatives on the regions politics.
more than 200 labor organizers entered the region seeking support especially in the southern textile industry the steel industry in the birmingham region and agriculture.
with war production at an end overtime work diminished even as inflation soared following the removal of price controls.
the resulting drop in workers real income sparked the largest strike wave in american history.
nearly 5 million workers including those in the steel auto coal and other key industries walked off their jobs demanding wage increases.
the strike of 750 000 steelworkers represented the largest single walkout in american history to that date.
even hollywood studios shut down because of a strike of actors and other employees of the movie industry that lasted for the better part of a year.
one historian calls this period the closest thing to a national general strike in industry in the twentieth century president truman feared the strikes would seriously disrupt the economy.
when railroad workers stopped work and set up picket lines the infuriated president prepared a speech in which he threatened to draft them all into the army and hang a few traitors language toned down by his advisers.
the walkout soon ended as did a coal strike after the truman administration secured a court order requiring the miners to return to work.
to resolve other strikes truman appointed federal fact finding boards which generally recommended wage increases although not enough to restore workers purchasing power to wartime levels.
the republican resurgence in the congressional elections of 1946 large numbers of middle class voters alarmed by the labor turmoil voted republican.
many workers disappointed by trumans policies stayed at home.
this was a lethal combination for the democratic party.
for the first time since the 1920s republicans swept to control of both houses of congress.
meanwhile in the face of vigorous opposition from southern employers and public officials and the reluctance of many white workers to join interracial labor unions operation dixie had failed to unionize the south or dent the political control of conservative democrats in the region.
the election of 1946 ensured that a conservative coalition of republicans and southern democrats would continue to dominate congress.
a few of the numerous world war ii veterans who attended college after the war thanks to the gi bill.
23 the united states and the cold war 1945 1953 the truman presidency congress turned aside trumans fair deal program.
it enacted tax cuts for wealthy americans and over the presidents veto in 1947 passed the taft hartley act which sought to reverse some of the gains made by organized labor in the past decade.
the measure authorized the president to suspend strikes by ordering an eighty day cooling off period and it banned sympathy strikes and secondary boycotts labor actions directed not at an employer but at those who did business with him.
it outlawed the closed shop which required a worker to be a union member when taking up a job and authorized states to pass right to work laws prohibiting other forms of compulsory union membership.
it also forced union officials to swear that they were not communists.
while hardly a slave labor bill as the afl and cio called it the taft hartley act made it considerably more difficult to bring unorganized workers into unions.
over time as population and capital investment shifted to states with right to work laws like texas florida and north carolina taft hartley contributed to the decline of organized labors share of the nations workforce.
postwar racial segregation and exclusion were not confined to the south in the post world war ii period.
here in 1947 picketers stand outside a seattle grocery store that refused to serve non whites.
a campaign by black activists supported by a coalition of unions church groups jewish organizations and communists forced most of the citys stores and restaurants to treat customers on an equal basis.
civil rights during his first term truman reached out in unprecedented ways to the nations black community.
the war as noted in the previous.

chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the planting of english america 1500 1733.
for i shall yet live to see it virginia an inglishe nation.
a s the seventeenth century dawned scarcely a hundred years after columbuss momentous landfall the face of much of the new world had already been profoundly transformed.
european crops and livestock had begun to alter the very landscape touching off an ecological revolution that would reverberate for centuries to come.
from tierra del fuego in the south to hudson bay in the north disease and armed conquest had cruelly winnowed and disrupted the native peoples.
several hundred thousand enslaved africans toiled on caribbean and brazilian sugar plantations.
from florida and new mexico southward most of the new world lay rmly within the grip of imperial spain.
but north of mexico america in 1600 remained largely unexplored and effectively unclaimed by europeans.
then as if to herald the coming century of colonization and con ict in the northern continent three european powers planted three primitive outposts in three distant corners of the continent within three years of one another the spanish at santa f in 1610 the french at qubec in 1608 and most consequentially for the future united states the eng lish at jamestown virginia in 1607 englands imperial stirrings feeble indeed were eng lands efforts in the 1500s to compete with the sprawling spanish empire.
as spains ally in the rst half of the century eng land took little interest in establishing its own overseas colonies.
religious con ict also disrupted eng land in midcentury after king henry viii broke with the roman catholic church in the 1530s launching the eng lish protestant reformation.
catholics battled protestants for decades and the religious balance of power seesawed.
but after this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 chronology elizabeth i becomes queen of eng land ca.
1565 eng lish crush irish uprising drake circumnavigates the globe raleigh founds lost colony at roanoke island eng land defeats spanish armada james i becomes king of eng land spain and eng land sign peace treaty 1640s large scale slave labor system established in eng lish west indies second anglo powhatan war act of toleration in maryland charles i beheaded cromwell rules eng land charles ii restored to eng lish throne barbados slave code adopted carolina colony created 1711 tuscarora war in north carolina virginia colony founded at jamestown rolfe perfects tobacco culture in virginia north carolina formally separates from south carolina first anglo powhatan war ends 1715 yamasee war in south carolina first africans arrive in jamestown virginia house of burgesses established georgia colony founded virginia becomes royal colony maryland colony founded key terms protestant reformation 27 roanoke island 28 spanish armada 29 primogeniture 30 joint stock company 30 charter 30 jamestown 30 first anglo powhatan war 32 second anglo powhatan war 33 people to know act of toleration 36 barbados slave code 37 squatters 40 tuscarora war 40 yamasee indians 40 buffer 41 iroquois confederacy 42 henry viii elizabeth i sir francis drake sir walter raleigh james i captain john smith powhatan pocahontas lord de la warr john rolfe lord baltimore oliver cromwell james oglethorpe hiawatha to learn more to learn more ira berlin generations of captivity a history of african american slaves 2003 many thousands gone the first two centuries of slavery in north america 1998 kathleen brown good wives nasty wenches and anxious patriarchs gender race and power in colonial virginia 1996 colin g calloway new worlds for all indians europeans and the remaking of america 1997 ralph davis the rise of the atlantic economies 1973 jack p greene pursuits of happiness the social development of early modern british colonies and the formation of american culture 1988 peter laslett the world we have lost 1965 edmund s morgan american slavery american freedom 1975 david b quinn england and the discovery of america 1481 1620 1974 daniel k richter facing east from indian country a native history of early america 2003 nancy shoemaker a strange likeness becoming red and white in eighteenth century north america 2004 alan taylor american colonies the settling of north america 2001 camilla townsend pocahontas and the powhatan dilemma 2004 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 andross dominion of new england 70w 200 km.
maine mass.
new hampshire five nations iroquois atlantic ocean massachusetts bay plymouth n y conn r i pa 40n md.
sir edmund andros 1637 1714 a boston broadside urging him to surrender 1689 after being expelled from new england andros eventually returned to the new world as governor of virginia 1692 1697.
members was now to be enjoyed by all qualied male property holders.
eng lands glorious revolution reverberated throughout the colonies from new eng land to the chesapeake.
inspired by the challenge to the crown in old eng land many colonists seized the occasion to strike against royal authority in america.
unrest rocked both new york and maryland from 1689 to 1691 until newly appointed royal governors restored a semblance of order.
most importantly the new monarchs relaxed the royal grip on colonial trade inaugurating a period of salutary neglect when the much resented navigation laws were only weakly enforced.
yet residues remained of charles iis effort to assert tighter administrative control over his empire.
more eng lish ofcials judges clerks customs ofcials east jersey west jersey n map 3 3 andross dominion of new england interactive map now staffed the courts and strolled the wharves of english america.
many were incompetent corrupt hacks who knew little and cared less about american affairs.
appointed by inuential patrons in far off eng land they blocked the rise of local leaders to positions of political power by their very presence.
aggrieved americans viewed them with mounting contempt and resentment as the eighteenth century wore on.
old netherlanders at new netherland late in the sixteenth century the oppressed people of the netherlands unfurled the standard of rebellion against catholic spain.
after bloody and protracted dutch explorers ocratic practices and the governors appointed by the company as directors general were usually harsh and despotic.
religious dissenters who opposed the ofcial dutch reformed church were regarded with suspicion and for a while quakers were savagely abused.
in response to repeated protests by the aggravated colonists tadoussac 1600 50 100 km.
w trois rivires 1634 n in qu e a ta is moh uo on aw q o eid k se sq ca d su ne r l an a no o ir cayu ndag ga a d an rensselaerwyck 1630 fort orange 1614 p ok ew on n l i ak 45n esopus 1653 hudson a n g r he mo salem 1630 boston 1630 plymouth 1620 an o k plymouth et rhode island connecticut new haven 40n yonkers 1646 new amsterdam 1626 ue h a delaware nn r pe a na le new sweden massachusetts bay gl n connecticut r an mahic st ro en l aw lake champlain rio hu n be r re ce c fort richelieu 1642 n g o montral 1642 n al ma fr beauport qubec 1608 an ce mic th e n ew n e n tinicum 1643 fort christina 1638 fort casimir 1651 fort nya elfsborg 1643 na nt o ic maryland k e swaanendael 1631 destroyed 1632 st marys 1634 pow hata n p esa ch virginia 70w area of english settlement y jamestown at l a n t i c ocean area of dutch settlement a eake b ghting they nally succeeded with the aid of protestant eng land in winning their independence.
the seventeenth century the era of rembrandt and other famous artists was a golden age in dutch history.
this vigorous little lowland nation nally emerged as a major commercial and naval power and then it ungratefully challenged the supremacy of its former benefactor eng land.
three great anglo dutch naval wars were fought in the seventeenth century with as many as a hundred ships on each side.
the sturdy dutch dealt blows about as heavy as they received.
the dutch republic also became a leading colonial power with by far its greatest activity in the east indies.
there it maintained an enormous and protable empire for over three hundred years.
the dutch east india company was virtually a state within a state and at one time supported an army of 10 000 men and a eet of 190 ships 40 of them men of war.
seeking greater riches this enterprising company employed an eng lish explorer henry hudson.
disregarding orders to sail northeast he ventured into delaware bay and new york bay in 1609 and then ascended the hudson river hoping that at last he had chanced upon the coveted shortcut through the continent.
but as the event proved he merely led a dutch claim to a magnicently wooded and watered area.
much less powerful than the mighty dutch east india company was the dutch west india company which maintained protable enterprises in the caribbean.
at times it was less interested in trading than in raiding and at one fell swoop in 1628 captured a eet of spanish trea sure ships laden with loot worth 15 million.
the company also established outposts in africa and a thriving sugar industry in brazil which for several decades was its principal center of activity in the new world.
new netherland in the beautiful hudson river area was planted in 1623 1624 on a permanent basis see map 3 4.
established by the dutch west india company for its quick prot fur trade it was never more than a secondary interest of the founders.
the companys most brilliant stroke was to buy manhattan island from the indians who did not actually own it for virtually worthless trinkets twenty two thousand acres of what is now perhaps the most valuable real estate in the world for pennies per acre.
new amsterdam later new york city was a company town.
it was run by and for the dutch company in the interests of the stockholders.
the investors had no enthusiasm for religious toleration free speech or dem area of french settlement 75w area of swedish settlement map 3 4 early settlements in the middle colonies with founding dates interactive map chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 fairly and prevent another bloody eruption like pontiacs uprising.
but countless americans especially land speculators were dismayed and angered.
was not the land beyond the mountains their birthright.
had they not in addition purchased it with their blood in the recent war.
in complete deance of the proclamation they clogged the westward trails.
in 1765 an estimated one thousand wagons rolled through the town of salisbury north carolina on their way up west this wholesale outing of royal authority boded ill for the longevity of british rule in america.
the seven years war also caused the colonists to develop a new vision of their destiny.
with the path cleared for the conquest of a continent with their birthrate high and their energy boundless they sensed that they were a potent people on the march.
and they were in no mood to be restrained.
lordly britons whose suddenly swollen empire had tended to produce swollen heads were in no mood for back talk.
puffed up over their recent victories they were already annoyed with their unruly colonial subjects.
the stage was set for a violent family quarrel.
chronology edict of nantes repealed in 1685 champlain colonizes qubec for france louis xiv becomes king of france 1744 king georges war war of austrian succession washington battles french on frontier albany congress la salle explores mississippi river to the gulf of mexico 1756 seven years war french and indian war 1689 king williams war war of the league of augsburg braddocks defeat 1702 pitt emerges as leader of british government queen annes war war of spanish succession battle of qubec french found new orleans war of jenkinss ear peace of paris pontiacs uprising proclamation of 1763 key terms huguenots 109 edict of nantes 109 coureurs de bois 111 voyageurs 111 king williams war 112 queen annes war 112 war of jenkinss ear 114 king georges war 114 acadians 116 people to know french and indian war seven years war 116 albany congress 117 regulars 117 qubec battle of 120 pontiacs uprising 122 proclamation of 1763 122 louis xiv samuel de champlain edward braddock william pitt james wolfe pontiac to learn more to learn more fred anderson crucible of war the seven years war and the fate of empire in british north america 1754 1766 2001 david armitage ed the british atlantic world 1500 1800 2002 colin g calloway the scratch of a pen 1763 and the transformation of america 2006 david dixon never come to peace again pontiacs uprising and the fate of the british empire in north america 2005 francis jennings empire of fortune crowns colonies and tribes in the seven years war in america 1988 elizabeth mancke and carole shammas eds the creation of the british atlantic world 2005 paul david nelson william tryon and the course of empire a life in british imperial service 1990 carolyn podruchny making the voyageur world travelers and traders in the north american fur trade 2006 james pritchard in search of empire the french in the americas 1670 1730 2004 armstrong starkey european and native american warfare 1615 1815 1998 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 american pluses and minuses the revolutionaries were blessed with outstanding leadership.
george washington was a giant among men benjamin franklin was a master among diplomats.
open foreign aid theoretically possible from the start eventually came from france.
numerous european ofcers many of them unemployed and impoverished volunteered their swords for pay.
in a class by himself was a wealthy young french nobleman the marquis de lafayette.
fleeing from boredom loving glory and ultimately liberty the french gamecock was made a major general in the colonial army at age nineteen.
his commission was largely a recognition of his family inuence and political connections but the ser vices of this teenage general in securing further aid from france were invaluable.
other conditions aided the americans.
they were ghting defensively with the odds all things considered favoring the defender.
in agriculture the colonies were mainly self sustaining like a kind of robinson crusoes island.
the americans also enjoyed the moral advantage that came from belief in a just cause.
the historical odds were not impossible.
other peoples had triumphed in the face of greater obstacles greeks against persians swiss against austrians dutch against spaniards.
yet the american rebels were badly orga nized for war.
from the earliest days they had been almost fatally lacking in unity and the new nation lurched forward uncertainly like an uncoordinated centipede.
even the continental congress which directed the con ict was hardly more than a debating society and it grew feebler as the struggle dragged on.
their congress now is quite disjointd gibed an eng lish satirist since gibbits gallows are for them appointed the disorga nized colonists fought almost the entire war before adopting a written constitution the articles of confederation in 1781 general washingtons 1732 1799 disgust with his countrymen is reected in a diary entry for 1776 chimney corner patriots abound venality corruption prostitution of ofce for selsh ends abuse of trust perversion of funds from a national to a private use and speculations upon the necessities of the times pervade all interests.
gilbert du motier marquis de lafayette 1757 1834 by joseph boze 1790 this youthful french ofcer gave to america not only military service but some 200 000 of his private funds.
he returned to france after the american revolution to play a conspicuous role in the french revolution.
jealousy every where raised its hideous head.
individual states proudly regarding themselves as sovereign resented the attempts of congress to exercise its imsy powers.
sectional jealousy boiled up over the appointment of military leaders some distrustful new eng landers almost preferred british ofcers to americans from other sections.
economic difculties were nearly insuperable.
metallic money had already been heavily drained away.
a cautious continental congress unwilling to raise anew the explosive issue of taxation was forced to print continental paper money in great amounts.
as this currency poured from the presses it depreciated until the expression not worth a continental became current.
one barber contemptuously papered his shop with the near worthless dollars.
the confusion proliferated when the individual states were compelled to issue depreciated paper money of their own.
the rebel army ination of the currency inevitably skyrocketed prices.
families of the soldiers at the ghting front were hard hit and hundreds of anxious husbands and fathers deserted.
debtors easily acquired handfuls of the quasi worthless money and gleefully paid their debts without mercy sometimes with the bayonets of the authorities to back them up.
a thin line of heroes basic military supplies in the colonies were dangerously scanty.
while many families and towns did own rearms widespread militia ser vice meant men needed weapons for training the colonists had long relied heavily on britain for troops armaments and military subsidies during expensive wars against indians france and spain.
the rebels were caught in an unavoidable trap at the very moment that the supply of british funds and war materiel evaporated the cost of home defense mounted.
sufcient stores of gunpowder cannon and other armaments let alone ships to transport them could not be found.
among the reasons for the eventual alliance with france was the need for a reliable source of essential military supplies.
other shortages bedeviled the rebels.
at valley forge pennsylvania shivering american soldiers went without bread for three successive days in the cruel winter of 1777 1778.
in one southern campaign some men fainted for lack of food.
manufactured goods also were generally in short supply in agricultural america and clothing and shoes were appallingly scarce.
the path of the patriot ghting men was often marked by bloody snow.
at frigid valley forge during one anxious period twenty eight hundred men were barefooted or nearly naked.
woolens were desperately needed against the wintry blasts and in general the only real uniform of the colonial army was uniform raggedness.
during a grand parade at valley forge some of the ofcers appeared wrapped in woolen bedcovers.
one rhode island unit was known as the ragged lousy naked regiment american militiamen were numerous but also highly unreliable.
able bodied american males perhaps several hundred thousand of them had received rudimentary training and many of these recruits served for short terms in the rebel armies.
but poorly trained plowboys could not stand up in the open eld against professional british troops advancing with bare bayonets.
many of these undisciplined warriors would in the words of washington y from their own shadows the flutist by brazilla lew this portrait is believed to be that of an african american fer in the revolutionary war.
lew was a veteran of the seven years war who had marched to ticonderoga and served in the army a full seven years as frontline soldier fer and drummer.
in 1775 at the age of thirtytwo he fought at bunker hill as an enlistee in the 27th massachusetts regiment.
a resident of chelmsford massachusetts he was said to have taught all twelve of his children to play musical instruments.
a few thousand regulars perhaps seven or eight thousand at the wars end were nally whipped into shape by stern drillmasters.
notable among them was an orga ni zational genius the salty german baron von steuben.
he spoke no eng lish when he reached america but he soon taught his men that bayonets were not for broiling beefsteaks over open res.
as they gained experience these soldiers of the continental line more than held their own against crack british troops.
blacks also fought and died for the american cause.
although many states initially barred them from militia ser vice by wars end more than ve thousand blacks chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 these are the times that try mens souls.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the ser vice of their country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
thomas paine december 1776 b loodshed at lexington and concord in april of 1775 was a clarion call to arms.
about twenty thousand musket bearing minute men swarmed around boston there to coop up the outnumbered british.
the second continental congress met in philadelphia the next month on may 10 1775 and this time the full slate of thirteen colonies was represented.
the conser vative element in congress was still strong despite the shooting in massachusetts.
there was still no wellde ned sentiment for independence merely a desire to continue ghting in the hope that the king and parliament would consent to a redress of grievances.
congress hopefully drafted new appeals to the british people and king appeals that were spurned.
anticipating a possible rebuff the delegates also adopted mea sures to raise money and to create an army and a navy.
the british and the americans now teetered on the brink of all out warfare.
congress drafts george washington perhaps the most important single action of the congress was to select george washington one of its members already in an ofcers uniform to head the hastily improvised army besieging boston.
this choice was made with considerable misgivings.
the tall powerfully built dignied virginia planter then forty three had never risen above the rank of a colonel in the militia.
his largest command had numbered only twelve hundred men and that had been some twenty years earlier.
falling short of true military genius washington would actually lose more pitched battles than he won.
but the distinguished virginian was gifted with outstanding powers of leadership and immense strength of character.
he radiated patience courage self discipline this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website early battles and a sense of justice.
he was a great moral force rather than a great military mind a symbol and a rallying point.
people instinctively trusted him they sensed that when he put himself at the head of a cause he was prepared if necessary to go down with the ship.
he insisted on serving without pay though he kept a careful expense account amounting to more than 100 000.
later he sternly reprimanded his steward at mount vernon for providing the enemy under duress with supplies.
he would have preferred instead to see the enemy put the torch to his mansion.
the continental congress though dimly perceiving washingtons qualities of leadership chose more wisely than it knew.
his selection in truth was largely political.
americans in other sections already jealous were beginning to distrust the large new eng land army being collected around boston.
prudence suggested a commander from virginia the largest and most populous of the colonies.
as a man of wealth both by inheritance and by marriage washington could not be accused of being a fortune seeker.
as an aristocrat he could be counted on by his peers to check the excesses of the masses bunker hill and hessian hirelings the clash of arms continued on a strangely contradictory basis.
on the one hand the americans were emphatically af rming their loyalty to the king and earnestly voicing their desire to patch up difculties.
on the other hand they were raising armies and shooting down his majestys soldiers.
this curious war of inconsistency was fought for fourteen long months from april 1775 to july 1776 before the fateful plunge into independence was taken.
gradually the tempo of warfare increased.
in may 1775 a tiny american force under ethan allen and benedict arnold surprised and captured the british garrisons at ticonderoga and crown point on the scenic lakes of upper new york.
a priceless store of gunpowder and artillery for the siege of boston was thus secured.
in june 1775 the colonists seized a hill now known as bunker hill actually breeds hill from which they menaced the enemy in boston.
the british instead of cutting off the retreat of their foes by anking them blundered bloodily when they launched a frontal attack with three thousand men.
sharpshooting americans numbering fteen hundred and strongly entrenched mowed down the advancing redcoats with frightful washington at verplancks point new york 1782 reviewing the french troops after the victory at yorktown by john trumbull 1790 this noted american artist accentuated washingtons already imposing height six feet two inches by showing him towering over his horse.
washington so appreciated this portrait of himself that he hung it in the dining room of his home at mount vernon virginia.
but the colonists scanty store of gunpowder nally gave out and they were forced to abandon the hill in disorder.
with two more such victories remarked the french foreign minister the british would have no army left in america.
even at this late date in july 1775 the continental congress adopted the olive branch petition professing american loyalty to the crown and begging the king to prevent further hostilities.
but following bunker hill king george iii slammed the door on all hope of reconciliation.
in august 1775 he formally proclaimed the colonies in rebellion the skirmishes were now outand out treason a hanging crime.
the next month he widened the chasm when he sealed arrangements for chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 whose revolution.
h istorians once assumed that the revolution was just another chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 years of intermittent ghting marked by spine tingling exploits jefferson succeeded in extorting a treaty of peace from tripoli in 1805 it was secured at the bargain price of only 60 000 a sum representing ransom payments for captured americans.
small gunboats which the navy had used with some success in the tripolitan war fascinated jefferson.
pledged to tax reduction he advocated a large number of little coastal craft jeffs or the mosquito eet as they were contemptuously called.
he believed these fast but frail vessels would prove valuable in guarding american shores and need not embroil the republic in diplomatic incidents on the high seas.
about two hundred tiny gunboats were constructed democratically in small shipyards where votes could be made for jefferson.
often mounting only one unwieldy gun they were sometimes more of a menace to the crew than to the prospective enemy.
during a hurricane and tidal wave at savannah georgia one of them was deposited eight miles inland in a corneld to the derisive glee of the federalists.
they drank toasts to american gunboats as the best in the world on land.
the louisiana godsend a secret pact fraught with peril for america was signed in 1800 napoleon bonaparte induced the king of spain to cede to france for attractive considerations the immense trans mississippi region of louisiana which included the new orleans area.
rumors of the transfer were partially con rmed in 1802 when the spaniards at new orleans withdrew the right of deposit guaranteed america by pinckneys treaty of 1795 see p 213.
deposit warehouse privileges were vital to frontier farmers who oated their produce down the mississippi to its mouth there to await oceangoing vessels.
a roar of anger rolled up the mighty river and into its tributary valleys.
american pioneers talked wildly of descending upon new orleans ries in hand.
had they done so the nation probably would have been engulfed in war with both spain and france.
thomas jefferson both pacist and antientanglement was again on the griddle.
louisiana in the senile grip of spain posed no real threat america could seize the territory when the time was ripe.
but louisiana in the iron st of napoleon the preeminent military genius of his age foreshadowed a dark and blood drenched future.
the united states would probably have to ght to dislodge him and because it alone was not strong enough to defeat his armies it would have to seek allies contrary to the deepening antialliance policy.
hoping to quiet the clamor of the west jefferson moved decisively.
early in 1803 he sent james monroe to paris to join forces with the regular minister there robert r livingston.
the two envoys were instructed to buy new orleans and as much land to its east as they could get for a maximum of 10 million.
if these proposals should fail and the situation became critical negotiations were to be opened with britain for an alliance.
the day that france takes possession of new orleans jefferson wrote we must marry ourselves to the british eet and nation that remark dramatically demonstrated jeffersons dilemma.
though a passionate hater of war and an enemy of entangling alliances he was proposing to make an alliance with his old foe britain against his old friend france in order to secure new orleans.
at this critical juncture napoleon suddenly decided to sell all of louisiana and abandon his dream of a new world empire.
two developments prompted his change of mind.
first he had failed in his efforts to reconquer the sugar rich island of santo domingo haiti for which louisiana was to serve as a source of foodstuffs.
rebellious enslaved africans inspired by the french revolutions promises of equality and ably led by the gifted toussaint louverture the opener had struck for their freedom in 1791 their revolt was ultimately broken.
but then the islands second line of defense mosquitoes carrying yellow fever had swept away thousands of crack french troops.
santo domingo could not be had except perhaps at a staggering cost hence there was no need for louisianas food supplies.
damn sugar damn coffee damn colonies burst out napoleon.
second bonaparte was about to end the twenty month lull in his deadly con ict with britain.
because the british controlled the seas he feared that he might be forced to make them a gift of louisiana.
rather than drive america into the arms of britain by attempting to hold the area he decided to sell the huge wilderness to the americans and pocket the money for his schemes nearer home.
napoleon hoped that the united states strengthened by louisiana would one day be a military and naval power that would thwart the ambitions of the lordly british in the new world.
the predicaments of france in europe were again paving the way for americas diplomatic successes.
events now unrolled dizzily.
the american minister robert livingston pending the arrival of monroe was busily negotiating in paris for a window on the gulf the louisiana purchase toussaint louverture ca.
1743 1803 a self educated ex slave and military genius louverture was nally betrayed by the french who imprisoned him in a chilly dungeon in france where he coughed his life away.
indirectly he did much to set up the sale of louisiana to the united states.
his slave rebellion in haiti also briey established the rst black government in the new world striking fear into the hearts of slaveowners throughout the western hemisphere.
of mexico at new orleans.
suddenly out of a clear sky the french foreign minister asked him how much he would give for all of louisiana.
scarcely able to believe his ears he was partially deaf anyhow livingston nervously entered upon the negotiations.
after about a week of haggling while the fate of north america trembled in the balance treaties were signed on april 30 1803 ceding louisiana to the united states for about 15 million.
when news of the bargain reached america jefferson was startled.
he had authorized his envoys to offer not more than 10 million for new orleans and as much to the east in the floridas as they could get.
instead they had signed three treaties that pledged 15 million for new orleans plus an im mea surable tract entirely to the west an area that would more than double the size of the united states.
they had bought a wilderness to get a city.
once again the two jeffersons wrestled with each other the theorist and former strict constructionist versus the democratic visionary.
where in his beloved constitution was the president authorized to negotiate treaties incorporating a huge new expanse into the union an expanse containing tens of thousands of indian french spanish and black inhabitants.
there was no such clause.
yet jefferson also perceived that the vast domain now within his reach could form a sprawling empire of liberty that would ensure the health and long life of americas experiment in democracy.
conscience stricken jefferson privately proposed that a constitutional amendment be passed.
but his friends pointed out in alarm that in the interval napoleon for whom thought was action might suddenly withdraw the offer.
so jefferson shamefacedly submitted the treaties to the senate while admitting to his associates that the purchase was unconstitutional.
the senators were less nicky than jefferson.
reecting enthusiastic public support they registered their prompt approval of the transaction.
land hungry americans were not disposed to split constitutional hairs when confronted with perhaps the most magnificent real estate bargain in history 828 000 square miles at about three cents an acre.
in accepting the louisiana purchase jefferson thus compromised with conscience in a private letter it is the case of a guardian investing the money of his ward in purchasing an important adjacent territory and saying to him when of age i did this for your good i pretend to no right to bind you you may disavow me and i must get out of the scrape as i can i thought it my duty to risk myself for you.
chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 ny mich terr.
vt 8 nh ma ri ct 4 nj ohio ind.
missouri terr.
pa the war of 1812 won a new respect for america among many britons.
michael scott a young lieutenant in the british navy wrote de va ky md dr 6 f 5 sc mississippi territory ga there was far more talk of nullication and secession in new eng land than in any other section including the south.
the outright outing of the jeffersonian embargo and the later crippling of the war effort were the two most damaging acts of nullication in america prior to the events leading to the civil war.
la candidate party electoral vote madison democratic republican 59 41 clinton federalist i dont like americans i never did and never shall like them.
i have no wish to eat with them drink with them deal with or consort with them in any way but let me tell the whole truth nor ght with them were it not for the laurels to be acquired by overcoming an enemy so brave determined and alert and in every way so worthy of ones steel as they have always proved.
nc tn map 12 2 presidential election of 1812 with electoral vote by state the federalists showed impressive strength in the north and their presidential candidate dewitt clinton the future father of the erie canal almost won.
if the 25 electoral votes of pennsylvania had gone to the new yorker he would have won 114 to 103 interactive map three special envoys from massachusetts carried these demands to the burned out capital of washington.
the trio arrived just in time to be overwhelmed by the glorious news from new orleans followed by that from ghent.
as the rest of the nation congratulated itself on a glorious victory new eng lands wartime complaints seemed petty at best and treasonous at worst.
pursued by the sneers and jeers of the press the envoys sank away in disgrace and into obscurity.
the hartford resolutions as it turned out were the death dirge of the federalist party.
the federalists were never again to mount a successful presidential campaign see map 12 2.
federalist doctrines of disunity which long survived the party blazed a portentous trail.
until 1815 the second war for american independence the war of 1812 was a small war involving about 6 000 americans killed or wounded.
it was but a footnote to the mighty european conagration that had been ignited by the french revolution and napoleons imperial ambitions.
in 1812 when napoleon invaded russia with about 500 000 men madison tried to invade canada with about 5 000 men.
but if the american con ict was globally unimportant it had huge consequences for the united states.
the republic had shown that it would take sword in hand to resist what it regarded as grievous wrongs.
other nations developed a new respect for americas ghting prowess.
naval ofcers like perry and macdonough were the most effective type of negotiators the hot breath of their broadsides spoke the most eloquent diplomatic language.
americas emissaries abroad were henceforth treated with less scorn.
in a diplomatic sense if not in a military sense the con ict could be called the second war for american independence.
a new nation moreover was welded in the roaring furnace of armed conict.
sectionalism now identied with discredited new eng land federalists was dealt a black eye.
the painful events of the war glaringly revealed as perhaps nothing else could have done the legacies of the war of 1812 folly of sectional disunity.
in a sense the most conspicuous casualty of the war was the federalist party.
war heroes emerged especially the two indianghters andrew jackson and william henry harrison.
both of them were to become president.
left in the lurch by their british friends at ghent the indians were forced to make such terms as they could.
they reluctantly consented in a series of treaties to relinquish vast areas of forested land north of the ohio river.
manufacturing prospered behind the wooden wall of the british blockade.
in both an economic and a diplomatic sense the war of 1812 bred greater american independence.
the industries that were thus stimulated by the ghting rendered america less dependent on europes workshops.
canadian patriotism and nationalism also received a powerful stimulus from the clash.
many canadians felt betrayed by the treaty of ghent.
they were especially aggrieved by the failure to secure an indian buffer state or even mastery of the great lakes.
canadians fully expected the frustrated yankees to return and for a time the americans and british engaged in a oating arms race on the great lakes.
but in 1817 the rushbagot agreement between britain and the united states severely limited naval armament on the lakes.
better relations brought the last border fortications down in the 1870s with the happy result that the united states and canada came to share the worlds longest unfortied boundary 5 527 miles long.
after napoleons nal defeat at waterloo in june 1815 europe slumped into a peace of exhaustion.
deposed monarchs returned to battered thrones as the old world took the rutted road back to conservatism illiberalism and reaction.
but the american people were largely unaffected by these european developments.
turning their backs on the old world they faced resolutely toward the untamed west and toward the task of building their democracy.
nascent nationalism the most impressive by product of the war of 1812 was a heightened nationalism the spirit of nationconsciousness or national oneness.
america may not have fought the war as one nation but it emerged as one nation.
the changed mood even manifested itself in the birth of a distinctively national literature.
washington irving and james fenimore cooper attained international recognition in the 1820s signicantly as view of the capitol by charles burton 1824 this painting of the capitol building much smaller than it is today reveals the rustic conditions of the early days in the nations capital.
a series of architects worked on the capitol following william thorntons original design along neoclassical or greek revival lines.
after the british burned the building in 1814 bostons charles bulnch oversaw the reconstruction of the capitol nally completed in 1830 chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 mantle without his popularity van buren also inherited the ex presidents numerous and vengeful enemies.
van burens four years overowed with toil and trouble.
a pair of short lived rebellions in canada in 1837 mostly over political reform but aggravated by unregulated immigration from the united states stirred up ugly incidents along the northern frontier and threatened to trigger war with britain.
the presidents attempt to play a neutral game led to the wail woe to martin van buren the antislavery agitators in the north were also in full cry.
among other grievances they were condemning the prospective annexation of texas see p 295.
worst of all jackson bequeathed to van buren the makings of a searing depression.
much of van burens energy had to be devoted to the purely negative task of battling the panic and there were not enough rabbits in the little magicians tall silk hat.
hard times ordinarily blight the reputation of a president and van buren was no exception.
depression doldrums and the independent treasury the panic of 1837 was a symptom of the nancial sickness of the times.
its basic cause was rampant speculation prompted by a mania of get rich quickism.
gamblers in western lands were doing a land ofce business on borrowed capital much of it in the shaky currency of wildcat banks the speculative craze spread to canals roads railroads and slaves.
but speculation alone did not cause the crash.
jacksonian nance including the bank war and the specie circular gave an additional jolt to an already teetering structure.
failures of wheat crops ravaged by the hessian y deepened the distress.
grain prices were forced so high that mobs in new york city three weeks before van buren took the oath stormed warehouses and broke open our barrels.
the panic really began before jackson left ofce but its full fury burst about van burens bewildered head.
financial stringency abroad likewise endangered americas economic house of cards.
late in 1836 the failure of two prominent british banks created tremors and these in turn caused british investors to call in foreign loans.
the resulting pinch in the united states combined with other setbacks heralded the beginning of the panic.
europes economic distresses have often become americas distresses for every major american nancial panic has been affected by conditions overseas.
the long bill americans who bought on credit condent that they could make their payments later were caught off guard by the panic of 1837 customers like the one shown here found themselves confronted with a long bill that they could not pay particularly when the banks holding their savings collapsed.
hardship was acute and widespread.
american banks collapsed by the hundreds including some pet banks which carried down with them several million in government funds.
commodity prices drooped sales of public lands fell off and customs revenues dried to a rivulet.
factories closed their doors and unemployed workers milled in the streets.
the whigs came forward with proposals for active government remedies for the economys ills.
they called for the expansion of bank credit higher tariffs and subsidies for internal improvements.
but van buren shackled by the jacksonian philosophy of keeping the governments paws off the economy spurned all such ideas.
the beleaguered van buren tried to apply vintage jacksonian medicine to the ailing economy through his controversial divorce bill convinced that some of the nancial fever was fed by the injection of federal van buren s presidency philip hone 1780 1851 a new york businessman described in his diary may 10 1837 a phase of the nancial crisis the savings bank also sustained a most grievous run yesterday.
they paid 375 depositors 81 000.
the press was awful the hour for closing the bank is six oclock but they did not get through the paying of those who were in at that time till nine oclock.
i was there with the other trustees and witnessed the madness of the people women nearly pressed to death and the stoutest men could scarcely sustain themselves but they held on as with a deaths grip upon the evidences of their claims and exhausted as they were with the pressure they had strength to cry pay.
pay funds into private banks he championed the principle of divorcing the government from banking altogether.
by establishing a so called independent treasury the government could lock its surplus money in vaults in several of the larger cities.
government funds would thus be safe but they would also be denied to the banking system as reserves thereby shriveling available credit resources.
van burens divorce scheme was never highly popular.
his fellow democrats many of whom longed for the risky but lush days of the pet banks supported one foreign traveler decried the chaotic state of american currency following the demise of the bank of the united states and the panic of 1837 the greatest annoyance i was subjected to in travelling was in exchanging money.
it is impossible to describe the wretched state of the currency which is all bills issued by private individuals companies cities and states almost all of which are bankrupt or what amounts to the same thing they cannot redeem their issues.
and these do not pass out of the state or frequently out of the city in which they are issued.
it only lukewarmly.
the whigs condemned it primarily because it squelched their hopes for a revived bank of the united states.
after a prolonged struggle the independent treasury bill passed congress in 1840 repealed the next year by the victorious whigs the scheme was reenacted by the triumphant democrats in 1846 and then continued until the republicans instituted a network of national banks during the civil war.
gone to texas americans greedy for land continued to covet the vast expanse of texas which the united states had abandoned to spain when acquiring florida in 1819 the spanish authorities wanted to populate this virtually unpeopled area but before they could carry through their contemplated plans the mexicans won their independence in 1821 a new regime in mexico city thereupon concluded arrangements in 1823 for granting a huge tract of land to stephen austin with the understanding that he would bring into texas three hundred american families.
immigrants were to be of the established roman catholic faith and upon settlement were to become properly mexicanized.
these two stipulations were largely ignored.
hardy texas pioneers remained americans at heart resenting the trammels imposed by a foreign government.
they were especially annoyed by the presence of mexican soldiers many of whom were ragged ex convicts.
energetic and prolic texan americans numbered about thirty thousand by 1835 see makers of america mexican or texican pp.
most of them were law abiding god fearing people but some of them had left the states only one or two jumps ahead of the sheriff.
g t t gone to texas became current descriptive slang.
among the adventurers were davy crockett the famous rieman and jim bowie the presumed inventor of the murderous knife that bears his name.
bowies blade was widely known in the southwest as the genuine arkansas toothpick a distinguished latecomer and leader was an ex governor of tennessee sam houston.
his life had been temporarily shattered in 1829 when his bride of a few weeks left him and he took up transient residence with the arkansas indians who dubbed him big drunk he subsequently took the pledge of temperance.
the pioneer individualists who came to texas were not easy to push around.
friction rapidly increased between mexicans and texans over issues such as slavery immigration and local rights.
slavery was a chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 inspiring literature and painting and eventually kindling a powerful conservation movement.
george catlin a painter and student of native american life was among the rst americans to advocate the preservation of nature as a deliberate national policy.
in 1832 he observed sioux indians in south dakota recklessly slaughtering buffalo in order to trade the animals tongues for the white mans whiskey.
appalled at this spectacle and fearing for the preservation of indians and buffalo alike catlin proposed the creation of a national park.
his idea later bore fruit with the creation of a national park system the worlds rst beginning with yellowstone park in 1872 the march of the millions as the american people moved west they also multiplied at an amazing rate.
by midcentury the population was still doubling approximately every twenty ve years as in fertile colonial days see figure 14 1.
by 1860 the original thirteen states had more than doubled in number thirty three stars graced the american ag.
the united states was the fourth most populous nation in the western world exceeded only by three european countries russia france and austria.
urban growth continued explosively.
in 1790 there had been only two american cities that could boast populations of twenty thousand or more souls philadelphia and new york.
by 1860 there were forty three and about three hundred other places claimed over ve thousand inhabitants apiece.
new york was the metropolis new orleans the queen of the south and chicago the swaggering lord of the midwest destined to be hog butcher for the world such overrapid urbanization unfortunately brought undesirable by products.
it intensied the problems of smelly slums feeble street lighting inadequate policing impure water foul sewage ravenous rats and improper garbage disposal.
hogs poked their scavenging snouts about many city streets as late as the 1840s.
bos mouth of the platte river 900 miles above st louis by george catlin 1832 catlins west unfolded as a vast panorama of at open space peopled only by the indians shown in the foreground.
catlin believed that capturing the unending prairie on canvas required a new aesthetic the sublime horizontal and an acceptance of a landscape bereft of man built features without anything rising above the horizon which was a perfect straight line around us like that of the blue and boundless ocean an inux of immigrants year white nonwhite percent nonwhite total population 3 172 000 757 000 3 929 000 4 306 000 1 002 000 5 308 000 5 862 000 1 378 000 7 240 000 7 867 000 1 772 000 9 639 000 10 537 000 2 329 000 12 866 000 14 196 000 2 874 000 17 070 000 19 553 000 3 639 000 23 192 000 26 922 000 4 521 000 31 443 000 10m 20m 30m 40m figure 14 1 population increase including slaves and indians 1790 1860 increasing european immigration and the closing of the slave trade gradually whitened the population beginning in 1820 this trend continued into the early twentieth century.
ton in 1823 pioneered a sewer system and new york in 1842 abandoned wells and cisterns for a piped in water supply.
the city thus unknowingly eliminated the breeding places of many disease carrying mosquitoes.
a continuing high birthrate accounted for most of the increase in population but by the 1840s the tides of immigration were adding hundreds of thousands more.
before this decade immigrants had been owing in at a rate of sixty thousand a year but suddenly the inux tripled in the 1840s and then quadrupled in the 1850s.
during these two feverish decades over a million and a half irish and nearly as many germans swarmed down the gangplanks see table 14 1.
why did they come.
the immigrants came partly because europe seemed to be running out of room.
the population of the old world more than doubled in the nineteenth century and europe began to generate a seething pool of apparently surplus people.
they were displaced and footloose in their homelands before they felt the tug of the american magnet.
indeed at least as many people moved about within europe as crossed the atlantic.
america beneted from these people churning changes cleveland in 1853 by j w hill looking west across the cuyahoga river down superior street the painting features the warehouses canals and industries that fed the citys prosperity and supported its thirty thousand residents.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 we americans will walk on our own feet we will work with our own hands we will speak our own minds.
r alph waldo emerson the american scholar 1837 a third revolution accompanied the reformation of american politics and the transformation of the american economy in the mid nineteenth century.
it consisted of a diffuse yet deeply felt commitment to improve the character of ordinary americans to make them more upstanding god fearing and literate.
some high minded souls were disillusioned by the roughand tumble realities of democratic politics.
others notably women were excluded from the political game altogether.
as the young republic grew increasing numbers of americans poured their considerable energies into an astonishing variety of religious revivals and reform movements.
reform campaigns of all types ourished in sometimes bewildering abundance.
there was not a reading man who was without some scheme for a new utopia in his waistcoat pocket claimed ralph waldo emerson.
reformers promoted better public schools and rights for women as well as miracle medicines polygamy celibacy rule by prophets and guidance by spirits.
societies were formed against alcohol tobacco profanity and the transit of mail on the sabbath.
eventually overshadowing all other reforms was the great crusade against slavery see pp.
many reformers drew their crusading zeal from religion.
beginning in the late 1790s and boiling over into the early nineteenth century the second great awakening swept through americas protestant churches transforming the place of religion in american life and sending a generation of believers out on their missions to perfect the world.
reviving religion church attendance was still a regular ritual for about three fourths of the 23 million americans in 1850 alexis de tocqueville declared that there was no country in the world where the christian religion retains a greater inuence over the souls of men than in amer this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website religious revivalism ica yet the religion of these years was not the old time religion of colonial days.
the austere calvinist rigor had long been seeping out of the american churches.
the rationalist ideas of the french revolutionary era had done much to soften the older orthodoxy.
thomas paines widely circulated book the age of reason 1794 had shockingly declared that all churches were set up to terrify and enslave mankind and monopolize power and prot american anticlericalism was seldom that virulent but many of the founding fathers including jefferson and franklin embraced the liberal doctrines of deism that paine promoted.
deists relied on reason rather than revelation on science rather than the bible.
they rejected the concept of original sin and denied christs divinity.
yet deists believed in a supreme being who had created a knowable universe and endowed human beings with a capacity for moral behavior.
deism helped to inspire an important spinoff from the severe puritanism of the past the unitarian faith which began to gather momentum in new eng land at the end of the eighteenth century.
unitarians held that god existed in only one person hence unitarian and not in the orthodox trinity god the father god the son and god the holy spirit.
although denying the deity of jesus unitarians stressed the essential goodness of human nature rather than its vileness they proclaimed their belief in free will and the possibility of salvation through good works they pictured god not as a stern creator but as a loving father.
embraced by many leading thinkers including ralph waldo emerson the unitarian movement appealed mostly to intellectuals whose rationalism and optimism contrasted sharply with the hell re doctrines of calvinism especially predestination and human depravity.
a boiling reaction against the growing liberalism in religion set in about 1800 a fresh wave of roaring revivals beginning on the southern frontier but soon rolling even into the cities of the northeast sent the second great awakening surging across the land.
sweeping up even more people than the first great awakening see p 98 almost a century earlier the second awakening was one of the most momentous episodes in the history of american religion.
this tidal wave of spiritual fervor left in its wake countless converted souls many shattered and reorga nized churches and numerous new sects.
it also encouraged an effervescent evangelicalism that bubbled up into innumerable areas of american life including prison reform the temperance cause the womens movement and the crusade to abolish slavery.
the second great awakening was spread to the masses on the frontier by huge camp meetings as many as twenty ve thousand people would gather for an encampment of several days to drink the hell re gospel as served up by an itinerant preacher.
thousands of spiritually starved souls got religion at these religious camp meeting by j maze burbank 1839 at huge daylong encampments repentant sinners dedicated themselves to lives of personal rectitude and social reform.
fire and brimstone preachers like the one depicted here inspired convulsions speaking in tongues and ecstatic singing and dancing among the converted.
out of this religious upheaval grew many of the movements for social improvement in the pre civil war decades including the abolitionist crusade.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 harvesting cotton this currier ives print shows slaves of both sexes harvesting cotton which was then ginned baled carted to the riverbank and taken by paddle wheeler downriver to new orleans for shipment to new england or overseas.
perpetuate a type of medievalism that had died out in europe or was rapidly dying out.
mark twain later accused sir walter scott of having had a hand in starting the civil war.
the british novelist twain said aroused the southerners to ght for a decaying social structure a sham civilization the plantation system also shaped the lives of southern women.
the mistress of a great plantation commanded a sizable household staff of mostly female slaves.
she gave daily orders to cooks maids seamstresses laundresses and body servants.
relationships between mistresses and slaves ranged from affectionate to atrocious.
some mistresses showed tender regard for their bondswomen and some slave women took pride in their status as members of the household.
but slavery strained even the bonds of womanhood.
virtually no slaveholding women believed in abolition and relatively few protested when the husbands and children of their slaves were sold.
one plantation mistress harbored a special affection for her slave annica but noted in her diary that i whipt annica for insolence.
slaves of the slave system unhappily the moonlight and magnolia tradition concealed much that was worrisome distasteful and sordid.
plantation agriculture was wasteful largely because king cotton and his money hungry subjects despoiled the good earth.
quick prots led to excessive cultiva oddly enough by legislative enactment jousting became the ofcial state sport of maryland in 1962 tion or land butchery which in turn caused a heavy leakage of population to the west and northwest.
the economic structure of the south became increasingly monopolistic.
as the land wore thin many small farmers sold their holdings to more prosperous neighbors and went north or west.
the big got bigger and the small smaller.
when the civil war nally erupted a large percentage of southern farms had passed from the hands of the families that had originally cleared them.
another cancer in the bosom of the south was the nancial instability of the plantation system.
the temptation to overspeculate in land and slaves caused many planters including andrew jackson in his later years to plunge in beyond their depth.
although the black slaves might in extreme cases be fed for as little as ten cents a day there were other expenses.
the slaves thomas jefferson 1743 1826 wrote in 1786 what a stupendous what an incomprehensible machine is man.
who can endure toil famine stripes imprisonment death itself in vindication of his own liberty and the next moment.
inict on his fellow men a bondage one hour of which is fraught with more misery than ages of that which he rose in rebellion to oppose.
unlike george washington jefferson freed only a couple of his slaves in his will the rest were sold to pay off his large debts.
problems in the cotton south basil hall 1788 1844 an englishman visited part of the cotton belt on a river steamer 1827 1828.
noting the preoccupation with cotton he wrote all day and almost all night long the captain pilot crew and passengers were talking of nothing else and sometimes our ears were so wearied with the sound of cotton.
that we gladly hailed a fresh inundation of company in hopes of some change but alas.
whats cotton at was the rst eager inquiry.
ten cents a pound oh that will never do dug with yankee shovels.
the south furnished the corpse and the hole in the ground.
the cotton kingdom also repelled large scale european immigration which added so richly to the manpower and wealth of the north.
in 1860 only 4 4 percent of the southern population was foreign born as compared with 18 7 percent for the north.
german and irish immigration to the south was generally discouraged by the competition of slave labor by the high cost of fertile land and by european ignorance of cotton growing.
the diverting of non british immigration to the north caused the white south to become the most anglo saxon section of the nation.
the white majority represented a heavy investment of capital perhaps 1 200 each in the case of prime eld hands and they might deliberately injure themselves or run away.
an entire slave quarter might be wiped out by disease or even by lightning as happened in one instance to twenty ill fated blacks.
dominance by king cotton likewise led to a dangerous dependence on a one crop economy whose price level was at the mercy of world conditions.
the whole system discouraged a healthy diversication of agriculture and particularly of manufacturing.
southern planters resented watching the north grow fat at their expense.
they were pained by the heavy outward ow of commissions and interest to northern middlemen bankers agents and shippers.
true souls of the south especially by the 1850s deplored the fact that when born they were wrapped in yankee made swaddling clothes and that they spent the rest of their lives in servitude to yankee manufacturing.
when they died they were laid in cof ns held together with yankee nails and were buried in graves only a handful of southern whites lived in grecianpillared mansions.
below those 1 733 families in 1850 who owned a hundred or more slaves were the less wealthy slaveowners see figure 16 1.
they totaled in 1850 some 345 000 families representing about 1 725 000 white persons.
over two thirds of these families 255 268 in all owned fewer than ten slaves each.
all told only about one fourth of white southerners owned slaves or belonged to a slaveowning family.
the smaller slaveowners did not own a majority of the slaves but they made up a majority of the masters.
these lesser masters were typically small farmers.
with the striking exception that their households contained a slave or two or perhaps an entire slave family the style of their lives probably resembled that of small farmers in the north more than it did that of the southern planter aristocracy.
they lived in modest farmhouses and sweated beside their bondsmen in the cotton elds laboring callus for callus just as hard as their slaves.
beneath the slaveowners on the population pyramid was the great body of whites who owned no slaves at all.
by 1860 their numbers had swelled to 6 120 825 1 733 own 100 or more slaves 6 196 own 50 99 29 733 own 20 49 54 595 own 10 19 80 765 own 5 9 105 683 own 2 4 68 820 own 1 each figure 16 1 slaveowning families 1850 more than half of all slaveholding families owned fewer than four slaves.
in contrast 2 percent of slaveowners owned more than fty slaves each.
a tiny slaveholding elite held a majority of slave property in the south.
the great majority of white southerners owned no slaves at all.
chapter 5 unchained the slaves in the west indies see thinking globally the struggle to abolish slavery pp.
wilberforce university in ohio an african american college that later sent many missionaries to africa is named for him.
as with wilberforce the religious spirit of the second great awakening now inamed the hearts of many on new years day 1831 a shattering abolitionist blast came from the bugle of william lloyd garrison a mild looking reformer of twenty six.
the emotionally high strung son of a drunken father and a spiritual child of the second great awakening garrison published in boston the rst issue of his militantly antislavery newspaper the liberator.
with this mighty paper broadside garrison triggered a thirty year war of words and in a sense red one of the opening barrages of the civil war.
stern and uncompromising garrison nailed his colors to the masthead of his weekly.
he proclaimed in strident tones that under no circumstances would he tolerate the poisonous weed of slavery but would stamp it out at once root and branch i will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice.
i am in earnest i will not equivocate i will not excuse i will not retreat a single inch and i will be heard.
other dedicated abolitionists rallied to garrisons standard and in 1833 they founded the american anti the abolitionist crusade william lloyd garrison 1805 1879 the most conspicuous and most vilied of the abolitionists garrison was a nonresistant pacist and a poor organizer.
he favored northern secession from the south and antagonized both sections with his intemperate language.
sojourner truth also known simply as isabella she held audiences spellbound with her deep resonant voice and the religious passion with which she condemned the sin of slavery.
this photo was taken about 1870 slavery society.
prominent among them was wendell phillips a boston patrician known as abolitions golden trumpet a man of strict principle he would eat no cane sugar and wear no cotton cloth since both were produced by southern slaves.
black abolitionists distinguished themselves as living monuments to the cause of african american freedom.
their ranks included david walker whose incendiary appeal to the colored citizens of the world 1829 advocated a bloody end to white supremacy.
also noteworthy were sojourner truth a freed black woman in new york who fought tirelessly for black emancipation and womens rights and martin delany one of the few black leaders to take seriously the notion of the mass recolonization of africa.
in 1859 he visited west africas niger valley seeking a suitable site for relocation.
the greatest of the black abolitionists was frederick douglass.
escaping from bondage in 1838 at the age of twenty one he was discovered by the abolitionists in 1841 when he gave a stunning impromptu speech at an antislavery meeting in massachusetts.
thereafter he lectured widely for the cause despite frequent beatings and threats against his life.
in 1845 he published his classic autobiography narrative of the life of frederick douglass.
it depicted his remarkable origins as the son of a black slave woman and a white father his struggle to learn to read and write and his eventual escape to the north.
douglass was as exibly practical as garrison was stubbornly principled.
garrison often appeared to be more interested in his own righteousness than in the substance of the slavery evil itself.
he repeatedly thinking globally the struggle to abolish slavery w hen slaves in the french caribbean colony of haiti inspired by the revolutionary fervor that had seized mainland france rose up and demanded liberty equality and fraternity for themselves they became in 1794 the rst enslaved people in the new world to win their freedom.
although napoleon would rip it from them again when he reinstated slavery in 1802 another revolution in france in 1848 would ensure their permanent freedom.
table 16 1 documents the long 250 year struggle to abolish slavery throughout the world.
agitators outraged by the scourge of human bondage and committed to ending it known as abolitionists shared antislavery sentiments and strategies across national boundaries.
from the late seventeenth through the mid nineteenth century british and american abolitionists wove dense networks of mutual support.
they shared writings lecturers and funding and jointly sponsored conferences such as the worlds anti slavery convention of 1840 in london which became famous for inspiring the american womens rights movement when it refused to seat female delegates.
but the political fortunes of abolitionist movements and hence the timing of the longed for day of freedom varied sharply from nation to nation.
in france emancipation was twice tied to revolutions.
in great britain massive citizens petition campaigns orchestrated by venerable lifelong abolitionist leaders such as william wilberforce brought enormous popular pressure to bear on the government.
parliament eventually responded by outlawing the slave trade in 1807 and then three days before wilberforce died in 1833 prohibiting slavery itself throughout most of the british empire.
in the united states as in britain abolitionism became a robust social movement propelled not least by women and free blacks.
but the roots of the peculiar institution in worlds anti slavery convention london 1840 the convention assembled antislavery advocates from around the world but it refused to seat female delegates.
women were allowed to observe but not to take part in the ofcial proceedings.
the frustrations of the unseated american representatives led to the historic womans rights convention at seneca falls new york in 1848 see p 352.
the united states ran wide and deep.
even though the american slave trade was ended in 1808 it took the unions victory in a bloody civil war in 1865 to eradicate slavery once and for all.
elsewhere in the americas enslaved peoples secured their freedom gradually and in stark contrast to the united states peacefully.
emancipation typically became possible only after the achievement of independence from spain where abolitionism never gained much traction.
cuba still a spanish colony into the 1890s was among the last places in the new world to set its slaves free.
table 16 1 comparative abolition of slavery country date abolished mexico great britain france bolivia ecuador peru argentina venezuela russia netherlands united states paraguay cuba brazil korea china saudi arabia yemen notes the slave trade was prohibited in 1824 but slavery itself was not abolished until 1829 eight years after mexico gained independence from spain.
the slave trade was ended in 1807 but slavery was not abolished until 1833 the abolition of slavery did not apply to british india where slavery persisted until 1860.
slavery was rst abolished in 1794 but was reestablished by napoleon bonaparte in 1802 in 1848 the second republic replaced the july monarchy and abolished slavery in all french colonies.
all slaves born since independence 1825 were freed in 1831 but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1851 at the time of independence in 1821 all children born to slaves after that date were declared free but slavery persisted until 1852 at the time of independence in 1821 all children born to slaves after that date were declared free but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1854 emancipation rst begun in 1813 was completed in 1854 gradual emancipation began when independence was fully secured in 1821 but slavery was not completely abolished until 1854 peter the great rst abolished slavery in 1723 by converting household slaves into serfs.
tsar alexander ii freed russias 22 million serfs in 1861 slavery was abolished in all dutch colonies.
the slave trade was ended in 1808 but slavery was not abolished entirely until after the civil war with the ratication of the thirteenth amendment.
slavery was abolished earlier in the north in the decades after the revolution often through gradual emancipation.
gradual emancipation began in 1842 but slavery was not abolished until 1869 gradual emancipation began in 1870 the spanish government freed the remaining slaves in 1886 the slave trade was abolished in 1851 a gradual emancipation law was rst passed in 1871 but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1888 state owned slaves were emancipated in 1801 although slavery was formally abolished in 1894 it persisted in some regions until the 1930s.
the emperor abolished slavery toward the end of the xing dynasty in 1910 but it persisted until the communist government proclaimed abolition in 1949 slavery was abolished under pressure from the united nations and moderate arab states.
leaders of the newly proclaimed yemen arab republic abolished slavery after overthrowing the imamate in 1962.
the british east india company had sovereignty over india until 1858 when the british government took over and abolished slavery shortly thereafter.
sources martin a klein historical dictionary of slavery and abolition 2002 robert fogel without consent of contract 1994 herbert klein african slavery in latin america and the caribbean 1986 edward alpers gwyn campbell and michael salman eds slavery and resistance in africa and asia 2005 jerome alan cohen r randle edwards and fu mei chang chen essays on chinas legal tradition 1980.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 our manifest destiny is to overspread the continent allotted by providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.
t erritorial expansion dominated american diplomacy and politics in the 1840s.
settlers swarming into the still disputed oregon country aggravated relations with britain which had staked its own claims in the pacic northwest.
the clamor to annex texas to the union provoked bitter tension with mexico which continued to regard texas as a mexican province in revolt.
and when americans began casting covetous eyes on mexicos northernmost province the great prize of cal i fornia open warfare erupted between the united states and its southern neighbor.
victory over mexico added vast new domains to the united states but it also raised thorny questions about the status of slavery in the newly acquired territories questions that would be answered in blood in the civil war of the 1860s.
earliest known use of the term manifest destiny sometimes called manifest desire the accession of tyler too a horde of hard ciderites descended upon washington early in 1841 clamoring for the spoils of ofce.
newly elected president harrison bewildered by the uproar was almost hounded to death by whig spoilsmen.
the real leaders of the whig party regarded old tippecanoe as little more than an impressive gurehead.
daniel webster as secretary of state and henry clay the uncrowned king of the whigs and their ablest spokesman in the senate would grasp the helm.
the aging general was nally forced to rebuke the overzealous clay and pointedly remind him that he william henry harrison was president of the united states.
unluckily for clay and webster their schemes soon hit a fatal snag.
before the new term had fairly started harrison contracted pneumonia.
wearied by ofcial functions and plagued by ofce seekers the enfeebled this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website john tyler accidental president old warrior died after only four weeks in the white house by far the shortest administration in american history following by far the longest inaugural address.
the tyler too part of the whig ticket hitherto only a rhyme now claimed the spotlight.
what manner of man did the nation now nd in the presidential chair.
six feet tall slender blue eyed and fair haired with classical features and a high forehead john tyler was a virginia gentleman of the old school gracious and kindly yet stubbornly attached to principle.
he had earlier resigned from the senate quite unnecessarily rather than accept distasteful instructions from the virginia legislature.
still a lone wolf he had forsaken the jacksonian democratic fold for that of the whigs largely because he could not stomach the dictatorial tactics of jackson.
tylers enemies accused him of being a democrat in whig clothing but this charge was only partially true.
the whig party like the democratic party was something of a catchall and the accidental president belonged to the minority wing which embraced a number of jeffersonian states righters.
tyler had in fact been put on the ticket partly to attract the vote of this fringe group many of whom were inuential southern gentry.
yet tyler high minded as he was should never have consented to run on the ticket.
although the dominant clay webster group had published no platform every alert politician knew what the unpublished platform contained.
and on virtually every major issue the obstinate virginian was at odds with the majority of his adoptive whig party which was pro bank pro protective tariff and pro internal improvements.
tyler too rhymed with tippecanoe but there the harmony ended.
as events turned out president harrison the whig served for only 4 weeks whereas tyler the ex democrat who was still largely a democrat at heart served for 204 weeks.
john tyler a president without a party after their hard won hard cider victory the whigs brought their not so secret platform out of clays waistcoat pocket.
to the surprise of no one it outlined a strongly nationalistic program.
financial reform came rst.
the whig congress hastened to pass a law ending the independent treasury system and president tyler disarmingly agreeable signed it.
clay next drove through congress a bill for a fiscal bank which would establish a new bank of the united states.
tylers hostility to a centralized bank was notorious and clay the great compromiser would have done well to conciliate him.
but the kentuckian robbed repeatedly of the presidency by lesser men was in an imperious mood and riding for a fall.
when the bank bill reached the presidential desk tyler atly vetoed it on both practical and constitutional grounds.
a drunken mob gathered late at night near the white house and shouted insultingly huzza for clay a bank.
a bank down with the veto the stunned whig leaders tried once again.
striving to pacify tylers objections to a fiscal bank they passed another bill providing for a fiscal corporation but the president still unbending vetoed the offensive substitute.
the democrats were jubilant they had been saved from another nancial monster only by the pneumonia that had felled harrison.
whig extremists seething with indignation condemned tyler as his accidency and as an executive ass widely burned in efgy he received numerous letters threatening him with death.
a wave of inuenza then sweeping the country was called the tyler grippe to the delight of democrats the stiff necked virginian was formally expelled from his party by a caucus of whig congressmen and a serious attempt to impeach him was broached in the house of representatives.
his entire cabinet resigned in a body except secretary of state webster who was then in the midst of delicate negotiations with eng land.
the proposed whig tariff also felt the prick of the presidents well inked pen.
tyler appreciated the necessity of bringing additional revenue to the treasury.
but old democrat that he was he looked with a frosty eye on the major tariff scheme of the whigs because it provided among other features for a distribution among the states of revenue from the sale of public lands in the west.
tyler could see no point in squandering federal money when the federal treasury was not overowing and he again wielded an emphatic veto.
chastened clayites redrafted their tariff bill.
they chopped out the offensive dollar distribution scheme and pushed down the rates to about the moderately protective level of 1832 roughly 32 percent on dutiable goods.
tyler had no fondness for a protective tariff but realizing the need for additional revenue he reluctantly signed the tariff of 1842 in subsequent months the pressure for higher customs duties slackened as the country gradually edged its way out of the depression.
the whig slogan harrison two dollars a day and chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 secession.
peaceable secession.
sir your eyes and mine are never destined to see that miracle.
t he year 1848 highlighted by a rash of revolutions in europe was lled with unrest in america.
the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo had ofcially ended the war with mexico but it had initiated a new and perilous round of political warfare in the united states.
the vanquished mexicans had been forced to relinquish an enormous tract of real estate including texas cal ifornia and all the area between.
the acquisition of this huge domain raised anew the burning issue of extending slavery into the territories.
northern antislaveryites had rallied behind the wilmot proviso which atly prohibited slavery in any territory acquired in the mexican war.
southern senators had blocked the passage of the proviso but the issue would not die.
ominously debate over slavery in the area of the mexican cession threatened to disrupt the ranks of both whigs and democrats and split national politics along northsouth sectional lines.
the popular sovereignty panacea each of the two great political parties was a vital bond of national unity for each enjoyed powerful support in both north and south.
if they should be replaced by two purely sectional groupings the union would be in peril.
to politicians the wisest strategy seemed to be to sit on the lid of the slavery issue and ignore the boiling beneath.
even so the cover bobbed up and down ominously in response to the agitation of zealous northern abolitionists and impassioned southern re eaters anxious democrats were forced to seek a new standard bearer in 1848 president polk broken in health by overwork and chronic diarrhea had pledged himself to a single term.
the democratic national convention at baltimore turned to an aging leader this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the election of 1848 general lewis cass a veteran of the war of 1812 although a senator and diplomat of wide experience and considerable ability he was sour visaged and somewhat pompous.
his enemies dubbed him general gass and quickly noted that cass rhymed with jackass.
the democratic platform in line with the lid sitting strategy was silent on the burning issue of slavery in the territories.
but cass himself had not been silent.
his views on the extension of slavery were well known because he was the reputed father of popular sovereignty.
this was the doctrine that stated that the sovereign people of a territory under the general principles of the constitution should themselves determine the status of slavery.
popular sovereignty had a persuasive appeal.
the public liked it because it accorded with the democratic tradition of self determination.
politicians liked it because it seemed a comfortable compromise between the free soilers bid for a ban on slavery in the territories and southern demands that congress protect slavery in the territories.
popular sovereignty tossed the slavery problem into the laps of the people in the various territories.
advocates of the principle thus hoped to dissolve the most stubborn national issue of the day into a series of local issues.
yet popular sovereignty had one fatal defect it might serve to spread the blight of slavery.
political triumphs for general taylor the whigs meeting in philadelphia cashed in on the taylor fever they nominated frank and honest zachary taylor the hero of buena vista who had never held civil ofce or even voted for president.
henry clay the living embodiment of whiggism should logically have been nominated.
but clay had made too many speeches and too many enemies.
as usual the whigs pussyfooted in their platform.
eager to win at any cost they dodged all troublesome issues and merely extolled the homespun virtues of their candidate.
the self reliant old frontier ghter had not committed himself on the issue of slavery extension.
but as a wealthy resident of louisiana living on a sugar plantation he owned scores of slaves.
ardent antislavery men in the north distrusting both cass and taylor orga nized the free soil party.
aroused by the conspiracy of silence in the democratic and whig platforms the free soilers made no bones general zachary taylor 1784 1850 this democratic campaign cartoon of 1848 charges that taylors reputation rested on mexican skulls.
about their own stand.
they came out foursquare for the wilmot proviso and against slavery in the territories.
going beyond other antislavery groups they broadened their appeal by advocating federal aid for internal improvements and by urging free government homesteads for settlers.
the new party assembled a strange assortment of new fellows in the same political bed.
it attracted industrialists miffed at polks reduction of protective tariffs.
it appealed to democrats resentful of polks settling for part of oregon while insisting on all of texas a disparity that suggested a menacing southern dominance in the democratic party.
it harbored many northerners whose hatred was directed not so much at slavery as at blacks and who gagged at the prospect of sharing the chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 true popular sovereignty would have none of this semipopular fraudulency.
deliberately tossing away his strong support in the south for the presidency he fought courageously for fair play and democratic principles.
the outcome was a compromise that in effect submitted the entire lecompton constitution to a popular vote.
the free soil voters thereupon thronged to the polls and snowed it under.
kansas remained a territory until 1861 when the southern secessionists left congress.
president buchanan by antagonizing the numerous douglas democrats in the north hopelessly divided the once powerful democratic party.
until then it had been the only remaining national party for the whigs were dead and the republicans were sectional.
with the disruption of the democrats came the snapping of one of the last important strands in the rope that was barely binding the union together.
bully brooks and his bludgeon bleeding kansas also spattered blood on the oor of the senate in 1856 senator charles sumner of massachusetts a tall and imposing gure was a leading abolitionist one of the few prominent in political life.
highly educated but cold humorless intolerant and preston brooks caning charles sumner 1856 cartoonist john magee of philadelphia depicted brookss beating of sumner in the senate as a display of southern ruthlessness in defending slavery ironically captioned southern chivalry egotistical he had made himself one of the most disliked men in the senate.
brooding over the turbulent miscarriage of popular sovereignty he delivered a blistering speech titled the crime against kansas sparing few epithets he condemned the proslavery men as hirelings picked from the drunken spew and vomit of an uneasy civilization he also referred insultingly to south carolina and to its white haired senator andrew butler one of the best liked members of the senate.
hot tempered congressman preston s brooks of south carolina now took vengeance into his own hands.
ordinarily gracious and gallant he resented the insults to his state and to its senator a distant cousin.
his code of honor called for a duel but in the south one fought only with ones social equals.
and had not the coarse language of the yankee who probably would reject a challenge dropped him to a lower order.
to brooks the only alternative was to chastise the senator as one would beat an unruly dog.
on may 22 1856 he approached sumner then sitting at his senate desk and pounded the orator with an eleven ounce cane until it broke.
the victim fell bleeding and unconscious to the oor while several nearby senators refrained from interfering.
sumner had been provocatively insulting but this counteroutrage put brooks in the wrong.
the house of representatives could not muster enough votes to expel the south carolinian but he resigned and was the sumner brooks clash and the campaign of 1856 triumphantly reelected.
southern admirers deluged brooks with canes some of them gold headed to replace the one that had been broken.
the injuries to sumners head and ner vous system were serious.
he was forced to leave his seat for three and a half years and go to europe for treatment that was both painful and costly.
meanwhile massachusetts deantly reelected him leaving his seat eloquently empty.
bleeding sumner was thus joined with bleeding kansas as a political issue.
the free soil north was mightily aroused against the uncouth and cowardly bully brooks.
copies of sumners abusive speech otherwise doomed to obscurity were sold by the tens of thousands.
every blow that struck the senator doubtless made thousands of republican votes.
the south although not unanimous in approving brooks was angered not only because sumner had made such an intemperate speech but because it had been so extravagantly applauded in the north.
the sumner brooks clash and the ensuing reactions revealed how dangerously inamed passions were becoming north and south.
it was ominous that the cultured sumner should have used the language of a barroom bully and that the gentlemanly brooks should have employed the tactics and tools of a thug.
emotion was displacing thought.
the blows rained on sumners head were broadly speaking among the rst blows of the civil war.
regarding the brooks assault on sumner the illinois state journal one of the more moderate antislavery journals declared brooks and his southern allies have deliberately adopted the monstrous creed that any man who dares to utter sentiments which they deem wrong or unjust shall be brutally assailed.
one of the milder southern responses came from the petersburg virginia intelligencer although mr brooks ought to have selected some other spot for the altercation than the senate chamber if he had broken every bone in sumners carcass it would have been a just retribution upon this slanderer of the south and her individual citizens.
old buck versus the pathnder with bullets whining in kansas the democrats met in cincinnati to nominate their presidential standardbearer of 1856 they shied away from both the weakkneed president pierce and the dynamic douglas.
each was too indelibly tainted by the kansas nebraska act.
the delegates nally chose james buchanan pronounced by many buck anan who was muscular white haired and tall six feet with a short neck and a protruding chin.
because of an eye defect he carried his head cocked to one side.
a well to do pennsylvania lawyer he had been serving as minister to london during the recent kansas nebraska uproar.
he was therefore kansas less and hence relatively enemyless.
but in a crisis that called for giants old buck buchanan was mediocre irresolute and confused.
delegates of the fast growing republican party met in philadelphia with bubbling enthusiasm.
higher law seward was their most conspicuous leader and he probably would have arranged to win the nomination had he been condent that this was a republican year the nal choice was captain john c frmont the so called path nder of the west a dashing but erratic explorer soldier surveyor who was supposed to nd the path to the white house.
the black bearded and ashy young adventurer was virtually without political experience but like buchanan he was not tarred with the kansas brush.
the republican platform came out vigorously against the extension of slavery into the territories while the democrats declared no less emphatically for popular sovereignty.
an ugly dose of antiforeignism was injected into the campaign even though slavery extension loomed largest.
the recent inux of immigrants from ireland and germany had alarmed nativists as many oldstock protestants were called.
they orga nized the american party also known as the know nothing party because of its secretiveness and in 1856 nominated the lackluster ex president millard fillmore.
antiforeign and anti catholic these superpatriots adopted the slogan americans must rule america remnants of the dying whig party likewise endorsed fillmore and they and the know nothings threatened to cut into republican strength.
republicans fell in behind frmont with the zeal of crusaders.
shouting we follow the path nder and we are buck hunting they orga nized glee clubs which sang to the tune of the marseillaise chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 in 1832 when abraham lincoln 1809 1865 became a candidate for the illinois legislature he delivered a speech at a political gathering i presume you all know who i am.
i am humble abraham lincoln.
i have been solicited by many friends to become a candidate for the legislature.
my whiggish politics are short and sweet like the old womans dance.
i am in favor of a national bank.
i am in favor of the internalimprovement system and a high protective tariff.
these are my sentiments and political principles.
if elected i shall be thankful if not it will be all the same.
he was elected two years later.
mounting the republican bandwagon he emerged as one of the foremost politicians and orators of the northwest.
at the philadelphia convention of 1856 where john c frmont was nominated lincoln actually received 110 votes for the vice presidential nomination.
abraham lincoln a most uncommon common man this daguerreotype of lincoln was done by mathew b brady a distinguished photographer of the era.
socially into the inuential todd family of kentucky and the temperamental outbursts of his high strung wife known by her enemies as the she wolf helped to school him in patience and forbearance.
after reading a little law he gradually emerged as one of the dozen or so better known trial lawyers in illinois although still accustomed to carrying important papers in his stovepipe hat.
he was widely referred to as honest abe partly because he would refuse cases that he had to suspend his conscience to defend.
the rise of lincoln as a political gure was less than rocketlike.
after making his mark in the illinois legislature as a whig politician of the logrolling variety he served one undistinguished term in congress 1847 1849 until 1854 when he was forty ve years of age he had done nothing to establish a claim to statesmanship.
but the passage of the kansas nebraska act in that year lighted within him unexpected res.
after the great debate lincoln versus douglas lincoln as republican nominee for the senate seat boldly challenged douglas to a series of joint debates.
this was a rash act because the stumpy senator was probably the nations most devastating debater.
douglas promptly accepted lincolns challenge and seven meetings the famed lincoln douglas debates were arranged from august to october 1858 at rst glance the two contestants seemed illmatched.
the well groomed and polished douglas with his bearlike gure and bullhorn voice presented a striking contrast to the lanky lincoln with his baggy clothes and unshined shoes.
moreover old abe as he was called in both affection and derision had a piercing high pitched voice and was often ill at ease when he began to speak.
but as he threw himself into an argument he seemed to grow in height while his glowing eyes lighted up a rugged face.
he relied on logic rather than on table thumping.
the most famous debate came at freeport illinois where lincoln nearly impaled his opponent on the the lincoln douglas debates lincoln and douglas debate 1858 thousands attended each of the seven lincoln douglas debates.
douglas is shown here sitting to lincolns right in the debate at charleston illinois in september.
on one occasion lincoln quipped that douglass logic would prove that a horse chestnut was a chestnut horse.
horns of a dilemma.
suppose he queried the people of a territory should vote slavery down.
the supreme court in the dred scott decision had decreed that they could not.
who would prevail the court or the people.
legend to the contrary douglas and some southerners had already publicly answered the freeport question.
the little giant therefore did not hesitate to meet the issue head on honestly and consistently.
his reply to lincoln became known as the freeport doctrine.
no matter how the supreme court ruled douglas argued slavery would stay down if the people voted it down.
laws to protect slavery would have to be passed by the territorial legislatures.
these would not be forthcoming in the absence of popular approval and black bondage would soon disappear.
douglas in truth had american history on his side.
where public opinion does not support the federal government as in the case of jeffersons embargo see pp.
240 242 the law is almost impossible to enforce.
the upshot was that douglas defeated lincoln for the senate seat.
the little giants loyalty to popular sovereignty which still had a powerful appeal in illi nois probably was decisive.
senators were then chosen by state legislatures and in the general election that followed the debates more pro douglas members were elected than pro lincoln members.
yet thanks to inequitable apportionment the districts carried by douglas supporters represented a smaller population than those carried by lincoln supporters.
honest abe thus won a clear moral victory.
lincoln possibly was playing for larger stakes than just the senatorship.
although defeated he had shambled into the national limelight in company with the most prominent northern politicians.
newspapers in the east published detailed accounts of the debates and lincoln began to emerge as a potential republican nominee for president.
but douglas in winning illinois hurt his own chances of winning the presidency while further splitting his splintering party.
after his opposition to the lecompton constitution for kansas and his further deance of the supreme court at freeport southern democrats were determined to break up the party and the union rather than accept him.
the lincoln douglas debate platform thus chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 lincoln expressed his views on the relation of the black and white races in 1858 in his rst debate with stephen a douglas i as well as judge douglas am in favor of the race to which i belong having the superior position.
i have never said anything to the contrary but i hold that notwithstanding all this there is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the declaration of independence the right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
i hold that he is as much entitled to those rights as the white man.
i agree with judge douglas he is not my equal in many respects certainly not in color perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment.
but in the right to eat the bread without leave of anybody else which his own hand earns he is my equal and the equal of judge douglas and the equal of every living man.
proved to be one of the preliminary battleelds of the civil war.
john brown murderer or martyr.
the gaunt grim gure of john brown of bleeding kansas infamy now once again took the stage.
after studying the tactics of the black rebels toussaint louverture see p 234 and nat turner see p 384 he hatched a daring scheme to invade the south secretly with a handful of followers call upon the slaves to rise furnish them with arms and establish a kind of black free state as a sanctuary.
brown secured several thousand dollars for rearms from northern abolitionists and nally arrived in hilly western virginia with some twenty men including several blacks.
at scenic harpers ferry he seized the federal arsenal in october 1859 incidentally kill ing seven innocent people including a free black and injuring ten or so more.
but the slaves largely ignorant of browns strike failed to rise and the wounded brown and the remnants of his tiny band were quickly captured by u s marines under the command of lieutenant colonel robert e lee.
upon hearing of john browns execution escaped slave and abolitionist harriet tubman ca.
1820 1913 paid him the highest tribute for his self sacrice ive been studying and studying upon it and its clar to me it wasnt john brown that died on that gallows.
when i think how he gave up his life for our people and how he never inched but was so brave to the end its clar to me it wasnt mortal man it was god in him.
not all opponents of slavery however shared tubmans reverence for brown.
republican presidential candidate abraham lincoln dismissed brown as deluded the brown affair in its philosophy corresponds with the many attempts related in history at the assassination of kings and emperors.
an enthusiast broods over the oppression of a people till he fancies himself commissioned by heaven to liberate them.
he ventures the attempt which ends in little else than his own execution.
ironically within two years lee would become the preeminent general in the confederate army.
old brown was convicted of murder and trea son after a hasty but legal trial.
his presumed insan ity was supported by afdavits from seventeen friends and relatives who were trying to save his neck.
actually thirteen of his near relations were regarded as insane including his mother and grandmother.
governor wise of virginia would have been wiser so his critics say if he had only clapped the culprit into a lunatic asylum.
but brown gods angry man was given every opportunity to pose and to enjoy martyrdom.
though perhaps of unsound mind he was clever enough to see that he was worth much more to the abolitionist cause dangling from a rope than in any other way.
his demeanor during the trial was dignied and courageous his last words this is a beautiful country were to become legendary and he marched up the scaffold steps without inching.
his conduct was so exemplary his devotion to freedom so inexible that he took on an exalted character however deplorable his previous record may have been.
so the hangmans trap was john brown s raid last moments of john brown by thomas hovenden sentenced to be hanged john brown wrote to his brother i am quite cheerful in view of my approaching end being fully persuaded that i am worth inconceivably more to hang than for any other purpose.
i count it all joy.
i have fought the good ght and have as i trust nished my course this painting of brown going to his execution may have been inspired by the journalist horace greeley who was not present but wrote that a black woman with a little child stood by the door.
he stopped for a moment and stooping kissed the child that scene never took place as brown was escorted from the jail only by a detachment of soldiers.
but this painting has become famous as a kind of allegorical expression of the pathos of browns martyrdom for the abolitionist cause.
sprung and brown plunged not into oblivion but into world fame.
a memorable marching song of the impending civil war ran john browns body lies a mouldring in the grave his soul is marching on.
the effects of harpers ferry were inammatory.
in the eyes of the south already embittered osawatomie brown was a wholesale murderer and an apostle of treason.
many southerners asked how they could possibly remain in the union while a murderous gang of abolitionists was nancing armed bands to brown them.
moderate northerners including republican leaders openly deplored this mad exploit.
but the south naturally concluded that the violent abolitionist view was shared by the entire north dominated by brown loving republicans.
abolitionists and other ardent free soilers were infuriated by browns execution.
many of them were ignorant of his bloody past and his even more bloody purposes and they were outraged because the virginians had hanged so earnest a reformer who was working for so righteous a cause.
on the day of his execution free soil centers in the north tolled bells red guns lowered ags and held rallies.
some spoke of saint john brown and the serene ralph waldo emerson compared the new martyr hero with jesus.
the gallows became a cross.
e c stedman wrote and old brown osawatomie brown may trouble you more than ever when youve nailed his cofn down.
the ghost of the martyred brown would not be laid to rest.
the disruption of the democrats beyond question the presidential election of 1860 was the most fateful in american history.
on it hung the issue of peace or civil war.
deeply divided the democrats met in charleston south carolina with douglas the leading candidate of the northern wing of the party.
but the southern chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 the state of south carolina leader of the secessionist movement justied its retreat from the union in its declaration of independence of december 1860 we afrm that the ends for which this federal government was instituted have been defeated and the government itself has been made destructive of them by the action of the non slaveholding states.
for twenty ve years this agitation has been steadily increasing until it has now secured to its aid the power of the common government.
observing the forms of the constitution a sectional party has found within that article establishing the executive department the means of subverting the constitution itself.
complex and serious problem.
one important reason why he did not resort to force was that the tiny standing army of some fteen thousand men then widely scattered was urgently needed to control the indians in the west.
public opinion in the north at that time was far from willing to unsheathe the sword.
fighting would merely shatter all prospects of adjustment and until the guns began to boom there was still a icker three days after lincolns election horace greeleys inuential new york tribune november 9 1860 declared if the cotton states shall decide that they can do better out of the union than in it we insist on letting them go in peace.
the right to secede may be a revolutionary one but it exists nevertheless.
whenever a considerable section of our union shall deliberately resolve to go out we shall resist all coercive measures designed to keep it in.
we hope never to live in a republic whereof one section is pinned to the residue by bayonets.
after the secession movement got well under way greeleys tribune changed its tune.
jefferson davis 1808 1889 president of the confederacy faced with grave difculties he was probably as able a man for the position as the confederacy could have chosen.
ironically davis and lincoln had both sprung from the same kentucky soil.
the davis family had moved south from kentucky the lincoln family north.
ing hope of reconciliation rather than a contested divorce.
the weakness lay not so much in buchanan as in the constitution and in the union itself.
ironically when lincoln became president in march he essentially continued buchanans wait and see policy.
the collapse of compromise impending bloodshed spurred nal and frantic attempts at compromise in the american tradition.
the most promising of these efforts was sponsored by senator john jordan crittenden of kentucky on whose shoulders had fallen the mantle of a fellow kentuckian henry clay.
the proposed crittenden amendments to the constitution were designed to appease the south.
slavery the failed crittenden compromise in the territories was to be prohibited north of 36 30 but south of that line it was to be given federal protection in all territories existing or hereafter to be acquired such as cuba.
future states north or south of 36 30 could come into the union with or without slavery as they should choose.
in short the slavery supporters were to be guaranteed full rights in the southern territories as long as they were territories regardless of the wishes of the majority under popular sovereignty.
federal protection in a territory south of 36 30 might conceivably though improbably turn the entire area permanently to slavery.
lincoln atly rejected the crittenden scheme which offered some slight prospect of success and all hope of compromise evaporated.
for this refusal he must bear a heavy responsibility.
yet he had been elected on a platform that opposed the extension of one reason why the crittenden compromise failed in december 1860 was the prevalence of an attitude reected in a private letter of senator james henry hammond 1807 1864 of south carolina on april 19 i rmly believe that the slave holding south is now the controlling power of the world that no other power would face us in hostility.
cotton rice tobacco and naval stores command the world and we have sense to know it and are sufciently teutonic to carry it out successfully.
the north without us would be a motherless calf bleating about and die of mange and starvation.
the eagles nest 1861 the american eagle jealously guards her nest of states and bids deance to the rebels.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 i consider the central idea pervading this struggle is the necessity that is upon us of proving that popular government is not an absurdity.
we must settle this question now whether in a free government the minority have the right to break up the government whenever they choose.
if we fail it will go far to prove the incapability of the people to govern themselves.
a braham lincoln solemnly took the presidential oath of ofce on march 4 1861 after having slipped into washington at night partially disguised to thwart assassins.
he thus became president not of the united states of america but of the dis united states of america.
seven had already departed eight more teetered on the edge.
the girders of the un nished capitol dome loomed nakedly in the background as if to symbolize the imperfect state of the union.
before the nation was restored and the slaves freed at last the american people would endure four years of anguish and bloodshed and lincoln would face tortuous trials of leadership such as have been visited upon few presidents.
the menace of secession lincolns inaugural address was rm yet conciliatory there would be no conict unless the south provoked it.
secession the president declared was wholly impractical because physically speaking we cannot separate here lincoln put his nger on a profound geographical truth.
the north and south were siamese twins bound inseparably together.
if they had been divided by the pyrenees or the danube river a sectional divorce might have been more feasible.
but the appalachian mountains and the mighty mississippi river both ran the wrong way.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the attack on fort sumter secretary of state william h seward 1801 1872 entertained the dangerous idea that if the north picked a ght with one or more european nations the south would once more rally around the ag.
on april fools day 1861 he submitted to lincoln a memorandum i would demand explanations from spain and france categorically at once.
i would seek explanations from great britain and russia.
and if satisfactory explanations are not received from spain and france.
would convene congress and declare war against them.
lincoln quietly but rmly quashed sewards scheme.
uncontested secession would create new controversies.
what share of the national debt should the south be forced to take with it.
what portion of the jointly held federal territories if any should the confederate states be allotted areas so largely won with southern blood.
how would the fugitive slave issue be resolved.
the underground railroad would certainly redouble its activity and it would have to transport its passengers only across the ohio river not all the way to canada.
was it conceivable that all such problems could have been solved without ugly armed clashes.
a united united states had hitherto been the paramount republic in the western hemisphere.
if this powerful democracy should break into two hostile parts the european nations would be delighted.
they could gleefully transplant to america their ancient concept of the balance of power.
playing the no lessancient game of divide and conquer they could incite one snarling fragment of the dis united states against the other.
the colonies of the european powers in the new world notably those of britain would thus be made safer against the rapacious yankees.
and european imperialists with no unied republic to stand across their path could more easily defy the monroe doctrine and seize territory in the americas.
south carolina assails fort sumter the issue of the divided union came to a head over the matter of federal forts in the south.
as the seceding states left they seized the united states arsenals mints and other public property within their borders.
when lincoln took ofce only two signicant forts in the south still ew the stars and stripes.
the more important of the pair was square walled fort sumter in charleston harbor with fewer than a hundred men.
ominously the choices presented to lincoln by fort sumter were all bad.
this stronghold had provisions that would last only a few weeks until the middle of april 1861 if no supplies were forthcoming its commander would have to surrender without ring a shot.
lincoln quite understandably did not feel that such a weak kneed course squared with his obligation to protect federal property.
but if he sent reinforcements the south carolinians would undoubtedly ght back they could not tolerate a federal fort blocking the mouth of their most important atlantic seaport.
after agonizing indecision lincoln adopted a middle of the road solution.
he notied the south carolin ians that an expedition would be sent to provision the garrison though not to reinforce it.
he promised no effort to throw in men arms and ammunition but to southern eyes provision still spelled reinforcement a union naval force was next started on its way to fort sumter a move that the south regarded as an act of aggression.
on april 12 1861 the cannon of the carolinians opened re on the fort while crowds in charleston applauded and waved handkerchiefs.
after a thirty four hour bombardment which took no lives the dazed garrison surrendered.
the shelling of the fort electried the north which at once responded with cries of remember fort sumter and save the union hitherto countless northerners had been saying that if the southern states wanted to go they should not be pinned to the rest of the nation with bayonets.
wayward sisters depart in peace was a common sentiment expressed even by the commander of the army war hero general wineld scott now so feeble at seventy ve that he had to be boosted onto his horse.
but the assault on fort sumter provoked the north to a ghting pitch the fort was lost but the union was saved.
lincoln had turned a tactical defeat into a calculated victory.
southerners had wantonly red upon the glorious stars and stripes and honor demanded an armed response.
lincoln promptly april 15 issued a call to the states for seventy ve thousand militiamen and volunteers sprang to the colors in such enthusiastic numbers that many were turned away a mistake that was not often repeated.
on april 19 and 27 the president proclaimed a leaky blockade of southern seaports.
chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 table 20 1 manufacturing by sections 1860 section new eng land middle states western states southern states pacic states territories total number of establishments capital invested average number of laborers annual value of products 20 671 53 387 36 785 20 631 8 777 140 533 257 477 783 435 061 964 194 212 543 95 975 185 23 380 334 3 747 906 1 009 855 715 391 836 546 243 209 909 110 721 50 204 2 333 1 311 246 468 599 287 802 338 392 384 606 530 155 531 281 71 229 989 3 556 197 1 885 861 676 recruiting immigrants for the union army this poster in several languages appeals to immigrants to enlist.
immigrant manpower provided the union with both industrial and military muscle.
percentage of total value 24 8 42 5 20 4 8 3 3 8 0 2 the union also enjoyed a much larger reserve of manpower.
the loyal states had a population of some 22 million the seceding states had 9 million people including about 3 5 million slaves.
adding to the norths overwhelming supply of soldiery were ever more immigrants from europe who continued to pour into the north even during the war see table 20 2.
over 800 000 newcomers arrived between 1861 and 1865 most of them british irish and german.
large numbers of them were induced to enlist in the union army.
altogether about one fth of the union forces were foreignborn and in some units military commands were given in four different languages.
whether immigrant or native ordinary northern boys were much less prepared than their southern counterparts for military life.
yet the northern clodhoppers and shopkeepers eventually adjusted themselves to soldiering and became known for their discipline and determination.
the north was much less fortunate in its higher commanders.
lincoln was forced to use a costly trialand error method to sort out effective leaders from the many incompetent political ofcers until he nally uncovered a general ulysses simpson grant who was determined to slog his way to victory at whatever cost in life and limb.
in the long run as the northern strengths were brought to bear they outweighed those of the south.
but when the war began the chances for southern independence were unusually favorable certainly better than the prospects for success of the thirteen colonies in 1776 the turn of a few events could easily have produced a different outcome.
the might have beens are fascinating.
if the border states had seceded if the uncertain states of the upper mississippi valley had turned against the union the threat of european intervention table 20 2 immigration to united states 1860 1866 year total britain ireland germany all others 1865 153 640 91 918 91 985 176 282 193 418 248 120 318 568 29 737 19 675 24 639 66 882 53 428 82 465 94 924 48 637 23 797 23 351 55 916 63 523 29 772 36 690 54 491 31 661 27 529 33 162 57 276 83 424 115 892 20 775 16 785 16 466 20 322 19 191 52 459 71 062 only the rst three months of 1865 were war months.
if a wave of northern defeatism had demanded an armistice and if britain and or france had broken the unions naval blockade of southern ports the south might well have won.
all of these possibilities almost became realities but none of them actually occurred and lacking their impetus the south could not hope to win.
dethroning king cotton successful revolutions including the american revolution of 1776 have generally succeeded because of foreign intervention.
the south counted on it did not get it and lost.
of all the confederacys potential assets none counted more weightily than the prospect of foreign intervention.
europes ruling classes were openly sympathetic to the confederate cause.
they had long abhorred the incendiary example of the american democratic experiment and they cherished a kind of fellow feeling for the souths semifeudal aristocratic social order.
in contrast the masses of working people in britain and to some extent in france were pulling and praying for the north.
many of them had read uncle toms cabin and they sensed that the war though at the outset ofcially fought only over the question of union might extinguish slavery if the north emerged victorious.
the common folk of britain could not yet cast the ballot but they could cast the brick.
their certain hostility to any ofcial intervention on behalf of the south evidently had a sobering effect on the british government.
thus the dead hands of uncle tom helped uncle sam by restraining the british and french ironclads from piercing the union blockade.
yet the fact re mained that british textile mills depended on the american south for 75 percent of their cotton supplies.
wouldnt silent looms force london to speak.
humanitarian sympathies aside southerners counted on hard economic need to bring britain to their aid.
why did king cotton fail them.
he failed in part because he had been so lavishly productive in the immediate prewar years of 1857 1860 enormous exports of cotton in those years had piled up surpluses in british warehouses.
when the shooting started in 1861 british manufacturers had on hand a hefty oversupply of ber.
the real pinch did not come until about a year and a half later when thousands of hungry operatives were thrown out of work.
but by this time lincoln had announced his slaveemancipation policy and the wage slaves of britain were not going to demand a war to defend the slaveowners of the south.
the american minister to britain wrote the great body of the aristocracy and the commercial classes are anxious to see the united states go to pieces but the middle and lower class sympathise with us because they see in the convulsion in america an era in the history of the world out of which must come in the end a general recognition of the right of mankind to the produce of their labor and the pursuit of happiness.
chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 booth at the sanitary fair in chicago 1863 the chicago sanitary fair was the rst of many such fairs throughout the nation to raise funds for soldier relief efforts.
mainly organized by women the fair sold captured confederate ags battle relics handicrafts like these potholders right and donated items including president lincolns original draft of the emancipation proclamation which garnered 3 000 in auction.
when the fair closed the chicago headquarters of the u s sanitary commission had raised 100 000 and its female managers had gained organizational experience that many would put to work in the postwar movement for womens rights.
the truth that some gluttony and greed always mar the devotion and self sacrice called forth by war.
the story of speculators and peculators was roughly the same in both camps.
but graft was more agrant in the north than in the south partly because there was more to steal.
yankee sharpness appeared at its worst.
dishonest agents putting prots above patriotism palmed off aged and blind horses on government purchasers.
unscrupulous northern manufacturers supplied shoes with cardboard soles and fast disintegrating uniforms of reprocessed or shoddy wool rather than virgin wool.
hence the reproachful term shoddy millionaires was doubly fair.
one proteer reluctantly admitted that his prots were painfully large newly invented laborsaving machinery enabled the north to expand economically even though the cream of its manpower was being drained off to the ghting front.
the sewing machine wrought wonders in fabricating uniforms and military footwear.
the marriage of military need and innovative machinery largely ended the production of customtailored clothing.
graduated standard mea surements were introduced creating sizes that were widely used in the civilian garment industry forever after.
clattering mechanical reapers which numbered about 250 000 by 1865 proved hardly less potent than thundering guns.
they not only released tens of thousands of farm boys for the army but fed them their eld rations.
they produced vast surpluses of grain that when sent abroad helped dethrone king cotton.
they provided prots with which the north was able to buy munitions and supplies from abroad.
they contributed to the feverish prosperity of the north a prosperity that enabled the union to weather the war with ying colors.
wartime transformations other industries were humming.
the discovery of petroleum gushers in 1859 had led to a rush of fiftyniners to pennsylvania.
the result was the birth of a new industry with its petroleum plutocracy and coal oil johnnies pioneers continued to push westward during the war altogether an estimated 300 000 people.
major magnets were free gold nuggets and free land under the homestead act of 1862 strong propellants were the federal draft agents.
the only major northern industry to suffer a crippling setback was the ocean carrying trade which fell prey to the alabama and other raiders.
the civil war was a womens war too.
the protracted con ict opened new opportunities for women.
when men departed in uniform women often took their jobs.
in washington d c ve hundred women clerks government girls became government workers with over one hundred in the treasury department alone.
the booming military demand for shoes and clothing combined with technological marvels like the sewing machine likewise drew countless women into industrial employment.
before the war one industrial worker in four had been female during the war the ratio rose to one in three.
other women on both sides stepped up to the ghting front or close behind it.
more than four hundred women accompanied husbands and sweethearts into battle by posing as male soldiers.
other women took on dangerous spy missions.
one woman was executed for smuggling gold to the confederacy.
dr elizabeth blackwell americas rst female physician helped organize the u s sanitary commission to assist the union armies in the eld.
the commission trained nurses collected medical supplies and equipped hospitals.
commission work helped many women to acquire the orga ni zational skills and the self condence that would propel the womens movement forward after the war.
heroically energetic clara barton and dedicated dorothea dix superintendent of nurses for the union army helped transform nursing from a lowly service into a respected profession and in the process opened up another major sphere of employment for women in the postwar era.
equally renowned in the south was sally tompkins who ran a richmond in rmary for wounded confederate soldiers and was awarded the rank of captain by confederate president jefferson davis.
still other women north as well as south orga nized bazaars and fairs that raised millions of dollars for the relief of widows orphans and disabled soldiers.
a crushed cotton kingdom the south fought to the point of exhaustion.
the suffocation caused by the blockade together with the destruction wrought by invaders took a terrible toll.
possessing 30 percent of the national wealth in 1860 the south claimed only 12 percent in 1870 before the war the average per capita income of southerners including slaves was about two thirds that of northerners.
the civil war squeezed the average southern income to two fths of the northern level where it remained for the rest of the century.
the souths bid for independence exacted a cruel and devastating cost.
transportation collapsed.
the south was even driven to the economic cannibalism of pulling up rails from the less used lines to repair the main ones.
window weights were melted down into bullets gourds replaced dishes pins became so scarce that they were loaned with reluctance.
to the brutal end the south mustered remarkable resourcefulness and spirit.
women buoyed up their menfolk many of whom had seen enough of war at rst hand to be heartily sick of it.
a proposal was made by a number of women that they cut off their long hair and sell it abroad.
but the project was not adopted partly because of the blockade.
the self sacricing women took pride in denying themselves the silks and satins of their northern sisters.
the chorus of a song the southern girl touched a cheerful note so hurrah.
for southern rights hurrah.
for the homespun dress the southern ladies wear.
at wars end the northern captains of industry had conquered the southern lords of the manor.
a crippled south left the capitalistic north free to work its own way with high tariffs and other benets.
the manufacturing moguls of the north ushering in the full edged industrial revolution were headed for increased dominance over american economic and political life.
hitherto the agrarian slavocracy of the south had partially checked the ambitions of the rising plutocracy of the north.
now cotton capitalism had lost out to industrial capitalism.
the south of 1865 was to be rich in little but amputees war heroes ruins and memories.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 charleston south carolina in ruins april 1865 rebel troops evacuating charleston blew up military supplies to deny them to general william tecumseh shermans forces.
the explosions ignited res that all but destroyed the city.
the moonlight and magnolia old south largely imaginary in any case had forever gone with the wind.
handsome cities of yesteryear such as charleston and richmond were rubble strewn and weed choked.
an atlantan returned to his once fair hometown and remarked hell has laid her egg and right here it hatched economic life had creaked to a halt.
banks and businesses had locked their doors ruined by runaway ination.
factories were smokeless silent dismantled.
the transportation system had broken down completely.
before the war ve different railroad lines had converged on columbia south carolina now the nearest connected track was twenty nine miles away.
efforts to untwist the rails corkscrewed by shermans soldiers proved bumpily unsatisfactory.
agriculture the economic lifeblood of the south was almost hopelessly crippled.
once white cotton elds now yielded a lush harvest of nothing but green weeds.
the slave labor system had collapsed seed was scarce and livestock had been driven off by plundering yankees.
pathetic instances were reported of men hitching themselves to plows while women and children gripped the handles.
not until 1870 did the se ceded states produce as large a cotton crop as that of the fateful year 1860 and much of that yield came from new acreage in the southwest.
the princely planter aristocrats were humbled by the war at least temporarily.
reduced to proud poverty they faced charred and gutted mansions lost investments and almost worthless land.
their investments of more than 2 billion in slaves their primary form of wealth had evaporated with emancipation.
beaten but unbent many high spirited white southerners remained dangerously deant.
they cursed the damnyankees and spoke of your government in washington instead of our government one southern bishop refused to pray for president andrew johnson though johnson proved to be in sore need of divine guidance.
conscious of no crime these former confederates continued to believe that their view of secession was correct and that the lost cause was still a just war.
one popular anti union song ran im glad i fought agin her i only wish wed won and i aint axed any pardon for anything ive done.
such attitudes boded ill for the prospects of painlessly binding up the republics wounds.
from slavery to freedom freedmen dene freedom confusion abounded in the still smoldering south about the precise meaning of freedom for blacks.
emancipation took effect haltingly and unevenly in different parts of the conquered confederacy.
as union armies marched in and out of various localities many blacks found themselves emancipated and then reenslaved.
a north carolina slave estimated that he had celebrated freedom about twelve times.
blacks from one texas county eeing to the free soil of the liberated county next door were attacked by slaveowners as they swam across the river that marked the county line.
the next day trees along the riverbank were bent with swinging corpses a grisly warning to others dreaming of liberty.
other planters resisted emancipation more legalistically stubbornly protesting that slavery was lawful until state legislatures or the supreme court declared otherwise.
for many slaves the shackles of bondage were not struck off in a single mighty blow long suffering blacks often had to wrench free of their chains link by link.
the variety of responses to emancipation by whites as well as blacks illustrated the sometimes startling complexity of the master slave relationship.
loyalty to the plantation master prompted some slaves to resist the liberating union armies while other slaves pentup bitterness burst forth violently on the day of liberation.
many newly emancipated slaves for example joined union troops in pillaging their masters possessions.
in one instance a group of virginia slaves laid twenty lashes on the back of their former master a painful dose of his own favorite medicine.
prodded by the bayonets of yankee armies of occupation all masters were eventually forced to recognize their slaves permanent freedom.
the oncecommanding planter would assemble his former human chattels in front of the porch of the big house and announce their liberty.
though some blacks initially responded to news of their emancipation with suspicion and uncertainty they soon celebrated their newfound freedom.
many took new names in place of the ones given by their masters and demanded that whites formally address them as mr or mrs others abandoned the coarse cottons that had been their only clothing as slaves and sought silks satins and other nery.
though many whites perceived such behavior as insubordinate they were forced to recognize the realities of emancipation.
never before had i a word of impudence from any of our black folk wrote one white southerner but they are not ours any longer the day of jubilo this french illustration of emancipated negroes celebrating the emancipation proclamation may have been somewhat fanciful but it captured well the exhilaration that came with freedom.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 him.
reverting to his stump speaking days in tennessee he shouted back angry retorts amid cries of you be damned and dont get mad andy the dignity of his high ofce sank to a new low as the old charges of drunkenness were revived.
as a vote getter johnson was highly successful for the opposition.
his inept speechmaking heightened the cry stand by congress against the tailor of the potomac when the ballots were counted the republicans had rolled up more than a two thirds majority in both houses of congress.
republican principles and programs the republicans now had a veto proof congress and virtually unlimited control of reconstruction policy.
but moderates and radicals still disagreed over the best course to pursue in the south.
republicans campaigning in baton rouge louisiana 1868 the soldiers caps and regimental ags demonstrate the continuing federal military presence in the reconstruction south.
radical republican congressman thaddeus stevens said that reconstruction must revolutionize southern institutions habits and manners.
the foundation of their institutions.
must be broken up and relaid or all our blood and treasure have been spent in vain the radicals in the senate were led by the courtly and principled idealist charles sumner long since recovered from his prewar caning on the senate oor who tirelessly labored not only for black freedom but for racial equality.
in the house the most powerful radical was thaddeus stevens crusty and vindictive congressman from pennsylvania.
seventy four years old in 1866 he was a curious gure with a protruding lower lip a heavy black wig covering his bald head and a deformed foot.
an unswerving friend of blacks he had defended runaway slaves in court without fee and before dying insisted on burial in a black cemetery.
his affectionate devotion to blacks was matched by his vitriolic hatred of rebellious white southerners.
a masterly parliamentarian with a razor sharp mind and withering wit stevens was a leading gure on the joint house senate committee on reconstruction.
still opposed to rapid restoration of the southern states the radicals wanted to keep them out as long as possible and apply federal power to bring about a dras military reconstruction though the moderates as the majority faction had the upper hand.
and one thing both groups had come to agree on by 1867 was the necessity to enfranchise black voters even if it took federal troops to do it.
representative thaddeus stevens 1792 1868 in a congressional speech on january 3 1867 urged the ballot for blacks out of concern for them and out of bitterness against southern whites i am for negro suffrage in every rebel state.
if it be just it should not be denied if it be necessary it should be adopted if it be a punishment to traitors they deserve it.
reconstruction by the sword tic social and economic transformation in the south.
but moderate republicans more attuned to the timehonored principles of states rights and self government recoiled from the full implications of the radical program.
they preferred policies that restrained the states from abridging citizens rights rather than policies that directly involved the federal government in individual lives.
the actual policies adopted by congress showed the inuence of both these schools of thought against a backdrop of vicious and bloody race riots that had erupted in several southern cities congress passed the reconstruction act on march 2 1867 see map 22 1.
supplemented by later mea sures this drastic legislation divided the south into ve military districts each commanded by a union general and policed by blue clad soldiers about twenty thousand all told.
the act also temporarily disfranchised tens of thousands of former confederates.
congress additionally laid down stringent conditions for the readmission of the seceded states.
the wayward states were required to ratify the fourteenth amendment giving the former slaves their rights as citizens.
the bitterest pill of all to white southerners map 22 1 military reconstruction 1867 ve districts and commanding generals for many white southerners military reconstruction amounted to turning the knife in the wound of defeat.
an often repeated story of later years had a southerner remark i was sixteen years old before i discovered that damnyankee was two words boundaries of the five military districts va interactive map military district 1 tennessee escaped military regime.
1870 date refers to year of readmission to the union general schofield n c tennessee arkansas military district 4 general ord texas miss.
military district 5 general sheridan alabama military district 2 general sickles georgia s c military district 3 general pope louisiana florida years redeemer governments established established 1869 1871 established 1873 1874 established 1876 1877 presidential electoral vote by party independent democratic republican democratic chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 chronology lincoln announces 10 percent reconstruction plan lincoln vetoes wade davis bill lincoln assassinated johnson issues reconstruction proclamation congress refuses to seat southern congressmen freedmens bureau established southern states pass black codes congress passes civil rights bill over johnsons veto congress passes fourteenth amendment johnson backed candidates lose congressional election ex parte milligan case ku klux klan founded key terms freedmens bureau 518 10 percent reconstruction plan 519 wade davis bill 519 black codes 521 pacic railroad act 522 civil rights bill 522 fourteenth amendment 523 reconstruction act 525 fifteenth amendment 526 reconstruction act tenure of ofce act united states purchases alaska from russia johnson impeached and acquitted johnson pardons confederate leaders fifteenth amendment ratied 1870 force acts freedmens bureau ended reconstruction ends people to know ex parte milligan 526 redeemers 527 womans loyal league 527 union league 527 scalawags 528 carpetbaggers 528 ku klux klan 529 force acts 530 tenure of ofce act 531 sewards folly 532 oliver o howard andrew johnson thaddeus stevens hiram revels edwin m stanton benjamin wade william seward how radical was reconstruction.
f ew topics have triggered as much intellectual warfare as the dark and bloody ground of reconstruction.
the period provoked questions sectional racial and constitutional about which people felt deeply and remain deeply divided even today.
scholarly argument goes back conspicuously to a columbia university historian william a dunning whose students in the early 1900s published a series of histories varying viewpoints of the reconstruction south.
dunning and his disciples were inuenced by the turn of the century spirit of sectional conciliation as well as by current theories about black racial inferiority.
sympathizing with the white south they wrote about the reconstruction period as a kind of national disgrace foisted upon a prostrate region by vindictive and self seeking radical republican politicians.
if the south had wronged the north by seceding the north had wronged the south by reconstructing.
a second cycle of scholarship in the 1920s was impelled by a widespread suspicion that the civil war itself had been a tragic and unnecessary blunder.
attention now shifted to northern politicians.
scholars like howard beale further questioned the motives of the radical republicans.
to beale and others the radicals had masked a ruthless desire to exploit southern labor and resources behind a false front of concern for the freed slaves.
moreover northern advocacy of black voting rights was merely a calculated attempt to ensure a republican political presence in the defeated south.
the unfortunate andrew johnson in this view had valiantly tried to uphold constitutional principles in the face of this cynical northern onslaught.
although ignored by his contemporaries scholar black nationalist and founder of the national association for the advancement of colored people w e b du bois wrote a sympathetic history of reconstruction in 1935 that became the basis for historians interpretations ever since.
following world war ii kenneth stampp and others inuenced by the modern civil rights movement built on du boiss argument and claimed that reconstruction had been a noble though ultimately failed attempt to extend american principles of equity and justice.
the radical republicans and the carpetbaggers were now heroes whereas andrew johnson was castigated for his obsti nate racism.
by the early 1970s this view had become orthodoxy and it generally holds sway today.
yet some scholars such as michael benedict and leon litwack disillusioned with the inability to achieve full racial justice in the 1960s and 1970s began once more to scrutinize the motives of northern politicians immediately after the civil war.
they claimed to discover that reconstruction had never been very radical and that the freedmens bureau and other agencies had merely allowed white planters to maintain their dominance over local politics as well as over the local economy.
more recently eric foner has powerfully reasserted the argument that reconstruction was a truly radical and noble attempt to establish an interracial democracy.
drawing upon the work of du bois foner has emphasized the comparative approach to american reconstruction.
clearly foner has admitted reconstruction did not create full equality but it did allow blacks to form political orga ni zations and churches to vote and to establish some mea sure of economic independence.
in south africa the caribbean and other areas once marked by slavery these opportunities were much harder to come by.
many of the benets of reconstruction were erased by whites in the south during the gilded age but in the twentieth century the constitutional principles and organizations developed during reconstruction provided the focus and foundation for the modern civil rights movement which some have called the second reconstruction.
steven hahns a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 is the latest contribution to the literature on reconstruction.
hahn emphasizes the assertiveness and ingenuity of african americans in creating new political opportunities for themselves after emancipation.
to learn more richard n current those terrible carpetbaggers 1988 eric foner forever free the story of emancipation and reconstruction 2005 nothing but freedom 1983 dewey w grantham life and death of the solid south 1988 steven hahn a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 james m mcpherson ordeal by fire the civil war and reconstruction 1981 michael perman emancipation and reconstruction rev.
ed 2003 lawrence powell new masters northern planters during the civil war and reconstruction 1980 julie saville the work of reconstruction 1994 booker t washington up from slavery 1901 heather andrea williams self taught african american education in slavery and freedom 2005 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 table 23 1 composition of the electoral commission 1877 members republicans democrats senate republican majority house democratic majority supreme court total renewed deadlock was avoided by the rest of the complex compromise of 1877 already partially concluded behind closed doors.
the democrats reluctantly agreed that hayes might take ofce in return for his withdrawing intrusive federal troops from the two states in which they remained louisiana and south carolina.
among various concessions the republicans assured the democrats a place at the presidential patronage trough and support for a bill subsidizing the texas and pacic railroads construction of a southern transcontinental line.
not all of these promises were kept in later years including the texas and pacic subsidy.
but the deal held together long enough to break the dangerous electoral standoff.
the democrats permitted hayes to receive the remainder of the disputed the end of reconstruction 1877 president hayess let em alone policy replaces the carpetbags and bayonets of the grant administration signifying the end of federal efforts to promote racial equality in the south until the second reconstruction of the civil rights era nearly a century later.
returns all by the partisan vote of 8 to 7 so close was the margin of safety that the explosive issue was settled only three days before the new president was ofcially sworn into ofce.
the nation breathed a collective sigh of relief.
the compromise bought peace at a price.
partisan violence was averted by sacricing the civil rights of southern blacks.
with the hayes tilden deal the republican party quietly abandoned its commitment to racial equality.
that commitment had been weakening in any case.
many republicans had begun to question the worthiness of reconstruction and were less willing to send dollars and enlisted sons to bolster southern state governments.
the civil rights act of 1875 was in a sense the last feeble gasp of the congressional radical republicans.
the act supposedly guaranteed equal accommodations in public places and prohibited racial discrimination in jury selection but the law was born toothless and stayed that way for nearly a century.
the supreme court pronounced much of the act unconstitutional in the civil rights cases 1883.
the court declared that the fourteenth amendment prohibited only government violations of civil rights not the denial of civil rights by individuals.
when president hayes withdrew the blue clad federal troops that were propping up reconstruction governments the bayonet backed republican regimes collapsed.
the emergence of jim crow the birth of jim crow in the post reconstruction south the democratic south speedily solidied and swiftly suppressed the now friendless blacks.
reconstruction for better or worse was ofcially ended.
shamelessly relying on fraud and intimidation white democrats redeemers reassumed political power in the south and exercised it ruthlessly.
blacks who tried to assert their rights faced unemployment eviction and physical harm.
many blacks as well as poor whites were forced into sharecropping and tenant farming.
former slaves often found themselves at the mercy of former masters who were now their landlords and creditors.
through the crop lien system storekeepers extended credit to small farmers for food and supplies and in return took a lien on their harvests.
shrewd merchants manipulated the system so that farmers remained perpetually in debt to them.
for generations to come southern blacks were condemned to eke out a threadbare living under conditions scarcely better than slavery see map 23 2.
with white southerners back in the political saddle daily discrimination against blacks grew increasingly oppressive.
what had started as the informal separation of blacks and whites in the immediate postwar years developed by the 1890s into systematic state level legal codes of segregation known as jim crow laws.
southern states also enacted literacy requirements voter registration laws and poll taxes and tolerated violent intimidation of black voters to ensure fullscale disfranchisement of the souths freedmen.
the supreme court validated the souths segregationist social order in the case of plessy v ferguson 1896.
it jim crow justice in 1893 a black man named henry smith was burned at the stake in paris texas for supposedly molesting a four year old white girl.
hundreds of gawkers poured into the city from the surrounding county to watch the gruesome spectacle.
public executions like this one or the more common lynching of black men were aimed at intimidating african americans into accepting second class status in the jim crow south.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 minnesota farmers loading a husker shredder 1890s the purchase of technologically advanced farm equipment increased the productivity of farmers but also saddled them with debt.
many sought debt relief in the 1890s by clamoring for inationary schemes including the monetization of silver.
that left ten people dead and some sixty wounded.
troops were eventually summoned and both the strike and the union were broken.
that same month federal troops bloodily smashed a strike among silver miners in idahos fabled coeur dalene district.
the populists made a remarkable showing in the 1892 presidential election see map 23 3.
singing good by party bosses they rolled up 1 029 846 popular votes and 22 electoral votes for general weaver.
they thus became one of the few third parties in u s history to break into the electoral column.
but they fell far short of an electoral majority.
industrial laborers especially in the urban east did not rally to the populist banner in appreciable numbers.
populist electoral votes came from only six midwestern and western states four of which kansas colorado idaho and nevada fell completely into the populist basket.
the south although a hotbed of agrarian agitation proved especially unwilling to throw in its lot with the new party.
race was the reason.
the more than one million southern black farmers orga nized in the colored farmers national alliance shared a host of complaints with poor white farmers and for a time their common economic goals promised to overcome their the homestead strike 1892 three hundred armed pinkerton detectives oated on barges down the monongahela river to the site of the carnegie steel plant at homestead pennsylvania.
met by a deant and disciplined force of strikers they were compelled to surrender.
here the pinkerton men are shown disembarking from their barges after their capitulation while the jeering strikers ashore exult in their victory.
the election of 1892 racial differences.
recognizing the crucial edge that black votes could give them in the south populist leaders like georgias tom watson reached out to the black community.
watson was a wiry redhead who could talk like the thrust of a bowie knife he declared there is no reason why the black man should not understand that the law that hurts me as a farmer hurts him as a farmer many blacks were disillusioned enough with the republican party to respond.
alarmed the conser vative white bourbon elite in the south played cynically upon historic racial antagonisms to counter the populists appeal for interracial solidarity and woo back poor whites.
southern blacks were heavy losers.
the populistinspired reminder of potential black political strength led to the near total extinction of what little african american suffrage remained in the south.
white southerners more aggressively than ever used literacy tests a popular protest song of the 1890s among western farmers was titled the hayseed one stanza ran i once was a tool of oppression and as green as a sucker could be and monopolies banded together to beat a poor hayseed like me.
and poll taxes to deny blacks the ballot.
the notorious grandfather clause exempted from those requirements anyone whose forebear had voted in 1860 when of course black slaves had not voted at all.
more than half a century would pass before southern blacks could again vote in considerable numbers.
accompanying this disfranchisement were more severe jim crow laws map 23 3 presidential election of 1892 showing vote by county note the concentration of populist strength in the semiarid farming regions of the western half of the country.
compare this with map 26 4 showing average annual precipitation with major agricultural products as of 1900 on p 647.
interactive map wash n h vt r 4 r 4 mont.
r 3 r 6 d 1 r 1 p 1 oregon minn r 3 p 1 mass.
r 9 idaho s dak.
d 12 r 3 r 13 r 8 utah terr.
calif ill d 24 colo p 4 okla terr.
new mexico terr.
d 15 r 32 ohio d 12 d 13 d 8 d 11 d 12 s c ark.
d 9 d 8 miss.
d 9 texas md.
n c tenn ind.
n j d 6 d 10 d 3 va d 6 ky d 17 conn del.
d 1 r 22 w va mo.
kansas p 10 arizona terr.
r i r 4 pa iowa neb.
d 8 r 1 d 36 mich d 5 r 9 nev p 3 r 15 n y ala d 11 ga d 13 la.
d 15 d 8 fla d 4 candidate party electoral vote popular vote cleveland democrat 62 5 555 426 46 1 harrison republican 33 5 182 690 43 0 5 1 029 846 8 5 weaver peoples territories indian reservations unsettled etc.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 figure 25 1 the shift to the american city this chart shows the percentage of total population living in locales with a population of twenty ve hundred or more.
note the slowing of the cityward trend from 1970 on.
the jagged skyline of americas perpendicular civilization could not fully conceal the canker sores of a feverish growth.
criminals ourished like lice in the teeming asphalt jungles.
sanitary facilities could not keep pace with the mushrooming population explosion.
impure water uncollected garbage unwashed bodies and droppings from draft animals enveloped many cities in a satanic stench.
baltimore was described as smelling like a billion polecats.
the cities were monuments of contradiction.
they represented humanity compressed remarked one observer the best and the worst combined in a strangely composite community they harbored merchant princes and miserable paupers stately banks 5 1 19 8 39 7 51 2 54 0 69 9 73 6 73 7 75 2 77 the brooklyn bridge the brooklyn bridge opened on may 24 1883 it had taken thirteen years to build and was the largest suspension bridge in the world as well as the rst made of steel wire.
on opening day an astonishing 1 800 vehicles and 150 300 people made the short but breathtaking trek between the new york city boroughs of manhattan and brooklyn.
the rst person to cross was emily warren roebling the daughter in law of the original designer john augustus roebling and the wife of his son washington roebling who had taken over the job when his father died suddenly in 1869 when washington fell ill himself emily learned civil engineering and oversaw much of the remaining work on the bridge.
urban problems and sooty factories green grassed suburbs and treeless ghettos towering skyscrapers and stinking tenements.
the glaring contrasts that assaulted the eye in new york reminded one visitor of a lady in ball costume with diamonds in her ears and her toes out at the boots worst of all were the human pigsties known as slums.
they seemed to grow ever more crowded more lthy and more rat infested especially after the perfection in 1879 of the dumbbell tenement see fig ure 25 2.
so named because of the outline of its oor plan the dumbbell was usually seven or eight stories high with shallow sunless and ill smelling air shafts providing minimal ventilation.
several families were sardined onto each oor of the barracks like structures and they shared a malodorous toilet in the hall.
in these fetid warrens conspicuously in new yorks lung block hundreds of unfortunate urbanites coughed away their lives.
flophouses abounded where the half starved and unemployed might sleep for a few cents on verminous mattresses.
small wonder that slum dwellers strove mightily to escape their wretched surroundings as many of them did.
the slums remained foul places inhabited by successive waves of newcomers.
to a remarkable degree hardworking people moved up and out of them.
cities were dangerous for everyone.
in 1871 twothirds of downtown chicago burned in a raging re that left ninety thousand people homeless and destroyed more than fteen thousand buildings.
closely packed wooden structures fed the insatiable ames prompting chicago and other wary cities to require stone and iron buildings downtown.
the wealthiest began to leave the risky cities behind and head for semirural suburbs.
these leafy bedroom communities eventually ringed the brick and concrete cities with a greenbelt of afuence.
the new immigration the powerful pull of the american urban magnet was felt even in faraway europe.
a seemingly endless stream of immigrants continued to pour in from the old mother continent in each of the three decades from the 1850s through the 1870s more than 2 million migrants had stepped onto americas shores.
by the 1880s the stream had swelled to a rushing torrent as more than 5 million cascaded into the country.
a new high for a single year was reached in 1882 when 788 992 arrived or more than 2 100 a day see figure 25 3.
air shaft living room bed room living room parlor bed room p u b l i c h a l l bed bed room room air shaft 50 0 living room parlor fire escape parlor bed room w c parlor bed room w c fire escape 10 living room figure 25 2 dumbbell tenement this was the standard architectural plan for the human warehouses on new yorks lower east side.
despite the innovation of an air shaft to bring light and ventilation to the middle of the building only one room in each of the apartments was directly exposed to sunlight and open air.
all families on a oor shared the toilet w c in the hallway.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 ordinary people and about contemporary and sometimes controversial social themes.
a modern instance 1882 deals with the once taboo subject of divorce.
the rise of silas lapham 1885 describes the trials of a newly rich paint manufacturer caught up in the caste system of brahmin boston.
a hazard of new fortunes 1890 portrays the reformers strikers and socialists in gilded age new york.
stephen crane 1871 1900 the fourteenth son of a methodist minister also wrote about the seamy underside of life in urban industrial america.
his maggie a girl of the streets 1893 a brutal tale about a poor prostitute driven to suicide was too grim to nd a publisher.
crane had to have it printed privately.
he rose quickly to prominence with the red badge of courage 1895 the stirring story of a bloodied young civil war recruit fresh sh under re.
crane himself had never seen a battle and wrote entirely from printed civil war records.
he died of tuberculosis in 1900 when only twenty nine.
not all authors came from humble stock.
the gifted henry adams 1838 1918 son of charles francis adams grandson of john quincy adams and greatgrandson of john adams turned unrivaled family connections into a prolic career as a historian novelist and critic.
in his nine volume history of the united states during the administrations of jefferson and madison 1889 1891 adams defended his patrician heritage from posthumous attack.
alarmed by modern trends adams penned a paean to the bygone beauty and spiritual unity of the high middle ages in montsaint michel and chartres 1905.
similar anxieties about modernity resurfaced in his best known work the education of henry adams 1907 an autobiographical account of his own failure to come to grips with the chaotic forces of twentieth century life.
henry james 1843 1916 brother of harvard philosopher william james was a new yorker who turned from law to literature.
taking as his dominant theme the confrontation of innocent americans with subtle europeans james penned a remarkable number of brilliant novels including daisy miller 1879 the portrait of a lady 1881 and the wings of the dove 1902.
his book the bostonians 1886 was one of the rst novels about the rising feminist movement.
james frequently made women his central characters exploring their inner reactions to complex situations with a deftness that marked him as a master of psychological realism long resident in eng land he became a british subject shortly before his death.
candid portrayals of contemporary life and social problems were the literary order of the day by the turn jack london 1876 1916 the socialist who hated strikebreakers known as scabs said no man has a right to scab so long as there is a pool of water to drown his carcass in or a rope long enough to hang his body with.
judas iscariot was a gentleman compared with a scab.
for betraying his master he had character enough to hang himself.
a scab has not.
of the century.
jack london 1876 1916 famous as a nature writer in such books as the call of the wild 1903 turned to depicting a possible fascistic revolution in the iron heel 1907.
frank norris 1870 1902 like london a cal i fornian wrote the octopus 1901 an earthy saga of the stranglehold in which railroad and corrupt politicians held cal i fornia wheat ranchers.
a sequel the pit 1903 dealt with the making and breaking of speculators on the chicago wheat exchange.
two black writers paul laurence dunbar 1872 1906 and charles w chesnutt 1858 1932 brought another kind of realism to late nineteenth century literature.
dunbar through poetry particularly his acclaimed lyrics of lowly life 1896 and chesnutt through ction short stories in the atlantic monthly and the conjure women 1899 embraced the use of black dialect and folklore previously shunned by black authors to capture the spontaneity and richness of southern black culture.
conspicuous among the new social novelists rising in the literary rmament was theodore dreiser 1871 1945 a homely gangling writer from indiana.
he burst upon the literary scene in 1900 with sister carrie a graphically realistic narrative of a poor working girl in chicago and new york.
she becomes one mans mistress then elopes with another and nally strikes out on her own to make a career on the stage.
the ctional carries disregard for prevailing moral standards so offended dreisers publisher that the book was soon withdrawn from circulation though it later reemerged as an acclaimed american classic.
the new morality victoria woodhull who was real esh and blood also shook the pillars of conventional morality when she publicly proclaimed her belief in free love in 1871 changes in moral standards victoria woodhull 1838 1927 pleads for woman suffrage before the house judiciary committee 1871 a colorful and charismatic gure woodhull became the rst woman to run for the presidency in 1872 as the candidate of the equal rights party.
elizabeth cady stanton is seated directly behind her at the extreme left sits susan b anthony.
woodhull was a beautiful and eloquent divorce sometime stockbroker and tireless feminist propagandist.
together with her sister tennessee cla in she published a far out periodical woodhull and clains weekly.
the sisters again shocked respectable society in 1872 when their journal struck a blow for the new morality by charging that henry ward beecher the most famous preacher of his day had for years been carrying on an adulterous affair.
pure minded americans sternly resisted these affronts to their moral principles.
their foremost champion was a portly crusader anthony comstock who made lifelong war on the immoral armed after 1873 with a federal statute the notorious comstock law this self appointed defender of sexual purity boasted that he had conscated no fewer than 202 679 obscene pictures and photos 4 185 boxes of pills powders etc used by abortionists and 26 obscene pictures framed on walls of saloons his proud claim was that he had driven at least fteen people to suicide.
the antics of the woodhull sisters and comstock exposed to daylight the battle in late nineteenthcentury america over sexual attitudes and the place of women.
switchboards and typewriters in the booming cities became increasingly the tools of womens independence.
young workingwomen headed to dance halls and nightclubs when the day was done enjoying a new sense of freedom in the cities.
this new morality began to be reected in soaring divorce rates the spreading practice of birth control and increasingly frank discussion of sexual topics.
by 1913 said one popular magazine the chimes had struck sex oclock in america families and women in the city the new urban environment was hard on families.
paradoxically the crowded cities were emotionally isolating places.
urban families had to go it alone separated from clan kin and village.
as families increasingly became the virtually exclusive arena for intimate companionship and for emotional and psychological satisfaction they were subjected to unprecedented stress.
many families cracked under the strain.
the urban era launched the era of divorce.
from the late nineteenth century dates the beginning of the divorce revolution that transformed the united states social landscape in the twentieth century see table 25 2.
urban life also dictated changes in work habits and even in family size.
not only fathers but mothers and even children as young as ten years old often worked and usually in widely scattered locations.
on the farm having many children meant having more hands to help with hoeing and harvesting but in the city more children meant more mouths to feed more crowding in sardine tin tenements and more human baggage to carry in the uphill struggle for social mobility.
not surprisingly birthrates were still dropping and family size continued to shrink as the nineteenth century chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 in the 1860s the federal government intensied this policy and herded the indians into still smaller connes principally the great sioux reservation in dakota territory and indian territory in present day oklahoma into which dozens of southern plains tribes were forced.
the indians surrendered their ancestral lands only when they had received solemn promises from washington that they would be left alone and provided with food clothing and other supplies.
regrettably the federal indian agents were often corrupt.
they palmed off moth eaten blankets spoiled beef and other defective provisions on the friendless indians.
one of these cheating ofcials on an annual salary of 1 500 re turned home after four years with an estimated savings of 50 000.
for more than a decade after the civil war erce warfare between indians and the u s army raged in various parts of the west see map 26 1.
army troops many of them recent immigrants who had ironically ed europe to avoid military ser vice met formidable adversaries in the plains indians whose superb horsemanship gave them baf ing mobility.
fully one fth of all u s army personnel on the frontier were african american dubbed buffalo soldiers by the indians supposedly because of the resemblance of their hair to the bisons furry coat.
map 26 1 indian wars 1860 1890 surrendering in 1877 chief joseph of the nez perce declared our chiefs are killed.
the old men are all dead.
the little children are freezing to death.
i want to have time to look for my children.
hear me my chiefs.
my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will ght no more forever c a n a da ft colville ft townsend battle of bear paw mountain 1877 seattle portland ft harney ak er ft reno.
ft hall santa fe ra d ft craig camp grant massacre 1871 r ft sumner 120w canyon de los embudos 1886 geronimo escapes.
major indian battle 110w ft reno arkansas red r miss.
fort worth texas ri o tenn jacksboro skeleton canyon 1886 geronimo surrenders.
n ky arkansas r red river war 1874 1875 m e x ico la.
30n austin 90w san antonio 100w ala waco ft quitman de fort bisbee indian terr.
an gr chief josephs route kiowa comanche ft crittenden missouri r arapaho pi ft garland ind.
ill southern cheyenne arizona terr.
new mexico terr.
amarillo gila m is ft riley massacre kansas topeka ft larned dodge city wichita ft lyon ft crawford canyon de chelly salt river canyon 1872 phoenix 40n lincoln sip san diego navajo iowa sis los angeles lo co r r i r s ou mis california las vegas o.
platte r ft kearney colorado city mich ft randall s cedar city cheyenne wisconsin colorado denver sand creek ft cameron nevada san jose ft ridgely wounded ft niobrara knee 1890 nebraska in utah terr.
arapaho ta salt lake city ft churchill sonoma austin sacramento paiute san francisco esmeralda ft laramie un ft halleck carson city cheyenne ft bridger mcdermit minn ft sully b lac k h i lls wyoming bannock shoshone ft ft bidwell ft abercrombie s dak.
ft meade mo coast modoc little bighorn idaho sn ft klamath bismarck sioux ft yates y nez perce oregon n dak.
montana ck ran ft berthold ft lapwaj columbia r ro ges washington pacific ocean interactive map g ulf of mexico 300 km.
the indian wars receding native population a young lieutenant told colonel chivington that to attack the indians would be a violation of pledges the indian wars in the west were often savage clashes.
aggressive whites sometimes shot peaceful indians on sight just to make sure they would give no trouble.
at sand creek colorado in 1864 colonel j m chivingtons militia massacred in cold blood some four hundred indians who apparently thought they had been promised immunity.
women were shot praying for mercy children had their brains dashed out and braves were tortured scalped and unspeakably mutilated.
cruelty begot cruelty.
in 1866 a sioux war party attempting to block construction of the bozeman trail to the montana goldelds ambushed captain william j fettermans command of eighty one soldiers and civilians in wyomings bighorn mountains.
the indians left not a single survivor and grotesquely mutilated the corpses.
one troopers face was spitted with 105 arrows.
george armstrong custer the buckskin clad boy general of civil war fame now demoted to colonel and turned indian ghter wrote that fettermans annihilation awakened a bitter feeling toward the savage perpetrators the cycle of ferocious warfare intensied.
his reply was bringing his st down close to my face damn any man who sympathizes with indians i told him what pledges were given the indians.
he replied that he had come to kill indians and believed it to be honorable to kill indians under any and all circumstances the fetterman massacre led to one of the few though short lived indian triumphs in the plains wars the battle of the little bighorn.
in another treaty of fort laramie signed in 1868 the government abandoned the bozeman trail.
the sprawling great sioux reservation was guaranteed to the sioux tribes.
but in 1874 a new round of warfare with the plains indians began when custer led a scientic expedition into the black hills of south dakota part of the sioux reservation and announced that he had discovered gold.
hordes of greedy gold seekers swarmed into the sioux battle of the little big horn by amos bad heart bull this depiction of the battle by an oglala sioux tribal historian and artist shows crazy horse in spotted war paint center ring on a trooper of custers 7th cavalry.
the ground is littered with the bodies of dead soldiers.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 twine binder and then in the 1880s by the combine the combined reaper thresher which was drawn by twenty to forty horses and which both reaped and bagged the grain.
widespread use of such costly equipment naturally called for rst class management.
but the farmers often unskilled as businesspeople were inclined to blame the banks and railroads or the volatility of the global marketplace rather than their own shortcomings for their losses.
this amazing mechanization of agriculture in the postwar years was almost as striking as the mechanization of industry.
in fact agricultural modernization drove many marginal farmers off the land thus swelling the ranks of the new industrial work force.
as the rural population steadily decreased those farmers who remained achieved miracles of production making america the worlds breadbasket and butcher shop.
the farm was attaining the status of a factory an outdoor grain factory.
bonanza wheat farms of the minnesota north dakota area for example were enormous.
by 1890 at least a half dozen of them were larger than fteen thousand acres with communication by telephone from one part to another.
these bonanza farms foreshadowed the gigantic agribusinesses of the next century.
agriculture was a big business from its earliest days in cal i fornias phenomenally productive and phenomenally irrigated central valley.
cal i fornia farms carved out of giant spanish mexican land grants and the railroads huge holdings were from the outset more than three times larger than the national average.
the reformer henry george in 1871 described the golden state as not a country of farms but a country of plantations and estates with the advent of the railroad refrigerator car in the 1880s cal i fornia fruit and vegetable crops raised on sprawling tracts by ill paid migrant mexican and chinese farmhands sold at a handsome prot in the rich urban markets of the east.
deation dooms the debtor once the farmers became chained to a one crop economy wheat or corn they were in the same leaky boat with the southern cotton growers.
as long as prices stayed high all went well.
but when they skidded in the 1880s bankruptcy fell like a blight on the farm belts.
the grain farmers were no longer the masters of their own destinies.
they were engaged in one of the most ercely competitive of businesses for the price of their product was determined in a world market by the world output.
if the wheat elds of argentina russia and other foreign countries ourished the price of the farmers grain would fall and american sodbusters would face ruin as they did in the 1880s and 1890s.
low prices and a deated currency were the chief worries of the frustrated farmers north south and west.
if a family had borrowed 1 000 in 1855 when wheat was worth about a dollar a bushel they expected to pay back the equivalent of one thousand bushels plus interest when the mortgage fell due.
but if they let their debt run to 1890 when wheat had fallen to about fty cents a bushel they would have to pay back the price of two thousand bushels for the 1 000 they had borrowed plus interest.
this unexpected burden struck them as unjust though their steely eyed creditors often branded the complaining farmers as slippery and dishonest rascals.
the deationary pinch on the debtor owed partly from the static money supply.
there were simply not enough dollars to go around and as a result prices were forced down.
in 1870 the currency in circulation for each person was 19 42 in 1890 it was only 22 67.
yet during these twenty years business and industrial activity increasing manyfold had intensied the scramble for available currency.
the forgotten farmers were caught on a treadmill.
despite unremitting toil they operated year after year at a loss and lived off their fat as best they could.
in a vicious circle their farm machinery increased their output of grain lowered the price and drove them even deeper into debt.
mortgages engulfed homesteads at an alarming rate by 1890 nebraska alone reported more than 100 000 farms blanketed with mortgages.
the repeated crash of the sheriff auctioneers hammer kept announcing to the world that another sturdy american farmer had become landless in a landed nation.
ruinous rates of interest running from 8 to 40 percent were charged on mortgages largely by agents of eastern loan companies.
the windburned sons and a contemporary farm protest song the kansas fool ran the bankers followed us out west and did in mortgages invest they looked ahead and shrewdly planned and soon theyll have our kansas land.
struggling farmers daughters of the sod who felt that they deserved praise for developing the country cried out in despair against the loan sharks and the wall street octopus.
farm tenancy rather than farm ownership was spreading like stinkweed.
the trend was especially marked in the sharecropping south where cotton prices also sank dismayingly.
by 1880 one fourth of all american farms were operated by tenants.
the united states was ready to feed the world but under the new industrial feudalism the farmers were about to sink into a status suggesting old world serfdom.
unhappy farmers even mother nature ceased smiling as her powerful forces conspired against agriculture.
mile wide clouds of grasshoppers leaving nothing but the mortgage periodically ravaged prairie farms.
the terrible cottonboll weevil was also wreaking havoc in the south by the early 1890s.
the good earth was going sour.
floods added to the waste of erosion which had already washed the topsoil off millions of once lush southern acres.
expensive fertilizers were urgently needed.
a long succession of droughts seared the trans mississippi west beginning in the summer of 1887 whole towns were abandoned.
going home to the wifes folks and in god we trusted in kansas we busted were typical la ments of many impoverished farmers as they ed their weather beaten shacks and sun baked sod houses.
one irate poet snarled fifty miles to water a hundred miles to wood to hell with this damned country im going home for good.
to add to their miseries the soil tillers were gouged by their government local state and national.
their land was overassessed and they paid painful local taxes whereas wealthy easterners could conceal their stocks and bonds in safe deposit boxes.
high protective tariffs in these years poured prots into the pockets of manufacturers.
farmers on the other hand had no choice but to sell their low priced products in a ercely competitive unprotected world market while buying high priced manufactured goods in a protected home market.
the farmers were also farmed by the corporations and processors.
they were at the mercy of the harvester trust the barbed wire trust and the fertilizer trust all of which could control output and raise prices to extortionate levels.
middlemen took a juicy cut from the selling price of the goods that the farmers bought while operators pushed storage rates to the ceiling at grain warehouses and elevators.
in addition the railroad octopus had the grain growers in its grip.
freight rates could be so high that nebraska homesteaders in front of their sod house 1887 these two brothers and their families had escaped to canada from the slave south during the civil war.
returning to the united states in the 1880s they took advantage of the homestead act to stake out farms in custer county nebraska.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 literature which led to his later leadership of the socialist movement in america.
embittered cries of government by injunction now burst from orga nized labor.
this was the rst time that such a legal weapon had been used conspicuously by washington to break a strike and it was all the more distasteful because deant workers who were held in contempt could be imprisoned without a jury trial.
signs multiplied that employers were striving to smash labor unions by court action.
nonlabor elements of the country including the populists and other debtors were likewise incensed.
they saw in the brutal pullman episode further proof of an unholy alliance between business and the courts.
golden mckinley and silver bryan the smoldering grievances of the long suffering farmers and the depression plagued laborers gave ominous signicance to the election of 1896 conservatives of all stripes feared an impending upheaval while downand out husbandmen and discontented workers cast about desperately for political salvation.
increasingly monetary policy whether to maintain the gold standard or inate the currency by monetizing silver loomed as the issue on which the election would turn.
the leading candidate for the republican presidential nomination in 1896 was former congressman william mckinley of ohio sponsor of the ill starred tariff bill of 1890 see p 672.
he had established a creditable civil war record having risen to the rank of major he hailed from the electorally potent state of ohio and he could point to long years of honorable ser vice in congress where he had made many friends with his kindly and conciliatory manner.
as a presidential candidate mckinley was largely the creature of a fellow ohioan marcus alonzo hanna who had made his fortune in the iron business and now coveted the role of president maker.
i love mckinley he once said.
as a wholehearted hamiltonian hanna believed that a prime function of government was to aid business.
honest earnest tough and direct he became the personication of big industry in politics.
he was often caricatured in cartoons quite unfairly as a bloated bully in a loud checkered suit with a dollar sign in each square.
he believed that in some mea sure prosperity trickled down to the laborer whose dinner pail was full when business ourished.
critics assailed this idea as equivalent to feeding the horses in order to feed the sparrows.
mckinley campaign headquarters chicago 1896 those few black americans who could exercise their right to vote in the 1890s still remained faithful to the party of lincoln the hardheaded hanna although something of a novice in politics orga nized his preconvention campaign for mckinley with consummate skill and with a liberal outpouring of his own money.
the convention steamroller well lubricated with hannas dollars nominated mckinley on the rst ballot in st louis in june 1896 the republican platform cleverly straddled the money question but leaned toward hard money policies.
it declared for the gold standard even though mckinleys voting record in congress had been embarrassingly friendly to silver.
the platform also condemned hard times and democratic incapacity while pouring praise on the protective tariff.
dissension riddled the democratic camp.
cleveland no longer led his party.
the depression had driven the last nail into his political cof n dubbed the stuffed prophet he was undeniably the most unpopular man in the country.
labor debtor groups remembered too vividly his intervention in the pullman strike mckinley versus bryan the convention hall setting was made to order for a magnicent oratorical effort.
a hush fell over the delegates as bryan stood before them.
with an organlike voice that rolled into the outer corners of the huge hall he delivered a fervent plea for silver.
rising to supreme heights of eloquence he thundered we will answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to them you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold the cross of gold speech was a sensation.
swept off its feet in a tumultuous scene the democratic convention nominated bryan the next day on the fth ballot.
the platform demanded ination through the unlimited coinage of silver at the ratio of 16 ounces of silver to 1 of gold though the market ratio was about 32 to 1 this meant that the silver in a dollar would be worth about fty cents.
democratic gold bugs unable to swallow bryan bolted their party over the silver issue.
a conser vative senator from new york when asked if he was a democrat still reportedly replied yes i am a democrat crying for protection 1896 uncle sam is called on in this cartoon to nurse so called infant industries some of which had in fact long since grown into vigorous adulthood.
the backstairs morgan bond deal and especially his stubborn hard money policies.
ultraconser vative in nance cleveland now looked more like a republican than a democrat on the money issue.
rudderless the democratic convention met in chicago in july 1896 with the silverites lusting for victory.
shouting insults at the absent cleveland the delegates refused by a suicidal vote of 564 to 357 to endorse their own administration.
they had the enthusiasm and the numbers all they lacked was a leader.
a new moses suddenly appeared in the person of william jennings bryan of nebraska.
then only thirtysix years of age and known as the boy orator of the platte he stepped condently onto the platform before fteen thousand people.
his masterful presence was set off by a peninsular jaw and raven black hair.
he radiated honesty sincerity and energy.
one contemporary sneered that bryan like the platte river in his home state of nebraska was six inches deep and six miles wide at the mouth william jennings bryan campaigning again in 1908 the premier orator of his day bryan also became a perennial presidential candidate running in 1896 1900 and 1908 he lost every time.
chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 nancial conservatism.
bryans defeat marked the last serious effort to win the white house with mostly agrarian votes.
the future of presidential politics lay not on the farms with their dwindling population but in the mushrooming cities with their growing hordes of freshly arriving immigrants.
the grand old partys smashing victory of 1896 also heralded a republican grip on the white house for sixteen consecutive years indeed for all but eight of the next thirty six years.
mckinleys election thus imparted a new character to the american political system.
the long reign of republican political dominance that it ushered in was accompanied by diminishing voter participation in elections the weakening of party orga ni zations and the fading away of issues like the money question and civil ser vice reform which came to be replaced by concern for industrial regulation and the welfare of labor.
scholars have dubbed this new political era the period of the fourth party system signaling a break with the previous third party system in place since 1860 and characterized by remarkably high voter turnouts and close contests between democrats and republicans.
the sacrilegious candidate a hostile cartoonist makes sport of bryans notorious cross of gold speech in 1896 campaign gimcracks 1896 these mechanical cards predicted republican prosperity with mckinley and economic ruin with bryan.
the election of 1896 republican stand pattism enthroned an eminently safe mckinley took the inaugural oath in 1897 with his impeccable white vest he seemed never to perspire even in oppressively muggy washington.
though a man of considerable ability he was an ear tothe ground politician who seldom got far out of line with majority opinion.
his cautious conser vative nature caused him to shy away from the aming banner of reform.
business was given a free rein and the trusts which had trusted him in 1896 were allowed to develop more mighty muscles without serious restraints.
almost as soon as mckinley took ofce the tariff issue which had played second ddle to silver in the battle of 96 quickly forced itself to the fore.
the current wilson gorman law was not raising enough revenue to cover the annual treasury decits and the republican trusts thought that they had purchased the right to additional tariff protection by their lush contributions to hannas war chest.
in due course the dingley tariff bill was jammed through the house in 1897 under the pounding gavel of the rethroned czar reed.
the proposed new rates were high but not high enough to satisfy the paunchy lobbyists who once again descended upon the senate.
over 850 amendments were tacked onto the overburdened bill.
the resulting piece of patchwork nally established the average rates at 46 5 percent substantially higher than the democratic wilson gorman act of 1894 and in some categories even higher than the mckinley act of 1890.
see the chart in the appendix.
prosperity long lurking around the corner began to return with a rush in 1897 the rst year of mckinleys term.
the depression of 1893 had run its course and farm prices rose.
paint thirsty midwestern barns blossomed in new colors and the wheels of industry resumed their hum.
republican politicians like crowing roosters believing they caused the sun to rise claimed credit for attracting the sunlight of prosperity.
with the return of prosperity the money issue that had overshadowed politics since the civil war gradually faded away.
the gold standard act of 1900 passed over last ditch silverite opposition provided that the paper currency be redeemed freely in gold.
nature and science gradually provided an ination that the gold bug east had fought so frantically to prevent.
electrifying discoveries of new gold deposits in canadas fabled klondike as well as in alaska south africa and australia brought huge quantities of gold onto world markets as did the perfecting of the cheap cyanide process for extracting gold from low grade ore moderate ination thus took care of the currency needs of an explosively expanding nation as its circulatory system greatly improved.
the tide of silver heresy rapidly receded and the popocratic sh were left gasping high and dry on a golden sanded beach.
chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 uncle sam and people from his colonies postcard ca.
1900 the acquisition of puerto rico the philippines hawaii and other pacic islands brought millions of people of color under the american ag and as depicted here the paternal watch of uncle sam whether they would eventually become citizens or remain colonial subjects was hotly debated in the united states.
many anti imperialists opposed colonial expansion precisely because they regarded the exotic new peoples as unassimilable opponents of annexation argued that such a step would dishonor and ultimately destroy americas venerable commitments to self determination and anticolonialism.
goddamn the united states for its vile conduct in the philippine isles burst out the usually mild mannered professor william james.
the harvard philosopher could not believe that the united states could puke up its ancient soul in ve minutes without a wink of squeamishness speaker of the house thomas czar reed resigned in protest against americas new imperial adventure.
proponents countered that philippine annexation would simply continue a glorious history of expansion that had pushed american civilization to the pacic and now beyond.
if americans were morally bound to abandon the philippines thundered theodore roosevelt we were also morally bound to abandon arizona to the apaches the anti imperialist league sprang into being to ght the mckinley administrations expansionist moves.
the orga ni zation counted among its members some of the most prominent people in the united states includ ing the presidents of stanford and harvard universities and the novelist mark twain.
the anti imperialist blanket even stretched over such strange bedfellows as the labor leader samuel gompers and the steel titan andrew carnegie.
anti imperialists raised many objections.
the filipinos thirsted for freedom to annex them would violate the consent of the governed philosophy in the declaration of independence and the constitution.
despotism abroad might well beget despotism at home.
imperialism was costly and unlikely ever to turn a prot.
finally annexation would propel the united states into the political and military cauldron of east asia.
yet the expansionists or imperialists could sing a seductive song.
they appealed to patriotism invoked americas civilizing mission and played up possible trade prots.
manila they claimed might become another hong kong.
rudyard kipling the british poet laureate of imperialism urged america down the slippery path with a quotable poem that he had circulated puerto rico and cuba the contest over american imperialism took place on the senate oor as well as around the globe.
in 1900 senator albert j beveridge 1862 1927 republican from indiana returned from an investigative trip to the philippines to defend its annexation the philippines are ours forever.
and just beyond the philippines are chinas illimitable markets.
we will not retreat from either.
we will not abandon our opportunity in the orient.
we will not renounce our part in the mission of our race trustee under god of the civilization of the world.
two years later senator george f hoar 1826 1904 republican from massachusetts broke with his party to denounce american annexation of the philippines and other territories you cannot maintain despotism in asia and a republic in america.
if you try to deprive even a savage or a barbarian of his just rights you can never do it without becoming a savage or a barbarian yourself.
before publication to theodore roosevelt and henry cabot lodge roosevelt found it good sense but poor poetry take up the white mans burden ye dare not stoop to less nor call too loud on freedom to cloak your weariness.
in short the wealthy americans must help to uplift and exploit the underprivileged underfed and underclad of the world.
over heated protests the senate approved the treaty with spain with just one vote to spare on february 6 1899 america was now ofcially an empire.
perplexities in puerto rico and cuba from the outset the status of puerto rico was anomalous neither a state nor a territory and with little prospect of eventual independence.
the foraker act of 1900 accorded the puerto ricans a limited degree of popular government and outlawed cockghting a favorite island pastime.
congress granted u s citizenship to puerto ricans in 1917 but withheld full selfrule.
although the american regime worked wondrous improvements in education sanitation and transportation many of the inhabitants still aspired to independence.
great numbers of puerto ricans ultimately moved to new york city where they added to the complexity of the melting pot.
the annexation of puerto rico and the philippines posed a thorny legal problem did the constitution follow the ag.
did american laws including tariff laws and the bill of rights apply with full force to the newly acquired possessions.
who are we a group of puerto rican petitioners asked congress in 1900.
are we citizens or are we subjects beginning in 1901 with the insular cases a badly divided supreme court decreed in effect that the ag did outrun the constitution and that the outdistanced document did not necessarily extend with full force to the new windfall.
puerto ricans and filipinos might be subject to american rule but they did not enjoy all american rights.
cuba scorched and chaotic presented another headache.
an american military government set up under the administrative genius of general leonard wood of rough rider fame wrought miracles in government nance education agriculture and public health.
under his leadership and that of colonel william c gorgas a frontal attack was launched on yellow fever.
spectacular experiments were performed by dr walter reed and others upon american soldiers who volunteered as human guinea pigs and the stegomyia mosquito was proved to be the lethal carrier.
cleaning up breeding places for mosquitoes wiped out yellow fever in havana while dampening the fear of recurrent epidemics in cities of the south and atlantic seaboard.
the united states honoring its self denying teller amendment of 1898 withdrew from cuba in 1902 old world imperialists could scarcely believe their eyes.
but the washington government could not turn this rich and strategic island completely loose on the international sea a grasping power like germany might secure dangerous lodgment near americas soft underbelly.
the cubans were therefore forced to write into their own constitution of 1901 the so called platt amendment.
the cubans loathed the amendment which served mckinleys ultimate purpose of bringing cuba under american control.
plattism survives as a colloquial chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 political progressivism the question who were the progressives evokes contradictory answers.
progressive reformers included militarists such as theodore roosevelt who thrilled to the strenuous life as well as pacists such as jane addams whose loftiest goals included the abolition of war.
female settlement workers hoping to americanize recent immigrants mobilized alongside labor unionists and enlightened businessmen to strengthen the helping hand of government.
in diverse ways and sometimes with divergent aims the progressives sought to modernize american institutions to achieve two chief goals to use the state to curb monopoly power and to improve the common persons conditions of life and labor.
progressives emerged in both major parties in all regions and at all levels of government.
the truth is that progressivism was less a monolithic minority movement and more a broadly dispersed majority mood.
see varying viewpoints p.
one of the rst objectives of progressives was to regain the power that had slipped from the hands of the people into those of the interests these ardent reformers pushed for direct primary elections so as to undercut power hungry party bosses.
they favored the initiative so that voters could directly propose legislation themselves thus bypassing the boss bought state legislatures.
progressives also agitated for the referendum.
this device would place laws on the ballot for nal approval by the people especially laws that had been railroaded through a compliant legislature by free spending agents of big business.
the recall would enable the voters to remove faithless elected ofcials particularly those who had been bribed by bosses or lobbyists.
rooting out graft also became a prime goal of earnest progressives.
a number of the state legislatures passed corrupt practices acts which limited the amount of money that candidates could spend for their election.
such legislation also restricted huge gifts from corporations for which the donors would expect jane addams and fellow pacists 1915 addams cofounded the womens peace party in 1915 its pacist platform was said to represent the views of the mother half of humanity although the party initially attracted twenty ve thousand members americas entry into the war two years later eroded popular support since pacist internationalism became suspect as anti american.
urban reformers special favors.
the secret australian ballot was likewise being introduced more widely in the states to counteract boss rule.
bribery was less feasible when bribers could not tell if they were getting their moneys worth from the bribed.
direct election of u s senators became a favorite goal of progressives especially after the muckrakers had exposed the scandalous intimacy between greedy corporations and congress.
by 1900 the senate had so many rich men that it was often sneered at as the millionaires club too many of these prosperous solons elected as they then were by trust dominated legislatures heeded the voice of their masters rather than the voice of the masses.
a constitutional amendment to bring about the popular election of senators had rough sledding in congress for the plutocratic members of the senate were happy with existing methods.
but a number of states established primary elections in which the voters expressed their preferences for the senate.
the local legislatures when choosing senators found it politically wise to heed the voice of the people.
partly as a result of such pressures the seventeenth amendment to the constitution approved in 1913 established the direct election of u s senators see the appendix.
but the expected improvement in caliber was slow in coming.
woman suffrage the goal of female reformers for many decades likewise received powerful new support from the progressives early in the 1900s.
the political reformers believed that womens votes would elevate the political tone and the foes of the saloon felt that they could count on the support of enfranchised females.
the suffragists with their cry of votes for women and equal suffrage for men and women protested bitterly against taxation without representation many of the states especially the more liberal ones in the west such as washington cal i fornia and the suffrage campaign of the early twentieth century beneted from a new generation of women who considered themselves feminists at a mass meeting in new york in 1914 marie jenny howe 1870 1934 a minister by training as well as a prominent early feminist proclaimed we intend simply to be ourselves not just our little female selves but our whole big human selves.
oregon gradually extended the vote to women.
but by 1910 nationwide female suffrage was still a decade away and a suffragist could still be sneeringly dened as one who has ceased to be a lady and has not yet become a gentleman progressivism in the cities and states progressives scored some of their most impressive gains in the cities.
frustrated by the inefciency and corruption of machine oiled city government many localities followed the pioneering example of galveston texas.
in 1901 it had appointed expert staffed commissions to manage urban affairs.
other communities adopted the city manager system also designed to take politics out of municipal administration.
some of these reforms obviously valued efciency more highly than democracy as control of civic affairs was further removed from the peoples hands.
urban reformers likewise attacked slumlords juvenile delinquency and wide open prostitution viceat a price which ourished in red light districts unchallenged by bribed police.
public spirited americans looked to eng lish and german cities for lessons on how to clean up their water supplies light their streets and run their trolley cars.
the vogue of public ownership of utilities swept the nation as local governments tried to halt the corrupt sale of franchises.
progressivism naturally bubbled up to the state level notably in wisconsin which became a yeasty laboratory of reform.
the governor of the state pompadoured robert m fighting bob la follette was an undersized but overbearing crusader who emerged as the most militant of the progressive republican leaders.
after a desperate ght with entrenched monopoly he reached the governors chair in 1901 routing the lumber and railroad interests he wrested considerable control from the crooked corporations and returned it to the people.
he also perfected a scheme for regulating public utilities while laboring in close association with experts on the faculty of the state university at madison.
other states marched steadily toward the progressive camp as they undertook to regulate railroads and trusts chiey through public utility commissions.
oregon was not far behind wisconsin and cal i fornia made giant bootstrides under the stocky hiram w johnson.
elected republican governor in 1910 this dynamic prosecutor of grafters helped break the dominant grip of the southern pacic railroad on cal i fornia chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 table 29 2 u s exports to belligerents 1914 1916 belligerent britain france italy germany 594 271 863 159 818 924 74 235 012 344 794 276 911 794 954 369 397 170 184 819 688 28 863 354 1 526 685 102 628 851 988 269 246 105 288 899 1916 figure as a percentage of 1914 figure 257 0 08 italy joined the allies in april 1915 could hardly apply to submarines which could easily be rammed or sunk if they surfaced.
the cigar shaped marauders posed a dire threat to the united states so long as wilson insisted on maintaining americas neutral rights.
berlin ofcials declared that they would try not to sink neutral shipping but they warned that mistakes would probably occur.
wilson now determined on a policy of calculated risk.
he would continue to claim protable neutral 20w 70n 10w british military area 0 german submarine war zone n allied powers iceland central powers neutral nations 400 km.
10e at l a n t i c ocean 60n norway 20e ic b a y rm an neth.
lusitania torpedoed may 7 1915 denmark ge 50n north sea lt united kingdom sea sweden trading rights while hoping that no high seas incident would force his hand to grasp the sword of war.
setting his peninsular jaw he emphatically warned germany that it would be held to strict accountability for any attacks on american vessels or citizens.
the german submarines known as u boats from the german unterseeboot or undersea boat meanwhile began their deadly work.
in the rst months of 1915 they sank about ninety ships in the war zone.
then the submarine issue became acute when the british passenger liner lusitania was torpedoed and sank off the coast of ireland on may 7 1915 with the loss of 1 198 lives including 128 americans.
the lusitania was carrying forty two hundred cases of small arms ammunition a fact the germans used to justify the sinking.
but americans were swept by a wave of shock and anger at this act of mass murder and piracy the eastern united states closer to the war seethed with talk of ghting but the rest of the country showed a strong distaste for hostilities.
the peace loving wilson had no stomach for leading a disunited nation into war.
he well remembered the mistake in 1812 of his fellow princetonian james madison.
instead by a series of increasingly strong notes wilson attempted to bring the german warlords sharply to book.
even this mea sured approach was too the fatherland the chief german american propaganda newspaper in the united states cried france switz.
map 29 3 british military area declared november 3 1914 and german submarine war zone declared february 4 1915 interactive map we americans prattle about humanity while we manufacture poisoned shrapnel and picric acid for prot.
ten thousand german widows ten thousand orphans ten thousand graves bear the legend made in america american neutrality a german u boat this deadly new weapon rendered useless existing rules of naval warfare eventually pushing the united states to declare war against germany in 1917 much for secretary of state bryan who resigned rather than sign a protestation that might spell shooting.
but wilson resolutely stood his ground.
there is such a thing he declared as a man being too proud to ght this kind of talk incensed the war thirsty theodore roosevelt.
the rough rider assailed the spineless simperers who heeded the weasel words of the pacistic professor in the white house.
yet wilson sticking to his verbal guns made some diplomatic progress.
after another british liner the arabic was sunk in august 1915 with the loss of two american lives berlin reluctantly agreed not to sink unarmed and unresisting passenger ships without warning.
advertisement from the new york herald may 1 1915 six days later the lusitania was sunk.
note the german warning.
chapter in the history of american civil liberty.
with the dawn of peace presidential pardons were rather freely granted including president hardings to eugene debs in 1921 yet a few victims lingered behind bars into the 1930s.
the nations factories go to war victory was no foregone conclusion especially since the republic despite ample warning was caught atfootedly unready for its leap into global war.
the pacistic wilson had only belatedly backed some mild preparedness mea sures beginning in 1915 including the creation of a civilian council of national defense to study problems of economic mobilization.
he had wartime workers also launched a shipbuilding program as much to capture the belligerents war disrupted foreign trade as to anticipate americas possible entry into the war and endorsed a modest bee ng up of the army which with 100 000 regulars then ranked about fteenth among the armies of the world in the same category with persias.
it would take a herculean effort to marshal americas daunting but disorga nized resources and throw them into the eld quickly enough to bolster the allied war effort.
towering obstacles confronted economic mobilizers.
sheer ignorance was among the biggest roadblocks.
no one knew precisely how much steel or explosive powder the country was capable of producing.
old ideas also proved to be liabilities as traditional fears of big government hamstrung efforts to orchestrate the economy from washington.
states rights democrats and businesspeople alike balked at federal economic controls even though the embattled nation could ill afford the freewheeling hit or miss chaos of the peacetime economy.
late in the war and after some bruising political battles wilson succeeded in imposing some order on this economic confusion.
in march 1918 he appointed lone eagle stock speculator bernard baruch to head the war industries board.
although the war industries board had only feeble formal powers it set a precedent for the federal government to take a central role in economic planning in moments of crisis.
it was disbanded just days after the armistice and americans returned to their preference for laissez faire and a weak central government.
but in the midst of the great depression of the 1930s policymakers would look back to world war i agencies like this one as models.
workers in wartime spurred by the slogan labor will win the war american workers sweated their way to victory.
in part they were driven by the war departments work or ght rule of 1918 which threatened any unemployed male with being immediately drafted a powerful discouragement to go on strike.
but for the most part government tried to treat labor fairly.
the national war labor board chaired by former president taft exerted itself to head off labor disputes that might hamper the war effort.
while pressing employers to grant concessions to labor including high wages and the eight hour day the board stopped short of supporting labors most im suppressing the steel strike pittsburgh 1919 the big steel producers ferociously resisted the unionization of their industry.
in pittsburgh compliant local ofcials bent to the steel makers will and issued an order banning all outdoor meetings of strikers.
this mounted policeman enforced the order with a ailing billy club.
the steelworkers strike eventually failed leaving the steel industry un unionized until the new deal championed labors cause in the depression decade of the 1930s.
portant demand a government guarantee of the right to organize into unions.
fortunately for the allied cause samuel gompers and his american federation of labor af of l loyally supported the war though some smaller and more radical labor orga ni zations including the industrial workers of the world did not.
the iww known as the wobblies and sometimes derided as the i wont works engineered some of the most damaging industrial sabotage and not without reason.
as transient laborers in such industries as fruit and lumber the wobblies were victims of some of the shabbiest working conditions in the country.
when they protested many were viciously beaten arrested or run out of town.
mainstream labors loyalty was rewarded.
at wars end the af of l had more than doubled its membership to over 3 million and in the most heavily unionized sectors coal mining manufacturing and chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 fateful moment his sureness of touch deserted him and he began to make a series of tragic fumbles.
under the slogan politics is adjourned partisan political strife had been kept below the surface during the war crisis.
hoping to strengthen his hand at the paris peace table wilson broke the truce by personally appealing for a democratic victory in the congressional elections of november 1918 but the maneuver back red when voters instead returned a narrow republican majority to congress.
having staked his reputation on the outcome wilson went to paris as a diminished leader.
unlike all the parliamentary statesmen at the table he did not command a legislative majority at home.
wilsons decision to go in person to paris to help make the peace infuriated republicans.
at that time no president had traveled to europe and wilsons journey looked to his critics like amboyant grandstanding.
he further rufed republican feathers when he snubbed the senate in assembling his peace delegation and neglected to include a single republican senator in his ofcial party.
the logical choice was the new chairman of the senate committee on foreign relations slender and aristocratically bewhiskered henry cabot lodge of massachusetts a harvard ph d but including lodge would have been problematic for the president.
the senators mind quipped one critic was like the soil of his native new eng land naturally barren but highly cultivated wilson loathed him and the feeling was hotly reciprocated.
an accomplished author lodge had been known as the scholar in poli wilson in dover england 1919 hailed by many europeans in early 1919 as the savior of the western world wilson was a fallen idol only a few months later when americans repudiated the peace treaty he had helped to craft.
tics until wilson came on the scene.
the two men were at daggers drawn personally and politically.
an idealist amid the imperialists woodrow wilson the great prophet arisen in the west received tumultuous welcomes from the masses of france eng land and italy late in 1918 and early in 1919 they saw in his idealism the promise of a better world.
but the statesmen of france and italy were careful to keep the new messiah at arms length from worshipful crowds.
he might so arouse the people as to prompt them to overthrow their leaders and upset nespun imperialistic plans.
the paris conference of great and small nations fell into the hands of an inner clique known as the big four.
wilson representing the richest and freshest great power more or less occupied the drivers seat.
he was joined by genial premier vittorio orlando of italy and brilliant prime minister david lloyd george of britain.
perhaps the most realistic of the quartet was cynical hard bitten premier georges clemenceau of france the seventy eight year old organizer of victory known as the tiger speed was urgent when the conference opened on january 18 1919 europe seemed to be slipping into anarchy the red tide of communism was licking westward from bolshevist russia.
the treaty of versailles the english science ction writer h g wells 1866 1946 soon a strong proponent of the league of nations spoke for many europeans when he praised woodrow wilson in 1917 in all the world there is no outstanding gure to which the world will listen there is no man audible in all the world in japan as well as germany and rome as well as boston except the president of the united states.
wilsons ultimate goal was a world parliament to be known as the league of nations but he rst bent his energies to preventing any vengeful parceling out of the former colonies and protectorates of the vanquished powers.
he was less attentive to the fate of colonies belonging to the victorious french and english.
wilson tried to force through a compromise between naked imperialism and wilsonian idealism.
the victors would not take possession of the conquered territory outright but would receive it as trustees of the league of nations.
strategic syria for example was awarded to france and oil rich iraq went to britain.
in practice this half loaf solution was little more than the old prewar colonialism thinly disguised although in the decades to come anticolonial independence movements would wield the wilsonian ideal of selfdetermination against their imperial occupiers.
meanwhile wilson had been serving as midwife for the league of nations which he envisioned as containing an assembly with seats for all nations and a council to be controlled by the great powers.
he gained a signal victory over the skeptical old world diplomats in february 1919 when they agreed to make the league covenant wilsons brainchild an integral part of the nal peace treaty.
at one point he spoke with such ardor for his plan that even the hard boiled newspaper reporters forgot to take notes.
hammering out the treaty domestic duties now required wilson to make a quick trip to america where ugly storms were brewing in the senate.
certain republican senators lodge in the lead were sharpening their knives for wilson.
to them the league was either a useless sewing circle or pilgrim landing in america 1919 an overpotent super state their hard core was composed of a dozen or so militant isolationists led by senators william borah of idaho and hiram johnson of cal i fornia who were known as irreconcilables or the battalion of death thirty nine republican senators or senatorselect enough to defeat the treaty proclaimed that the senate would not approve the league of nations in its existing imperfect form.
these difculties delighted wilsons allied adversaries in paris.
they were now in a stronger bargaining position because wilson would have to beg them for changes in the covenant that would safeguard the monroe doctrine and other american interests dear to the senators.
as soon as wilson was back in paris the hardheaded clemenceau pressed french demands for the german inhabited rhineland and the saar valley a rich coal area.
faced with erce wilsonian opposition to this violation of self determination france settled for a compromise whereby the saar basin would remain under the league of nations for fteen years and chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 released after a jury twice failed to agree.
during the trial daugherty hid behind the trousers of the nowdead harding by implying that persistent probing might uncover crookedness in the white house.
harding was mercifully spared the full revelation of these iniquities though his worst suspicions were aroused.
while news of the scandals was beginning to break he embarked upon a speechmaking tour across the country all the way to alaska.
on the return trip he died in san francisco on august 2 1923 of pneumonia and thrombosis.
his death may have been hastened by a broken heart resulting from the disloyalty of designing friends.
mourning millions not yet fully aware of the graft in washington expressed genuine sorrow.
the brutal fact is that harding was not a strong enough man for the presidency as he himself privately admitted.
such was his weakness that he tolerated people and conditions that subjected the republic to its worst disgrace since the days of president grant.
washington ofcials trying to outpace the teapot dome scandal ca.
1922 silent cal coolidge teapot dome no tempest in a teapot nally came to a whistling boil.
details of the crooked transaction gradually began to leak out in march 1923 two years after harding took ofce.
fall sinclair and doheny were indicted the next year but the case dragged through the courts until 1929 finally fall was found guilty of taking a bribe and was sentenced to one year in jail.
by a curious quirk of justice the two bribe givers were acquitted while the bribe taker was convicted although sinclair served several months in jail for having shadowed jurors and for refusing to testify before a senate committee.
the oily smudge from teapot dome polluted the prestige of the washington government.
right thinking citizens wondered what was going on when public ofcials could sell out the nations vital resources especially those reserved for the u s navy.
the acquittal of sinclair and doheny undermined faith in the courts while giving further currency to the cynical sayings you cant put a million dollars in jail and in america everyone is assumed guilty until proven rich still more scandals erupted.
persistent reports as to the underhanded doings of attorney general daugherty prompted a senate investigation in 1924 of the illegal sale of pardons and liquor permits.
forced to resign the accused ofcial was tried in 1927 but was news of hardings death was sped to vice president coolidge then visiting at his fathers new eng land farmhouse.
by the light of two kerosene lamps the elder coolidge a justice of the peace used the old family bible to administer the presidential oath to his son.
this homespun setting was symbolic of coolidge.
quite unlike harding the stern faced vermonter with his thin nose and tightly set lips embodied the new eng land virtues of honesty morality industry and frugality.
as a youth his father reported he seemed to get more sap out of a maple tree than did any of the other boys.
practicing a rigid economy in both money and words silent cal came to be known in washington conversational circles for his brilliant ashes of silence.
his dour serious visage prompted the acid observation that he had been weaned on a pickle coolidge seemed to be a crystallization of the commonplace.
painfully shy he was blessed with only mediocre powers of leadership.
he would occasionally display a dry wit in private but his speeches delivered in a nasal new eng land twang were invariably boring.
a staunch apostle of the status quo he was no knight in armor riding forth to tilt at wrongs.
his only horse in fact was an electric powered steed on which he took his exercise.
true to republican philosophy he became the high priest of the great god business cautious cal coolidge calvin coolidge gentleman angler coolidge was a real conservative a fundamentalist in religion in the economic and social order and in shing said his successor herbert hoover who had a y shermans disdain for coolidges bait shing tactics and for his predecessors laissezfaire politics as well.
cash register chorus business croons its appreciation of coolidge prosperity he believed that the man who builds a factory builds a temple and that the man who works there worships there the hands off temperament of cautious cal coolidge suited the times perfectly.
his thrifty nature caused him to sympathize fully with secretary of the treasury mellons efforts to reduce both taxes and debts.
no foe of industrial bigness he let business have its head.
coolidge luck held during his ve and a half prosperity blessed years.
ever a pro le in caution coolidge slowly gave the harding regime a badly needed moral fumigation.
teapot dome had scalded the republican party badly but so transparently honest was the vinegary vermonter that the scandalous oil did not rub off on him.
the public though at rst shocked by the scandal quickly simmered down and an alarming tendency developed in certain quarters to excuse some of the wrongdoers on the grounds that they had gotten away with it some critics even condemned the government prosecutors for continuing to rock the boat.
americas moral sensibility was evidently being dulled by prosperity.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 the country needs and.
demands bold persistent experimentation.
it is common sense to take a method and try it.
if it fails admit it frankly and try another.
but above all try something.
franklin d roosevelt campaign speech 1932 v oters were in an ugly mood as the presidential campaign of 1932 neared.
countless factory chimneys remained ominously cold while more than 11 million unemployed workers and their families sank ever deeper into the pit of poverty.
herbert hoover may have won the 1928 election by promising a chicken in every pot but three years later that chicken seemed to have laid a discharge slip in every pay envelope.
hoover sick at heart was renominated by the republican convention in chicago without great enthusiasm.
the platform indulged in extravagant praise of republican antidepression policies while halfheartedly promising to repeal national prohibition and return control of liquor to the states.
the rising star of the democratic rmament was governor franklin delano roosevelt of new york a fth cousin of theodore roosevelt.
like the rough rider he had been born to a wealthy new york family had graduated from harvard had been elected as a kid gloved politician to the new york legislature had served as governor of the empire state had been nominated for the vice presidency though not elected and had served capably as assistant secretary of the navy.
although both men were master politicians adept with the colorful phrase tr was pugnacious and confrontational while fdr was suave and conciliatory qualities that appealed strongly to a people traumatized by one of the greatest crises in american history.
fdr politician in a wheelchair infantile paralysis while putting steel braces on franklin roosevelts legs put additional steel into his soul.
until 1921 when the dread disease struck young roosevelt tall six feet two inches athletic and handsome this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 to the southeastern tip of new guinea the last buffer protecting australia.
the scales of war gradually began to tip as the american navy including submarines in icted lethal losses on japa nese supply ships and troop carriers.
conquest of the north coast of new guinea was completed by august 1944 after general macarthur had fought his way westward through tropical jungle hells.
this hard won victory was the rst leg of his long return journey to the philippines.
the u s navy with marines and army divisions doing the meat grinder ghting had meanwhile been leapfrogging the japa nese held islands in the pacic.
old fashioned strategy dictated that the american forces as they drove toward tokyo should reduce the fortied japa nese outposts on their ank.
this course would have taken many bloodstained months for the holed in defenders were prepared to die to the last man in their caves.
the new strategy of island hopping called for bypassing some of the most heavily fortied japa nese posts capturing nearby islands setting up airelds on them and then neutralizing the enemy bases through heavy bombing.
deprived of essential supplies from the homeland japans outposts would slowly wither on the vine as they did.
brilliant success crowned the american attacks on the japa nese island strongholds in the pacic where admiral nimitz skillfully coordinated the efforts of naval air and ground units.
in may and august of 1943 attu and kiska in the aleutians were easily retaken.
in november 1943 bloody tarawa and makin both in the gilbert islands fell after suicidal resistance.
in january and february 1944 the key outposts of the marshall islands group succumbed after savage ghting.
especially prized were the marianas including americas conquered guam.
from bases in the marianas the united states new b 29 superbombers could carry out round trip bombing raids on japans home islands.
the assault on the marianas opened on june 19 1944 with what american pilots called the 1 defeating the japanese in china by funneling supplies over the himalayan hump from india.
2 carrying the war into southeast asia a proposal much favored by the british who could thus regain singapore.
3 heavy bombing of japan from chinese air bases.
island hopping from the south pacic to within striking distance of the japanese home islands.
this strategy favored by general douglas macarthur was the one nally emphasized.
interactive map tia kiska i.
u a l e u is.
s map 35 3 united states thrusts in the pacic 1942 1945 american strategists had to choose among four proposed plans for waging the war against japan 60n si b er ia n alaska sovi et u n io n mongolia ma attu i ia n 40 hiroshima aug 6 1945 ch i na india nc r hu gr.
hong kong thailand gr.
indochina vichy fr.
singapore pac i f i c u s n 20 saipan june 1944 philippine sea june 1944 u s marshall is.
caroline is.
tarawa nov 1943 new guinea major battle limit of japanese conquest japanese held areas 1942 u s advance solomon is.
160w australia 140e 600 1 200 km.
guadalcanal 0s aug 1942 feb.
1943 2 coral sea may 1942 80e 120e tor equa gilbert is.
netherlands east indies indian ocean pearl harbor dec 7 1941 wake i guam july 1944 leyte oct 1944 o c e a n iwo jima march 1945 philippine is.
100e hawaiian is.
u s okinawa june burma midway is.
june 1942 japan tokyo nagasaki aug 9 1945 180 160e 40s 0 battles above and below the sea great marianas turkey shoot a combination of the combat superiority of the recently developed american hellcat ghter plane and the new technology of the antiaircraft proximity fuse destroyed nearly 250 japa nese aircraft with a loss of only 29 american planes.
the following day in the battle of the philippine sea u s naval forces sank several japa nese carriers.
the japa nese navy never recovered from these massive losses of planes pilots and ships.
after fanatical resistance including a mass suicide leap of surviving japa nese soldiers and civilians from suicide cliff on saipan the major islands of the marianas fell to the u s attackers in july and august 1944 with these unsinkable aircraft carriers now available virtual round the clock bombing of japan began in november 1944 see map 35 3.
the allied halting of hitler early setbacks for america in the pacic were paralleled in the atlantic.
hitler had entered the war with a formidable eet of ultramodern submarines which ultimately operated in wolf packs with frightful effect especially in the north atlantic the caribbean and the gulf of mexico.
during ten months of 1942 more than 500 merchant ships were reported lost 111 in june alone as ship destruction far outran construction.
the tide of subsea battle turned with agonizing slowness.
old techniques such as escorting convoys of merchant vessels and dropping depth bombs from destroyers were strengthened by air patrol the newly invented technology of radar and the bombing of submarine bases.
keep em sailing was the motto of oil begrimed merchant seamen hundreds of whom perished as unsung heroes in icy seas.
eventually allied antisubmarine tactics improved substantially thanks especially to british code breakers who had cracked the germans enigma codes and could therefore pinpoint the locations of the u boats lurking in the north atlantic.
not until the spring of 1943 did the allies clearly have the upper hand against the u boat.
if they had not won the battle of the atlantic britain would have been forced under and a second front could not have been launched from its island springboard.
victory over the undersea raiders was nerve rackingly narrow.
when the war ended hitler was about to massproduce a fearsome new submarine one that could remain underwater inde nitely and cruise at seventeen knots when submerged.
british prime minister winston churchill 1874 1965 observed in a speech in may 1943 the proud german army has by its sudden collapse sudden crumbling and breaking up.
once again proved the truth of the saying the hun german is always either at your throat or at your feet meanwhile the turning point of the land air war against hitler had come late in 1942 the british had launched a thousand plane raid on cologne in may.
in august 1942 they were joined by the american air force and were cascading bombs on german cities.
the germans under marshal erwin rommel the desert fox had driven eastward across the hot sands of north africa into egypt perilously close to the suez canal.
a breakthrough would have spelled disaster for the allies.
but late in october 1942 british general bernard montgomery delivered a withering attack at el alamein west of cairo.
with the aid of several hundred hastily shipped american sherman tanks he speedily drove the enemy back to tunisia more than a thousand miles away.
on the soviet front the unexpected successes of the red army gave a new lift to the allied cause.
in september 1942 the russians stalled the german steamroller at rubble strewn stalingrad graveyard of hitlers hopes.
more than a score of invading divisions caught in an icy noose later surrendered or were mopped up in november 1942 the resilient russians unleashed a crushing counteroffensive which was never seriously reversed.
a year later stalin had regained about twothirds of the blood soaked soviet motherland wrested from him by the german invader.
a second front from north africa to rome soviet losses were already staggering in 1942 millions of soldiers and civilians lay dead and hitlers armies had overrun most of the western ussr.
angloamerican losses at this time could be counted only in the thousands.
by wars end the grave had closed over some 20 million soviets and a great swath of their country equivalent in the united states to the area from chicago to the atlantic seaboard had been laid waste.
small wonder that kremlin leaders clamored chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 making of the atomic bomb emphasizes that the anglo american atomic project began as a race against the germans who were known to be actively pursuing a nuclear weapons program.
unknown to the americans germany effectively terminated its effort in 1942 just as the anglo american project went into high gear.
from the outset both british and american planners believed that the bomb if successful would be not just another weapon but the ultimate instrument of destruction that would decisively deliver victory into the hands of whoever possessed it.
they consequently assumed that it would be used at the earliest possible moment.
there is therefore no credible reason to conclude that german cities would not have suffered the fate of hiroshima and nagasaki if nuclear weapons had become available sooner or if the european phase of the war had lasted longer.
it is true that american intelligence sources in the early summer of 1945 reported that some japanese statesmen were trying to enlist the still neutral russians good ofces to negotiate a surrender.
but as r j c butows ne grained study of japans decision to surrender demonstrates it was unclear whether those initiatives had the full backing of the japa nese government.
moreover the japa nese clung to several unacceptable conditions including protection for their imperial system of government the right to disarm and repatriate their own troops no military occupation of the home islands no international trials of alleged war criminals and possible retention of some of their conquered territories.
all this ew squarely in the face of americas repeatedly declared intention to settle for nothing less than unconditional surrender.
as for the nagasaki bomb dropped on august 9 butow also notes that it conclusively dispelled the japa nese governments original assessment that the hiroshima attack on aug ust 6 was a one time only stunt with little likelihood of further nuclear strikes to follow.
even then some diehard military ofcers refusing to ac knowledge defeat tried on the night of august 14 to storm the imperial palace to seize the recording of the emperors surrender announcement before it could be broadcast the following day.
could the use of the atomic bombs have been avoided.
studies by martin j sherwin barton j bernstein and mcgeorge bundy have shown that few policymakers at the time seriously asked that question.
as winston churchill later wrote the decision whether or not to use the atomic bomb to compel the surrender of japan was never even an issue.
there was unanimous automatic unquestioned agreement around our table nor did i ever hear the slightest suggestion that we should do otherwise in fact the decision to use the bomb was not made in 1945 but in 1942 when the united states committed itself to a crash program to build and use a nuclear weapon as swiftly as possible.
intimidating the soviets might have been a bonus to using the bomb against japan but inuencing soviet behavior was never the primary reason for the fateful decision.
american leaders wanted to end the war as soon as possible.
to that end they had always assumed the atomic bomb would be dropped as soon as it was available.
that moment came on august 6 1945 doubt and remorse about the atomic conclusion of world war ii have plagued the american conscience ever since.
less often remarked on are the deaths of four times more japa nese noncombatants than died at hiroshima and nagasaki in the so called conventional rebombing of some ve dozen japa nese cities in 1945 those deaths suggest that the deeper moral question should perhaps be addressed not to the particular technology of nuclear weaponry and the fate of those two unfortunate japa nese cit ies but to the quite deliberate decision made by several combatants including the germans the british the americans and the japanese themselves to designate civilian populations as legitimate military targets.
to learn more to learn more kai bird and martin j sherwin american prometheus the triumph and tragedy of j robert oppenheimer 2005 john m blum v was for victory politics and american culture during world war ii 1976 roger daniels prisoners without trial japanese americans in world war ii 1993 norman davies no simple victory world war ii in europe 1939 1945 2007 john w dower war without mercy race and power in the pacic war 1986 sherna gluck rosie the riveter revisited women the war and social change 1988 nelson lichtenstein labors war at home the cio in world war ii 1982 richard rhodes the making of the atomic bomb 1986 ronald h spector eagle against the sun the american war with japan 1985 ronald t takaki double victory a multicultural history of america in world war ii 2000 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 baby boomers changed again and the most popular jeans maker began marketing pants with a fuller cut for those former kids who could no longer squeeze into their size thirty levis.
in the 1980s the horde of baby boomers bumped and jostled one another in the job market struggling to get a foothold on the crowded ladder of social mobility.
as the boomers entered middle age a secondary boom of children peaked in the early 1990s a faint demographic echo of the post war population explosion.
the impact of the huge postwar generation will continue to ripple through american society well into the twenty rst century when its members pass eventually into retirement placing enormous strains on the social security system.
truman the gutty man from missouri presiding over the opening of the postwar period was an accidental president harry s truman.
the moon the stars and all the planets had fallen on him he remarked when he was called upon to shoulder the dead roosevelts awesome burdens of leadership.
trim and owlishly bespectacled with his graying hair and friendly toothy grin truman was called the average mans average man even his height ve feet eight inches was average.
the rst president in many years without a college education he had farmed served as an artillery ofcer in france during world war i and failed as a haberdasher.
he then tried his hand at precinct level missouri politics through which he rose from a judgeship to the u s senate.
though a protg of a notorious political machine in kansas city he had managed to keep his own hands clean.
the problems of the postwar period were staggering and the suddenly burdened new president at rst approached his tasks with humility.
but gradually he evolved from a shrinking pipsqueak into a scrappy little cuss gaining condence to the point of cockiness.
when the soviet foreign minister complained i have never been talked to like that in my life truman shot back carry out your agreements and you wont get talked to like that truman later boasted i gave him the one two right to the jaw a smallish man thrust suddenly into a giant job truman permitted designing old associates of the missouri gang to gather around him and like grant was stubbornly loyal to them when they were caught with cream on their whiskers.
on occasion he would send critics hot tempered and profane s o b letters.
most troubling in trying to demonstrate to a skeptical public his decisiveness and power of command he was inclined to go off half cocked or stick mulishly to a wrongheaded notion.
to err is truman cynics jibed.
but if he was sometimes small in the small things he was often big in the big things.
he had down home authenticity few pretensions rock solid probity and a lot of that old fashioned character trait called moxie.
not one to dodge responsibility he placed a sign on his white house desk that read the buck stops here among his favorite sayings was if you cant stand the heat get out of the kitchen yalta bargain or betrayal.
vast and silent the soviet union continued to be the great enigma.
the conference at tehran in 1943 where roosevelt rst met joseph stalin man to man had cleared the air somewhat but much remained unresolved especially questions about the postwar fates of germany eastern europe and asia.
the yalta conference the nal fateful conference of the big three took place in february 1945 at this former tsarist resort on the relatively warm shores of the black sea stalin churchill and the fast failing roosevelt reached momentous agreements after pledging their faith with vodka.
final plans were laid for smashing the buckling german lines and assigning occupation zones in germany to the victorious powers.
stalin agreed that poland with revised boundaries should have a representative government based on free elections a pledge he soon broke.
bulgaria and romania were likewise to have free elections a promise also outed.
the big three further announced plans for fashioning a new international peacekeeping organi zation the united nations.
of all the grave decisions at yalta the most controversial concerned the far east.
the atomic bomb had not yet been tested and washington strategists expected frightful american casualties in the projected assault on japan.
from roosevelts standpoint it seemed highly desirable that stalin should enter the asian war pin down japa nese troops in manchuria and korea and lighten american losses.
but soviet casualties had already been enormous and moscow presumably needed inducements to bring it into the far eastern conagration.
horse trader stalin was in a position at yalta to exact a high price.
he agreed to attack japan within three months after the collapse of germany and he the big three at yalta the big three from left to right churchill roosevelt and stalin sit somberly at their fateful meeting at yalta in february 1945 roosevelt was only weeks away from death.
later redeemed this pledge in full.
in return the soviets were promised the southern half of sakhalin island lost by russia to japan in 1905 and japans kurile islands as well.
the soviet union was also granted joint control over the railroads of chinas manchuria and special privileges in the two key seaports of that area dairen and port arthur.
these concessions evidently would give stalin control over vital industrial centers of americas weakening chinese ally.
as it turned out moscows muscle was not necessary to knock out japan.
critics charged that roosevelt had sold jiang jieshi chiang kai shek down the river when he conceded control of manchuria to stalin.
the consequent undermining of chinese morale so the accusation ran contributed powerfully to jiangs overthrow by the communists four years later.
the critics also assailed the sellout of poland and other eastern european countries.
roosevelts defenders countered that stalin with his mighty red army could have secured much more of china if he wished and that the yalta conference really set limits on his ambitions.
apologists for roosevelt also contended that if stalin had kept his promise to support free elections in poland and the liberated balkans the sorry sequel would have been different.
actually soviet troops had then occupied much of eastern europe and a war to throw them out was unthinkable.
the fact is that the big three at yalta were not drafting a comprehensive peace settlement at most they were sketching general intentions and testing one anothers reactions.
later critics who howled about broken promises overlooked that fundamental point.
in the case of poland roosevelt admitted that the yalta agreement was so elastic that the russians can stretch it all the way from yalta to washington without ever technically breaking it more specic understandings among the wartime allies especially the two emerging superpowers the united states and the soviet union awaited the arrival of peace.
the united states and the soviet union history provided little hope that the united states and the soviet union would reach cordial understandings about the shape of the postwar world.
mutual suspicions were ancient abundant and abiding.
communism and capitalism were historically hostile social philosophies.
the united states had refused ofcially to recognize the bolshevik revolutionary government chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 to add to the confusion within democratic ranks former vice president henry a wallace threw his hat into the ring.
having parted company with the administration over its get tough with russia policy he was nominated at philadelphia by the new progressive party a bizarre collection of disgruntled former new dealers starry eyed pacists well meaning liberals and communist fronters.
wallace a vigorous if misguided liberal assailed uncle sams dollar imperialism from the stump.
this so called pied piper of the politburo took an apparently pro soviet line that earned him drenchings with rotten eggs in hostile cities.
but to many americans wallace raised the only hopeful voice in the deepening gloom of the cold war.
with the democrats ruptured three ways and the republican congressional victory of 1946 just past deweys victory seemed assured.
succumbing to overcondence engendered by his massive lead in publicopinion polls the cold smug dewey con ned himself to dispensing soothing syrup trivialities like our future lies before us the harried piano player 1948 besieged by the left and right wings of his own party and by a host of domestic and foreign problems truman was a long shot for reelection in 1948 but the scrappy president surprised his legions of critics by handily defeating his opponent thomas e dewey.
that aint the way i heard it.
truman wins.
the seemingly doomed truman with little money and few active supporters had to rely on his gutghter instincts and folksy personality.
traveling the country by train to deliver some three hundred give em hell speeches he lashed out at the taft hartley slavelabor law and the do nothing republican congress while whipping up support for his program of civil rights improved labor benets and health insurance.
pour it on em harry cried increasingly large and enthusiastic crowds as the pugnacious president rained a barrage of verbal uppercuts on his opponent.
on election night the chicago tribune ran off an early edition with the headline dewey defeats truman but in the morning it turned out that president dewey had embarrassingly snatched defeat from the jaws of victory.
truman had swept to a stunning triumph to the complete bewilderment of politicians pollsters prophets and pundits.
even though thurmond took away 39 electoral votes in the south truman won 303 electoral votes primarily from the south midwest and west.
deweys 189 electoral votes came principally from the east.
the popular vote was 24 179 345 for truman 21 991 291 for dewey 1 176 125 for thurmond and 1 157 326 for wallace.
to make the victory sweeter the democrats regained control of congress as well.
trumans victory rested on farmers workers and blacks all of whom were republican wary.
republican overcondence and trumans lone wolf never say die the election of 1948 in his inaugural address in january 1949 president harry s truman 1884 1972 said communism is based on the belief that man is so weak and inadequate that he is unable to govern himself and therefore requires the rule of strong masters.
democracy is based on the conviction that man has the moral and intellectual capacity as well as the inalienable right to govern himself with reason and justice.
campaign also won him the support of many americans who admired his guts no one wanted him someone remarked except the people.
dewey in contrast struck many voters as arrogant evasive and wooden.
when dewey took the platform to give a speech said one commentator he comes out like a man who has been mounted on casters and given a tremendous shove from behind smiling and self assured truman sounded a clarion note in the fourth point of his inaugural address when he called for a bold new program known thereafter as point four.
the plan was to lend u s money and technical aid to underdeveloped lands to help them help themselves.
truman wanted to spend millions to keep underprivileged peoples from becoming communists rather than spend billions to shoot them after they had become communists.
this farseeing program was ofcially launched in 1950 and it brought badly needed assistance to impoverished countries notably in latin america africa the near east and the far east.
at home truman outlined a sweeping fair deal program in his 1949 message to congress.
it called for as trumans fair deal was rebuffed by a hostile congress critics like the conservative new york daily news gloated that the odious new deal was nally vanquished the new deal is kaput like the thirty years war or the black plague or other disasters.
its demise is like coming out of the darkness into sunlight.
like feeling clean again after a long time in the muck.
improved housing full employment a higher minimum wage better farm price supports new tvas and an extension of social security.
but most of the fair deal fell victim to congressional opposition from republicans and southern democrats.
the only major successes came in raising the minimum wage providing for public housing in the housing act of 1949 and extending old age insurance to many more beneciaries in the social security act of 1950 the korean volcano erupts korea the land of the morning calm heralded a new and more disturbing phase of the cold war a shooting phase in june 1950 when japan collapsed in 1945 soviet troops had accepted the japa nese surrender north of the thirty eighth parallel on the korean peninsula and american troops had done likewise south of that line.
both superpowers professed to want the reunication and independence of korea a japanese colony since 1910 but as in germany each helped to set up rival regimes above and below the parallel.
by 1949 when the soviets and americans had both withdrawn their forces the entire peninsula was a bristling armed camp with two hostile regimes eyeing each other suspiciously.
secretary of state acheson seemed to wash his hands of the dispute early in 1950 when he declared in a memorable speech that korea was outside the essential united states defense perimeter in the pacic.
the explosion came on june 25 1950 spearheaded by soviet made tanks north korean army columns rumbled across the thirty eighth parallel.
caught atfooted the south korean forces were shoved back southward to a dangerously tiny defensive area around pusan their weary backs to the sea.
president truman sprang quickly into the breach.
the invasion seemed to provide devastating proof of a fundamental premise in the containment doctrine that shaped washingtons foreign policy that even a slight relaxation of americas guard was an invitation to communist aggression somewhere.
the korean invasion prompted a massive expansion of the american military.
a few months before trumans national security council had issued its famous national security council memorandum number 68 nsc 68 recommending that the united states quadruple its defense spending.
ignored at rst because it seemed politically impossible to implement nsc 68 got a new lease on life from the korean crisis.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the stormy sixties 1960 1968 let the word go forth from this time and place to friend and foe alike that the torch has been passed to a new generation of americans.
john f kennedy inaugural 1961 c omplacent and comfortable as the 1950s closed americans elected in 1960 a young vigorous president who pledged to get the country moving again neither the nation nor the new president had any inkling as the new decade opened just how actionpacked it would be both at home and abroad.
the 1960s would bring a sexual revolution a civil rights revolution the emergence of a youth culture a devastating war in vietnam and the beginnings at least of a feminist revolution.
by the end of the stormy sixties many americans would yearn nostalgically for the comparative calm of the fties.
kennedys new frontier spirit hatless and topcoatless in the twenty two degree chill john f kennedy delivered a stirring inaugural address on january 20 1961 tall elegantly handsome speaking crisply and with staccato nger jabs at the air kennedy personied the glamour and vitality of the new administration.
the youngest president ever elected he assembled one of the youngest cabinets including his thirty ve year old brother robert f kennedy as attorney general.
bobby the president quipped would nd some legal experience useful when he began to practice law.
the new attorney general set out among other reforms to recast the priorities of the fbi.
the bureau deployed nearly a thousand agents on internal security work but targeted only a dozen against orga nized crime and gave virtually no attention to civil rights violations.
robert kennedys efforts were stoutly resisted by j edgar hoover who had served as fbi director longer than the new attorney general had been alive.
business whiz robert s mcnamara left the presidency of the ford motor company to take over the defense department.
along with other youthful talented advisers these appointees made up an inner circle of the best and the brightest men around the president.
from the outset kennedy inspired high expectations especially among the young.
his challenge of a new frontier quickened patriotic pulses.
he brought this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website kennedy takes charge richard goodwin b.
1931 a young peace corps staffer eloquently summed up the buoyantly optimistic mood of the early 1960s for a moment it seemed as if the entire country the whole spinning globe rested malleable and receptive in our benecent hands.
a warm heart to the cold war when he proposed the peace corps an army of idealistic and mostly youthful volunteers to bring american skills to underdeveloped countries.
he summoned citizens to ser vice with his clarion call to ask not what your country can do for you ask what you can do for your country himself harvard educated kennedy and his ivy league lieutenants heavily from harvard radiated condence in their abilities.
the presidents personal grace and wit won him the deep affection of many of his fellow citizens.
a journalist called kennedy the most seductive man ive ever met.
he exuded a sense of vibrant life and humor that seemed naturally to bubble up out of him in an unprecedented gesture he invited white maned poet robert frost to speak at his inaugural ceremonies.
the old yankee versier shrewdly took stock of the situation.
youre something of irish and i suppose something of harvard he told kennedy and advised him to be more irish than harvard.
the new frontier at home kennedy came into ofce with fragile democratic majorities in congress.
southern democrats threatened to team up with republicans and ax new frontier proposals such as medical assistance for the aged and increased federal aid to education.
kennedy won a rst round in his campaign for a more cooperative congress when he forced an expansion of the all important house rules committee dominated by conser vatives who could have bottled up his entire legislative program.
despite this victory the new frontier did not expand swiftly.
key medical and education bills remained stalled in congress.
another vexing problem was the economy.
kennedy had campaigned on the theme of revitalizing the economy after the recessions of the eisenhower years.
his administration helped negotiate a noninationary wage agreement in the steel industry in early 1962 the assumption was that the companies for their part would keep the lid on prices.
but almost immediately steel management announced signicant price president john f kennedy and his wife jacqueline bouvier kennedy shown here leaving the white house to attend a series of inaugural balls in january 1961 the young and vibrant rst couple brought beauty style and grace to the presidency.
chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 members of the armed forces were to be volunteers greatly easing anxieties among draft age youth.
the arab oil embargo and the energy crisis the long rumbling middle east erupted anew in october 1973 when the rearmed syrians and egyptians unleashed surprise attacks on israel in an attempt to regain the territory they had lost in the six day war of 1967 with the israelis in desperate retreat kissinger who had become secretary of state in september hastily ew to moscow in an effort to restrain the soviets who were arming the attackers.
believing that the kremlin was poised to y combat troops to the suez area nixon placed americas nuclear forces on alert and ordered a gigantic airlift of nearly 2 billion in war materials to the israelis.
this assistance helped save the day as the israelis aggressively turned the tide and threatened cairo itself before american diplomacy brought about an uneasy cease re to what became known as the yom kippur war.
americas policy of backing israel against its oilrich neighbors exacted a heavy penalty.
late in october 1973 the opec nations announced an embargo on oil shipments to the united states and several european allies supporting israel especially the netherlands.
what was more the oil rich arab states cut their oil production further ratcheting up pressure on the entire west whose citizens suffered a long winter uncle sams bed of nails the oil crises of the 1970s tortured the american economy.
of lowered thermostats and speedometers.
lines at gas stations grew longer as tempers grew shorter.
the shortage triggered a major economic recession not just in america but also in france and britain.
although the latter two countries had not supported israel and had thus been exempted from the embargo in an increasingly globalized interconnected world all nations soon felt the crunch.
the energy crisis suddenly energized a number of long deferred projects.
congress approved a costly alaska pipeline and a national speed limit of fty ve miles per hour to conserve fuel.
agitation mounted for heavier use of coal and nuclear power despite the environmental threat they posed.
the ve months of the arab blackmail embargo in 1974 clearly signaled the end of an era the era of cheap and abundant energy.
a twenty year surplus of world oil supplies had masked the fact that since 1948 the united states had been a net importer of oil.
amer ican oil production peaked in 1970 and then began an irreversible decline.
blissfully unaware of their dependence on foreign suppliers americans like revelers on a binge had more than tripled their oil consumption since the end of world war ii.
the number of automobiles increased 250 percent between 1949 and 1972 and detroits engineers gave nary a thought to build ing more fuel efcient engines.
by 1974 america was oil addicted and extremely vulnerable to any interruption in supplies.
that stark fact would deeply color the diplomatic and economic history of the next three decades and beyond as the the watergate scandal oil shock when opec dramatically jacked up oil prices in the 1970s many americans as represented by the henry kissinger gure in this cartoon were slow to realize that an era of low energy prices had ended forever.
middle east loomed ever larger on the map of americas strategic interests.
opec approximately quadrupled its price for crude oil after lifting the embargo in 1974 huge new oil bills wildly disrupted the u s balance of international trade and added further fuel to the already raging res of ination.
the united states took the lead in forming the international energy agency in 1974 as a counterweight to opec and various sectors of the economy including detroits carmakers began their slow grudging adjustment to the rudely dawning age of energy dependency.
but full reconciliation to that uncomfortable reality was a long time coming.
watergate and the unmaking of a president nixons electoral triumph in 1972 was almost immediately sullied and eventually undone by the socalled watergate scandal.
on june 17 1972 ve men were arrested in the watergate apartment ofce complex in washington after a bungled effort to plant electronic bugs in the democratic partys headquarters.
they were soon revealed to be working for the republican committee to re elect the president popularly known as creep.
the watergate break in turned out to be just one in a series of nixon administration dirty tricks that included forging documents to discredit democrats using the internal revenue service to harass innocent citizens named on a white house enemies list burglarizing the ofce of the psychiatrist who had treated the leaker of the pentagon papers and perverting the fbi and the cia to cover the tricksters tracks.
meanwhile the moral stench hanging over the white house worsened when vice president agnew was forced to resign in october 1973 for taking bribes from maryland contractors while governor and also as vice president.
in the rst use of the twenty fth amendment see the appendix nixon nominated and congress con rmed agnews successor a twelve term congressman from michigan gerald jerry ford.
amid a mood of growing national outrage a select senate committee conducted widely televised hearings about the watergate affair in 1973 1974.
nixon indignantly denied any prior knowledge of the breakin and any involvement in the legal proceedings against the burglars.
but john dean iii a former white house lawyer with a remarkable memory accused top white house ofcials including the president of obstructing justice by trying to cover up the watergate break in and silence its perpetrators.
then another former white house aide revealed that a secret taping system had recorded most of nixons oval ofce conversations.
now deans sensational testimony could be checked against the white house tapes and the senate committee could better determine who was telling the truth.
but nixon stubbornly citing his executive privilege refused to hand over the tapes.
then on october 20 1973 he ordered the saturday night massacre ring his own special prosecutor appointed to investigate the watergate scandal as well as his attorney general and deputy attorney general because they had refused to go along with ring the prosecutor.
responding at last to the house judiciary committees demand for the watergate tapes nixon agreed in the spring of 1974 to the publication of relevant portions of the tapes with many sections missing including nixons frequent obscenities which were excised with the phrase expletive deleted.
but on july 24 1974 the president suffered a disastrous setback when the supreme court unanimously ruled that executive privilege gave him no right to withhold evidence relevant to possible criminal activity.
skating on thin ice over hot water nixon reluctantly complied.
seeking to soften the impact of inevitable disclosure nixon now made public three subpoenaed tapes of conversations with his chief aide on june 23 1972 chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 celebrating the camp david agreement september 1978 anwar sadat of egypt left and menachem begin of israel right join u s president jimmy carter in conrming the historic accord that brought the hope of peace to the war torn middle east.
the new presidents popularity remained exceptionally high during his rst few months in ofce even when he courted public disfavor by courageously keeping his campaign promise to pardon some ten thousand draft evaders of the vietnam war era.
but carters honeymoon did not last long.
an inexperienced outsider he had campaigned against the washington establishment and never quite made the transition to being an insider himself.
he repeatedly rubbed congressional fur the wrong way especially by failing to consult adequately with the leaders.
critics charged that he isolated himself in a shallow pool of fellow georgians whose ignorance of the ways of washington compounded the problems of their greenhorn chief.
carters humanitarian diplomacy as a committed christian president carter displayed from the outset an overriding concern for human rights as the guiding principle of his foreign policy.
in the african nations of rhodesia later zimbabwe and south africa carter and his eloquent u n am bassador andrew young championed the oppressed black majority.
the presidents most spectacular foreign policy achievement came in september 1978 when he invited president anwar sadat of egypt and prime minister menachem begin of israel to a summit conference at camp david the woodsy presidential retreat in the maryland highlands.
skillfully serving as go between carter persuaded the two visitors to sign an accord september 17 1978 that held considerable promise of peace.
israel agreed in principle to withdraw from territory conquered in the 1967 war and egypt in return promised to respect israels borders.
both parties pledged themselves to sign a formal peace treaty within three months.
the president crowned this diplomatic success by resuming full diplomatic relations with china in early 1979 after a nearly thirty year interruption.
carter also successfully pushed through two treaties to turn over the panama canal to the panamanians.
although these treaties were decried by conser vatives such as ronald reagan who stridently declared we bought it we paid for it we built it and we intend to keep it the united states gave up control of the canal on december 31 1999 carter s foreign and economic policies historical double take many americans who looked back reverently to theodore roosevelts rough rider diplomacy were outraged at the panama giveaway but the carter administration looking to the future argued persuasively that relinquishing control of the canal would be healthy for u s latin american relations.
despite these dramatic accomplishments trouble stalked carters foreign policy.
overshadowing all international issues was the ominous reheating of the cold war with the soviet union.
dtente fell into disrepute as thousands of cuban troops assisted by soviet advisers appeared in angola ethiopia and elsewhere in africa to support revolutionary factions.
arms control negotiations with moscow stalled in the face of this soviet military meddling.
economic and energy woes adding to carters mushrooming troubles was the failing health of the economy.
a stinging recession during fords presidency had brought the ination rate down slightly to just under 6 percent but from the moment carter took over prices resumed their dizzying ascent driv ing the ination rate well above 13 percent by 1980 see figure 39 2.
the soaring bill for imported oil plunged americas balance of payments deeply into the red an unprecedented 40 billion in 1978.
the oil shocks of the 1970s taught americans a painful but necessary lesson that they could never again seriously consider a policy of economic isolation as they had tried to do in the decades between the two world wars.
for most of american history foreign trade had accounted for no more than 10 percent of gross national product gnp.
but huge foreign oil bills drove that gure steadily upward in the 1970s and thereafter.
by centurys end some 27 percent of gnp depended on foreign trade.
unable to dominate international trade and nance as easily as they once had americans would have to master foreign languages and study foreign cultures if they wanted to prosper in the rapidly globalizing economy.
yawning decits in the federal budget reaching nearly 60 billion in 1980 further aggravated the u s economys inationary ailments.
the elderly and other americans living on xed incomes suffered from the shrinking dollar.
people with money to lend pushed interest rates ever higher hoping to protect themselves from being repaid in badly depreciated dollars.
the prime rate the rate of interest that banks charge their very best customers vaulted to an unheard of 20 percent in early 1980 the high cost of borrowing money shoved small businesses to the wall and strangled the construction industry which was heavily dependent on loans to nance new housing and other projects.
carter diagnosed americas economic disease as stemming primarily from the nations costly dependence on foreign oil.
unfortunately his legislative proposals for energy conservation in 1977 ignited a blaze of indifference among the american people who had already forgotten the long gasoline lines of 1973 events in iran jolted americans out of their complacency about energy supplies in 1979 the imperious mohammed reza pahlevi installed as shah of iran with help from americas cia in 1953 had long ruled his oil rich land with a will of steel.
his repressive regime was nally overthrown in january 1979 violent revolution was spearheaded in iran by muslim fundamentalists who ercely resented the shahs campaign to westernize and secularize his country.
denouncing the united states as the great satan that had abetted the shahs efforts these extremists engulfed iran in chaos in the wake of his departure.
the crippling upheavals soon spread to irans oil elds.
as iranian oil stopped owing into the stream of world commerce chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 succeeded fabulously as a right wing tornado roared across the land in the 1994 congressional elections.
every incumbent republican gubernatorial senatorial and congressional candidate was reelected.
republicans also picked up eleven new governorships eight seats in the senate and fty three seats in the house where gingrich became speaker giving them control of both chambers of the federal congress for the rst time in forty years.
but if president clinton had overplayed his mandate for liberal reform in 1993 the congressional republicans now proceeded to overplay their mandate for conser vative retrenchment.
in 1996 the new congress achieved a major conser vative victory when it compelled a reluctant clinton to sign the welfare reform bill which made deep cuts in welfare grants and required able bodied welfare recipients to nd employment.
the new welfare law also tightly restricted welfare benets for legal and illegal immigrants alike reecting a rising tide of anti immigrant sentiment as the numbers of newcomers climbed toward an alltime high.
old line liberal democrats howled with pain at the presidents alleged betrayal of his partys heritage and some prominent administration members resigned in protest against his decision to sign the welfare bill.
but clintons acceptance of the welfare reform package was part of his shrewd political strategy of accommodating the electorates conser vative mood by moving to his right.
president clinton was at rst stunned by the magnitude of the republican congressional victory in 1994 but many americans gradually came to feel that the gingrich republicans were bending their conser vative bow too far especially when the new speaker advocated provocative ideas like sending the children of welfare families to orphanages.
in a tense confrontation between the democratic president and the republican congress the federal government actually had to shut down for several days at the end of 1995 until a budget package was agreed upon.
these outlandishly partisan antics bred a backlash that helped president clinton rebound from his political neardeath experience.
as the 1996 election approached the republicans chose kansas senator robert dole as their presidential candidate.
a decorated world war ii veteran dole ran a listless campaign.
clinton buoyed by a healthy economy and by his artful trimming to the conser vative wind breezed to an easy victory with 47 401 898 popular votes to doles 39 198 482 see map 41 2.
the reform partys egomaniacal leader ross perot ran a sorry third picking up less than half the votes he had wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm il la tx mi in mo oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri pa nj ct 4 15 8 ga sc de md dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote clinton democrat 70 4 47 401 054 49 2 dole republican 29 6 39 197 350 40 7 0 0 8 085 285 8 4 perot independent popular vote map 41 2 presidential election of 1996 with electoral vote by state the solid south once a safe democratic stronghold had by centurys end largely become republican territory.
interactive map garnered in 1992 clinton won 379 electoral votes dole only 159 but republicans remained in control of congress.
clinton again as clinton began his second term the rst democratic president since franklin delano roosevelt to be reelected the heady promises of far reaching reform with which he had entered the white house four years earlier were no longer heard.
still facing republican majorities in both houses of congress he proposed only modest legislative goals even though soaring tax revenues generated by the prosperous economy produced in 1998 a balanced federal budget for the rst time in three decades.
clinton cleverly managed to put republicans on the defensive by claiming the political middle ground.
he now warmly embraced the landmark welfare reform bill of 1996 that he had initially been slow to endorse.
juggling the political hot potato of af rmative action clinton pledged to mend it not end it when voters in cal i fornia in 1996 approved proposition 209 prohibiting af rmative action preferences in government and higher education the number of minority post cold war foreign policies protesting nafta 1993 these members of the teamsters union feared that the adoption of the north american free trade agreement would mean the replacement of high paying american jobs with low wage nonunion mexican labor.
more than a decade later the treaty still rankled.
policymakers disagreed about whether nafta had been damaging to american workers.
in the 2008 election the republicans endorsed it while the democrats attacked it.
students in the states public universities temporarily plummeted.
a federal appeals court decision hopwood v texas had a similar effect in texas.
clinton criticized these broad assaults on af rmative action but stopped short of trying to reverse them aware that public support for afrmative action especially among white americans had diminished since the 1970s.
clintons major political advantage continued to be the roaring economy which by 2000 had sustained the longest period of growth in american history driven by new internet dot com businesses and other high tech and media companies.
while unemployment crept down to 4 percent and businesses scrambled madly for workers inationary pressure remained remarkably low.
prosperity did not make clinton immune to controversy over trade policy.
during his rst term he had displayed political courage by supporting the north american free trade agreement nafta creating in 1993 a free trade zone encompassing mexico canada and the united states.
in doing so he reversed his own stand in the 1992 election campaign and bucked the opposition of protectionists in his own party especially labor leaders fearful of losing jobs to lowwage mexican workers.
clinton took another step in 1994 toward a global free trade system when he vigorously promoted the creation of the world trade organization wto the successor to the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt and a cherished goal of free trade advocates since the end of the second world war.
simmering discontent over trade policy boiled over in 1999 when clinton hosted the meeting of the wto in seattle.
the citys streets lled with protesters railing against what they viewed as the human and environmental costs of economic globalization trade talks zzled in seattle with clinton taking a hefty share of the blame.
money spurred controversy of another sort in the late 1990s.
campaign nance reform long smoldering as a potential issue suddenly ared up after the 1996 presidential contest.
congressional investigators revealed that the clinton campaign had received funds from many improper sources including contributors who paid to stay overnight in the white house and foreigners who were legally prohibited from giving to american candidates.
but republicans and democrats alike had reason to avoid reform.
both parties had grown dependent on vast sums to nance television ads for their candidates.
clinton did little more than pay lip ser vice to the cause of campaign nance reform.
but within the ranks of both parties a few mavericks proposed to eliminate the corrupting inuence of big donors.
senator john mccain from arizona made campaign nance reform a centerpiece of his failed 2000 campaign for the republican presidential nomination and ultimately succeeded in passing the mccain feingold act of 2002 that more strictly regulated how money owed to candidates.
problems abroad the end of the cold war dismantled the framework within which the united states had conducted foreign policy for nearly half a century.
clinton groped for a diplomatic formula to replace anticommunism as the basic premise of american diplomacy.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the legacy of impeachment time magazines cartoonist asked how future generations would judge the clinton impeachment episode and how it might be treated in history textbooks.
republican votes for conviction fell far short of the constitutionally required two thirds majority.
the vote on the perjury charge was forty ve guilty fty ve not guilty.
clintons legacy and the 2000 election beyond the obvious stain of impeachment clintons legacy was mixed.
his sound economic policies encouraged growth and trade in a rapidly globalizing post cold war world.
yet as a new democrat and avowed centrist clinton did more to consolidate than to reverse the reagan bush revolution against new deal liberalism that had for half a century provided the compass for the democratic party and the nation.
further by setting such a low standard in his personal conduct he replenished the sad reservoir of public cynicism about politics that vietnam and watergate had created a generation before.
nonetheless as the end of the clinton term and the beginning of the new millennium approached the democrats stayed on their political course and nom the controversial election of 2000 counting chads with bush and gore neckand neck in floridas presidential vote count election ofcials in broward county examined by eye paper ballots disqualied by machine because the punched chads had not fully separated from the ballots.
they hoped that close scrutiny would reveal the voters intentions.
inated loyal vice president albert gore for president.
gore faced the tricky challenge of linking himself to clinton era peace and prosperity while at the same time distancing himself from his bosss personal foibles.
he chose as his running mate connecticut senator joseph lieberman an outspoken clinton critic and the rst jew nominated to a major national ticket.
their republican challenger george w bush won the nomination on the strength of his fathers name and his years as governor of texas.
bush surrounded himself with washington insiders including vice presidential nominee richard cheney and in a clear jab at clinton promised to restore dignity to the white house rosy estimates that the federal budget would produce a surplus of some 2 trillion in the coming decade set the stage for the presidential contest.
echoing the republican creed of smaller government bush argued for returning the budget surplus to the people through massive tax cuts and for promoting privatesector programs such as school vouchers and a reliance on faith based institutions to help the poor.
gore proposed smaller tax cuts targeted at middleand lower class people and strengthening social security.
in an era of peace foreign policy gured hardly at all in the campaign although bush struck a moderate note when he urged that america should act like a humble nation pollsters predicted a close election but none foresaw the epochal cliffhanger that the election would become.
on election day the country split nearly evenly between the two candidates and it was soon clear that floridas electoral votes would determine the winner.
television news programs announced that bush had won the sunshine state and al gore called the texas governor to concede defeat.
yet just an hour later gores camp decided that florida was too close to call and the vice president in perhaps the most awkward phone call in modern politics retracted his concession.
what ensued was a ve week political standoff over how to count the votes in florida.
democrats argued that some ballots were confusing or had been misread by machines and asked for recounts by hand in several counties.
republicans claimed that such recounts would amount to changing the rules in the middle of the game and thus thwart the rule of law.
after weeks of legal bickering with the presidency in the balance the supreme court nally intervened.
by a ve to four vote along partisan lines the court reasoned that since neither floridas legislature nor its courts had established a uniform standard for evaluating disputed ballots the hand counts amounted to an unconstitutional breach of the fourteenth amendments equal protection clause.
that ruling gave bush the white house but cast a dark shadow of illegitimacy over his presidency.
bush ofcially won florida by 537 votes out of 6 million cast and he squeaked by in the electoral college 271 to 266 see maps 41 3 and 41 4.
the national popular vote went decisively to gore 50 999 897 to 50 456 002 for the rst time since 1888 a candidate won the white house with fewer popular votes than his opponent.
calls to abolish the electoral college however were few and muted see art.
v of the constitution.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 image not available due to copyright restrictions vt 3 n h me.
12 idaho mont.
3 nev utah calif pa 21 ariz ill 21 n d 3 s d.
5 colo 9 ind.
11 ohio md.
10 d c 3 ky 8 okla w va 5 ark.
3 ore remove keyline before placing 1053641 m 41 06b iowa r i mich minn wash conn n y wisc.
va 13 tenn 11 n c 15 n m miss.
texas ala s c 8 ga 15 la.
9 bush republican kerry democrat fla 27 hawai i alaska each box represents one electoral vote in the 2004 election.
the election of 2004 bushs second term reelection george w bush announced gave him political capital which he intended to spend on an aggressive domestic agenda.
the appointment of two new conser vative supreme court justices upon the retirement of sandra day oconnor and the death of chief justice william rehnquist seemed to bode well for his ambitions.
but bush overplayed his hand.
attacking the core of new deal liberalism bush proposed a radical program to privatize much of social security providing incentives for younger americans to fund their own retirements through personal accounts.
a massive outcry led by the american association of retired persons aarp and other liberal groups reminded americans how much they loved social security warts and all.
bushs proposal faded away within six months of his reelection.
the same fate befell a proposed constitutional amendment to ban same sex marriage which had been a major values issue in the 2004 campaign.
the president also took aim at the contentious issue of immigration reform where he parted company with the conser vative wing of his party.
bush opposed arresting and deporting the nearly 12 million undocumented people in the united states as some nativists proposed.
at the same time he felt that simply nor malizing their status would reward them for entering the country illegally.
his compromise plan to establish a guest worker program and a path to citizenship for the undocumented ended up pleasing no one.
congress rejected it in the summer of 2007 and the issue was dead for the rest of bushs term see p 1095.
very second term president since the 1960s had seen scandal mar his later years in ofce.
nixon had watergate reagan had iran contra and clinton had lewinsky.
the bush white house was no exception but this time the accusations were political not personal.
bushs critics claimed that the presidents erce loyalty to his staff prevented him from recognizing incompetence and that he had unlawfully expanded the power of the presidency under the guise of protecting america in the war on terror in the fall of 2005 vice president dick cheneys chief of staff was convicted of perjury in an investigation into the source of a leak that had exposed the identity of an undercover cia agent as political retaliation against her antiwar husband.
in december of that year journalists discovered that the government was conducting illegal wiretap surveillance on american citizens inside the united states in violation of federal law.
in 2007 scandal engulfed the justice department over the ring for political reasons of eight u s attorneys.
perhaps the most tragic and avoidable of bushs missteps came in the botched response to the deadly hurricane katrina after the levees broke in new orleans august 2005 when ferocious hurricane katrina hammered the gulf coast it overtaxed a decient levee system and unleashed oodwaters into new orleans submerging 80 percent of the city and destroying more than a quartermillion of its homes.
many families unable or unwilling to ee the city sought refuge in the superdome where water food and other supplies were soon in very short supply.
experts predicted that it would be years before the city fully recovered if ever.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century especially in genetics and computer applications presented americans with stunning opportunities as well as wrenching ethical choices.
ecological dangers made the responsible stewardship of a fragile planet more urgent than ever.
inequality and prejudice continued to challenge americans to close the gap between their most hallowed values and the stark realities of modern life.
and the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 violently heralded a new era of fear and anxiety.
but men and women make history only within the framework bequeathed to them by earlier generations.
for better or worse they march forward along times path bearing the burdens of the past.
knowing when they have come to a truly new turn in the road when they can lay part of their burden down and when they cannot or should not all this constitutes the sort of wisdom that only historical study can engender.
economic revolutions when the twentieth century opened united states steel corporation was the agship business of americas booming industrial revolution.
a generation later general motors annually producing millions of automobiles became the characteristic american corporation signaling the historic shift to a mass consumer outsourcing jobs to india sophisticated computer technology has allowed developing countries like india to attract western employers seeking lower labor costs.
indias educated and englishspeaking work force has made it particularly suitable for international call centers and computer programming.
economy that began in the 1920s and owered fully in the 1950s.
following world war ii the rise of international business machines ibm symbolized yet another momentous transformation to the fast paced information age when the storing organizing and processing of data became an industry in its own right.
the pace of the information age soon accelerated.
by centurys end the rapid emergence of microsoft corporation and the phenomenal growth of the internet heralded an explosive communications revolution.
americans now rocketed down the information superhighway toward the uncharted terrain of an electronic global village where traditional geographic social and political boundaries could be vaulted with the tap of a keypad.
the communications revolution was full of both promise and peril.
in the blink of an eye ordinary cit izens could gain access to information once available only to privileged elites with vast libraries or expert staffs at their disposal.
businesspeople instantaneously girdled the planet with transactions of prodigious scope and serpentine complexity.
japa nese bankers might sell wheat contracts in chicago and simultaneously direct the prots to buying oil shipments from the persian gulf offered by a broker in amsterdam.
by the late 1990s a dot com explosion of new commercial ventures quickly expanded the mar the economy and technology index 5 000 4 500 4 000 3 500 3 000 2 500 2 000 1 500 1 000 ket and the stock market stakes for entrepreneurs leading the way in making the internet a twenty rstcentury electronic mall town square library and entertainment center rolled into one.
but the very speed and efciency of the new communications tools threatened to wipe out entire occupational categories.
postal carriers travel agents store clerks bank tellers stockbrokers and all kinds of other workers whose business it was to mediate between product and client might nd themselves roadkill on the information superhighway.
white collar jobs in nancial ser vices and high tech engineering once thought securely anchored in places like chicago los angeles and new york could now be outsourced to countries such as ireland and india where employees could help keep a companys global circuits ring twenty four hours a day.
the high tech economy also proved to be as prone to boom and bust as the old smokestack economy.
in the spring of 2000 the stock market began its most precipitous slide since the second world war.
by the time the markets bottomed out in 2003 they had lost 6 trillion in value see figure 42 1.
the boom of the late 1990s turned out to be as one observer put it the dot con investors had scooped up shares in edgling rms that proved unable to turn a prot and stock prices imploded accordingly once the bubble burst.
millions of americans watched aghast as their pension plans shrank by a third or more.
recent retir figure 42 1 the rise and fall of the nasdaq composite index 1994 2004 in march 2000 the nasdaq composite index replete with technology stocks peaked at its alltime closing high of 5 048 before losing over 75 percent of its market value in the next three years.
the same index had opened in february 1971 with a base valuation of 100 points.
source msn money.
ees scrambled back into the job market.
the economic turbulence of the rst years of the century stood as a sober reminder that even as the american economy generated extraordinary wealth and innovation by global standards it was scarcely immune to the ageold vagaries of risk error scandal and the business cycle.
increasingly scientic research was the motor that propelled the economy and new scientic knowledge raised new moral dilemmas and provoked new political arguments.
when scientists rst unlocked the secrets of molecular genetic structure in the 1950s the road lay open to breeding new strains of high yield pest and weather resistant crops to curing hereditary diseases and also unfortunately to unleashing genetic mutations that might threaten the fragile balance of the wondrous biosphere in which humankind was delicately suspended.
by the dawn of the new century scientists stood at the threshold of a revolution in biological engineering.
the human genome project established the dna sequencing of the thirty thousand human genes pointing the way to radical new medical therapies and to mouthwatering prots for bioengineering rms.
startling breakthroughs in the cloning of animals raised thorny questions about the legitimacy of applying cloning technology to human reproduction.
research into human stem cells held out the promise of cures for af ictions like parkinsons disease and alzheimers.
but the bush administration chapter 42 the american people face a new century shared the concern of certain religious groups that harvesting stem cells involved the destruction of human life in embryonic form.
bush therefore limited government funding for stem cell research as americans continued to struggle with the ethical implications of their vast new technological powers.
other unprecedented ethical questions clamored for resolution.
what principles should govern the allocation of human organs for lifesaving transplants.
was it wise in the rst place to spend money on such costly procedures rather than devote societys resources to improved sanitation maternal and infant care and nutritional and health education.
how if at all should society regulate the increasingly lengthy and often painful process of dying.
see makers of america scientists and engineers pp.
afuence and inequality americans were still an afuent people at the beginning of the twenty rst century.
median household income declined somewhat in the early 1990s but reached 48 200 in 2006 yet even those americans with incomes below the governments ofcial poverty level de ned in 2007 as 20 650 for a family of four enjoyed a standard of living higher than that of twothirds of the rest of humankind.
americans were no longer the worlds wealthiest people as they had been in the quarter century after world war ii.
citizens of several other countries enjoyed higher average per capita incomes and many nations boasted more equitable distributions of wealth see map 42 1.
in an unsettling reversal of long term trends in american society during the last two decades of the twentieth century the rich got much richer while the poor got an ever shrinking share of the pie.
the richest 20 percent of americans in 2006 raked in over half the nations income while the poorest 20 percent received a little over 3 percent see table 42 1.
the gap between rich and poor began to widen in the 1980s and widened further thereafter.
that trend was evident in many industrial societies but it was most pronounced in the united states.
between 1968 and 2006 the share of the nations income that owed to the top 20 percent of its households swelled from 40 percent to 50 5 percent.
even more striking in the same period the top 5 percent of income earners saw their share of the national income grow from about 15 percent to a remarkable 22 3 percent.
the welfare reform bill of 1996 restricting access to social ser vices and requiring able bodied welfare recipients to nd work weakened the nancial footing of many impoverished families still further.
widening inequality could be mea sured in other ways as well.
in the 1970s chief executives typically two nations.
while decaying neighborhoods and legions of the homeless blighted american cities in the early twenty rst century afuent americans lived the good life in booming suburbs and in the more suburbanized cities of the sunbelt such as this development of million dollar homes around a country club in las vegas nevada.
widening inequality table 42 1 widening income inequality share of aggregate income lowest fth second fth third fth fourth fth highest fth top 5 4 2 10 2 16 8 24 7 44 1 16 5 3 8 9 6 15 9 24 0 46 6 18 5 3 6 8 9 14 8 23 0 49 8 22 1 3 4 8 6 14 6 23 0 50 4 22 2 during the last two decades of the twentieth century the top fth of the countrys households made signicant gains in income while everyone else lost ground.
source statistical abstract of the united states 2008 earned forty one times as much as the average worker in their corporations by the early 2000s they earned 245 times as much.
in 2006 47 million people had no medical insurance.
at the same time some 36 5 mil lion people 12 3 percent of all americans 8 2 percent of whites 24 3 percent of african americans 20 6 percent of latinos and 10 3 percent of asians remained mired in poverty a depressing indictment of the inequities aficting an afuent and allegedly egalitarian republic.
what caused the widening income gap.
some critics pointed to the tax and scal policies of the reagan and both bush father and son presidencies which favored the wealthy see table 42 2.
but deeperrunning historical currents probably played a more powerful role as suggested by the similar experiences of other industrialized societies.
among the most conspicuous causes were intensifying global economic competition the shrinkage in high paying manufacturing jobs for semiskilled and unskilled workers the greater economic rewards commanded by educated workers in high tech industries the decline of unions the growth of part time and temporary work the rising tide of relatively low skill immigrants and the increasing tendency of educated men and women to denmark ireland norway united kingdom 1 406 billion canada 677 billion netherlands sweden finland germany 1 874 billion belgium russia poland france 1 303 billion united states 10 171 billion czech rep hungary switzer austria land greece spain portugal 578 billion mexico 618 billion italy 1 091 billion algeria turkey i i r ra i an s q r a s e aa l ur da i b egypt i a pakistan japan 4 245 billion taiwan bangladesh india 478 billion thailand south africa venezuela colombia rep korea china 1 159 billion malaysia singapore philippines indonesia brazil 503 billion peru australia chile per capita income over 20 000 argentina one square represents 20 billion in gdp 10 000 19 999 2 000 9 999 under 2 000 map 42 1 global distribution of wealth new zealand the top fifty countries are named the gdp of the top twelve is listed.
interactive map makers of america scientists and the great africanengineers american migration s ubatomic particles and space bound satellites do not respect political boundaries.
disease carrying viruses spread across the globe.
radio waves and internet communications reach every corner of planet earth.
at rst glance science technology and medicine appear to be quintessentially international phenomena.
scientists often pride themselves on the universal validity of scientic knowledge and the transnational character of scientic networks.
in a world marked by political divisions science evidently knows no bounds.
but a closer look reveals that national context does inuence the character of scientic enterprise.
american scientists have repeatedly made signicant contributions to the life of the nation.
they in turn have been shaped by its unique historical circumstances especially americas intensifying concerns about national security in the twentieth century.
once marginal players in global intellectual life american scientists now stand at the forefront of scientic advancement.
in many ways the rise of american science has kept pace with the arrival of the united states as a world power.
nowhere was this trend more evident than in the story of big science the unusual demands of americas national security state during world war ii and the cold war required vast scientic investments.
the result was big science or multidisciplinary research enterprises of unparalleled size scope and cost.
big science and big technology meant big bucks big machines and big teams of scientists and engineers.
the close link between government and science was not new precedents stretched as far back as the founding of the national academy of sciences during the civil war.
but the depression era tennessee valley authority tva and the wartime manhattan project ushered in ventures of colossal scale and ambition.
as the head of the tva wrote in 1944 there is almost nothing however fantastic that given competent orga ni zation a team of engineers scientists and administrators can not do today cold war competition with the soviets translated into huge government investments in physics chemistry and aerospace.
the equation was simple national security depended on technological superiority which entailed costly facilities for scientic research and ambitious efforts to recruit and train scientists.
in the 1950s defense projects employed two thirds of launching apollo 11 nasa ight directors monitor the launch of the apollo 11 lunar landing mission from the manned spacecraft center in houston texas in july 1969 the nations scientists and engineers.
laboratories reactors accelerators and observatories proliferated.
after the soviets launched the worlds rst articial satellite sputnik i in 1957 the international space race became americas top scientic priority.
to land astronauts on the moon the national aeronautics and space administration nasa spent a whopping 25 4 billion over eleven years on project apollo.
another massive aerospace mission president reagans controversial strategic defense initiative or star wars consumed somewhere between 32 billion and 71 billion between 1984 and 1994 in americas burgeoning research universities the federal government found willing partners in the promotion of the scientic enterprise.
university employed scientists largely paid by government grants concentrated on basic research accounting for over half of the estimated 50 billion spent on basic science in 2002 meanwhile private industry spent additional billions on applied research and product development.
for consumers of air bags silicon chips and other high tech gadgets these investments yielded rich rewards as innovative technologies dramatically improved the quality of life.
over the course of the twentieth century american corporations spearheaded a global revolution in communications and information technology.
american telephone and telegraph at t and radio corporation of america rca attended the birth of telephones radio and television.
apple international business machines ibm and microsoft introduced personal computers.
government and industry scientists together invented the internet.
twentieth century advances in medical science and technology have also revolutionized american lives.
thanks to new drugs devices and methods of treatment the average life expectancy in the united states leapt from 47 3 years in 1900 to 77 0 years in 2000 in the rst half of the twentieth century physicians discovered hormones and vitamins introduced penicillin and other antibiotics and experimented with insulin therapy for diabetes and radiation therapy for cancer.
more recently cutting edge medical science has nurtured in vitro fertilization developed respirators articial hearts and other medical devices and attacked though with limited success the aids epidemic.
much of the optimism for future medical breakthroughs centers on the 3 billion human genome project which completed its mapping and sequencing of all the genetic material in the human body in 2003 deemed the holy grail of genomics research the project promised countless benets including new diagnoses for genetic defects innovative therapies and untold commercial applications.
coordinated by the department of energy and the national institutes of health the project involved thousands of scientists in universities and laboratories across the nation and around the globe.
to achieve such innovation big science typically demands complex teams of scientists engineers and technicians.
when traditional channels of recruitment a scientist working in her lab this medical school professor researching pancreatic regeneration was part of the surge of women pursuing scientic careers particularly in the biological sciences.
by 2004 as many women as men enrolled in medical schools and minority enrollment climbed as well.
in that year 7 percent of entering medical students were latino and 6 5 percent were african american.
percent female black latino foreign born figure 42 2 demographic prole of women minorities and the foreign born in nonacademic science and engineering occupations 1980 2000 source science and engineering indicators 2002 statistics seind02 c3 g03 13 htm.
came up short scientic institutions increasingly recruited foreigners women and minorities see figure 42 2.
immigrants and exiles played key roles in the development of the atomic bomb and cold war weaponry.
long relegated to ju nior positions as assistants and technicians women and minorities have recently made signicant gains in the white mans world of science.
in 2001 women represented 26 percent of employed doctoral scientists and engineers in the united states the foreign born 24 percent and minorities 21 percent.
despite these stunning achievements current evidence suggests that the united states might be losing its preeminence in science.
after dominating the intellectual world from the 1960s through the 1990s american scientists are now winning fewer prizes and patents and publishing fewer scientic papers than their peers in europe and asia.
experts predict that current schoolage americans will not be able to meet the rising demand for scientic ex per tise.
moreover fewer foreigners will arrive to ll the gap as international competition for their labor heats up in places like japan china and india.
for the united states to retain preeminence in science in the twenty rst century it must continue to welcome all talent to the eld.
that means attracting both foreign born scientists and young american students whose brainpower has long helped make the nation a scientic power.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century jen guided her readers into the poignant comedy of suburban family relationships that was not uncommon for second generation asian americans.
jhumpa lahiris interpreter of maladies 1999 explored the sometimes painful relationship between immigrant indian parents and their american born children.
latino writers made their mark as well.
sandra cisneros drew on her own life as a mexican american child to evoke latino life in working class chicago in the house on mango street 1984.
women writers and womens themes forged to the ctional forefront as the feminist movement advanced.
jane smiley modeled her touching narrative of a midwestern farm family a thousand acres 1991 on shakespeares king lear and followed up with a hilarious spoof of university life in moo 1995.
e annie proulx won widespread acclaim with her comical yet tender portrayal of a struggling family in the shipping news 1993 as well as with her moving tale of homoerotic love between two cowboys in brokeback mountain 1997.
the rising interest in feminist and african american themes revived the popularity of a 1930s writer zora neale hurston especially her naturalistic novel their eyes were watching god rst published in 1937 new york became the art capital of the world after world war ii as well heeled americans supported a in her touching novel the joy luck club amy tan b.
1952 explored the complex dilemmas of growing up as a chinese american a girl is like a young tree my mother said.
you must stand tall and listen to your mother standing next to you.
that is the only way to grow strong and straight.
but if you bend to listen to other people you will grow crooked and weak.
over the years i learned to choose from the best opinions.
chinese people had chinese opinions.
american people had american opinions.
and in almost every case the american version was much better.
it was only later that i discovered there was a serious aw with the american version.
there were too many choices so it was easy to get confused and pick the wrong thing.
large number of painters and sculptors.
the open and tradition free american environment seemed especially congenial to the experimental mood of much modern art.
jackson pollock pioneered abstract expressionism in the 1940s and 1950s inging paint on huge ats stretched on his studio oor.
realistic representation went out the window as artists like pollock and willem de kooning strove to create action paintings that expressed the painters individuality and made the viewer a creative participant in dening the paintings meaning.
pop artists in the 1960s notably andy warhol canonized on canvas everyday items of consumer culture such as soup cans.
claes oldenburg tried to stun viewers into a new visual awareness with unfamiliar versions of familiar objects such as giant plastic sculptures of pillow soft telephones.
on the stage playwright david mamet analyzed the barbarity of american capitalism in plays like glengarry glen ross and american buffalo in which he crafted a kind of poetry from the sludge of american slang.
eve ensler took a feminist commitment into new territory that blended comic intimacy and searing social commentary with her vagina monologues.
the aids epidemic inspired tony kushners sensationally inventive angels in america a broad ranging commentary alternately hilarious and touching about the condition of american life at the twentieth centurys end.
cuban american nilo cruz won a pulitzer prize in 2003 for anna in the tropics his evocative play about immigrant cigar makers in 1930 tampa.
film the most characteristic american art form continued to ourish especially as a wave of younger lmmakers like george lucas steven spielberg spike lee quentin tarantino and the coen brothers as well as the innovative documentary artist ken burns made their inuence felt.
architecture also beneted from the building boom of the postwar era.
old master frank lloyd wright produced strikingly original designs as in the roundwalled guggenheim museum in new york.
louis kahn employed stark geometric forms and basic building materials like brick and concrete to make beautiful simple buildings.
eero saarinen the son of a finnish immigrant contributed a number of imaginative structures including two yale university residential colleges that evoked the at mosphere of an italian hill town.
chinese born i m pei designed numerous graceful buildings on several college campuses as well as the john f kennedy library in boston.
postmodernists such as robert venturi and michael graves inspired by the decorative details of earlier historical artistic achievements mecha mural by student artists directed by sergio ocadiz 1974 people have scribbled on walls since time immemorial but in the 1960s and 1970s mural painting emerged as a new form of american folk art.
drab buildings and bare fences often in minority inner city neighborhoods were turned into huge canvases.
this mural incorporates many mexican american and mexican themes including the united farm workers bird symbol and a skeleton a frequent motif in mexican art.
styles rejected the spare functionalism that had dominated modern architecture for much of the century.
the ight from stark modernism took fanciful forms in frank gehrys use of luminous undulating sheets of metallic skin in the widely hailed guggenheim museum in bilbao spain and the walt disney concert hall in los angeles.
the new media by the early twenty rst century the internet had dramatically transformed daily life for most americans.
first created by the government for cold war intelligence sharing the world wide web spread like wild re through american homes schools and ofces during the mid 1990s.
the percentage of households with internet access skyrocketed from 18 percent in 1997 to over 70 percent in 2007 in rapidly increasing numbers americans turned to the internet to communicate shop and even work.
the dot com explosion drove the tremendous economic boom of the late 1990s.
dot com refers to the uniform resource locater or url suf x used for commercial web sites.
even as the dot com bubble began to deate the internet demonstrated its staying power.
many online start up companies failed but those that survived often became giants in retail information gathering google and even nance e trade.
the internet reshaped the traditional corporate world as well.
by the end of the 1990s almost every business group or organization from used car dealers to sports teams to college arts groups had its own web site.
ful lling the promises of its early boosters the internet seemed to have a democratizing effect spreading power and information among more and more.

chapter 1 the growth of civilizations the south the most elaborate early civilizations emerged in south and central america and in mexico.
in peru the incas created the largest empire in the americas stretching almost the inca in peru 2 000 miles along western south america.
the incas developed a complex administrative system and a large network of paved roads that welded together the populations of many tribes under a single government.
organized societies of mesoamericans emerged around 10 000 b c.
they created a mesoamerican civilizations civilization in what is now mexico and much of central america.
they were known as the olmec people.
the first truly complex society in the region began in approximately 1000 b c.
a more sophisticated culture grew up around a d 800 in parts of central america and in the yucatn peninsula of mexico in an area known as maya.
mayan civilization developed a written language a numerical system similar to the arabic an accurate calendar an advanced agricultural system and important trade routes into other areas of the continents.
gradually the societies of the maya region were superseded by other mesoamerican tribes who have become known collectively and somewhat inaccurately as the aztec.
they called themselves mexica.
in about a d 1300 the mexica built the city of tenochtitln on a large island in a lake in central mexico the site of present day mexico city.
with a population as high as 100 000 by 1500 tenochtitln featured large and impressive public buildings schools that all male children attended an organized military a medical system and a slave workforce drawn from conquered tribes.
a warlike people the mexica gradually established their dominance over almost all of central mexico.
like other mesoamerican societies the mexica developed a religion that included a belief that the gods could be satisfied only by being fed the living hearts of humans.
the mexica sacrificed people largely prisoners captured in combat on a scale unknown in other american civilizations.
the mesoamerican civilizations were for many centuries the center of civilized life in north and central america the hub of culture and trade.
the civilizations of the north the peoples north of mexico developed less elaborate but still substantial civilizations.
inhabitants of the northern regions of the continent subsisted on combinations of hunting hunting gathering and fishing gathering and fishing.
they included the eskimo or inuit of the arctic circle who fished and hunted seals big game hunters of the northern forests who led nomadic lives based on the pursuit of moose and caribou tribes of the pacific northwest whose principal occupation was salmon fishing and who created substantial permanent settlements along the coast and a group of tribes spread through relatively arid regions of the far west who developed successful communities based on fishing hunting small game and gathering edible plants.
other societies in north america were agricultural.
among the most developed were agricultural societies those in the southwest.
the people of that arid region built large irrigation systems and they constructed towns of stone and adobe.
in the great plains region too most tribes were engaged in sedentary farming corn and other grains.
they lived in large permanent settlements.
the eastern third of what is now the united states much of it covered with forests and inhabited by the woodland indians had the greatest food resources of any area of the continent.
most of the many tribes of the region engaged in farming hunting gathering the collision of cultures 5 inuit arctic tlingit inuit tshimshian northwest coast kwakiutls makah salish cree kootenay blackfeet skagit puyallup plateau walla umatilla walla cayuse tillamook pomo assiniboine colville chinook pacific ocean hidatsa sioux mandan arapaho kiowa crow apachean pawnee shoshone maidu great basin chemehuevi chumash serrano cahuilla luiseo diegueo california hopi zui menominee ottawa abenaki wampanoag mohegan huron pequot iroquois neutral erie susquehannock narragansett winnebago fox lenni potawatomi lenape sauk kickapoo mosopelea illinois shawnee kaskaskia eastern woodland cherokee wichita apachean pamlico tuscarora atlantic chickasaw caddo pueblo ocean creek apachean yamasee southwest choctaw jano yaqui natchez apalachee timucua concho lagunero agriculture hunting chippewa ute pima main subsistence mode iowa prairie great plains goshute shoshone southern paiute micmac penobscot algonquin chippewa cheyenne sioux flathead nez perc northern paiute klamath modoc costano montagnais subarctic shuswap nootkin karankawa coahuiltec northeast mexico calusa caribbean arawak hunting and gathering fishing this map shows the various ways in which the native tribes of north america supported themselves before the arrival of european civilization.
like most precommercial peoples the native americans survived largely on the resources available in their immediate surroundings.
note for example the reliance on the products of the sea of the tribes along the northern coastlines of the continent and the way in which tribes in relatively inhospitable climates in the north where agriculture was difficult relied on hunting large game.
most native americans were farmers.
what different kinds of farming would have emerged in the very different climates of the agricultural regions shown on this map.
how the early north americans lived and fishing simultaneously.
in the south there were permanent settlements and large trading networks based on the corn and other grains grown in the rich lands of the mississippi river valley.
cahokia a trading center located near present day st louis had a cahokia population of 40 000 at its peak in a d 1200 the agricultural societies of the northeast were more mobile.
farming techniques there were designed to exploit the land quickly rather than to develop permanent settlements.
many of the tribes living east of the mississippi river were linked together loosely by common linguistic roots.
the largest of these language groups consisted of the algonquian tribes who lived along the atlantic seaboard from canada to virginia the iroquois confederacy which was centered in what is now upstate new york and the muskogean 6 chapter 2 john white created this illustration of life among the eastern woodland indians in coastal north carolina.
it shows the diversified agriculture practiced by the natives squash tobacco and three varieties of corn.
the hunters shown in nearby woods suggest another element of the native economy.
at bottom right indians perform a religious ritual which white described as strange gestures and songs private collection bridgeman images the indian village of secoton ca.
1585 by john white the tiny english populations had no choice but to learn from the indians.
they recognized the value of corn which was easy to cultivate and produced large yields.
the english also learned the advantages of growing beans alongside corn to enrich the soil.
like the natives the english quickly learned to combine the foods they grew and foods they hunted and fished.
they built canoes like the indians and gained the ability to navigate the local streams.
they learned from the indians how to build canoes by hollowing out a single log dugouts or sewing birchbark around a simple frame sealing it with resin.
without what they learned from the natives the early settlers would not have survived.
a few months after the first colonists arrived in virginia additional ships appeared with more men and supplies.
by then of the 144 men who had sailed to america only 38 were still alive the rest killed by diseases and famine.
jamestown survived largely because of two important events.
one was what they learned from the local indians.
the john smith other was the leadership of captain john smith who at age twenty seven was already a famous world traveler.
he imposed work and order on the community created transplantations and borderlands 27 a shaky relationship with the natives sometimes negotiating with the indians and at other times stealing food and kidnapping them.
jamestown was a tiny colony for more than a decade.
the natives were far more powerful than the english for years.
coastal virginia had numerous tribes the algonquians the sioux and the iroquois.
they had drawn together as part of the powhatan powhatan confederacy confederacy named after the great chief who controlled a large area near the coasts.
what the english called virginia the natives called tsenacommacah.
reorganization and expansion as jamestown struggled to survive the london company now renamed the virginia company was already dreaming of bigger things.
in 1609 it obtained a new charter from the king which increased its power and enlarged its territory.
it offered stock in the company to planters who were willing to migrate at their own expense.
and it provided free passage to virginia for poorer people who would agree to serve the company for seven years.
in the spring of 1609 two years after the first arrival of the english a fleet of nine vessels was dispatched to jamestown with approximately 600 people including some women and children.
nevertheless disaster followed.
one of the virginia bound ships was lost at sea in a hurricane.
another ran aground in the bermuda islands and was unable to sail for months.
many of the new settlers succumbed to fevers before winter came.
and the winter of 1609 1610 was especially severe a period known as starving time by then the the starving time natives realized that the colonists were a threat to their civilization and they blocked the english from moving inland.
barricaded in the small palisade unable to hunt or cultivate food the settlers lived on what they could find dogs cats rats snakes toadstools horsehides and even the corpses of dead men as one survivor recalled.
when the migrants who had run aground in bermuda finally arrived in jamestown the following may they found only about 60 emaciated people still alive.
the new arrivals took the survivors onto their ship and sailed for england.
but as the refugees proceeded down the james they met an english ship coming up the river part of a fleet bringing supplies and the colonys first governor lord de la warr.
the departing settlers agreed to return to jamestown.
new relief expeditions soon began to arrive and the effort to turn a profit in jamestown resumed.
new settlements began lining the river above and below jamestown.
the immigrants discovered a newly found crop tobacco which was already popular among the spanish colonies to the south.
it was already being imported to europe.
in 1612 the jamestown planter john rolfe began trying to cultivate the crop in virginia.
other planters followed suit up and down the james river.
tobacco became the first profitable crop in the new colony and its success encouraged tobacco planters to move deeper the tobacco economy inland intruding more and more into the native farmlands.
the emerging tobacco economy soon created a heavy demand for labor.
to entice new workers to the colony the virginia company established what it called the headright system headrights were fifty acre grants of land.
those who already the headright system lived in the colony received two headrights 100 acres apiece.
each new settler received a single headright for himself or herself.
this system encouraged family groups to migrate together since the more family members who traveled to america the more land the family would receive.
in addition anyone who paid for the passage of immigrants to virginia would receive an extra headright for each arrival.
as a result some colonists were quickly able to assemble large plantations.
28 chapter 2 eventually after more than a century of conflict in the southeastern borderlands the english prevailed acquiring florida in the aftermath of the seven years war known in america as the french and indian war and rapidly populating it with settlers from their colonies to the north.
before that point however protecting the southern boundary of the british empire in north america was a continual concern to the english and contributed in crucial ways to the founding of the colony of georgia.
the founding of georgia georgia the last english colony to be established in what would become the united states was founded to create a military barrier against spanish lands on the southern border of english america.
it was also designed to provide a refuge for the impoverished a place where english men and women without prospects at home could begin anew.
its founders led by general james oglethorpe served as unpaid trustees of a society created to serve the needs of the british empire.
oglethorpe himself a veteran of the most recent spanish wars with england was keenly aware of the military advantages of an english colony south of the carolinas.
yet oglethorpes mission his interest in settlement rested even more on his philanthropic commitments.
as head of a parliamentary committee investigating english prisons he had been appalled by the plight of honest debtors rotting in confinement.
such prisoners this view of savannah by an english artist shows the intensely orderly character of early settlement in the georgia colony.
as the colony grew its residents gradually abandoned the plan created by oglethorpe and his fellow trustees.
historic map works getty images savannah in 1734 transplantations and borderlands 47 and other poor people in danger of succumbing to a similar fate could he believed become the farmer soldiers of the new colony in america.
in 1732 king george ii granted oglethorpe and his fellow trustees control of the land between the savannah and altamaha rivers.
their colonization policies reflected the vital military purposes of the colony.
they limited the size of landholdings to make the settlement compact and easier to defend against spanish and indian attacks.
georgia founded they excluded africans free or slave oglethorpe feared that slave labor would produce internal revolts and that disaffected slaves might turn to the spanish as allies.
the trustees strictly regulated trade with the indians again to limit the possibility of wartime insurrection.
they also excluded catholics for fear they might collude with their coreligionists in the spanish colonies to the south.
oglethorpe himself led the first colonial expedition to georgia which built a fortified town at the mouth of the savannah river in 1733 and later constructed additional forts south of the altamaha.
in the end only a few debtors were released from jail and sent to georgia.
instead the trustees brought hundreds of impoverished tradesmen and artisans from england and scotland and many religious refugees from switzerland and germany.
among the immigrants was a small group of jews.
english settlers made up a lower proportion of the european population of georgia than of any other english colony.
oglethorpe whom some residents of georgia began calling our perpetual dictator created almost constant dissensions and conflict through his heavy handed regulation of the colony.
he also suffered military disappointments such as a 1740 assault on the spanish outpost at st augustine florida which ended in failure.
georgias political evolution gradually as the threats from spain receded he lost his grip on the colony which over time became more like the rest of british north america with an elected legislature that loosened the restrictions on settlers.
georgia continued to grow more slowly than the other southern colonies but in other ways it now developed along lines roughly similar to those of south carolina.
middle grounds the struggle for the north american continent was not just one among competing european empires.
it was also a series of contests among the many different peoples who shared the continent the spanish english french dutch and other colonists on one hand and the many indian tribes with whom they shared the continent on the other.
in some parts of the british empire virginia and new england for example english settlers quickly established their dominance subjugating and displacing most natives until they had established societies that were dominated almost entirely by europeans.
but in other regions the balance of power shifted for many years.
along the western borders of english settlement in particular europeans and indians lived together in regions in which neither side was able to establish clear dominance.
in these middle grounds the two populations despite frequent conflicts carved out ways of living together with each side making concessions to the other.
see debating the past native americans and the middle ground these were the peripheries of empires in which the influence of formal colonial governments was at times almost invisible.
european settlers and the soldiers scattered in forts throughout these regions to protect them were unable to displace the indians.
so they had to carve out their own relationships with the tribes.
in those relationships debating the past native americans and the middle ground for many generations historians chronicling the westward movement of european settlement in north america portrayed native americans largely as weak and inconvenient obstacles swept aside by the inevitable progress of civilization indians were presented either as murderous savages or as relatively docile allies of white people but rarely as important actors of their own.
francis parkman the great nineteenth century american historian described indians as a civilization crushed and scorned by the march of european powers in the new world.
many subsequent historians departed little from his assessment.
in more recent years historians have challenged this traditional view by examining how white civilization victimized the tribes.
gary nashs red white and black 1974 was one of the important modern presentations of this approach and ramon guttierezs when jesus came the corn mothers went 1991 was a more recent contribution.
they and other scholars rejected the optimistic progressive view of white triumph over adversity and presented instead a picture of white brutality and futile indian resistance ending in defeat.
more recently however a new view of the relationship between the peoples of the old and new worlds has emerged.
it sees native americans and euro americans as uneasy partners in the shaping of a new society in which for a time at least both were a vital part.
richard whites influential 1991 book the middle ground was among the first important statements of this view.
48 white examined the culture of the great lakes region in the eighteenth century in which algonquian indians created a series of complex trading and political relationships with french english and american settlers and travelers.
in this borderland between the growing european settlements in the east and the still largely intact indian civilizations farther west a new kind of hybrid society emerged in which many cultures intermingled.
james merrells into the american woods 1999 contributed further to this new view of collaboration by examining the world of negotiators and go betweens along the western pennsylvania frontier in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
like white he emphasized the complicated blend of european and native american diplomatic rituals that allowed both groups to conduct business make treaties and keep the peace.
daniel richter extended the idea of a middle ground further in two important books the ordeal of the long house 1992 and facing east from indian country 2001.
richter demonstrates that the iroquois confederacy was an active participant in the power relationships in the hudson river basin and in his later book he tells the story of european colonization from the native american perspective revealing how western myths of first contact such as the story of john smith and pocahontas look entirely different when seen through the eyes of native americans who remained in many ways the more powerful of the two societies in the seventeenth century.
how did these important collaborations collapse.
what happened to the middle ground.
over time the delicate partnerships along the frontiers of white settlement gave way to the sheer numbers of europeans and in some places africans who moved westward.
joyce chaplins subject matter 2001 argues as well that old world americans at first admired the natives as a kind of natural nobility until european diseases ravaged the tribes.
their vulnerability to disease strengthened the sense of superiority among europeans that had been a part of their view of indians from the beginning.
jill lepores the name of war 1998 describes how the violence of king philips war in seventeenth century new england helped transform english views of the tribes.
that was because of the white victory over the indians and because of their success in turning this victory into a rationale for the moral superiority of europeans.
in fact europeans had used at least as much savagery against the natives as the natives had used against them.
as the pressures of white settlement grew as the indian populations weakened as a result of disease and war and as the relationship between the tribes and the european settlers grew more and more unequal the cultural middle ground that for many decades characterized much of the contact between the old and new worlds gradually disappeared.
by the time historians began seriously chronicling this story in the late nineteenth century the indian tribes had indeed become the defeated helpless obstacles that they portrayed.
but for generations before the relationship between white americans and native americans was much more equal than it later became.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how have historians views of native americans and their role in the european colonization of north america changed over time.
2 why did the middle ground between native americans and european settlers disappear.
the europeans found themselves obligated to adapt to tribal expectations at least as much as the indians had to adapt to european ones.
to the indians the european migrants were both menacing and appealing.
they feared the power of these strange european people their guns their rifles their forts.
but they also wanted the french and british settlers to behave like fathers to help them mediate their own internal disputes to offer them gifts to moderate their conflicts.
europeans came from a world in which the formal institutional and military power of a nation or empire governed relationships between societies.
but the natives had no understanding of the modern notion of a nation and thought much more in terms of ceremony and kinship.
gradually europeans learned to fulfill at least some of their expectations to settle disputes among tribes to moderate conflicts within tribes to participate solemnly in indian ceremonies and to offer gifts as signs of respect.
in the seventeenth century before many english settlers had entered the interior the french were particularly adept at creating successful relationships with the tribes.
french migrants in the interior regions of the continent were often solitary fur traders and some of them welcomed the chance to attach themselves to even to marry within tribes.
they also recognized the importance of treating tribal chiefs with respect and channeling gifts and tributes through them.
but by the mid eighteenth century french influence in the interior was in decline and british settlers gradually became the dominant european group.
eventually the british learned the 49 50 chapter 7 women.
as americans began to place a higher value on the importance of the republican mother who would help train the new generation for citizenship people began to ask how mothers could raise their children to be enlightened if the mothers themselves were uneducated.
such concerns helped speed the creation of female academies throughout the nation usually for the daughters of affluent families.
in 1789 massachusetts required that its public schools serve females as well as males.
other states although not all soon followed.
some women aspired to more.
in 1784 judith sargent murray published an essay judith sargent murray defending the right of women to education.
women and men were equal in intellect and potential murray argued.
women therefore should have precisely the same educational opportunities as men.
and they should have opportunities to earn their own livings and to establish roles in society apart from their husbands and families.
murrays ideas attracted relatively little support.
because jefferson and his followers liked to think of native americans as noble savages uncivilized but not necessarily uncivilizable they hoped that schooling the indians in white culture would uplift the tribes.
missionaries and mission schools proliferated among the tribes.
but there were no comparable efforts to educate enslaved african americans.
higher education similarly diverged from republican ideals.
the number of colleges and universities in america grew substantially from nine at the time of the revolution to twenty two in 1800 none of the new schools however was truly public.
even universities established by state legislatures relied on private contributions and tuition fees to survive.
scarcely more than one white man in a thousand and virtually no women blacks or indians had access to any college education and those few who did attend universities were almost without exception members of prosperous propertied families.
medicine and science medicine and science were not always closely connected to each other in the early nineteenth century but many physicians were working hard to strengthen the link.
the university of pennsylvania created the first american medical school in 1765 most doctors however studied medicine by working with an established practitioner.
some american physicians believed in applying new scientific methods to medicine but they had to struggle against age old prejudices and superstitions.
efforts to teach anatomy for example encountered strong public hostility because of the dissection of cadavers that the study required.
municipal authorities had virtually no understanding of medical science and almost no idea of what to do in the face of the severe epidemics that so often swept their populations only slowly did they respond to warnings that the lack of adequate sanitation programs was to blame for much disease.
individual patients often had more to fear from their doctors than from their illnesses.
even the leading advocates of scientific medicine often embraced ineffective or dangerous treatments.
george washingtons death in 1799 was probably less a result of the minor throat infection that had afflicted him than of his physicians efforts to cure him by bleeding and purging.
the medical profession also used its newfound commitment to the scientific method to justify expanding its control over kinds of care that had traditionally been outside its domain.
most childbirths for example had been attended by female midwives in the decline of midwifery eighteenth century.
in the early nineteenth century physicians began to handle deliveries themselves.
among the results of that change were a narrowing of opportunities for women and a restriction of access to childbirth care for poor mothers who could afford midwives but not physicians.
the jeffersonian era 157 cultural aspirations of the new nation many americans dreamed of an american literary and artistic life that would rival the greatest achievements of europe.
the 1772 poem on the rising glory of america predicted that america was destined to become the seat of empire and the final stage of civilization.
noah webster the connecticut schoolmaster lawyer and author of widely used american spellers and dictionaries echoed such sentiments arguing that the american schoolboy should be educated as a nationalist.
as soon as he opens his lips webster wrote he should rehearse the history of his own country he should lisp the praise of liberty and of those illustrious heroes and statesmen who have wrought a revolution in her favor a growing number of writers began working to create a strong american literature.
among the most ambitious was the philadelphia writer charles american literature brockden brown.
but his fascination with horror and deviance kept him from developing a popular audience.
more successful was washington irving of new york whose popular folktales recounting the adventures of such american rustics as ichabod crane and rip van winkle made him the widely acknowledged leader of american literary life in the early eighteenth century.
religion and revivalism by elevating ideas of individual liberty and reason the american revolution had weakened traditional forms of religious practice and challenged many ecclesiastical traditions.
by the 1790s only a small proportion of white americans were members of formal churches and ministers were complaining about the decay of vital piety methodist camp meeting 1837 camp or revival meetings were popular among some evangelical christians in america as early as 1800 by the 1820s there were approximately 1 000 meetings a year most of them in the south and the west.
after one such meeting in 1806 a participant wrote will i ever see anything more like the day of judgement on the side of eternity to see the people running yes running from every direction to the stand weeping shouting and shouting for joy.
glorious day they went home singing shouting this lithograph dated 1837 suggests the degree to which women predominated at many revivals.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
158 chapter 7 religious traditionalists were particularly alarmed about the emergence of new rational religious doctrines theologies that reflected modern scientific attitudes.
deism which had originated among enlightenment philosophers in france attracted such educated americans as jefferson and benjamin franklin and by 1800 was reaching a moderately broad popular audience.
deists accepted the existence of god but they considered him a remote watchmaker who after having created the universe had withdrawn from direct involvement with the human race and its sins.
religious skepticism also produced the philosophies of universalism and unitarianism disciples of these new ideas rejected the traditional calvinist belief in predestination and the idea of the trinity.
jesus was only a great religious teacher they claimed not the son of god.
but religious skepticism attracted relatively few people.
most americans clung to more traditional faiths.
beginning in 1801 traditional religion staged a dramatic comeback in a wave of revivalism known as the second great awakening.
the origins of the awakening lay in the efforts of conservative theologians to fight the second great awakening the spread of religious rationalism and of church establishments.
presbyterians expanded their efforts on the western fringes of white settlement.
itinerant methodist preachers traveled throughout the nation to win recruits for their new church which soon became the fastest growing denomination in america.
almost as successful were the baptists who found an especially fervent following in the south.
by the early nineteenth century the revivalist energies of all these denominations were combining to create the greatest surge of evangelical fervor since the first great awakening sixty years before.
in only a few years membership in churches embracing revivalism was cane ridge mushrooming.
at cane ridge kentucky in the summer of 1801 a group of evangelical ministers presided over the nations first camp meeting an extraordinary revival that lasted several days and impressed all who saw it with its fervor and its size some estimated that 25 000 people attended.
such events became common in subsequent years.
the basic message of the second great awakening was that individuals must readmit god and christ into their daily lives.
they must embrace a fervent active piety and they must reject the skeptical rationalism that threatened traditional beliefs.
yet the wave of revivalism did not restore the religion of the past.
few denominations any longer accepted the idea of predestination and the belief that people could affect their own destinies added intensity to the individuals search for salvation.
the awakening in short combined a more active piety with a belief in a god whose grace could be attained through faith and good works.
one of the striking features of the awakening was the preponderance of women within new roles for women it.
female converts far outnumbered males.
that may have been due in part to the movement of industrial work out of the home and into the factory.
that process robbed women of one of their roles as part of a household based economy and left many feeling isolated.
religious enthusiasm provided among other things access to a new range of activities charitable societies ministering to orphans and the poor missionary organizations and others in which women came to play important parts.
in some areas of the country revival meetings were open to people of all races.
from these revivals emerged a group of black preachers who became important figures within the enslaved community.
some of them translated the apparently egalitarian religious message of the awakening that salvation was available to all into a similarly liberating message for blacks in the present world.
out of black revival meetings in virginia for example arose an elaborate plan in 1800 devised by gabriel prosser the brother of a black preacher for a slave rebellion and an attack on richmond.
the plan was discovered and foiled in advance by whites but revivalism continued in subsequent years to create occasional racial unrest in the south.
the jeffersonian era 159 the spirit of revivalism was particularly strong among native americans.
presbyterian and baptist missionaries were active among the southern tribes and sparked a wave of conversions.
but the most important revivalist was handsome lake a handsome lake seneca whose seemingly miraculous rebirth after years of alcoholism helped give him a special stature within his tribe.
handsome lake called for a revival of traditional indian ways a repudiation of the individualism of white society and a restoration of the communal quality of the indian world.
his message spread through the scattered iroquois communities that had survived the military and political setbacks of previous decades and inspired many indians to give up whiskey gambling and other destructive customs derived from white society.
but handsome lake also encouraged christian missionaries to become active within the tribes and he urged iroquois men to abandon their roles as hunters and become sedentary farmers instead.
as in much of white society iroquois women who had traditionally done the farming were to move into more domestic roles.
stirrings of industrialism while americans had been engaged in a revolution to win their independence an even more important revolution had been in progress in england the emergence of modern industrialism.
power driven machines were permitting manufacturing to become more rapid and extensive with profound social and economic consequences.
see america in the world the global industrial revolution one reason for the growth of the textile industry in new england in the early nineteenth century was that there were many sources of water power in the region to run the machinery in the factories.
that was certainly the case with slaters mill one of the first american textile factories.
it was located in pawtucket rhode island alongside a powerful waterfall demonstrating the critical importance of water power to early american industry.
bettmann corbis pawtucket bridge and falls america in the world the global industrial revolution while americans were engaged in a revolution to win their independence they were also taking the first steps toward another great revolution one that was already in progress in england and europe.
it was the emergence of modern industrialism.
historians differ over precisely when the industrial revolution began but it is clear that by the end of the e ighteenth century it was well under way in many parts of the world.
a hundred years later the global process of industrialization had transformed the societies of britain most of continental europe japan and the united states.
its social and economic consequences were complex and profound and continue to shape the nature of global society.
for americans the industrial revolution largely resulted from rapid changes in great britain the nation with which they had the closest relations.
britain was the first nation to develop significant industrial capacity.
the factory system took root in england in the late eighteenth century revolutionizing the manufacture of cotton thread and cloth.
one invention followed another in quick succession.
improvements in weaving drove improvements in spinning and these changes created a demand for new devices for carding combing and straightening the fibers for the spinner.
water wind and animal power continued to be important in the textile industry but more important was the emergence of steam power which began to proliferate after the appearance of james watts advanced steam engine patented in 1769.
cumbersome and inefficient by modern standards watts engine was nevertheless a major improvement over earlier atmospheric engines.
englands textile industry 160 quickly became the most profitable in the world and it helped encourage comparable advances in other fields of manufacturing as well.
despite the efforts of the british government to prevent the export of english industrial technology knowledge of the new machines reached other nations quickly usually through the emigration of people who had learned the technology in british factories.
america benefited the most because it received more immigrants from great britain than from any other country but english technology spread quickly to the nations of continental europe as well.
belgium was the first developing a significant coal iron and armaments industry in the early nine teenth century.
france profiting from the immigration of approximately fifteen thousand british workers with advanced technological skills had created a substantial industrial capacity in textiles and metals by the end of the 1820s which in turn contributed to a great boom in railroad construction later in the century.
german industrialization progressed rapidly after 1840 beginning with coal and iron production and then in the 1850s moving into large scale railroad construction.
by the late nineteenth century germany had created some of the worlds largest industrial corporations.
in japan the sudden intrusion of american and european traders helped spur the so called meiji reforms of the 1880s and 1890s which launched a period of rapid industrialization there as well.
industrialization changed not just the worlds economies but also its societies.
first in england and then in europe america and japan social systems underwent wrenching changes.
hundreds of thousands of men and women moved from rural areas into cities to work in factories where they experienced both the benefits and the costs of industrialization.
the standard of living of the new working class when objectively quantified was usually significantly higher than that of the rural poor.
most of those who moved from farm to factory in other words experienced some improvement in nutrition and other material circumstances.
but the psychological costs of being suddenly uprooted from one way of life and thrust into a fundamentally different one could outweigh the economic gains.
there was little in most workers prior experience to prepare them for the nature of industrial labor.
it was disciplined routinized work with a fixed and rigid schedule a sharp contrast to the varying seasonal work pattern of the rural economy.
nor were many factory workers prepared for life in the new industrial towns and expanding cities.
industrial workers experienced too a fundamental change in their relationship with their employers.
unlike rural landlords and local aristocrats factory owners and managers were usually remote and inaccessible figures.
the new class of industrial capitalists many of them accumulating unprecedented wealth dealt with their workers impersonally and the result was a growing schism between the two classes each lacking access to or understanding of the other.
working men and women throughout the globe began thinking of themselves as a distinct class with common goals and interests.
and their efforts simultaneously to adjust to their new way of life and to resist its most damaging aspects sometimes created great social turbulence.
battles between workers and employers became a characteristic feature of industrial life throughout the world.
life in industrial nations changed at every level.
populations grew rapidly and people began to live longer.
at the same time pollution crime and infectious disease until modern sanitation systems emerged increased greatly in industrialized cities.
around the industrial world middle classes expanded and came in varying degrees to dominate the economy although not always the culture or the politics of their nations.
not since the agrarian revolution thousands of years earlier when many humans had turned from hunting to farming for sustenance had there been an economic change of a magnitude comparable to the industrial revolution.
centuries of traditions of social patterns and of cultural and religious assumptions were challenged and often shattered.
the tentative stirrings of industrial activity in the united states in the early nineteenth century therefore were part of a vast movement that over the course of the next century was to transform much of the globe.
understand analyze evaluate 1 why did the british government a ttempt to prevent the export of britains industrial technology.
2 what did the industrial revolution mean for ordinary people around the world.
technology in america nothing comparable to the english industrial revolution occurred in america in the first two decades of the nineteenth century.
yet even while jeffersonians warned of the dangers of rapid economic change they witnessed a series of technological advances 161 162 chapter 8 the monroe doctrine emerged directly out of americas relations with europe in the 1820s.
many americans feared that spains european allies notably france would help spain retake its lost empire.
even more troubling was the fear that great britain had designs on cuba.
monroe and adams wanted to keep cuba in spanish hands until it fell to the americans.
the monroe doctrine had few immediate effects but it was important as an expression of the growing spirit of nationalism in the united states in the 1820s.
and it established the idea of the united states as the dominant power in the western hemisphere.
the revival of opposition after 1816 the federalist party ceased to exist.
the republican party became the only national political organization in america for a short time.
in many ways it now resembled the defunct federalist party in its commitment to economic growth and centralized government.
but divisions were growing just as they had in the late eighteenth century.
by the 1820s a two party system was emerging once again.
the mighty republican party split apart and two new parties emerged.
one was the democratic republican party later the democrats which leaned toward the old jeffersonian vision of a decentralized nation.
the democrats opposed the federal governments growing role in the economy.
the other party was the national republican party later the whigs which leaned toward the old federalists belief in a centralized government.
the whigs believed in a strong national bank and a centralized economy.
both parties believed in economic growth and expansion.
but they disagreed on whether the national government should oversee the economy or whether the economy should be decentralized without interference.
the corrupt bargain until 1820 presidential candidates were nominated by party caucuses in congress.
but in 1824 king caucus was overthrown.
the republican caucus nominated william h crawford of georgia the favorite of the extreme states rights faction of the party.
but other candidates received nominations from state legislatures and won endorsements from irregular mass meetings throughout the country.
one of them was secretary of state john quincy adams.
but he was a man of cold and forbidding manners with little popular appeal.
another contender was henry clay the speaker of the house.
he had a devoted personal following and a definite and coherent program the american system which proposed creating a great home market for factory and farm producers by raising the protective tariff strengthening the national bank and financing internal improvements.
andrew jackson the fourth major candidate had no significant political record even though he was a new member of the united states senate.
but he was a military hero and had the help of shrewd political allies from his home state of tennessee.
jackson received more popular and electoral votes than any other candidate but not a majority.
the twelfth amendment to the constitution passed in the aftermath of the disputed election contested 1800 election required the house of representatives to choose among the three candidates with the largest numbers of electoral votes.
crawford was seriously ill clay was out of the running but he was in a strong position to influence the result.
jackson was clays most dangerous political rival in the west so clay supported adams in part because adams was an ardent nationalist and a likely supporter of the american system.
with clays endorsement adams won election in the house.
varieties of american nationalism 199 the jacksonians believed that their large popular and electoral pluralities entitled their candidate to the presidency and they were enraged when he lost.
but they grew angrier still when adams named clay his secretary of state.
the state department was the wellestablished route to the presidency and adams thus appeared to be naming clay as his own successor.
the outrage the jacksonians expressed at what they called a corrupt bargain haunted adams throughout his presidency.
the second president adams adams proposed an ambitiously nationalist program reminiscent of clays american system but jacksonians in congress blocked most of it.
adams also experienced diplomatic frustrations.
he appointed delegates to an international conference that the diplomatic frustrations venezuelan liberator simn bolvar had called in panama in 1826 but haiti was one of the participating nations and southerners in congress opposed the idea of white americans mingling with the black delegates.
congress delayed approving the panama mission so long that the american delegation did not arrive until after the conference was over.
even more damaging to the administration was its support for a new tariff on imported goods in 1828 this measure originated with the demands of new england woolen manufacturers.
but to win support from middle and western states the administration had to accept duties on other items.
in the process it antagonized the original supporters of the bill the benefits of protecting their manufactured goods from foreign competition now had to be weighed against the prospects of having to pay the tariff of abominations more for raw materials.
adams signed the bill earning the animosity of southerners who cursed it as the tariff of abominations jackson triumphant by the time of the 1828 presidential election the new two party system was now in place.
on one side stood the supporters of john quincy adams and the national republicans.
opposing them were the followers of andrew jackson known simply as democrats.
adams attracted the support of most of the remaining federalists jackson appealed to a broad coalition that opposed the economic aristocracy but issues seemed to count for little in the end as the campaign degenerated into a war of personal invective.
the jacksonians charged that adams had been guilty of gross waste and extravagance.
adamss supporters hurled even worse accusations at jackson.
they called him a murderer and distributed a coffin handbill which listed within coffin shaped outlines the names of militiamen whom jackson was said to have shot in cold blood during the war of 1812.
the men had been deserters who were legally executed after sentence by a court martial.
and they called his wife a bigamist.
jackson had married his beloved rachel at a time when the pair incorrectly believed her first husband had divorced her.
when jacksons wife read of the accusations against her she collapsed and a few weeks later died.
jacksons victory was decisive but sectional.
adams swept virtually all of new england and showed significant strength in the mid atlantic region.
nevertheless the jacksonians considered their victory as complete and as important as jeffersons in 1800 once again the forces of privilege had been driven from washington.
once again a champion of democracy would occupy the white house.
america had entered some jacksonians claimed a new era of democracy the era of the common man 200 chapter 9 harrison and reform this hand colored engraving was made for a brass brooch during the 1840 presidential campaign and served the same purposes that modern campaign buttons do.
it conveys harrisons presumably humble beginnings in a log cabin.
in reality harrison was a wealthy aristocratic man but the unpopularity of the aristocratic airs of his opponent president martin van buren persuaded the whig party that it would be good political strategy to portray harrison as a humble man of the people david j.
janice l frent collection corbis of their opposition to andrew jacksons common people democracy presented themselves in 1840 as the party of the common people.
so of course did the democrats.
with both parties using the same techniques of mass voter appeal what mattered was not the philosophical purity of the party but its ability to win votes.
the whig campaign was particularly effective in portraying william henry harrison a wealthy member of the frontier elite with a considerable estate as a simple man of the people who loved log cabins and hard cider.
the democrats already weakened by the depression had no effective defense against such tactics.
harrison won the election with 234 electoral votes to 60 for van buren and with a popular majority of 53 percent.
the frustration of the whigs despite their decisive victory the whigs found the four years after their resounding victory frustrating and divisive.
the trouble began when their appealing new president died of pneumonia just one month after taking office.
vice president john tyler of virginia succeeded him.
jacksonian america 223 tyler was a former democrat who had left the party in reaction to what he considered jacksons excessively egalitarian program tylers approach to public policy still showed signs of his democratic past.
the president did agree to bills abolishing van burens independenttreasury system and raising tariff rates.
but he refused to support clays attempt to recharter the bank of the united states and he vetoed several internal improvement bills sponsored by clay and other congressional whigs.
finally a conference of congressional whigs voted tyler out of the party.
every cabinet member but webster who was serving as secretary of state resigned five former democrats took their places.
when webster too left the cabinet tyler appointed calhoun who had rejoined the democratic party to replace him.
a new political alignment was taking shape.
tyler and a small band of conservative southern whigs were preparing to rejoin the democrats.
into the common changes to democratic party peoples party of jackson and van buren was arriving a faction with decidedly aristocratic political ideas men who thought that government had an obligation to protect and even expand the institution of slavery and who believed in states rights with almost fanatical devotion.
whig diplomacy in the midst of these domestic controversies anti british factions in canada launched an unsuccessful rebellion against the colonial government there in 1837 when the insurrection failed some of the rebels took refuge near the united states border and chartered an american steamship the caroline to ship them supplies across the caroline affair and aroostook war niagara river from new york.
british authorities in canada seized the caroline and burned it killing one american in the process.
resentment in the united states grew rapidly.
at the same time tensions flared over the boundary between canada and maine which had been in dispute since the treaty of 1783 in 1838 rival groups of americans and canadians mostly lumberjacks began moving into the aroostook river region in the disputed area precipitating a violent brawl that became known as the aroostook war several years later in 1841 an american ship the creole sailed from virginia for new orleans with more than 100 slaves aboard.
en route the slaves mutinied seized possession of the ship and took it to the bahamas.
british officials there declared the slaves free and the english government refused to overrule them.
many americans especially southerners were furious.
at this critical juncture a new government eager to reduce tensions with the united states came to power in great britain.
it sent lord ashburton an admirer of america to negotiate an agreement on the maine boundary and other matters.
the result was the webster ashburton treaty of 1842 under which the united states webster ashburton treaty received slightly more than half the disputed area and agreed to a northern boundary as far west as the rocky mountains.
ashburton also eased the memory of the caroline and creole affairs by expressing regret and promising no future officious interference with american ships.
anglo american relations improved significantly.
during the tyler administration the united states established its first diplomatic relations with china.
in the 1844 treaty of wang hya american diplomats trade with china secured the same trading privileges as the english.
in the next ten years american trade with china steadily increased.
in their diplomatic efforts at least the whigs were able to secure some important successes.
but by the end of the tyler administration the party could look back on few other victories.
and in the election of 1844 the whigs lost the white house to james k polk a democrat with an explicit agenda of westward expansion.
224 chapter 9 conclusion the election of andrew jackson in 1828 reflected the emergence of a new political world.
throughout the american nation the laws governing political participation were loosening and the number of people permitted to vote which eventually included most white males but almost no one else was increasing.
along with this expansion of the electorate was emerging a new spirit of party politics.
jackson set out as president to entrench his party the democrats in power.
a fierce defender of the west and a sharp critic of what he considered the stranglehold of the aristocratic east on the nations economic life he sought to limit the role of the federal government in economic affairs and worked to destroy the bank of the united states which he considered a corrupt vehicle of aristocratic influence.
and he confronted the greatest challenge yet to american unity the nullification crisis of 1832 1833 with a strong assertion of the power and importance of the union.
these positions won him broad popularity and ensured his reelection in 1832 and the election of his designated successor martin van buren in 1836 but a new coalition of anti jacksonians who called themselves the whigs launched a powerful new party that used much of the same anti elitist rhetoric to win support for their own much more nationalist program.
their emergence culminated in the campaign of 1840 with the election of william henry harrison the first whig president.
when his death led to the accidental presidency of john tyler however further realignments were set in motion.
key terms people places events alexis de tocqueville 204 andrew jackson 202 anti masonry 217 aroostook war 223 bank war 215 black hawk war 211 caroline affair 223 daniel webster 210 dorr rebellion 203 five civilized tribes 211 indian removal act 212 indian territory 213 john c calhoun 209 john tyler 222 martin van buren 209 nicholas biddle 214 nullification 209 panic of 1837 218 roger b taney 216 seminole wars 213 specie circular 219 spoils system 207 trail of tears 213 webster ashburton treaty 223 webster hayne debate 210 whigs 216 william henry harrison 219 recall and reflect 1 what was andrew jacksons political philosophy and how was it reflected in the policies and actions of his administration.
who benefited under jacksonian democracy.
who suffered.
how did andrew jackson change the office of the presidency.
who supported and who opposed the bank of the united states and why.
who was right.
how and why did white attitudes toward native americans change and how did these changes lead to the indian removal act and the trail of tears.
6 how did native americans in the southeast respond to white efforts to seize their land and remove them to the west.
5 americas economic revolution the changing american population transportation and communications revolutions commerce and industry men and women at work patterns of society the agricultural north looking ahead 1 what were the factors sparking the u s economic revolution of the mid nineteenth century.
2 how did the u s population change between 1820 and 1840 and how did the population change affect the nations economy society and politics.
3 why did americas industrial revolution affect the northern economy and society differently than it did the southern economy and society.
when the united states entered the war of 1812 it was still an essentially agrarian nation.
there were to be sure some substantial cities in america and also modest but growing manufacturing mainly in the northeast.
but the overwhelming majority of americans were farmers and tradespeople.
by the time the civil war began in 1861 the united states had transformed itself.
most americans were still rural people.
but even most farmers were now part of a national and even international market economy.
equally important the united states was beginning to challenge the industrial nations of europe for supremacy in manufacturing.
the nation had experienced the beginning of its industrial revolution.
225 time line the changing american population 1817 1825 erie canal constructed 1830s immigration from ireland and germany begins baltimore and ohio railroad begins operation lowell mills women strike native american association fights immigration mccormick patents mechanical reaper morse sends first telegraph message native american party formed rotary press invented john deere manufactures steel plows american party know nothings formed 226 the american industrial revolution was a result of many factors advances in transportation and communications the growth of manufacturing technology the development of new systems of business organization and perhaps above all population growth.
population trends three trends characterized the american population during the antebellum period rapid population increase movement westward and the growth of towns and cities where demand for work was expanding.
the american population 4 million in 1790 had reached 10 million by 1820 and 17 million by 1840 improvements in public health played a role in this growth.
epidemics declined in both frequency and intensity and the death rate as a whole dipped.
but the population increase was also a result of a high birthrate.
in 1840 white women bore an average of 6 14 children each.
the african american population increased more slowly than the white population.
after 1808 when the importation of slaves became illegal the proportion of blacks to whites in the nation as a whole steadily declined.
the slower increase of the black population was also a result of its comparatively high death rate.
slave mothers had large families but life was shorter for both slaves and free blacks than for whites a result of the enforced poverty and harsh working conditions in which virtually all african americans lived.
immigration choked off by wars in europe and economic crises in america contributed little to the american population in the first three decades of the nineteenth century.
of the total 1830 population of nearly 13 million the foreign born numbered fewer than 500 000 soon however immigration americas economic revolution 227 began to grow once again.
reduced transportation costs and increasing economic opportunities helped stimulate the immigration boom as did deteriorating economic conditions in some areas of europe.
much of this new european immigration flowed into the rapidly growing cities of the northeast.
but urban growth was a result of substantial internal migration as well.
as agriculture in new england and other areas grew less profitable more and more people picked up stakes and moved some to promising agricultural regions in the west but many to eastern cities.
immigration and urban growth 1840 1860 the growth of cities accelerated dramatically between 1840 and 1860 the population of new york for example rose from 312 000 to 805 000 making it the rapid urbanization nations largest and most commercially important city.
philadelphias population grew over the same twenty year period from 220 000 to 565 000 bostons from 93 000 to 177 000 by 1860 26 percent of the population of the free states was living in towns places of 2 500 people or more or cities up from 14 percent in 1840 the urban population of the south by contrast increased from 6 percent in 1840 to only 10 percent in 1860 the booming agricultural economy of the west produced significant urban growth as well.
between 1820 and 1840 communities that had once been small villages or trading posts became major cities st louis pittsburgh cincinnati louisville.
all became centers of the growing carrying trade that connected the farmers of the midwest with new orleans and through it the cities of the northeast.
after 1830 however an increasing proportion of this trade moved from the mississippi river to the great lakes creating such important new port cities as buffalo detroit milwaukee and chicago which gradually overtook the river ports.
immigration from europe swelled.
between 1840 and 1850 more than 1 5 million europeans moved to america.
in the 1850s the number rose to 2 5 million.
almost half the residents of new york city in the 1850s were recent immigrants.
in st louis chicago and milwaukee the foreign born outnumbered those of native birth.
few immigrants settled in the south.
the newcomers came from many different countries but the overwhelming majority came from ireland and germany.
by 1860 there were more than irish and german immigrants 1 5 million irish born and approximately 1 million german born people in the united states.
most of the irish stayed in the eastern cities where they landed and became part of the unskilled labor force.
the largest single group of irish immigrants comprised young single women who worked in factories or in domestic service.
germans who unlike the irish usually arrived with at least some money and often came in family groups generally moved on to the northwest where they became farmers or small businessmen.
the rise of nativism many politicians particularly democrats eagerly courted the support of the new arrivals.
other older citizens however viewed the growing foreign population with alarm.
some people argued that the immigrants were racially inferior or that they corrupted politics by selling their votes.
others complained that they were stealing jobs from the native workforce.
protestants worried that the growing irish population would increase the power of the catholic church in america.
older stock americans feared that immigrants would become a radical force in politics.
out of these fears and prejudices emerged a number of secret societies to combat the alien menace 228 chapter 11 cotton economies might have forced the region to shift its attention to other nonagricultural pursuits had it not been for the growing importance of a new product that soon short staple cotton overshadowed all else short staple cotton.
it was a hardier and coarser strain of cotton that could grow successfully in a variety of climates and soils.
it was harder to process than the long staple cotton because its seeds were difficult to remove from the fiber.
but the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 had largely solved that problem.
demand for cotton increased rapidly in britain in the 1820s and 1830s and in new england in the 1840s and 1850s.
from the western areas of south carolina and georgia production moved into alabama and mississippi and then into northern louisiana texas and arkansas.
by the 1850s cotton had become the linchpin of the southern economy.
by the time of the civil war cotton constituted nearly two thirds of the total export trade of the united states.
it was little wonder that southern politicians now proclaimed cotton is king cotton production boomed in the lower south later known as the deep south.
some began to call it the cotton kingdom the prospect of tremendous profits drew settlers to the lower south by the thousands.
some were wealthy planters from the older states but most were small slaveholders or slaveless farmers who hoped to move into the planter class.
a similar shift if an involuntary one occurred in the slave population.
between 1840 and 1860 hundreds of thousands of slaves moved from the upper south to the cotton states either accompanying masters who were themselves migrating to the lower south or more often sold to planters already there.
this second middle passage as the historian ira berlin has called it using a term usually associated with the transatlantic slave trade was a traumatic experience for perhaps a million dislocated african americans.
slave families were b roken up and scattered across the expand second middle passage ing cotton kingdom.
marched over hundreds of rugged miles tied together in coffles as on the earlier slave ships coming from africa they arrived in unfamiliar and usually forbidding territory where they were made to construct new plantations and work in cotton fields.
the sale of slaves to the lower south became an important economic activity for whites in the upper south where agricultural production was declining.
southern trade and industry in the face of this booming agricultural expansion other forms of economic activity were slow to develop in the south.
flour milling and textile and iron manufacturing grew particularly in the upper south but industry remained a relatively insignificant force in comparison with the agricultural economy.
the total value of southern textile manufactures in 1860 was 4 5 million a threefold increase over the value of those goods twenty years before.
but the value of the exports was approximately 200 million.
the limited nonfarm commercial sector that did develop in the south was largely intended to serve the needs of the plantation economy.
particularly important were the brokers or factors who in the absence of banks marketed the planters crops and provided them with credit.
other obstacles to economic development included the souths inadequate transportation system.
canals were almost nonexistent most roads were crude and unsuitable for heavy transport and railroads although they expanded substantially in the 1840s and 1850s failed to tie the region together effectively.
despite the lack of canals the principal means of transportation was still water.
planters generally shipped their crops to market along rivers or by sea most manufacturing was in or near port towns.
the south therefore was becoming more and more dependent on the industrial manufacturers merchants and professionals of the north.
concerned by this trend some cotton slavery and the old south 255 southerners began to advocate economic independence for the region among them james d b de bow of new orleans whose magazine de bows de bows commercial review commercial review called for southern commercial expansion and economic independence from the north.
yet even de bows commercial review was filled with advertisements from northern manufacturing firms and its circulation was far smaller in the south than such northern magazines as harpers weekly.
sources of southern difference an important question about antebellum southern history concerns why the region did so little to develop a larger industrial and commercial economy of its own.
why did it remain so different from the north.
part of the reason was the great profitability of the regions agricultural system.
in the northeast many people had turned to manufacturing as the agricultural economy of the region declined.
in the south the agricultural economy was booming and ambitious capitalists had little incentive to look elsewhere.
another reason was that wealthy southerners had so much capital invested in land and slaves that they had little left for other investments.
some historians have also suggested that the southern climate with its long hot steamy summers was less suitable for industrial development than the climate of the north.
edgar degas the renowned french painter painted this scene of cotton traders examining samples in the new orleans cotton exchange in 1873 by this time the cotton trade was producing less impressive profits than those that had made it the driving force of the booming southern economy of the 1850s.
degass mother came from a creole family of cotton brokers in new orleans and two of the artists brothers depicted here reading a newspaper and leaning against a window joined the business in america.
musee des beaux arts pau france bridgeman images the new orleans cotton exchange 256 chapter 11 some nonslaveowning whites did oppose the planter elite but for the most part in limited ways and in isolated areas.
these were mainly the hill people who lived in the appalachian ranges east of the mississippi in the ozarks to the west of the river and in other hill country or backcountry areas.
they practiced a simple form of subsistence agriculture owned practically no slaves and were in most respects unconnected to the cotton economy.
such whites frequently expressed animosity toward the planter aristocracy.
unsurprisingly the mountain regions were the only parts of the south to resist the movement toward secession in the early 1860s.
even during the civil war itself many refused to support the confederacy.
far greater in number however were the nonslaveowning whites who lived in the midst of the plantation system.
many perhaps most of them accepted that system because they were tied to it in important ways.
small farmers depended on the local plantation aristocracy for access to cotton gins markets for their modest crops and their livestock and credit or other financial assistance in time of need.
in many areas moreover the poorest resident of a county might easily be a cousin of the richest aristocrat.
in the 1850s the cotton boom allowed many small farmers to improve their economic fortunes.
some bought more land became s laveowners and moved into at least the fringes of plantation society.
others simply felt more secure in their positions as independent yeomen and hence were more likely to embrace the fierce regional loyalty that was spreading throughout the white south in these years.
there were other white southerners however who were known at the time variously as crackers sand hillers or poor white trash occupying the infertile lands of the pine barrens the red hills and the swamps they lived in genuine squalor.
many owned no land poorest whites and supported themselves by foraging or hunting.
others worked at times as common laborers for their neighbors.
their degradation resulted partly from dietary deficiencies and disease.
forced to resort at times to eating clay hence the tendency of moreaffluent whites to refer to them disparagingly as clay eaters they suffered from pellagra hookworm and malaria.
planters and small farmers alike held them in contempt.
even among these southerners the true outcasts of white society there was no real opposition to the plantation system or slavery.
in part this was because they were so benumbed by shared sense of racial supremacy poverty that they had little strength to protest.
but the single greatest unifying factor among the southern white population was their perception of race.
however poor and miserable white southerners might be they could still look down on the black population of the region and feel a bond with their fellow whites and a sense of racial supremacy.
hill people slavery the peculiar institution white southerners often referred to slavery as the peculiar institution meaning that it was distinctive special.
and indeed it was.
the south in the mid nineteenth century was the only area in the western world except for brazil cuba and puerto rico where slavery still existed.
slavery more than any other single factor isolated the south from the rest of american society and much of the world.
within the south itself slavery produced paradoxical results.
on one hand it isolated blacks from whites.
as a result african americans under slavery began to develop a society and culture of their own.
on the other hand slavery created a unique bond between blacks and whites slaves and masters in the south.
the two groups may have maintained separate spheres but each sphere was deeply influenced by the other.
in both cases slavery profoundly affected all aspects of southern and even american society.
see debating the past the character of slavery cotton slavery and the old south 261 varieties of slavery southern slave codes forbade slaves to hold property to leave their masters premises without permission to be out after dark to congregate with other slaves except slave codes at church to carry firearms to testify in court against white people or to strike a white person even in self defense.
the codes prohibited whites from teaching slaves to read or write.
the laws contained no provisions to legalize slave marriages or divorces.
if an owner killed a slave while punishing him the act was generally not considered a crime.
slaves however faced the death penalty for killing or even resisting a white person and for inciting revolt.
the codes also contained extraordinarily rigid provisions for defining a persons race.
anyone with a trace or often even a rumor of african ancestry was defined as black.
enforcement of the codes however was spotty and uneven.
some slaves did acquire property did become literate and did assemble with other slaves.
white owners themselves handled most transgressions by their slaves and inflicted widely varying punishments.
in other words despite the rigid provisions of law there was in reality considerable difference within the slave system.
some slaves lived in almost prisonlike conditions rigidly and harshly controlled by their masters.
many probably most others experienced considerable flexibility and autonomy.
the nature of the relationship between masters and slaves depended in part on the size of the plantation.
white farmers with few slaves generally plantation size and slave experience supervised their workers directly and often worked closely alongside them.
the paternal relationship between such masters and their slaves could be warm and benevolent or tyrannical and cruel.
in general african americans themselves preferred to live on larger plantations where they had a chance for a social world of their own.
although the majority of slaveowners were small farmers the majority of slaves lived on plantations of medium or large size with substantial slave workforces.
thus the relationship between master and slave was much less intimate for the typical slave than for the typical slaveowner.
substantial planters often hired overseers and even assistant overseers to represent them.
head drivers trusted and responsible slaves often assisted by several subdrivers acted under the overseer as foremen.
life under slavery most but not all slaves received an adequate if rude diet consisting mainly of cornmeal salt pork molasses and on rare occasions fresh meat or poultry.
many slaves cultivated gardens for their own use.
their masters provided them with cheap clothing and shoes.
they lived in rough cabins called slave quarters.
the plantation mistress or a doctor retained by the owner provided some medical care but slave women themselves as healers midwives or simply as mothers often were the more important source of medical attention.
slaves worked hard beginning with light tasks as children.
their workdays were longest at harvesttime.
slave women worked particularly hard.
they work conditions generally labored in the fields with the men and they also handled cooking cleaning and child rearing.
many slave families were divided.
husbands and fathers often lived on neighboring plantations at times one spouse usually the male would be sold to a plantation owner far away.
as a result black women often found themselves acting in effect as single parents.
slaves were as a group much less healthy than southern whites.
after 1808 when the importation of slaves became illegal the proportion of blacks to whites in the nation as a whole steadily declined as a result of the comparatively high black death rate.
debating the past the character of slavery no issue in american history has produced a more spirited debate than the nature of plantation slavery.
the debate began well before the civil war when a bolitionists strove to expose slavery to the world as a brutal dehumanizing institution while southern defenders of slavery tried to depict it as a benevolent and paternalistic system.
but by the late nineteenth century with white americans eager for sectional conciliation most northern and southern chroniclers of slavery began to accept a romanticized and unthreatening picture of the old south and its peculiar institution.
the first major scholarly examination of slavery was ulrich b phillipss american negro slavery 1918 which portrayed slavery as an essentially benign institution in which kindly masters looked after submissive and generally contented african americans.
phillipss apologia for slavery remained the authoritative work on the subject for nearly thirty years.
in the 1940s challenges to phillips began to emerge.
melville j herskovits disputed phillipss contention that black americans retained little of their african cultural inheritance.
herbert aptheker published a chronicle of slave revolts as a way of refuting phillipss claim that blacks were submissive and content.
a somewhat different challenge to phillips emerged in the 1950s from historians who emphasized the brutality of the institution.
kenneth stampps the peculiar institution 1956 and stanley elkinss slavery 1959 described a labor system that did serious physical and psychological damage to its victims.
they portrayed slavery as something like a prison in which men and women 262 had virtually no space to develop their own social and cultural lives.
elkins compared the system to nazi concentration camps and likened the childlike sambo personality of slavery to tragic distortions of character produced by the holocaust.
in the early 1970s an explosion of new scholarship on slavery shifted the emphasis away from the damage the system inflicted on african americans and toward the striking success of the slaves themselves in building a culture of their own.
john blassingame in 1973 argued that the most remarkable aspect of the whole process of enslavement is the extent to which the american born slaves were able to retain their ancestors culture herbert gutman in the black family in slavery and freedom 1976 challenged the prevailing belief that slavery had weakened and even destroyed the african american family.
on the contrary gutman argued the black family survived slavery with impressive strength although with some significant differences from the prevailing form of the white family.
eugene genoveses roll jordan roll 1974 revealed how african americans manipulated white paternalist assumptions to build a large c ultural space of their own where they could develop their own family life social traditions and religious patterns.
that same year robert fogel and stanley engerman published the controversial time on the cross a highly quantitative study that supported some of the claims of gutman and genovese about black achievement but that went much further in portraying slavery as a successful and reasonably humane if u ltimately immoral system.
slave workers they argued were better treated and lived in greater this 1855 photograph of a slave woman and masters child is documentary evidence of the complex relationships that historians of slavery have studied.
the library of congress nursing the masters child comfort than most northern i ndustrial workers of the same era.
their conclusions produced a storm of criticism.
other important scholarship includes african american slave women.
elizabeth fox genoveses within the plantation household 1988 examined the lives of both white and black women on the plantation.
she portrayed slave women as defined by their dual roles as members of the plantation workforce and anchors of the black family.
slave women she argued professed loyalty to their mistresses when forced to serve them as domestics but their real loyalty remained to their own communities and families.
more recent studies by walter johnson and ira berlin mark an at least partial return to the damage approach to slavery of the 1970s.
johnsons soul by soul 2000 examines the souths largest slave market new orleans.
for whites he argues purchasing slaves was a way of fulfilling the middle class male fantasy of success and independence.
for the slaves themselves the trade was dehumanizing and destructive to black families and communities.
berlins many thousands gone 2000 and generation of captivity 2003 among the most important studies of slavery in a generation similarly emphasize the dehumanizing character of the slave market and show that whatever white slaveowners might say slavery was less a social system than a commodification of human beings.
understand analyze evaluate 1 why might the conclusions drawn by robert fogel and stanley engerman in time on the cross have provoked vehement criticism.
2 what might be some reasons for the resurrection of focus on the damage thesis of slavery as in the works by walter johnson and ira berlin.
263 264 chapter 11 clear starching in louisiana this 1837 etching by french artist auguste hervieu depicts a plantation mistress verbally abusing a slave woman and child.
hervieu traveled to america with british writer and abolitionist frances trollope.
this illustration is from trollopes 1836 novel the life and adventures of jonathan jefferson whitlaw or scenes on the mississippi a work that exposed the degrading effects of slavery on both slaves and slaveowners.
the life and adventures of jonathan jefferson whitlaw by frances trollope 1836 slave mothers had large families but the enforced poverty in which virtually all african americans lived ensured that fewer of their children would survive to adulthood than the high mortality rates children of white parents.
even those who did survive typically died at a younger age than the average white person.
household servants had a somewhat easier life physically at least than did field hands.
on a small plantation the same slaves might do both field work and housework.
but on a large estate there would generally be a separate domestic staff nursemaids housemaids cooks butlers coachmen.
these people lived close to the master and his family eating the leftovers from the family table.
between the blacks and whites of such households affectionate almost familial relationships might develop.
more often however house servants resented their isolation from their fellow slaves and the lack of privacy and increased discipline that came with living in such close proximity to the masters family.
when emancipation came after the civil war it was often the house servants who were the first to leave the plantations of their former owners.
female household servants were especially vulnerable to sexual abuse by their masters and sexual abuse white overseers.
in addition to being subjected to unwanted sexual attention from white men female slaves often received vindictive treatment from white women.
plantation mistresses naturally resented the sexual liaisons between their husbands and female slaves.
punishing their husbands was not usually possible so they often punished the slaves instead with arbitrary beatings increased workloads and various forms of psychological torment.
slavery in the cities the conditions of urban slavery differed significantly from those in the countryside.
on the relatively isolated plantations slaves had little contact with free blacks and lower class whites and masters maintained a fairly direct and effective control.
in the city however cotton slavery and the old south 265 a master often could not supervise his slaves closely and at the same time use them profitably.
even if they slept at night in carefully watched backyard barracks they moved about during the day alone performing errands of various kinds.
there was a considerable market in the south for common laborers particularly since unlike in the north there were few european immigrants to perform menial chores.
as a result masters often hired out slaves for such tasks.
slaves on contract worked in mining and lumbering often far from cities but others worked on the docks and on construction sites drove wagons and performed other unskilled jobs in cities and towns.
slave women and children worked in the regions few textile mills.
particularly skilled workers such as blacksmiths or carpenters were also often hired out.
after regular working hours many of them fended for themselves thus urban slaves gained numerous opportunities to mingle with free blacks and with whites.
in the cities the line between slavery and freedom was less distinct than on the plantation.
free african americans over 250 000 free african americans lived in the slaveholding states by the start of the civil war more than half of them in virginia and maryland.
in some cases they were slaves who had somehow earned money to buy their own and their families freedom.
it was most often urban blacks with their greater freedom of movement and activity who could take that route.
one example was elizabeth keckley a slave woman elizabeth keckley who bought freedom for herself and her son with proceeds from sewing.
she later became a seamstress personal servant and companion to mary todd lincoln in the white house.
but few masters had any incentive or inclination to give up their slaves so this route was open to relatively few people.
some slaves were set free by a master who had moral qualms about slavery or by a masters will after his death for example the more than 400 slaves belonging to john randolph of roanoke freed in 1833 from the 1830s on new restrictions on manumission however state laws governing slavery became stricter in part in response to the fears nat turners revolt created among white southerners.
the new laws made it more difficult and in some cases practically impossible for owners to set free or manumit their slaves.
a few free blacks attained wealth and prominence.
some even owned slaves themselves usually relatives whom they had bought to ensure their ultimate emancipation.
in a few cities new orleans natchez and charleston free black communities managed to flourish with relatively little interference from whites and with some economic stability.
most southern free blacks however lived in abject poverty.
yet great as were the hardships of freedom blacks much preferred it to slavery.
the slave trade the transfer of slaves from one part of the south to another was one of the most important and terrible consequences of slavery.
sometimes slaves moved to the new cotton lands in the company of their original owners who were migrating themselves.
more often however the transfer occurred through the efforts of professional slave traders.
the traders took slaves to such central markets as natchez new orleans mobile and charleston where purchasers bid for them.
a sound young field hand could fetch a price that might vary in the 1840s and 1850s from 500 to 1 700 depending on fluctuations in the market and the health and age of the slaves.
266 chapter 11 when marriages did not survive it was often because of circumstances over which blacks had no control.
up to a third of all black families were broken apart by the slave trade.
extended kinship networks were strong and important and often helped compensate for the breakup of nuclear families.
a slave forced suddenly to move to a new area far from his or her family might create fictional kinship ties and become adopted by a family in the new community.
even so the impulse to maintain contact with a spouse and children remained strong long after the breakup of a family.
one of the most frequent causes of flight from the plantation was a slaves desire to find a husband wife or child who had been sent elsewhere.
after the civil war white and black newspapers were filled with notices from former slaves seeking to reconnect with family members separated during bondage.
however much blacks resented their lack of freedom they often found it difficult to maintain an entirely hostile attitude toward their owners.
they depended on whites for the material means of existence food clothing and shelter and they relied on them as well for security and protection.
there was in short a paternal relationship between slave paternalism and master sometimes harsh at other times kindly but always important.
that paternalism in fact became a vital instrument of white control.
by creating a sense of mutual dependence whites helped minimize though never eliminated resistance to an institution that served only the interests of the ruling race.
conclusion while the north was creating a complex and rapidly developing commercial industrial economy the south was expanding its agrarian economy without making many fundamental changes in the regions character.
great migrations took many southern whites and even more african american slaves into new agricultural areas in the deep south where they created a booming cotton kingdom the cotton economy created many great fortunes and some modest ones.
it also entrenched the planter class as the dominant force within southern society both as owners of vast numbers of slaves and as patrons creditors politicians landlords and marketers for the large number of poor whites who lived on the edge of the planter world.
the differences between the north and the south were a result of differences in natural resources social structure climate and culture.
above all they were the result of the existence within the south of an unfree labor system that prevented the kind of social fluidity that an industrializing society usually requires.
within that system however slaves created a vital independent culture and religion in the face of white subjugation.
key terms people places events abolitionist 262 amistad 266 cotton kingdom 254 cult of honor 257 denmark vesey 267 elizabeth keckley 265 gabriel prosser 267 james henry hammond 258 manumission 265 nat turner 267 peculiar institution 260 planter class 257 second middle passage 254 slave codes 261 cotton slavery and the old south 271 recall and reflect why did cotton become the leading crop of the south.
why did industry fail to develop in the south to the extent that it did in the north.
how did slavery function economically and socially.
what was the effect of slavery on white slaveowners.
on nonslaveowning whites.
on free blacks.
5 through what means did slaves maintain a distinct african american culture.
4 antebellum culture and reform the romantic impulse remaking society the crusade against slavery looking ahead 1 how did an american national culture of art literature philosophy and communal living develop in the nineteenth century.
2 what were the issues on which social and moral reformers tried to remake the nation.
how successful were their efforts.
3 why did the crusade against slavery become the preeminent issue of the reform movement.
the united states in the mid nineteenth century was growing rapidly in size population and economic complexity.
most americans were excited by the new possibilities these changes produced.
but many people were also painfully aware of the problems that accompanied them.
one result of these conflicting attitudes was the emergence of movements to reform the nation.
some reforms rested on an optimistic faith in human nature a belief that within every individual resided a spirit that was basically good and that society should attempt to unleash.
a second impulse was a desire for order and control.
with their traditional values and institutions being challenged and eroded many americans yearned above all for stability and discipline.
by the end of the 1840s however one issue slavery had come to overshadow all others.
and one group of reformers the abolitionists had become the most influential of all.
272 the romantic impulse in the four quarters of the globe wrote the english wit sydney smith in 1820 who reads an american book.
or goes to an american play.
or looks at an american picture or statue the answer he assumed was obvious no one.
american intellectuals were painfully aware of the low regard in which europeans held their culture and they tried to create an artistic life that would express their own nations special virtues.
at the same time many of the nations cultural leaders were striving for another kind of liberation which was ironically largely an import from europe the spirit of romanticism.
in literature in philosophy in art even in politics and economics american intellectuals were committing themselves to the liberation of the human spirit.
nationalism and romanticism in american painting despite sydney smiths contemptuous question a great many people in the united states were in fact looking at american paintings and they were doing so because they believed americans were creating important new artistic traditions of their own.
american painters sought to capture the power of nature by portraying some of the nations most spectacular and undeveloped areas.
the first great school of american painters known as the hudson river school emerged in new york.
frederic church thomas cole thomas doughty asher durand and others painted the spectacular vistas of the rugged and still largely untamed hudson valley.
like ralph waldo emerson and henry david thoreau whom many of the painters read and admired they considered nature far more than civilization the best source of wisdom and fulfillment.
in portraying the hudson valley they seemed to announce that in time line new york constructs first penitentiary coopers the last of the mohicans joseph smith publishes the book of mormon the liberator begins publication american antislavery society founded horace mann appointed secretary of massachusetts board of education liberty party formed brook farm founded frederick douglasss autobiography womens rights convention at seneca falls n y oneida community founded hawthornes the scarlet letter melvilles moby dick stowes uncle toms cabin thoreaus walden whitmans leaves of grass 273 274 chapter 13 key terms people places events abraham lincoln 317 antonio lpez de santa anna 291 charles sumner 312 compromise of 1850 309 dred scott decision 315 forty niners 307 free soil party 306 gadsden purchase 311 harpers ferry 318 james k polk 301 john brown 317 kansas nebraska act 311 manifest destiny 297 oregon trail 299 popular sovereignty 306 sam houston 298 stephen a douglas 309 stephen f austin 298 tejanos 298 the alamo 291 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo 304 wilmot proviso 306 young america 310 zachary taylor 302 recall and reflect 1 how were the boundary disputes over oregon and texas resolved.
why were the resolutions in the two cases so different.
2 how did polks decisions and actions as president intensify the sectional conflict.
3 what was the issue at stake in bleeding kansas and how did events in kansas reflect the growing sectional division between the north and the south.
4 what was the dred scott decision.
what was the decisions impact on the sectional crisis.
5 how did the growing sectional crisis affect the nations major political parties.
the civil war the secession crisis the mobilization of the north the mobilization of the south strategy and diplomacy campaigns and battles looking ahead 1 how did the norths mobilization for war differ from mobilization in the south.
what accounts for these differences.
2 what were the differences between the impact of the war in the north and the south.
3 what were the military strategies employed by the north and the south from the opening clashes in 1861 through the union victory in 1865 and how did these strategies differ.
by the end of 1860 the cords that had bound the union together had snapped.
the second party system had collapsed replaced by one that accentuated rather than muted regional controversy.
the federal government was no longer a remote unthreatening presence the need to resolve the status of the territories had made it necessary for washington to deal directly with sectional issues.
the election of 1860 brought these tensions to a head and precipitated the most terrible war in the nations history.
321 the secession crisis time line almost as soon as news of abraham lincolns election reached the south militant leaders began to demand an end to the union.
confederate states of america formed davis president of confederacy the withdrawal of the south conflict at fort sumter first battle of bull run battles of shiloh antietam second bull run confederacy enacts military draft emancipation proclamation battle of gettysburg vicksburg surrenders union enacts military draft new york city antidraft riots battle of the wilderness shermans march to the sea lincoln reelected lee surrenders to grant 13th amendment south carolina long the hotbed of southern separatism seceded first on december 20 1860 by the time lincoln took office six other southern states mississippi january 9 1861 florida january 10 alabama january 11 georgia january 19 louisiana january 26 and texas february 1 had withdrawn from the union.
in february 1861 representatives of the seven seceded states met at montgomery alabama and formed a new nation the confederate states of america.
two months earlier president james buchanan told congress that no state had the right to secede from the union but that the federal government had no authority to stop a state if it did.
the seceding states immediately seized the federal property within their boundaries.
but they did not at first have sufficient military power to seize two fortified offshore military installations fort sumter in the harbor of charleston south carolina garrisoned by a small force under major robert anderson and fort pickens in pensacola florida.
buchanan refused to yield fort sumter when south carolina demanded it.
instead in january 1861 he ordered an unarmed merchant ship to proceed to fort sumter with additional troops and supplies.
confederate guns turned it back.
still neither section was yet ready to concede that war had begun.
and in washington efforts began once more to forge a compromise.
the failure of compromise gradually the compromise efforts came together around a proposal from john j crittenden of kentucky.
known as the crittenden compromise it proposed 322 the civil war 323 r eestablishing the missouri compromise line and extending it westward to the pacific.
slavery would be prohibited north of the line and permitted south of it.
southerners in the senate seemed willing to accept the plan.
but the compromise would have required the republicans to abandon their most fundamental position that slavery not be allowed to expand and they rejected it.
whether the failure to compromise and find common ground between northern and southern politicians triggered the civil war has been a topic of debate among historians for generations.
see debating the past the causes of the civil war when abraham lincoln arrived in washington talk of secession and possible war filled the air.
in his inaugural address lincoln insisted that acts of force or violence to support secession were insurrectionary and that the government would hold occupy and possess federal property in the seceded states a clear reference to fort sumter.
but fort sumter was running short of supplies.
so lincoln sent a relief expedition to the fort and informed the south carolina authorities that he would send no troops or munitions unless the supply ships met with resistance.
the new confederate government ordered general p g t beauregard commander of confederate forces at bombardment and war charleston to take the fort.
when anderson refused to give up the confederates bombarded it for two days.
on april 14 1861 anderson surrendered.
the civil war had begun.
almost immediately four more slave states seceded from the union and joined the confederacy virginia april 17 arkansas may 6 tennessee may 7 and north carolina may 20.
the four remaining slave states maryland delaware kentucky and missouri under heavy political pressure from washington remained in the union.
the opposing sides all the important material advantages for waging war lay with the north most notably an advanced industrial system able by 1862 to manufacture almost all the norths own war materials.
the south had almost no industry at all.
in addition the north had a much better transportation system with more and better railroads than did the south.
during the war the already inferior confederate railroad system steadily deteriorated and by early 1864 had almost collapsed.
but the south also had advantages.
the southern armies were for the most part fighting a defensive war on familiar land with local support.
the northern armies on the other hand were fighting mostly within the south amid hostile local populations they had to maintain long lines of communication.
the commitment of the white population of the south to the war was with limited exceptions clear and firm throughout much of the early years of fighting.
in the north opinion was more divided and support remained shaky until very near the end.
a major southern victory at any one of several crucial moments might have proved decisive in breaking the norths will to continue the struggle.
finally the dependence of the english and french textile industries on american cotton inclined many leaders in those countries to favor the confederacy and southerners hoped with some reason that one or both might intervene on their behalf.
billy yank and johnny reb the vast majority of civil war soldiers were volunteers.
recruiters for the union often pulled in groups of men from the same town or ethnic group.
there were entire companies and even regiments of irish americans german americans italian americans or later debating the past the causes of the civil war abraham lincoln in his 1865 inaugural address looked back at the terrible war that was now nearing its end and said all knew that slavery was somehow the cause of the war few historians dispute that.
but disagreement has been sharp over whether slavery was the only or even the principal cause of the war.
the debate began even before the war itself.
in 1858 senator william h seward of new york took note of the two competing explanations of the sectional tensions that were then inflaming the nation.
on one side he said stood those who believed the conflicts to be accidental unnecessary the work of interested or fanatical agitators opposing them stood those among them seward himself who believed there to be an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces the irrepressible conflict argument dominated historical discussion of the war from the 1860s to the 1920s.
war was inevitable some historians claimed because there was no room for compromise on the central issue of slavery.
others de emphasized slavery and pointed to the economic differences between the agrarian south and the industrializing north.
charles and mary beard for example wrote in 1927 of the inherent antagonisms between the interests of planters and those of industrialists.
still others cited social and cultural differences as the source of an irrepressible conflict.
slavery the historian allan nevins argued was only one factor that was making residents of the north and south separate peoples fundamental differences in 324 assumptions tastes and cultural aim made it virtually impossible for the two societies to live together in peace.
more recent proponents of irrepressible conflict arguments similarly emphasize culture and ideology but define the concerns of the north and the south in different terms.
eric foner writing in 1970 argued that the moral concerns of abolitionists and the economic concerns of industrialists were less important in explaining northern hostility to the south than was the broad based free labor ideology of the region.
northerners opposed slavery because they feared it might spread into their own region or into the west and threaten the position of free white laborers.
other historians have argued that the war was not inevitable beginning with a group of scholars in the 1920s known as the revisionists james g randall and avery craven were the two leading proponents of the view that the differences between the north and the south were not so great as to require a war that only a blundering generation of leaders caused the conflict.
michael holt revived the revisionist argument in a 1978 book in which he too emphasized the partisan ambitions of politicians.
holt was along with paul kleppner joel silbey and william gienapp one of the creators of an ethnocultural interpretation of the war which emphasized the collapse of the party system and the role of temperance and nativism which was central to the coming of the conflict.
understand analyze evaluate 1 some arguments regarding the civil war as inevitable focus on economic differences between the north and the south.
what were these differences and how might they have led inevitably to war.
2 some revisionist scholars attribute the civil war to a blundering generation of political leaders.
who were these leaders and what blunders did they make.
could better decisions have avoided war.
african americans.
initially these soldiers and their officers were haphazardly trained and unprepared for battle.
many officers jokingly referred to their troops as armed mobs.
because individual states outfitted their soldiers at the outset of the war union uniforms were at first far from uniform ranging from the dark blue jackets and light blue pants of the regular army to dark blue and red zouave uniforms based on the french colonial regiments in algeria.
in the wars first major battle some union regiments wore gray uniforms which led to tragic mixups with confederate troops.
federals did not consistently wear blue uniforms until 1862 when the federal government provided them along with shoes weapons cartridge boxes knapsacks blankets canteens and other basic supplies.
northerners generally saw themselves fighting to restore the union and preserve the american democratic experiment.
they questioned how the nation might endure if parts of it could secede at every undesirable election result.
most white northerners understood that divisions over slavery had caused the civil war but they did not fight at first to abolish it.
later when it became clear that abolishing slavery would help end the rebellion emancipation joined reunion as a war aim.
in contrast black northerners immediately in thomas nasts painting the departure of the seventh regiment to the war union troops parade down broadway in april 1861 shortly before departing for what most people thought would be a short war.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
sending the boys off to war 325 326 chapter 14 leadership spending too much time on routine items.
unlike lincoln he displayed a punctiliousness about legal and constitutional requirements.
although there were no formal political parties in the confederacy its politics were fiercely divided nevertheless.
some white southerners opposed secession and war altogether.
most white southerners supported the war but as in the north many were openly critical of the government and the military particularly as the tide of battle turned against the south.
states rights had become such a cult among many white southerners that they resisted states rights within the confederacy virtually all efforts to exert national authority even those necessary to win the war.
states rights enthusiasts obstructed conscription and restricted daviss ability to impose martial law and suspend habeas corpus.
governors such as joseph brown of georgia and zebulon m vance of north carolina tried at times to keep their own troops apart from the confederate forces.
but the national government was not impotent.
it experimented successfully for a time with a food draft which permitted soldiers to feed themselves by seizing crops from farms in their path.
the confederacy also seized control of the railroads and shipping it impressed slaves to work as laborers on military projects and imposed regulations on industry it limited corporate profits.
states rights sentiment was a significant handicap but the south nevertheless took important steps in the direction of centralization.
money and manpower financing the confederate war effort was a monumental task.
the confederate congress tried at first to requisition funds from the individual states but the states were as reluctant to tax their citizens as the congress was.
in 1863 therefore the congress enacted an income tax.
but taxation produced only about 1 percent of the governments total income.
borrowing was not much more successful.
the confederate government issued bonds in such vast amounts that the public lost faith in them and efforts to borrow money in europe using cotton as collateral fared no better.
as a result the confederacy had to pay for the war through the least stable most destructive form of financing paper currency which it began issuing in 1861 by 1864 the confederacy had issued the staggering total of 1 5 billion in paper money.
the result inflation was a disastrous inflation a 9 000 percent increase in prices in the course of the war in contrast to 80 percent in the north.
like the united states the confederacy first raised armies by calling for volunteers.
and as in the north by the end of 1861 voluntary enlistments were declining.
in april conscription act 1862 therefore the congress enacted the conscription act which subjected all white males between the ages of eighteen and thirty five to military service for three years.
as in the north a draftee could avoid service if he furnished a substitute.
but since the price of substitutes was high the provision aroused such opposition from poorer whites that it was repealed in 1863 even so conscription worked for a time in part because enthusiasm for the war was intense and widespread among white men in most of the south.
at the end of 1862 about 500 000 soldiers were in the confederate army not including the many slave men and women recruited by the military to perform such services as cooking laundry and manual labor.
small numbers of slaves and free blacks enlisted in the confederate army and a few participated in combat.
after 1862 however conscription began producing fewer men and by 1864 the confederate government faced a critical manpower shortage.
the south was suffering the civil war 333 from intense war weariness and many southerners had concluded that defeat was inevitable.
nothing could attract or retain an adequate army any longer.
troop shortage in a frantic final attempt to raise men the congress authorized the conscription of 300 000 slaves but the war ended before the government could attempt this incongruous experiment.
economic and social effects of the war the war cut off southern planters and producers from northern markets and a union blockade of confederate ports made the sale of cotton overseas much more difficult.
in the north production of all goods increased during the war in the south it declined by more than a third.
above all the fighting itself wreaked havoc on the southern landscape destroying farmland towns cities and railroads.
as the war continued the shortages the inflation and the carnage created increasing instability in southern society.
resistance to conscription food impressment and taxation increased throughout the confederacy as did hoarding and black market commerce.
some recreational pursuits found new popularity.
baseball emerged as a favorite pastime for confederate and union troops alike who set up makeshift games within their ranks to relieve the pressures of the war.
at the same time civilians in northern cities flocked to cheer on local teams in the newly founded national association of base ball players.
see patterns of popular culture baseball and the civil war the war forced many women and some men to perform untraditional nondomestic tasks during the conflict.
because the war decimated the male new roles for southern women population women soon outnumbered men in most southern states by significant margins.
the result was a large number of unmarried or widowed women who had no choice but to find employment.
even before emancipation the war had far reaching effects on the lives of slaves.
confederate leaders enforced slave codes with particular severity.
even so many slaves especially those near the front escaped their masters and crossed union lines.
strategy and diplomacy the military initiative in the civil war lay mainly with the north since it needed to destroy the confederacy as quickly as possible.
southerners needed only to survive however survival required diplomatic recognition from other nations especially great britain and the financial and military aid that would accompany it.
lincoln and his diplomatic corps worked tirelessly to keep foreign powers and their resources out of the confederacy while the union navy blockaded southern ports.
the commanders the most important union military leader was abraham lincoln.
he ultimately succeeded as commander in chief because he recognized the norths material advantages and he realized that the proper objective of his armies was to destroy the confederate armies ability to fight.
despite his missteps and inexperience the north was fortunate to have lincoln but the president struggled to find a general as well suited for his task as lincoln was for his.
patterns of popular culture baseball and the civil war long before the great urban stadiums the lights the cameras and the multimilliondollar salaries baseball was the most popular game in america.
during the civil war it was a treasured pastime for soldiers and for thousands of men and some women behind the lines in both the north and the south.
the legend that baseball was invented by abner doubleday who probably never even saw the game was created by albert g spalding a patriotic sporting goods manufacturer eager to prove that the game had purely american origins.
in fact baseball was derived from a variety of earlier games especially the english pastimes of cricket and rounders.
american baseball took its own distinctive form beginning in the 1840s when alexander cartwright a shipping clerk formed the new york knickerbockers laid out a diamond shaped field with four bases and declared that batters with three strikes were out and that teams with three outs were retired.
cartwright moved west in search of gold in 1849 settling finally in hawaii where he introduced the game to americans in the pacific.
but the game did not languish in his absence.
henry chadwick an english born journalist spent much of the 1850s popularizing the game and regularizing its rules.
by 1860 baseball was being played by college students and irish workers by urban elites and provincial farmers by people of all classes and ethnic groups from new england to louisiana.
students at vassar college formed ladies teams in the 1860s and in philadelphia free black men formed the pythians the first of what was to become a great network of african american 334 baseball teams.
from the beginning they were barred from playing against most white teams.
when young men marched off to war in 1861 some took their bats and balls with them.
almost from the start of the fighting soldiers in both armies took advantage of idle moments to lay out baseball diamonds and organize games.
games on battlefields were sometimes interrupted by gunfire and cannon fire.
it is astonishing how indifferent a person can become to danger a soldier wrote home to ohio in 1862.
the report of musketry is heard but a very little distance from us.
yet over there on the other side of the road is most of our company playing bat ball after a skirmish in texas another union soldier lamented that in addition to casualties his company had lost the only baseball in alexandria texas far from discouraging baseball military commanders and the united states sanitary commission the union armys medical arm actively encouraged the game during the war.
it would they believed help keep up the soldiers morale.
away from the battlefield baseball continued to flourish.
in new york city games between local teams drew crowds of ten thousand to twenty thousand.
the national association of base ball players founded in 1859 had recruited ninety one clubs in ten northern states by 1865 a north western association of baseball players organized in chicago in 1865 indicated that the game was becoming well established in the west as well.
in brooklyn william cammeyer drained a skating pond on his property built a board fence around it and created the first enclosed baseball field in america the union grounds.
he charged ten cents for admission.
the professionalization of the game had begun.
despite all the commercialization and spectacle that came to be associated with baseball in the years after the civil war the game remained for many americans what it was to millions of young men fighting in the most savage war in the nations history an american passion that at times even if briefly erased the barriers dividing groups from one another.
officers and men forget for a time the differences in rank a massachusetts private wrote in 1863 and indulge in the invigorating sport with a schoolboys ardor understand analyze evaluate 1 how could a competitive game of base ball erase the barriers dividing groups from one another.
2 baseball during the civil war crossed the lines of cultural differences between the north and the south.
does baseball today professional or amateur continue to cross lines of cultural differences.
from 1861 to 1864 lincoln tried repeatedly to find a chief of staff capable of orchestrating the union war effort.
he turned first to general winfield scott the ailing 74 yearold hero of the mexican war who had already contributed strategic advice to the president but scott was no longer physically capable of leading an army.
lincoln then appointed the young george b mcclellan the commander of the union forces in the east the army of the potomac.
unfortunately the proud and overly cautious mcclellan seemed too slow to act for lincolns tastes.
lincoln returned mcclellan to his previous command in march 1862 for most of the rest of the year lincoln had no chief of staff at all.
when he eventually appointed general henry w halleck to the post he found him ineffectual as well.
not until march 1864 did lincoln finally find a general he trusted to command the war effort ulysses s grant who shared lincolns belief in unremitting ulysses s grant combat and in making enemy armies and resources the target of military efforts.
lincolns handling of the war effort faced constant scrutiny from the committee on the conduct of the war a joint investigative committee of the two houses of congress.
established in december 1861 and chaired by senator benjamin e wade of ohio the committee complained constantly of the inadequate ruthlessness of northern generals which radicals on the committee attributed largely inaccurately to a secret sympathy among the officers for slavery.
the committees efforts often seriously interfered with the conduct of the war.
southern military leadership centered on president davis a trained soldier who nonetheless failed to create an effective central command system.
early in 1862 davis named general robert e lee as his principal military adviser.
but in fact davis had no intention of sharing control of strategy with anyone.
after a few months lee left richmond to command forces in the field and for the next two years davis planned strategy alone.
in february 1864 he named general braxton bragg as a military adviser but bragg never provided much more than technical advice.
at lower levels of command men of markedly similar backgrounds controlled the war in both the north and the south.
many of the professional officers on both sides were graduates of the united states military academy at west point and the united states naval academy at annapolis.
amateur officers played an important role in both armies as commanders of volunteer regiments.
in both the north and the south such men were usually economic or social leaders in their communities who rounded up troops to lead.
sometimes this system produced officers of real ability more often it did not.
335 336 chapter 15 the various bourbon governments of the new south behaved in many respects quite similarly.
virtually all the new democratic regimes lowered taxes reduced spending and drastically diminished state services.
one state after another eliminated or reduced its support for public school systems.
industrialization and the new south many white southern leaders in the post reconstruction era hoped to see their region develop a vigorous industrial economy a new south henry grady editor of the atlanta constitution and other new south advocates seldom challenged white supremacy but they did promote the virtues of thrift industry and progress qualities that prewar southerners had often denounced in northern society.
southern industry did expand dramatically in the years after reconstruction most visibly in textile manufacturing.
in the past southern planters had usually shipped their cotton to manufacturers in the north or in europe.
now textile factories appeared in the textiles tobacco and iron south itself many of them drawn to the region from new england by the abundance of water power the ready supply of cheap labor the low taxes and the accommodating conservative governments.
the tobacco processing industry similarly established an important foothold in the region.
in the lower south and particularly in birmingham alabama the iron and later steel industry grew rapidly.
railroad development also increased substantially in the post reconstruction years.
between 1880 and 1890 trackage in the south more than doubled.
and in 1886 the south changed the gauge width of its trackage to correspond with the standards of the north.
no longer would it be necessary for cargoes heading into the substantial railroad development south to be transferred from one train to another at the borders of the region.
yet southern industry developed within strict limits and its effects on the region were never even remotely comparable to the effects of industrialization on the north.
the southern share of national manufacturing doubled in the last twenty years of the century but it was still only 10 percent of the total.
similarly the regions per capita income increased 21 percent in the same period but average income in the south was still only 40 percent of that in the north in 1860 it had been more than 60 percent.
and even in those industries where development had been most rapid textiles iron railroads much of the capital had come from and many of the profits thus flowed to the north.
the growth of southern industry required the region to recruit a substantial industrial workforce for the first time.
from the beginning a high percentage of the factory workers were women.
heavy male casualties in the civil war had helped create a large population of unmarried women who desperately needed employment.
hours were long often as much as twelve hours a day and wages were far below the northern equivalent indeed one of the greatest attractions of the south to industrialists was that employers were able worker exploitation to pay workers there as little as one half of what northern workers received.
life in most mill towns was rigidly controlled by the owners and managers of the factories who rigorously suppressed attempts at protest or union organization.
company stores sold goods to workers at inflated prices and issued credit at exorbitant rates much as country stores did in agrarian areas and mill owners ensured that no competing merchants were able to establish themselves in the community.
some industries such as textiles offered virtually no opportunities to african american workers.
others tobacco iron and lumber for example did provide some employment reconstruction and the new south 373 southern counties percentage of farms sharecropped 35 80 26 34 20 25 13 19 0 12 300 mi 600 km commercial center urban cotton center rural cotton center the crop lien system in 1880 in the years after the civil war more and more southern farmers white and black became tenants or sharecroppers on land owned by others.
this map shows the percentage of farms that were within the so called crop lien system the system by which people worked their lands for someone else who had a claim or lien on a part of the farmers crops.
note the high density of sharecropping and tenant farming in the most fertile areas of the deep south the same areas where slaveholding had been most dominant before the civil war.
how did the crop lien system contribute to the shift in southern agriculture toward one crop farming.
for blacks.
some mill towns therefore were places where the black and white cultures came into close contact increasing the determination of white leaders to take additional measures to protect white supremacy.
tenants and sharecroppers the most important economic problem in the post reconstruction south was the impoverished state of agriculture.
the 1870s and 1880s saw an acceleration of growth of tenantry the process that had begun in the immediate postwar years the imposition of systems of tenantry and debt peonage on much of the region the reliance on a few cash crops rather than on a diversified agricultural system and increasing absentee ownership of valuable farmlands.
during reconstruction perhaps a third or more of the farmers in the south were tenants by 1900 the figure had increased to 70 percent.
african americans and the new south the new south creed was not the property of whites alone.
many african americans were attracted to the vision of progress and self improvement as well.
some former slaves and as the decades passed their offspring succeeded in elevating themselves into the middle class acquired property established small businesses or entered professions.
believing strongly that education was vital to the future of their people they expanded 374 chapter 18 corrupt city boss was william m tweed boss of new york citys tammany hall in the 1860s and 1870s whose extravagant use of public funds and kickbacks landed him in jail in 1872 the urban machine was not without competition.
reform groups frequently mobilized public outrage at the corruption of the bosses and often succeeded in driving machine politicians from office.
but the reform organizations typically lacked the permanence of the machine.
boss tweed and tammany hall the rise of mass consumption in the last decades of the nineteenth century a distinctive middle class culture began to exert influence over the whole of american life.
other groups in society advanced less rapidly or not at all but the rise of the new urban consumer culture began to shape a new image of the nation.
patterns of income and consumption incomes rose for almost everyone in the industrial era although highly unevenly.
one result of the new economy was the creation of vast fortunes but perhaps the most imporgrowth of middle class tant result for society as a whole was the growth and increasing prosperity of the middle class.
clerks accountants middle managers and other white collar workers saw their salaries rise by an average of a third between 1890 and 1910 doctors lawyers and other professionals experienced a particularly dramatic increase in both the prestige and the profitability of their professions.
working class incomes rose in those years as well although from a much lower base and more slowly.
the iron and steel industries saw workers hourly wages increase by a third between 1890 and 1910 but industries with large female workforces shoes textiles and paper saw more modest increases as did almost all industries in the south.
wages for african americans mexicans and asians also rose more slowly than those for white workers.
rising incomes created new markets for consumer goods which were now available new consumerism to a mass market for the first time as a result of technological innovations and new merchandising techniques.
an example of such changes was the emergence of ready made clothing.
in the early nineteenth century most americans had made their own clothing.
the invention of the sewing machine and the civil war demand for uniforms spurred the manufacture of clothing and helped create an enormous industry devoted to producing ready made garments.
by the end of the century almost all americans bought their clothing from stores.
partly as a result much larger numbers of people became concerned with personal style.
interest in womens fashion for example had once been a luxury reserved for the relatively affluent.
now middle class and even working class women could strive to develop a distinctive style of dress.
buying and preparing food also became a critical part of the new consumerism.
the development and mass production of tin cans in the 1880s created a large new industry devoted to packaging and selling canned food and condensed milk.
refrigerated railroad cars made it possible for perishable foods to be transported over long distances without spoiling.
artificially frozen ice enabled many households to afford iceboxes.
the changes brought improved diets and better health.
life expectancy rose six years in the first two decades of the twentieth century.
the age of the city 441 department stores often created events to help promote sales of their many wares.
here strawbridge and clothier department store creates a stir on market street in philadelphia in 1907.
corbis department stores chain stores mail order houses and department stores changes in marketing also altered the way americans bought goods.
new chain stores could usually offer a wider array of goods at lower prices than the small local stores with which they competed.
the atlantic and pacific tea company the a p began a national network of grocery stores in the 1870s.
f w woolworth built a chain of dry goods stores.
sears and roebuck established a large market for its mail order merchandise by distributing an enormous catalog each year.
in larger cities the emergence of great department stores helped make shopping more alluring and glamorous.
marshall field in chicago created one of the first american department stores a place deliberately designed to produce a sense of department stores wonder and excitement.
similar stores emerged in new york brooklyn boston philadelphia and other cities.
for the philosophy of one of the leading department store innovators see consider the source john wanamaker the four cardinal points of the department store women as consumers the rise of mass consumption had particularly dramatic effects on american women.
womens clothing styles changed much more rapidly than mens which encouraged more frequent purchases.
women generally bought and prepared food for their families so the availability of new food products changed not only how people ate but also how women shopped and cooked.
the consumer economy produced new employment opportunities for women as salesclerks and waitresses.
and it spawned the creation of a new movement in which women co ns ider t he s o urc e john wanamaker the four cardinal points of the department store 1874 the philadelphia merchant john wanamaker was one of the most successful and innovative businessmen of his day.
a pioneer of the department store wanamaker ran this advertisement explaining the policies and benefits for consumers of his new commercial venue.
four cardinal points by which we will hereafter steer our craft full guarantee cash payment one price cash returned explanation and elaboration of the new plan first point cash houses doing a credit business must provide for losses on bad debts interest on long standing accounts capital locked up etc.
to bear such losses themselves would drive them out of business.
therefore a per cent is added to the price of each article sold to cover this leakage and cash buyers whether they know it or not really pay the bad debts and the interest on the long credits of the other customers.
under the cash payment system one pays only for what he gets and contributes nothing to a sinking fund by this radical change we shall lose some of our customers no doubt but we will gain ten where we lose one the advantages being so great to all who can avail themselves of them.
so we say cash throughout.
bring money for clothing and we will supply it at prices possible under no other plan.
second point one price the fairness of this feature of our plan all will praise.
it is simply treating all alike exacting nothing from indisposition to bargain or ignorance and at the same time conceding all that shrewdness on the shrewdest customers part could possibly extort because the one price 442 which we mark on our goods shall invariably be not the first price but the last and lowest price.
not the top price but the very bottom price.
third point full guarantee a printed guarantee bearing the signature of our firm will accompany each garment as a warrantee.
this binds us in every sense and will be honored as quickly as a good draft of the government of the united states.
this is a sample of the full guarantee and tells its own story guarantee.
we hereby guarantee first that the prices of our goods shall be as low as the same quality of material and manufacture are sold anywhere in the united states.
second that prices are precisely the same to everybody for same quality on same day of purchase.
third that the quality of goods is as represented on printed labels.
fourth that the full amount of cash paid will be refunded if customers find the articles unsatisfactory and return them unworn and uninjured within ten days of date of purchase.
fourth point cash returned this is simply a concession on our part to our customers to secure them full confidence in dealing for goods they know very little about and we thus prevent any occasion for dissatisfaction from any and every cause whatsoever.
if the garment is not exactly what you thought if your taste changes if the home folks prefer another color or another shape if you find you can buy the same material and style elsewhere for less money if you conclude you dont need it after you get home if the season changes suddenly and you wish you had not bought it bring it back unworn and uninjured and the full amount of money you paid will be returned on the spot.
what more can we do for our customers than this when we make our clothing so that they can draw the money value with it equally as well as with a check on the banks.
the advantages incident to a system having for its cardinal points these which we have now explained are simply innumerable.
saving of time and temper perfect security absence of all huckstering etc etc.
but above all this.
all of these by ways lead direct to cheapness and this without lowering the quality or style of our celebrated make of mens and boys clothing.
understand analyze evaluate 1 what were the benefits of wanamakers four cardinal points for consumers.
what were the benefits for wanamaker.
judging by wanamakers new way of doing business what must business practices and customer service have looked like before.
2 why might these assurances have been particularly important for a large department store.
why might it have been essential for the urban consumer market.
source golden book of the wanamaker stores jubilee year 1861 1911 philadelphia john wanamaker 1911 pp.
this advertisement was originally published in 1874 located in regina lee blaszczyk and philip b scranton eds.
major problems in american business history boston houghton mifflin company 2006 pp.
played a vital role the consumer protection movement.
the national consumers league ncl formed in the 1890s under the leadership of florence national consumers league kelley attempted to mobilize the power of women as consumers to force retailers and manufacturers to improve wages and working conditions.
the ncl encouraged women to buy only products with the leagues white label which indicated that the product was made under fair working conditions.
leisure in the consumer society closely related to the rise of consumption was a growing interest in leisure time.
members of the urban middle and professional classes had large blocks of time during which they were not at work evenings weekends even paid vacations.
working hours in many factories declined from an average of nearly seventy hours a week in 1860 to under sixty in 1900 even farmers found that the mechanization of agriculture gave them more free time.
as many peoples lives became more compartmentalized with clear distinctions between work and leisure many americans began to search for new forms of recreation and entertainment.
redefining leisure in earlier eras relatively few americans had considered leisure a valuable thing.
many equated it with laziness.
in the late nineteenth century however the beginnings of a redefinition of leisure appeared.
the economist simon patten articulated this new view 443 444 chapter 20 believed than crowded immigrant neighborhoods.
one response to the problems of such communities borrowed from england was the settlement house the most famous was jane addams and hull house hull house which opened in 1889 in chicago as a result of the efforts of the social worker jane addams.
it became a model for more than 400 similar institutions throughout the nation.
staffed by members of the educated middle class settlement houses sought to help immigrant families adapt to the language and customs of their new country.
young college women mostly unmarried were important participants in the settlement house movement.
working in a settlement house a protected site that served mostly women was consistent with the widespread assumption that women needed to be sheltered from difficult environments.
the clean and well tended buildings that settlement houses created were not only a model for immigrant women but an appropriate site for elite women as well.
the settlement houses also helped create another important institution of reform the profession of social work.
a growing number of programs for the professional training of social workers began to appear in the nations leading universities partly in response to the activities of the settlement houses.
the allure of expertise as the emergence of the social work profession suggests progressives involved in humanitarian efforts placed a high value on knowledge and expertise.
even nonscientific problems they believed could be analyzed and solved scientifically.
many reformers came to believe that only enlightened experts and well designed bureaucracies could create the stability and order america needed.
some even spoke of the creation of a new civilization in which the expertise of scientists and engineers could be brought to bear on the problems of the economy and society.
the social scientist thorstein veblen for example proposed a new economic system in which power would reside in the hands of highly trained engineers.
only they he argued could fully understand the machine process by which modern society must be governed.
the professions the late nineteenth century saw a dramatic expansion in the number of americans engaged in administrative and professional tasks.
industries needed managers technicians and accountants as well as workers.
cities required commercial medical legal and educational services.
new technology required scientists and engineers who in turn required institutions and instructors to train them.
by the turn of the century those performing these services had come to constitute a distinct social group what some historians have called a new middle class by the early twentieth century millions within this new middle class were building organizations and establishing standards to secure their position in society.
most of all they created the modern organized professions.
the idea of professionalism had been a frail one in america even as late as 1880 but as the demand for professional services increased so did the pressures for reform.
among the first to respond was the medical profession.
in 1901 doctors who considamerican medical association ered themselves trained professionals reorganized the american medical association ama into a national professional society.
by 1920 nearly two thirds the progressives 493 of all american doctors were members.
the ama quickly called for strict scientific standards for admission to the practice of medicine.
state governments responded by passing new laws requiring the licensing of all physicians.
by 1900 medical education at a few medical schools notably johns hopkins in baltimore founded in 1893 compared favorably with those in the leading institutions of europe.
by 1916 lawyers in all forty eight states had established professional bar associations.
the nations law schools accordingly expanded greatly.
businessmen supported the creation of schools of business administration and set up their own national organizations the national association of manufacturers in 1895 and national association of manufacturers the united states chamber of commerce in 1912 farmers responded to the new order by forming through the national farm bureau federation a network of agricultural organizations designed to spread scientific farming methods.
the professions removed the untrained and incompetent.
but the admission requirements also protected those already in the professions from excessive competition and lent prestige and status to the professional level.
some professions used their entrance requirements to exclude african americans women immigrants and other undesirables from their ranks.
others used them simply to keep the numbers down to ensure that demand would remain high.
women and the professions american women found themselves excluded from most of the emerging professions.
but a substantial number of middle class women particularly those emerging from the new womens colleges and from the coeducational state universities entered professional careers nevertheless.
a few women managed to establish themselves as physicians lawyers engineers scientists and corporate managers.
most however turned by necessity to those professional outlets that society considered suitable for women settlement houses social work and most important teaching.
indeed in the late nineteenth century perhaps 90 percent of all professional women were teachers.
for educated black women in particular the existence of segregated schools in the south created a substantial market for african american teachers.
women also dominated other professional activities.
nursing had become primarily a womens field during and after the civil war.
by the early twentieth century it was adopting professional standards.
and many women entered academia often earning advanced degrees at such predominantly male institutions as the university of chicago mit or columbia and then finding professional opportunities in the new and expanding womens colleges.
women and reform the prominence of women in reform movements is one of the most striking features of progressivism.
in many states in the early twentieth century women could not vote.
they almost never held public office.
they had footholds in only a few and usually primarily female professions and lived in a culture in which most people male and female believed that women were not suited for the public world.
what then explains the prominent role so many women played in the reform activities of the period.
494 chapter 22 galena freeport rockford savanna m issis sipp oregon rochelle dixon.
ir chicago galena rockford freeport mi ssi ss r pi ip savanna oregon chicago rochelle dixon area reached in 1 hour 3 hours 2 hours more than 3 hours railroads 1900 paved roads 1930 unpaved roads 1930 breaking down rural isolation the expansion of travel horizons in oregon illinois this map uses the small town of oregon illinois west of chicago to illustrate the way in which first railroads and then automobiles reduced the isolation of rural areas in the early decades of the twentieth century.
the gold and purple areas of the two maps show the territory that residents of oregon could reach within two hours.
note how small that area was in 1900 and how much larger it was in 1930 by which time an area of over 100 square miles had become easily accessible to the town.
note too the significant network of paved roads in the region by 1930 few of which had existed in 1900.
why did automobiles do so much more than railroads to expand the travel horizons of small towns.
mexican barrios grew up in los angeles el paso san antonio denver and many other urban centers.
some of the residents found work locally in factories and shops others traveled to mines or did migratory labor on farms but returned to the cities between jobs.
mexican workers too faced hostility and discrimination from the anglo population of the region but there were few efforts actually to exclude them.
employers in the relatively underpopulated west needed this ready pool of low paid and unorganized workers.
rising mexican immigration the new era 551 agricultural technology and the plight of the farmer like industry american agriculture in the 1920s embraced new technologies.
the number of tractors on american farms quadrupled during the 1920s especially after they began to be powered by internal combustion engines like automobiles rather than by the cumbersome steam engines of the past.
they helped open 35 million new acres to cultivation.
increasingly sophisticated combines and harvesters proliferated making it possible to produce more crops with fewer workers.
agricultural researchers worked on other innovations the invention of hybrid corn made possible by advances in genetic research which became available to farmers in 1921 but was not grown in great quantities for a decade or more and the creation of chemical fertilizers and pesticides which also had limited use in the 1920s but proliferated quickly in the 1930s and 1940s.
the new technologies greatly increased agricultural productivity but the demand for agricultural goods was not rising as fast as production.
as a result declining food prices there were substantial surpluses a disastrous decline in food prices and a severe drop in farmers incomes beginning early in the 1920s.
more than 3 million people left agriculture altogether in the course of the decade.
of those who remained many lost ownership of their lands and had to rent instead from banks or other landlords.
in response some farmers began to demand relief in the form of government price supports.
one price raising scheme in particular came to dominate agrarian demands the idea of parity parity was a complicated formula for setting an adequate price for parity farm goods and ensuring that farmers would earn back at least their production costs no matter how the national or world agricultural market might fluctuate.
champions of parity urged high tariffs against foreign agricultural goods and a government commitment to buy surplus domestic crops at parity and sell them abroad.
the legislative expression of the demand for parity was the mcnary haugen bill which required the government to support prices at parity for grain cotton tobacco and rice.
it was introduced repeatedly between 1924 and 1928 in 1926 and again in 1928 congress approved the bill.
president calvin coolidge vetoed it both times.
the new culture the urban and consumer oriented culture of the 1920s helped americans in all regions live their lives and perceive their world in increasingly similar ways.
that same culture exposed them to a new set of values.
but different segments of american society experienced the new culture in different ways.
consumerism and communications the united states of the 1920s was a consumer society.
more people than ever before could buy items not just because of need but also for convenience and pleasure.
middle class families purchased electric refrigerators washing machines and vacuum cleaners.
people wore wristwatches and smoked cigarettes.
women purchased cosmetics and mass produced fashions.
above all americans bought automobiles.
by the end of the decade there were more than 30 million cars on american roads.
no group was more attuned to the emergence of consumerism or more responsible for creating it than the advertising industry.
in the 1920s partly as a advertising industry result of techniques pioneered by wartime propaganda advertising came of age.
publicists america in the world the cinema there is probably no cultural or commercial product more closely identified with the united states than motion pictures or as they are known in much of the world the cinema.
although the technology of cinema emerged from the work of inventors in england and france as well as the united states the production and distribution of films has been dominated by americans almost from the start.
the united states was the first nation to create a film industry and it did so at a scale vaster than that of any other country.
with 700 feature films a year in the 1920s hollywood produced ten times as many movies as any other nation and even then its films were dominating not only the huge american market but much of the worlds market as well.
seventy percent of the films seen in france 80 percent of those seen in latin america and 95 percent of the movies viewed in canada and great britain were produced in the united states in the 1920s.
as early as the 1930s the penetration of other nations by american movies was already troubling many governments.
the soviet union responded to the popularity of walt disneys mickey mouse cartoons by inventing a cartoon hero of its own a porcupine designed to e ntertain in a way consistent with socialist values and not the capitalist ones that they believed hollywood conveyed.
during world war ii american films were banned in occupied france prompting some antifascist dissidents to screen such american films as frank capras mr smith goes to washington in protest.
american dominance was a result in part of world war i and its aftermath which debilitated european filmmaking just as 552 movies were vigorously growing in the united states.
by 1915 the united states had gained complete control of its own vast market and had so saturated it with movie theaters that by the end of world war i half the theaters of the world were in america.
two decades later after an extraordinary expansion of theaters in other nations the united states continued to have over 40 percent of the worlds cinemas.
and while the spread of theaters through other areas of the world helped launch film industries in many other countries it also increased the market and the appetite for american films and strengthened american supremacy in their production.
the sun it now appears the saturday evening post commented in the mid 1920s never sets on the british empire and the american motion picture movies were then and perhaps remain still americas most influential cultural export.
even american popular music which has enormous global reach faces more significant local competition than american movies do in most parts of the world.
despite this american dominance however filmmaking has flourished and continues to flourish in many countries around the world.
indias fabled bollywood for example produces an enormous number of movies for its domestic market almost as many as the american industry creates although few of them are widely exported.
this global cinema has had a significant impact on american filmmaking.
the small british film industry had a strong early influence on american movies partly because of the quality and originality of british films and partly because of the emigration of talented actors directors and screenwriters valentino the popularity of the film star rudolph valentino among american women was one of the most striking cultural phenomena of the 1920s.
valentino was slight and delicate not at all like the conventional image of manliness but he developed an enormous following among women in part as this poster is obviously intended to suggest by baring his body on screen.
valentino was italian which made him seem somehow strange and foreign to many older stock americans and he was almost always cast in exotic roles never as an american.
his sudden death in 1926 at the age of 31 created enormous outpourings of grief among many american women.
united artists photofest to the united states.
the great alfred hitchcock for example made his first films in london before moving to hollywood where he spent the rest of his long career.
after world war ii french new wave cinema helped spawn a new generation of highly individualistic directors in the united states.
asian cinema especially the thriving film industry in hong kong with its gritty realism helped lead to some of the powerfully violent american films of the 1980s and beyond as well as the genre of martial arts films that has become popular around the world.
german italian swedish dutch japanese spanish australian and indian filmmakers also had enormous influence on hollywood and over time perhaps even greater influence on the large and growing independent film movement in the united states.
in recent decades as new technologies and new styles have transformed films around the world the american movie industry has continued to dominate global cinema.
but national boundaries no longer adequately describe moviemaking in the twenty first century.
it is becoming as truly global as other commercial ventures.
american films today are often produced abroad often have non american directors and actors and are often paid for with international financing.
hollywood still dominates worldwide filmmaking but hollywood itself is now an increasingly global community.
understand analyze evaluate 1 did american movies as the soviet union claimed in the 1930s promote capitalism.
2 why has the american movie industry continued to dominate global cinema.
no longer simply conveyed information they sought to identify products with a particular lifestyle.
they also encouraged the public to absorb the values of promotion and salesmanship and to admire those who were effective boosters and publicists.
one of the most successful books of the 1920s was the man nobody knows by the advertising executive bruce barton.
it portrayed jesus as not only a religious prophet but also a super salesman bartons message one sensitive to the new spirit of the consumer culture was that jesus had been concerned with living a full and rewarding life in this world and that twentieth century men and women should do the same.
553 554 chapter 23 black women suffered massive unemployment particularly in the south because of a great reduction of domestic service jobs.
as many as half of all black working women lost their jobs in the 1930s.
even so at the end of the 1930s 38 percent of black women were employed as compared with 24 percent of white women.
that was so because black women both married and unmarried had always been more likely to work than white women less out of preference than out of economic necessity.
the depression also worked to erode the strength of many family units.
there was a declining marriage rate and birthrate decline in the divorce rate but largely because divorce was now too expensive for some.
more common was the informal breakup of families particularly the desertion of families by unemployed men trying to escape the humiliation of being unable to earn a living.
the marriage rate and the birthrate both declined for the first time since the early nineteenth century.
the depression and american culture the great depression was a traumatic experience for millions of americans.
out of the crisis emerged probing criticisms of american life.
but the depression also produced powerful confirmations of more traditional values and reinforced many traditional goals.
there was not one depression culture but many.
depression values prosperity and industrial growth had done much to shape american values in the 1920s.
yet even when hard times came american social values seemed to change relatively little in response to the depression.
instead many people responded to hard times by redoubling their commitment to familiar ideas and goals.
the depression did not destroy the success ethic.
the survival of the ideals of work and individual responsibility was evident in many ways not least in the reactions of those most traumatized by the depression people who suddenly found themselves without employment.
some expressed anger and struck out at the economic system.
many however seemed to blame themselves.
at the same time millions responded eagerly to reassurances that they could through their own efforts dale carnegie restore themselves to prosperity and success.
dale carnegies how to win friends and influence people 1936 a self help manual preaching individual initiative was one of the best selling books of the decade.
yet the most popular cultural products of the 1930s diverted attention away from the depression.
and they came to americans primarily through the two most powerful instruments of popular culture in the 1930s radio and the movies.
for another powerful vehicle of escapist culture see patterns of popular culture the golden age of comic books radio almost every american family had a radio in the 1930s.
in cities and towns radio consoles were as familiar a part of the furnishing of homes as tables and chairs.
even in remote rural areas without access to electricity many families purchased radios and hooked them up to car batteries when they wished to listen.
radio was often a community experience.
young people would place radios on their front porches and invite friends by to sit talk or dance.
in poor urban neighborhoods the great depression 575 people would gather on a street or in a backyard to listen to sporting events or concerts.
within families the radio often drew parents and children together to listen to favorite programs.
although radio stations occasionally carried provocative programs the staple of broadcasting was escapism including comedies such as amos n escapist programming andy with its demeaning picture of urban blacks and adventures such as superman dick tracy and the lone ranger.
radio brought a new kind of comedy to a wide audience.
jack benny george burns and gracie allen and other masters of elaborately timed repartee began to develop broad followings.
enormously popular especially among women who were alone in the house during the day were soap operas so named because they were generally sponsored by soap companies whose advertising was targeted at women.
radio provided americans with their first direct access to important public events.
on air coverage of news and sports expanded rapidly to meet the demand.
some of the most dramatic moments of the 1930s were a result of radio coverage of celebrated events the world series the academy awards political conventions.
when the german dirigible hindenburg crashed in flames in lakehurst new jersey in 1937 it the hindenburg crash produced an enormous national reaction largely because of the live radio account by a broadcaster overcome with emotion who cried out as he watched the terrible crash oh the humanity.
oh the humanity the actor director orson welles created another memorable event on halloween night 1938 when he broadcast a radio play about aliens landing in central new jersey who had set off toward new york armed with terrible weapons.
the play took the form of a news broadcast and it created panic among some people who believed for a while that the events it described were real.
the movies in the first years of the depression movie attendance dropped significantly.
by the mid 1930s however most americans had resumed their moviegoing habits in part because the movies now with sound and by the end of the decade color were becoming more appealing.
hollywood continued to exercise tight control over its products in the 1930s through its resilient censor will hays who ensured that most movies carried no sensational or controversial messages.
the studio system through which a few large movie companies exercised iron control over actors writers and directors also worked to ensure that hollywood films avoided controversy.
neither the censor nor the studio system however could or wished to completely prevent films from exploring social questions.
there were many serious films that portrayed the problems of the depression for example king vidors our daily bread 1932 and john fords adaptation of the grapes of wrath 1940.
gangster movies such as little caesar 1930 and the public enemy 1931 portrayed a dark gritty violent world with which few americans were familiar but their desperate stories were popular nevertheless with those engaged in their own difficult struggles.
but the most effective presentation of a social message came from the brilliant italian born director frank capra.
capra had a deep and somewhat romanticized love for his adopted country and he translated that love into a vaguely populistic admiration for ordinary people.
he contrasted the decency of small town america films of frank capra and the common man with what he considered the grasping opportunism of the patterns of popular culture the golden age of comic books in the troubled years of the great depression and later world war ii many americans sought release from their anxieties in fantasy.
movies plays books radio shows and other diversions drew people out of their own lives and into a safer or more glamorous or more exciting world.
beginning in 1938 one of the most popular forms of escape for many young americans was the comic book.
in february 1935 malcolm wheelernicholson founded the first comics magazine what we now know as the comic book titled new fun.
it was not successful but wheeler founded a new company detective comics.
he began in 1937 to design a new magazine called action comics.
wheeler ran out of money before he could publish anything but the company continued without him.
in 1938 the first issue of action comics appeared with a startling and controversial cover a powerful man in a skintight suit lifting a car over his head.
his name was superman and he became the most popular cartoon character of all time.
within a year superman had a comic book named after him which was selling over 1 2 million copies each issue.
by 1940 there was a popular superman radio show introduced by a breathless announcer crying its a bird.
its a plane.
superman soon other publishers began developing new superheroes a term invented by the creators of superman to capitalize on this growing popular appetite.
in 1939 a s econd great comic book publisher appeared marvel comics.
by the early 1940s superman had been joined by other superheroes the human torch the sub mariner batman the flash 576 and wonder woman a character created in part to signal the importance of women to the war effort.
it is not hard to imagine why super heroes would be so appealing to americans in the 1930s and 1940s particularly to the teenage boys who were the largest single purchasers of comic books.
superman and other superheroes were idealized versions of the ideal boy smart good the perfect boy scout as one fan put it.
but they were also all powerful capable of righting wrong and preventing catastrophe.
even as the national economy faltered comic book heroes modeled patriotic pride resilience and optimism.
they operated with moral certainty when so much was uncertain.
at a time when suffering was an ever present reality in the world superheroes offered a comforting escape from anxiety.
many of the early comic book writers were young jewish men conscious of their outsider status in an american culture not yet wholly open to them.
almost all the characters they created had alter egos identities they used while living within the normal world.
superman was clark kent a mild mannered reporter batman was bruce wayne a wealthy heir.
all were part of mainstream american society and they expressed in part the outsiders dream of assimilation.
the superheroes themselves were outsiders too but outsiders endowed with special powers and abilities unavailable to ordinary people.
in the last years of the depression the comic superheroes began battling the axis powers.
marvels human torch and submariner joined forces against the german navy.
superman fought spies and saboteurs at home.
captain america a new character created in march 1941 was a frail young man rejected by the army who after being given a secret serum by a military doctor became extraordinarily powerful.
the cover of the first issue of captain america showed the title character punching adolf hitler in his headquarters in germany.
the end of the war was also the end of this first golden age of american comic books.
new comic books emphasized romance mild sexuality and over time violence and cruelty.
but comic books never surpassed the heights of popularity that the superhero comics attained during the depression and world war ii.
understand analyze evaluate superman the most popular action figure in the history of comic books was superman whose superhuman powers were particularly appealing fantasies to americans suffering through the depression and later world war ii.
hulton archive getty images 1 what could comic books offer readers suffering through the crisis of the great depression.
2 how and why have comic book super heroes changed over time.
city and the greedy capitalist marketplace.
in mr deeds goes to town 1936 a simple man from a small town inherits a large fortune moves to the city and not liking the greed and dishonesty he finds there gives the money away and moves back home.
in mr smith goes to washington 1939 a decent man from a western state is elected to the united states senate refuses to join in the self interested politics of washington and dramatically exposes the corruption and selfishness of his colleagues.
capras films incredibly popular in the 1930s helped audiences find solace in a vision of an imagined american past in the warmth and goodness of idealized small towns and the decency of ordinary people.
more often however the commercial films of the 1930s like most radio programs were deliberately and explicitly escapist lavish musicals such as gold diggers of 1933 screwball comedies such as capras it happened one night or the many films of the marx brothers films designed to divert audiences from their troubles and often indulge their fantasies about quick and easy wealth.
the 1930s were the first years of walt disneys long reign as the champion of animation and childrens entertainment.
after producing cartoon shorts for theaters in the late 1920s many of them starring the newly created character mickey mouse disney began to produce feature length animated films starting in 1937 with snow white.
other enormously popular films of the 1930s were adaptations of popular novels such as the wizard of oz and gone with the wind both released in 1939.
577 578 chapter 24 w virginia illinois oh io r kentu cky paducah bowling green wolf greek m t s h inc cl la n d dale hollow be m nashville tennessee r.
tennessee columbia chattanooga hales bar decatur a watts bar pp al i ch a knoxville nt a s in cherokee douglas fort loudoun e gr at sm o guntersville alabama chatuge 50 mi north carolina santeetlah nantahala hiwassee g eor g ia r watauga asheville cheoah calderwood fontana t on south holston johnson city.
ts m y k glenville south carolina blue ridge r huntsville oak ridge an ou ls ho ss ee wheeler muscle shoals te nn e wilson norris apalachia chickamauga ocoee elk r pickwick landing mississippi cu center hill duck r m r berland r cum virginia r 100 km tennessee river watershed power plant tva dam project chemical plant the tennessee valley authority was one of the largest experiments in government funded public works and regional planning in american history to that point.
the federal government had helped fund many projects in its history canals turnpikes railroads bridges dams and others.
but never before had it undertaken a project of such great scope and never before had it maintained such close control and ownership over the public works it helped create.
this map illustrates the broad reach of the tva within the tennessee valley region which spanned seven states.
tva dams throughout the region helped control floods and also provided a source of hydroelectric power which the government sold to consumers.
note the dam near muscle shoals alabama in the bottom left of the map.
it was begun during world war i and efforts to revive it in the 1920s helped create the momentum that produced the tva.
why were progressives so eager to see the government enter the business of hydroelectric power in the 1920s.
the tennessee valley authority utilities soon grew so intense that the companies were no longer able to block the public power movement.
the result was legislation supported by the president and enacted by congress in may 1933 creating the tennessee valley authority.
the tva was authorized to complete the dam at muscle shoals and build other dams in the region and to generate and sell electricity from them to the public at reasonable rates.
it was also intended to promote a comprehensive redevelopment of the entire region encouraging the growth of local industries supervising a substantial program of reforestation and helping farmers improve productivity.
opposition by conservatives ultimately blocked many of the ambitious social planning projects proposed by the more visionary tva administrators but the authority revitalized the region in numerous ways.
it improved water transportation virtually eliminated flooding in the region and provided electricity to thousands who had never before had it.
throughout the country largely because of the yardstick provided by the tvas cheap production of electricity private power rates declined.
even so the tennessee valley remained a generally impoverished region despite the tvas efforts.
the growth of federal relief the roosevelt administration did not consider relief to the unemployed its most important task but it recognized the necessity of doing something to help impoverished americans survive until the government could revive the economy to the point where the new deal 593 relief might not be necessary.
among roosevelts first acts as president was the establishment of the federal emergency relief administration fera which provided cash grants to states to prop up bankrupt relief agencies.
to administer the program he chose the director of the new york state relief agency harry hopkins.
both hopkins and roosevelt had misgivings about establishing a government dole but they felt somewhat more comfortable with another form of government assistance work relief.
thus when it became clear that the fera grants were not enough the administration established a second program the civil works administration cwa which put more than 4 million people to work on temporary projects between november 1933 and april 1934 some of the projects were of lasting value such as the construction of roads schools and parks others were little more than make work.
to hopkins however the important things were pumping money into the economy and providing assistance to people with nowhere else to turn.
roosevelts favorite relief project was the civilian conservation corps ccc.
the ccc created camps in national parks and forests and in other rural civilian conservation corps and wilderness settings.
there young unemployed men from the cities worked in a semimilitary environment on such projects as planting trees building reservoirs developing parks and improving agricultural irrigation.
mortgage relief was a pressing need for millions of farm owners and homeowners.
the farm credit administration which within two years refinanced mortgage relief one fifth of all farm mortgages in the united states was one response to that problem.
the frazier lemke farm bankruptcy act of 1933 was another.
it enabled some farmers to regain their land even after the foreclosure of their mortgages.
despite such efforts however 25 percent of all american farm owners had lost their land by 1934 homeowners were similarly troubled and in june 1933 the administration established the home owners loan corporation which by 1936 had refinanced the mortgages of more than 1 million householders.
a year later congress established the federal housing administration to insure mortgages for new construction and home repairs.
the new deal in transition seldom has an american president enjoyed such remarkable popularity as franklin roosevelt did during his first two years in office.
but by early 1935 the new deal faced fierce public criticism.
for reverberations of such praise and condemnation in the historical scholarship on roosevelt see debating the past the new deal in the spring of 1935 partly in response to these growing attacks roosevelt launched an ambitious new program of legislation that has often been called the second new deal the conservative criticism of the new deal despite his great popularity franklin roosevelt had many conservative critics.
some of them detested him so bitterly that they would refuse to say his name calling him that man those critics included businessmen financiers wealthy families and members of aristocratic society.
debating the past the new deal contemporaries of franklin roosevelt debated the impact of the new deal with ferocious intensity.
conservatives complained of a menacing tyranny of the state.
liberals celebrated the new deals progressive achievements.
some people on the left charged that the reforms of the 1930s were largely cosmetic and ignored the nations fundamental problems.
although the conservative critique found relatively little scholarly expression until many years after roosevelts death the liberal and left positions continued for decades to shape the way historians described the roosevelt administration.
the dominant view from the beginning was an approving liberal interpretation and its most important early voice was that of arthur m schlesinger jr he argued in the three volumes of the age of roosevelt 1957 1960 that the new deal marked a continuation of the long struggle between public power and private interests a struggle roosevelt had moved to a new level.
workers farmers consumers and others now had much more protection than they had enjoyed in the past.
at almost the same time however other historians were offering more qualified assessments of the new deal although they remained securely within the liberal framework.
richard hofstadter argued in 1955 that the new deal gave american liberalism a social democratic tinge that had never before been present in american reform movements but that its highly pragmatic approach lacked a central guiding philosophy.
james macgregor burns argued in 1956 that roosevelt failed to make full use of his potential as a leader.
594 william leuchtenburgs franklin d roosevelt and the new deal 1963 was the first systematic revisionist interpretation.
leuchtenburg challenged the views of earlier scholars who had proclaimed the new deal a revolution in social policy.
leuchtenburg could muster only enough enthusiasm to call it a halfway revolution one that helped some previously disadvantaged groups most notably farmers and workers but that did little or nothing for many others african americans sharecroppers the urban poor.
harsher criticisms soon emerged.
barton bernstein in a 1968 essay concluded that the new deal had saved capitalism but at the expense of the least powerful.
ronald radosh paul conkin and later thomas ferguson and colin gordon expanded on these criticisms.
the new deal they contended was part of the twentieth century tradition of corporate liberalism a tradition in which reform is closely wedded to the needs and interests of capitalism.
most scholars in the 1980s and 1990s however seemed largely to have accepted the revised liberal view that the new deal was a significant and valuable chapter in the history of reform but one that worked within rigid occasionally crippling limits.
much of that work on the new deal therefore focused on the constraints it faced.
some scholars notably the sociologist theda skocpol emphasized the issue of state capacity the absence of a government bureaucracy with sufficient strength and expertise to shape or administer many programs.
james t patterson barry karl mark leff and others stressed the political constraints the new deal encountered the conservative inhibitions about government that remained strong in congress and among the public.
frank freidel ellis hawley herbert stein and many others pointed as well to the ideological constraints affecting franklin roosevelt and his supporters the limits of their own understanding of their time.
alan brinkley in the end of reform 1995 described an ideological shift within new deal liberalism that marginalized older concerns about wealth and monopoly power and replaced them with consumer oriented keynesianism.
david kennedy in freedom from fear 1999 argued by contrast that the more aggressively anticapitalist measures of the early new deal actually hampered recovery.
only when roosevelt embraced the power of the market did prosperity begin to return.
the conservative attacks on the new deal in the 2000s provided a newly powerful alternative view.
a group of conservatives among them amity schlaes and burton folsom attacked the new deal as a failure that created a vast bureaucracy and caused the depression to last longer than it had to.
the phrase new deal liberalism has come in the postwar era to seem synonymous with modern ideas of aggressive federal management of the economy elaborate welfare systems a powerful bureaucracy and large scale government spending.
but many historians of the new deal would argue that the modern idea of new deal liberalism bears only a limited relationship to the ideas that new dealers themselves embraced.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how has the scholarly understanding of the new deal changed over time.
2 did the new deal save capitalism.
if so how and why.
roosevelt himself was among the most aristocratic presidents in american history.
but he became the enemy of the very world that he came from.
he was an alumnus of harvard university but the university president barely spoke to him when he went there to give a speech.
he was as many members of the american elite called him a traitor to his class but even greater hatred came from conservative businessmen and financiers who correctly accused new dealers of imposing new regulations on the business and financial worlds.
his critics were also infuriated by new taxes imposed by roosevelt even though high taxation reached only a few wealthy people.
the hatred of roosevelt from conservatives took many forms.
in 1935 a whispering campaign emerged from a new deal effort to regulate the public utility industry.
stories circulated that the president was a drug addict that he was insane and that he was surrounded by psychiatrists at all times.
hamilton fish jr a highly conservative member of congress said on the floor of the house of representatives that whom the gods would destroy they make first mad not all critics were as virulent in their hatred of the president.
walter lippmann a revered columnist complained that roosevelt was moving away from the nations traditions.
we belong to a generation that has lost its way he wrote.
unable to develop the great truths which it inherited from the emancipators it has returned to the heresies of absolutism authority and the domination of men by men he added that the enormous concentration of power in the hands of appointed officials.
can lead only to waste confusion bureaucratic rigidity and the loss of personal liberty he charged that roosevelt had become attracted to fascism and communism instead of protecting the freedom of individuals.
595 596 chapter 27 c ommunism.
some americans on the left believed that containment was an unnecessarily belligerent approach to the soviet union that the united states could have made peace with the russians.
wider opposition to containment came from conservative americans who believed that containment was too weak a response to communism that indeed it was a kind of appeasement.
among the conservatives who disdained containment were members of an anticomjohn birch society munist organization known as the john birch society.
its leader was robert welch a man so fearful of communism that he believed that some of the most important leaders of american government were trying to undermine the united states and collaborating with the soviets.
welch presented his opposition in the blue book of the john birch society in which he argued that much of the american government was riddled with treason.
for years he wrote we have been taken steadily down the road to communism by steps supposedly designed.
as ways of fighting communism instead he argued it was communist americans themselves who were undermining the nation.
both the u s and soviet governments are controlled by the same furtive conspiratorial cabal of internationalists greedy bankers and corrupt politicians welch wrote.
if left unexposed the traitors inside the u s government would betray the countrys sovereignty to the united nations for a collectivist new world order managed by a one world socialist government among the sources of treason welch claimed was the creation of the united nations and other international institutions.
many americans considered the john birch society an extremist organization but the belief that communism was the greatest danger facing the united states was widely supported.
the opposition to containment reached some of the highest levels of the government.
john foster dulles who would soon become secretary of state in the eisenhower administration wrote the foreign policy plank in the republican platform in 1952.
we charge that the leaders of the administration in power lost the peace so dearly earned by world war ii dulles charged.
they abandoned friendly nations such as latvia lithuania estonia poland and czechoslovakia containment they argued was a policy of weakness that had allowed the communists to take over much of the world.
instead those who opposed containment called for what was known as rollback instead of containing communism the united states should be pushing back the borders of communism despite the possibility of another war.
president dwight eisenhower however did not share dulless belief in rollback and the government abided by the containment strategy throughout the 1950s and beyond despite the fevered opposition to what some still considered to be treason.
the marshall plan an integral part of the containment policy was a proposal to aid in the economic reconstruction of western europe.
there were many motives humanitarian concern for the european people a fear that europe would remain an economic drain on the united states if it could not quickly rebuild and a desire for a strong european market for american goods.
but above all american policymakers believed that unless something could be done to strengthen the shaky pro american governments in western europe those governments might fall under the control of the growing domestic communist parties.
in june 1947 secretary of state george c marshall announced a plan to provide economic assistance to all european nations including the soviet union that would join in drafting a program for recovery.
although russia and its eastern satellites predictably the cold war 661 rejected the plan sixteen western european nations eagerly participated.
whatever isolationist opposition there was in the united states largely vanished after a sudden coup in czechoslovakia in february 1948 which established a soviet dominated communist government.
in april congress approved the creation of the economic cooperation administration the agency that would administer the marshall plan as it became known.
over the next three years the marshall plan channeled 13 billion of american aid into europe helping to spark a substantial economic revival.
by the end of 1950 european industrial production had risen 64 percent communist strength in the member nations had declined and opportunities for american trade had revived.
mobilization at home in 1948 at the presidents request congress approved a new military draft and revived the selective service system.
in the meantime the united states having failed to reach agreement with the soviet union on international control of nuclear weapons redoubled its own efforts in atomic research elevating nuclear weaponry to a central place in its military arsenal.
the atomic energy commission established in 1946 became the supervisory body charged with overseeing all nuclear research civilian and military alike.
and in 1950 the truman administration approved the development of the new hydrogen bomb a nuclear weapon far more powerful than those used in 1945 the national security act of 1947 reshaped the nations military and diplomatic institutions.
a new department of defense would oversee all branches of the armed services combining functions previously performed separately by the war and navy departments.
a national security council nsc operating out creation of nsc cia and defense department of the white house would govern foreign and military policy.
a central intelligence agency cia would replace the wartime office of strategic services and would be responsible for collecting information through both open and covert methods as the cold war continued the cia would also engage in secret political and military operations on behalf of american interests.
the national security act in other words gave the president expanded powers with which to pursue the nations international goals.
the road to nato the united states also moved to strengthen the military capabilities of western europe.
convinced that a reconstructed germany was essential to the needs of the west truman reached an agreement with england and france to merge the three western zones of occupation into a new west german republic which would include the three non soviet sectors of berlin even though that city lay within the soviet zone.
stalin responded quickly.
on june 24 1948 he imposed a tight blockade around the western sectors of berlin.
berlin airlift if germany was to be officially divided stalin was implying then the countrys western government would have to abandon the capital city in the heart of the soviet controlled eastern zone.
truman refused to do so.
unwilling to risk war through a military challenge to the blockade he ordered a massive airlift to supply the city with food fuel and other needed goods.
the airlift continued for more than ten months transporting nearly 2 5 million tons of food and other material keeping a city of 2 million people alive.
in the spring of 1949 stalin lifted the now ineffective blockade.
and in october the division of germany into two nations the federal republic in the west with its new capital in bonn and the democratic republic in the east with its capital in east berlin became official.
662 chapter 28 edwin buzz aldrin is photographed by his fellow astronaut neil armstrong in july 1969 when they became the first humans to set foot on the surface of the moon.
nasa moon walk detached a smaller craft from the capsule landed on the surface of the moon and became the first humans to walk on a celestial body other than earth.
six more lunar missions followed the last in 1972 eventually the space program became a relatively modest effort to make travel in near space easier and more practical through the development of the space shuttle an airplanelike device launched by a missile but capable of both navigating in space and landing on earth much like a conventional aircraft.
the first space shuttle was successfully launched in 1982 the explosion of one shuttle challenger in january 1986 shortly after takeoff killing all seven astronauts stalled the program for two years.
missions resumed in the late 1980s but problems remained as illustrated by the explosion of the space shuttle columbia during reentry in 2003 the space shuttle was used to launch and repair communications satellites and to insert the hubble space telescope into orbit in 1990 and to repair its flawed lens on several occasions including in 2009.
the space shuttle program officially ended in 2011 people of plenty among the most striking social developments of the postwar era was the rapid extension of a middle class lifestyle and outlook to an expanding portion of the population.
the historian david potter published an influential examination of economic abundance and american character in 1954 he called it people of plenty.
for the american middle class in the 1950s at least it seemed an appropriate label.
the affluent society 687 the consumer culture at the center of middle class culture in the 1950s was a growing preoccupation with consumer goods a result of increased prosperity greater variety and availability of products and the adeptness of advertisers in creating demand.
it was also a result of the growth of consumer credit which increased by 800 percent between 1945 and 1957 through the development of credit cards revolving charge accounts and easy payment plans.
prosperity fueled a greater desire for such longtime consumer goods as the automobile and detroit responded to the boom with ever flashier styling and accessories.
consumers also responded eagerly to such new products as dishwashers garbage disposals television and stereos.
because consumer goods were so often marketed and advertised nationally the 1950s were notable for the rapid spread of great national consumer crazes.
for example children adolescents and even some adults became entranced in the late 1950s with the hula hoop a large plastic ring kept spinning around the waist.
the popularity of the walt disney produced childrens television show the mickey mouse club created a national demand for mickey mouse watches and hats and also contributed to the stunning success of disneyland an amusement park near los angeles that re created many of the characters and events of disney entertainment programs.
the suburban nation a third of the nations population lived in suburbs by 1960 a result not only of increased affluence but of important innovations in home building which made single family houses affordable to millions of new people.
the most famous of the suburban developers william levitt built low cost mass produced houses in large suburban developments known as levittowns these types of relatively inexpensive developments levittowns popped up in new york new jersey and pennsylvania but also soon appeared throughout the country.
why did so many americans want to move to the suburbs.
one reason was the enormous importance postwar americans placed on family life after five years of war.
suburbs provided families with larger homes than they could find or afford in the cities and thus made it easier to raise larger numbers of children.
the suburbs provided privacy and a sense of security from the noise and dangers of urban living.
they offered space for new consumer goods the appliances cars boats outdoor furniture and other products that many middleclass americans craved.
another factor motivating white americans to move to the suburbs was race.
most suburbs were restricted to white inhabitants both because relatively few african americans could afford to live in them and because formal and informal barriers kept even prosperous blacks out of all but a few.
in an era when the black population of most cities was rapidly growing many white families fled to the suburbs to escape the integration of urban neighborhoods and schools.
the suburban family for professional men who tended to work in the city at some distance from their homes suburban life generally meant a rigid division between their working and personal worlds.
for many middle class women it meant an increased isolation from the workplace.
many middle class husbands considered it demeaning for their wives to be employed.
and many 688 chapter 28 organized society and its detractors large scale organizations and bureaucracies increased their influence over american life in the postwar era as they had been doing for many decades before.
white collar workers came to outnumber blue collar laborers for the first time and an increasing proportion of them worked in corporate settings with rigid hierarchical structures.
industrial workers also confronted large bureaucracies both in the workplace and in their own unions.
the debilitating impact of bureaucratic life on the individual became one of the central themes of popular and scholarly debate.
william h whyte jr produced one of the most the organization man widely discussed books of the decade the organization man 1956 which attempted to describe the special mentality of the worker in a large bureaucratic setting.
self reliance whyte claimed was losing place to conformity and the ability to get along and work as a team the sociologist david riesman made similar observations in the lonely crowd 1950 in which he argued that the traditional inner directed man who judged himself on the basis of his own values and the esteem of his family was giving way to a new other directed man more concerned with winning the approval of the larger organization or community.
novelists too expressed misgivings in their work about the impersonality of modern society.
saul bellow produced a series of novels the adventures of augie march 1953 seize the day 1956 herzog 1964 and many others that chronicled the difficulties of american jewish men in finding fulfillment in modern urban america.
j d salinger wrote in the catcher in the rye 1951 of a prep school student holden caulfield who is unable to find any area of society school family friends city in which he can feel secure or committed.
the beats and the restless culture of youth the most derisive critics of bureaucracy and middle class society were a group of young poets writers and artists known as the beats and often called beatniks by disapproving critics.
they wrote harsh critiques of what they considered the sterility and conformity of american life the meaninglessness of american politics and the banality of popular culture.
jack kerouac produced the most popular document of the beat generation in his novel on the road 1957 an account of a cross country automobile trip that depicts the rootless iconoclastic lifestyle of kerouac and his friends.
the beats were the most visible evidence of a widespread restiveness among young juvenile delinquency americans in the 1950s.
the phenomenon of juvenile delinquency attracted tremendous public attention and in both politics and popular culture dire warnings surfaced about the growing criminality of american youth.
the 1955 film blackboard jungle for example was a frightening depiction of crime and violence in city schools.
scholarly studies presidential commissions and journalistic exposs all contributed to the sense of alarm about the spread of delinquency although in fact youth crime did not dramatically increase in the 1950s.
the culture of alienation that the beats so vividly represented had counterparts even in ordinary middle class behavior teenage rebelliousness toward parents youthful fascination with fast cars and motorcycles and increasing sexual activity assisted by the greater availability of birth control devices.
the popularity of james dean who starred in rebel without a cause 1955 east of eden 1955 and giant 1956 was a particularly vivid sign of youth culture in the 1950s.
both in the roles he played moody alienated teenagers and young men with a streak of self destructive violence and in the way he lived beat writers the affluent society 693 his own life he died in 1955 at the age of 24 in an automobile accident dean became an icon of the unfocused rebelliousness of american youth in his time.
rock n roll one of the most important cultural developments of the 1950s was the birth of rock n roll and the enormous popularity of the greatest early rock star elvis presley.
elvis presley presley became a symbol of a youthful determination to push at the borders of the conventional and the acceptable.
his sultry good looks his self conscious effort to dress in the vaguely rebellious style of urban gangs motorcycle jackets and slicked back hair even though presley himself was a product of the conservative rural south and most of all the open sexuality of his music and his public performances all made him wildly popular among young americans in the 1950s.
his first great hit heartbreak hotel established him as a national phenomenon in 1956 and he remained a powerful figure in american popular culture well after his death in 1977 presleys music like that of many early white rock musicians drew heavily from black rhythm and blues traditions.
sam phillips a record promoter who had recorded some of the important black r b musicians of his time reportedly said in the early 1950s if i could find a white man with a negro sound i could make a billion dollars soon after that he found presley.
but there were others as well among them buddy holly and bill haley whose 1955 song rock around the clock used in the film blackboard jungle announced the arrival of rock n roll to millions of young people who were closely connected to african american musical traditions.
rock drew from other sources too from country western music another strong influence on presley from gospel music even from jazz.
elvis this photograph of the musician in performance is from very early in his career.
photo by hulton archive getty images 694 chapter 28 the 1950s also saw african american bands and singers grow in popularity among both black and white audiences.
chuck berry little richard b b king chubby checker the temptations the miracles the supremes and others many of them recorded by the motown records black producer berry gordy the founder and president of motown records in detroit never rivaled presley in their popularity among white youths but did develop significant multiracial audiences of their own.
the rapid rise of rock owed a great deal to innovations in radio and television programming.
by the 1950s radio stations no longer felt obliged to present mostly live programming especially once television took over many of the entertainment functions radio had once performed.
instead many radio stations devoted themselves almost entirely to playing recorded music.
early in the 1950s a new breed of radio announcers known as disk jockeys or djs for the records they played began to create programming aimed specifically at young fans of rock music and when those programs became wildly successful other stations followed suit.
american bandstand which began airing in 1957 was a televised showcase for rock n roll hits in which a live audience danced to recorded music.
the program helped spread the popularity of rock and made its host dick clark one of the best known figures among young americans.
radio and television were important to the recording industry of course because they encouraged the rapidly increasing sale of records in the mid and late 1950s especially in the inexpensive and popular 45 rpm format small disks that contained one song on each side.
also important were jukeboxes which played individual songs on 45s and which proliferated in soda fountains diners bars and other places where young people congregated.
sales of records increased from 182 million to 521 million between 1954 and 1960 so eager were record promoters to get their songs on the air that they routinely made secret payments to station owners and disk jockeys to encourpayola scandals age them to showcase their artists.
these payments which became known as payola produced a briefly sensational series of scandals when they were exposed in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
the other america it was relatively easy for white middle class americans in the 1950s to believe that the world of economic growth personal affluence and cultural homogeneity was universal and that their values and assumptions were ones that most other americans shared.
but such beliefs were false.
large groups of americans remained outside the circle of abundance and shared neither in the affluence of the middle class nor in many of its values.
on the margins of the affluent society in 1962 the socialist writer michael harrington published a celebrated book called the other america which chronicled the continuing existence of poverty in the united states.
the great economic expansion of the postwar years reduced poverty dramatically but the other america did not eliminate it.
in 1960 at any given moment more than a fifth of all american families over 30 million people continued to live below what the government defined as the poverty line down from a third of all families fifteen years before.
many millions more lived just above the official poverty line but with incomes that gave them little comfort and no security.
the affluent society 695 most of the poor up to 80 percent experienced poverty intermittently and temporarily.
but approximately 20 percent were people for whom poverty was a continuous often inescapable reality.
that included approximately half the nations elderly population and a significant proportion of african americans and hispanics.
native americans constituted the single poorest group in the country.
this hard core poverty rebuked the popular assumption that a rising tide lifts all boats it was a poverty that the growing prosperity of the postwar era seemed to affect hardly at all a poverty as harrington observed that appeared impervious to hope rural poverty among those on the margins of the affluent society were many rural americans.
in 1948 farmers had received 8 9 percent of the national income in 1956 they received only 4 1 percent.
in part this decline reflected the steadily shrinking farm population in 1956 alone nearly 10 percent of the rural population moved into or was absorbed by cities.
but it also reflected declining farm prices.
because of enormous surpluses in basic staples prices fell 33 percent in those years even though national income as a whole rose 50 percent at the same time.
the surpluses were the result of higher yields per acre as well as increases in the amount of acreage under production a function of the widespread use of tractors.
sharecroppers and tenant farmers most of them african american continued to live at or below subsistence levels throughout the rural south in part because of the mechanization of cotton picking after 1944 in part because of the development of synthetic fibers that reduced demand for cotton.
two thirds of the cotton acreage went out of production between 1930 and 1960.
migrant farmworkers a group concentrated especially in the west and southwest and containing many mexican american and asian american workers lived in similarly dire circumstances.
in rural areas without much commercial agriculture such as the appalachian region in the east where the decline of the coal economy reduced the one significant source of support for the region whole communities lived in desperate poverty increasingly cut off from the market economy.
all these groups were vulnerable to malnutrition and even starvation.
the inner cities as prospering white families moved from cities to suburbs in vast numbers more and more inner city neighborhoods became repositories for the poor ghettoes growth of ghettoes from which there was no easy escape.
the growth of these neighborhoods owed much to a vast migration of african americans out of the countryside and into industrial cities.
not all these black migrants were poor and many found in the city routes to economic progress similar to those of whites.
but african americans were substantially more likely to live in poverty than most other groups in part because of the persistent patterns of discrimination that denied them any real opportunities.
more than 3 million black men and women moved from the south to northern cities between 1940 and 1960 chicago detroit cleveland new york and other eastern and midwestern industrial cities experienced a major expansion of their black populations while many whites were leaving cities at the same time.
similar migrations from mexico and puerto rico expanded poor hispanic neighborhoods in many american cities.
between 1940 and 1960 nearly a million puerto ricans moved into american cities especially new york.
mexican workers crossed the borders 696 chapter 29 the crime.
later that day he was mysteriously murdered by a dallas nightclub owner jack ruby as he was being moved from one jail to another.
most americans at the time accepted the conclusions of a federal commission appointed by president johnson to investigate the assassination.
the commission chaired by chief justice earl warren found that both oswald and ruby had acted alone that there was no larger conspiracy.
warren commission in later years however many americans came to believe that the warren commission report had ignored evidence of a wider conspiracy behind the murders.
controversy over the assassination continues still.
lyndon johnson the kennedy assassination was a national trauma a defining event for almost everyone old enough to be aware of it.
at the time however much of the nation took comfort in the personality and performance of kennedys successor in the white house lyndon baines johnson.
johnson was a native of the poor hill country of west texas and had risen to become majority leader of the u s senate by dint of extraordinary even obsessive effort and ambition.
having failed to win the democratic nomination for president in 1960 he surprised many who knew him by agreeing to accept the vice presidential nomination on the ticket with kennedy.
the events in dallas thrust him into the white house.
johnsons rough edged even crude personality could hardly have been more different from kennedys.
but like kennedy johnson was a man who believed in the active use of power.
between 1963 and 1966 he compiled the most impressive legislative record of any president since franklin roosevelt.
he was aided by the tidal wave of emotion that the johnson treatment lyndon johnson was legendary for his powers of persuasion for a combination of charm and intimidation that often worked on even the most experienced politicians.
he is shown here in the oval office meeting with his old friend senator richard russell of georgia and demonstrating one of his most powerful and unsettling techniques moving so close to the person with whom he was talking as to be almost touching him.
lyndon baines johnson library the turbulent sixties 711 followed the death of kennedy which helped win support for many new frontier proposals.
but johnson also constructed a greater and more far reaching reform program of his own one that he ultimately labeled the great society and he won great society approval of much of it through the same sort of skillful lobbying in congress that had made him an effective majority leader.
johnsons first year in office was by necessity dominated by the campaign for reelection.
there was little doubt that he would win particularly after the republican party nominated the very conservative senator barry goldwater of arizona.
in the november 1964 election the president received a larger plurality over 61 percent than any candidate before or since.
goldwater with his hard line stance against communism and government expansion managed to carry only his home state of arizona and five states in the deep south.
nevertheless the failed goldwater campaign mobilized many right wing activists who would propel the growth of conservative political strength for decades to come.
record democratic majorities in both houses of congress many of whose members had been swept into office only because of the margin of johnsons victory ensured that the president would be able to fulfill many of his goals.
the assault on poverty for the first time since the new deal the federal government took steps in the 1960s to create important new social welfare programs.
the most important of these was medicare which provides federal aid to elderly individuals for medical expenses.
medicare and medicaid its enactment in 1965 came at the end of a bitter twenty year debate between those who believed in the concept of national health assistance and those who denounced it as socialized medicine but medicare pacified many critics.
for one thing it avoided the stigma of welfare by making medicare benefits available to all elderly americans regardless of need just as social security had done with pensions.
that created a large middle class constituency for the program.
it also defused the opposition of the medical community by allowing doctors serving medicare patients to practice privately and at first to charge their normal fees medicare simply shifted responsibility for paying those fees from the patient to the government.
in 1966 johnson steered to passage the medicaid program which extended federal medical assistance to welfare recipients and other indigent people of all ages.
medicare and medicaid were early steps in a much larger assault on poverty one that kennedy had been planning in the last months of his life and that johnson launched only weeks after taking office.
the centerpiece of this war on poverty as johnson called it was the office of economic opportunity oeo which created an array of new educational employment housing and health care programs.
but the oeo was controversial from the start in part because of its commitment to the idea of community action community action was an effort to involve members of poor communities themselves in the planning and administration of the programs designed to help community action programs them.
the community action programs provided jobs for many poor people and gave them valuable experience in administrative and political work.
but despite its achievements the community action approach proved impossible to sustain.
administrative failures damaged the program.
so did the apparent excesses of a few agencies which damaged the popular image of the community action programs and indeed the war on poverty as a whole.
the oeo spent nearly 3 billion during its first two years of existence and it helped reduce poverty in some areas.
but it fell far short of eliminating poverty altogether.
that 712 chapter 30 nixons farewell only moments before nixon had been in tears saying good bye to his staff in the east room of the white house.
but as he boarded a helicopter to begin his trip home to california shortly after resigning as president he flashed his trademark victory sign to the crowd on the white house lawn.
bettmann corbis nixon to relinquish were several that offered apparently incontrovertible evidence of his involvement in the watergate cover up.
only three days after the burglary the recordings disclosed the president had ordered the fbi to stop investigating the break in.
impeachment and conviction now seemed inevitable.
for several days nixon cloistered himself in the white house.
finally on august 8 resignation 1974 he announced his resignation the first president in american history ever to do so.
at noon the next day while nixon and his family flew west to their home in california gerald ford took the oath of office as president.
many americans expressed relief and exhilaration that as the new president put it our long national nightmare is over but the wave of good feeling could not obscure the deeper and more lasting damage of the watergate crisis.
in a society in which distrust of leaders and institutions of authority was already widespread the fall of richard nixon confirmed for many americans their most cynical assumptions about the untrustworthy character of american public life.
conclusion the victory of richard nixon in the 1968 presidential election represented a popular repudiation of turbulence and radicalism.
it was a call for a restoration of order and stability.
but order and stability were not the dominant characteristics of nixons troubled years in office.
nixon entered office when the political left and the counterculture were approaching the peak of their influence.
american culture and society in the late 1960s and early 1970s were shaped decisively by and were deeply divided over the challenges by young people the crisis of authority 765 to the prevailing social norms.
these were also the years in which a host of new liberation movements joined the drive for racial equality and when above all women mobilized effectively to demand changes in the way society treated gender differences.
nixon had run for office attacking the failure of his predecessor to end the war in vietnam.
but for four years under his presidency the war and the protests against it continued and even in some respects escalated.
the division of opinion over the war was as deep as any of the other divisions in national life.
it continued to poison the nations politics and social fabric until the american role in the conflict finally shuddered to a close in 1973 but much of the controversy and division in the 1970s was a product of the nixon presidency itself.
nixon was in many ways a dynamic and even visionary leader who proposed some important domestic reforms and who made important changes in american foreign policy most notably making overtures to communist china and forging dtente with the soviet union.
he was also however a devious secretive man whose white house became engaged in a series of covert activities that produced the most dramatic political scandal in american history.
watergate as it was called preoccupied much of the nation for nearly two years beginning in 1972 and ultimately in the summer of 1974 the scandal forced richard nixon who had been reelected to office only two years before by one of the largest majorities in modern history to become the first president in american history to resign.
nixon was elected to lead the nation out of a war it no longer wanted but his shameful exit from office and the ongoing vietnam war continued to damage the nations self confidence and trust in government.
key terms people places events american indian movement aim 741 betty friedan 745 csar chvez 743 counterculture 739 dtente 754 earth day 749 free speech movement 738 gerald ford 763 henry kissinger 750 indian civil rights act 741 national organization for women now 746 new left 737 nixon doctrine 754 organization of the petroleum exporting countries opec 755 rachel carson 748 roe v wade 747 silent majority 755 stonewall riot 744 students for a democratic society sds 737 vietnamization 750 watergate 761 woodstock 740 recall and reflect 1 what was the new left.
how was it related to the counterculture.
2 how did ethnic minorities especially native americans and latinos challenge the status quo in the 1970s.
3 what were the objectives of the new feminism of the 1970s.
what gains did women achieve in this era.
what setbacks did the feminist movement experience.
4 what was the nixon doctrine.
how did this doctrine play out in foreign policy.
5 what was the effect of nixons policies on the u s economy.
what was nixons response to escalating economic difficulties.
from the age of limits to the age of reagan politics and diplomacy after watergate the rise of the new conservative movement the reagan revolution america and the waning of the cold war looking ahead 1 what economic and energy problems plagued the presidencies of gerald ford and jimmy carter.
how did ford and carter attempt to deal with these problems.
2 what was the new right and what effect did its rise have on american politics.
3 what was reaganomics and how did this policy affect the national economy.
the frustrations of the early 1970s the defeat in vietnam the watergate crisis the decay of the american economy inflicted damaging blows to the confident optimistic nationalism that had characterized so much of the postwar era.
some americans responded to these problems by announcing the arrival of an age of limits in which americans would have to learn to live with less.
by the end of the decade however another response was gaining strength one that combined a steady retreat from some of the heady liberal visions of the 1960s with a reinforced commitment to traditional ideas of economic growth international power and american virtue.
766 politics and diplomacy after watergate in the aftermath of richard nixons ignominious departure from office many americans wondered whether faith in the presidency and in the government as a whole could ever be restored.
the administrations of the two presidents who succeeded nixon did little to answer those questions.
the ford custodianship gerald ford inherited the presidency under difficult circumstances.
he had to try to rebuild confidence in government in the wake of the watergate scandals and to restore prosperity in the face of major economic difficulties.
the new presidents effort to establish himself as a symbol of political integrity suffered a setback only a month after he took office when he granted richard nixon a full free and absolute pardon for any crimes he may have committed during his presidency.
the pardon angered a public eager to see nixon face criminal charges and caused a decline in fords popularity from which he never fully recovered.
nevertheless most americans considered ford a decent man his honesty and amiability did much to reduce the bitterness and acrimony of the watergate years.
the ford administration enjoyed far less success in its effort to solve the problems of the economy.
to curb inflation the president called for largely ineffective voluntary efforts.
after supporting high interest rates opposing increased federal spending through liberal use of his veto power and resisting pressures for a tax reduction ford had to deal with a confounding economic mix of rising unemployment high inflation and slowing economic growth in 1974 and 1975 known as stagflation while it occurred only during this twoyear period it was synonymous with most of the economic troubles of the seventies.
time line carter elected president 1978 1979 camp david accords american hostages in iran soviet union invades afghanistan u s and china restore relations three mile island nuclear accident stagflation ford pardons nixon panama canal treaties signed apple introduces first personal computer u s boycotts moscow olympics reagan elected president american hostages in iran released reagan wins tax and budget cuts aids first reported in u s severe recession u s invades grenada reagan reelected reagan and gorbachev meet iran contra scandal revealed george h w bush elected president berlin wall dismantled communist regimes collapse u s troops in panama iraq invades kuwait los angeles race riots collapse of soviet regime persian gulf war clinton elected president 767 768 chapter 31 global preeminence and drew it increasingly into the role of international arbiter and peacemaker.
the gulf war of 1991 was the most dramatic example of the new global role the united states would now increasingly assume as the worlds only true superpower.
key terms people places events ayatollah ruhollah khomeini 770 bill clinton 786 camp david accords 769 christian coalition 773 deregulation 779 george h w bush 784 gerald ford 774 glasnost 782 iran contra scandal 784 jimmy carter 768 mikhail gorbachev 782 neoconservatives 777 new right 773 perestroika 782 reagan doctrine 781 reaganomics 779 ronald reagan 774 saddam hussein 785 sagebrush rebellion 771 stagflation 767 strategic defense initiative sdi 781 sunbelt 771 tiananmen square 783 recall and reflect 1 did the ford and carter presidencies fail to repair the damage done to the reputation of the presidency by the watergate scandal and nixons resignation.
2 why did the american electorate become increasingly conservative during the 1970s and 1980s.
what are some examples that testify to this increasing conservatism.
3 what philosophy guided foreign policy under reagan.
how did the rise of mikhail gorbachev alter reagans foreign policy toward the soviet union.
the age of globalization a resurgence of partisanship science and technology in the new economy a changing society america in the world looking ahead 1 how did increasing partisanship affect governing during the late 1900s and early 2000s.
how does it continue to affect the relationship between the president and congress.
2 how did the growth of the new economy affect how americans worked and lived.
3 how was the american population changing at the turn of the century.
what characterizes it and what key challenges does it confront.
4 how did the terrorist attack of september 11 2001 affect the united states and begin a new era in american foreign policy.
on an early tuesday morning in 2001 a commercial airliner crashed into the side of one of two tallest buildings in new york the north tower of the world trade center.
within thirty minutes another commercial airliner struck the south tower.
before the steel girders in both towers buckled and collapsed from the tremendous heat of the burning wreckage americans learned of even more disasters.
a plane flew into the pentagon in washington d c and another crashed a few hundred miles away in a field not far from pittsburgh after passengers apparently seized the cockpit and prevented the hijackers from reaching their unknown target.
in these four almost simultaneous catastrophes nearly 3 000 people died.
the events of september 11 and their aftermath sparked significant changes in american life.
and yet there was at least one great continuity between the world of the 1990s and the world that seemed to begin on september 11 2001 the united states in the last years of the twentieth century and the first years of the twenty first more than at any other time in its history was becoming more and more deeply entwined in a new age of globalism an age that combined great promise with great peril.
789 a resurgence of partisanship time line bill clinton elected government shutdown nafta ratified welfare reform passed defense of marriage act balanced budget agreement clinton reelected lewinsky scandal breaks clinton acquitted by senate clinton impeached by house george w bush wins contested election 9 11 attacks u s defeats taliban regime in afghanistan u s invades iraq abu ghraib scandal bush reelected tea party fields candidates hurricane katrina troop surge in iraq the great recession mortgage crisis obama elected nations first african american president affordable care act signed deepwater horizon bp oil spill osama bin laden killed by u s special forces occupy wall street obama reelected sandy hook school shooting obergefell v hodges 790 border bill passes senate fails in the house when bill clinton took the presidential oath of office in january 1993 little did he or any other american realize that partisan politics would become a crippling problem.
beginning with clinton and continuing through the administration of president barack obama democrats and republicans regularly chose ideological purity over political compromise effectively gumming up the machinery of the federal government and nearly bringing it to the brink of shutting down on more than one occasion.
at times the political divides occurred within a party conservative republicans refusing the hand of negotiation to their more liberal brethren on matters of higher taxes raising the national debt ceiling or supporting national health insurance.
like few periods in american history the turn of the twentyfirst century showcased bitter splits between the parties that fundamentally affected how the white house and congress functioned.
launching the clinton presidency bill clinton entered office as the first democratic president since jimmy carter and the first self proclaimed activist president meaning a president seeking to expand the active role of the federal government in solving social problems since lyndon johnson.
indeed his domestic agenda was more ambitious than that of any president since the 1960s.
but clinton also had significant political weaknesses.
having won the vote of well under half the electorate he had no powerful mandate for change.
the new administration began with a series of missteps and misfortunes in its first months.
the presidents effort to end the longtime ban on gay men and lesbians serving in the military met with ferocious resistance and he was forced to settle for a the age of globalization 791 compromise known as dont ask dont tell which forbade recruiters to ask recruits about their sexual preferences but also forbade servicemen and servicewomen to reveal them.
several of his early appointments became so controversial he had to withdraw them.
then vince foster a longtime friend of the president who served as a deputy white house counsel and previous legal partner of first lady hillary rodham clinton committed suicide in the summer of 1993 his death sparked an escalating inquiry into some banking and real estate ventures involving the clintons in the early 1980s which became known as the whitewater affair.
an independent counsel began examining these issues in 1993.
the clintons were ultimately cleared of wrongdoing in whitewater in 2000.
despite its many problems the clinton administration had some important achievements in its first year.
the president narrowly won approval of a budget that marked a significant turn away from some of the policies of the reagan bush years especially the focus on reducing personal and corporate taxes.
it included a substantial tax increase on the wealthiest americans a sizable reduction in many areas of government spending and a major expansion of tax credits to low income working people.
clinton was a committed advocate of free trade.
after a long and difficult battle against among others ross perot the afl cio and many democrats in congress he secured passage of the north american free trade agreement nafta which eliminated free trade agreements most trade barriers among the united states canada and mexico.
later he won approval to sign a global accord that created the world trade organization wto an international organization charged with negotiating agreements and settling disputes among its members.
the presidents most notable and ambitious initiative was a major reform of the nations health care system.
early in 1993 he appointed a task force chaired by the first lady.
the presidential task force proposed a sweeping reform designed to guarantee coverage to every american and hold down the costs of medical care.
but there was substantial opposition from those who believed the reform would transfer too much power to the government.
well funded opposition doomed the plan.
the foreign policy of the clinton administration was at first cautious and tentative.
yugoslavia a nation created after world war i out of a group of small balkan countries dissolved again into several different countries in the wake of the 1989 collapse of its communist government.
bosnia was among the new nations and it quickly became embroiled in a bloody civil war between its two major ethnic groups one muslim the other serbian and christian backed by the neighboring serbian republic.
all efforts by the other european nations and the united states to negotiate an end to the struggle failed until 1995 when the american negotiator richard holbrooke finally brought the warring parties together and crafted an agreement to partition bosnia.
the republican resurgence the trials of the clinton administration and the failure of health care reform in particular proved damaging to the democratic party as it faced the congressional elections of 1994 for the first time in over forty years republicans gained control of both houses of congress.
throughout 1995 the republican congress under the aggressive leadership of house speaker newt gingrich worked at a sometimes feverish pace to construct newt gingrich what they called a contract with america an ambitious and even radical legislative program.
the republicans proposed a series of measures to transfer important powers from the federal government to the states pushed for dramatic reductions in federal spending including a major restructuring of the medicare program to reduce costs and attempted to scale back a wide range of federal regulatory functions.
792 chapter 32 the digital revolution has contributed to a vast change in the reporting of news events and political commentary.
politicians now have much less control over how their messages are transmitted and received.
ian dagnall alamy twenty four hour news cycle billion computers in use in the world and many more now obsolete ones.
virtually all of them are connected to the internet.
the development of the internet along with the emergence of the computer industry and digital technology made possible an enormous range of new products and services that quickly became central to economic life digital music video and cameras ipods smartphones and tablets and facebook instagram youtube and vine.
these modern industries employed hundreds of thousands of people many of them from outside the united states and created new consumer needs and appetites.
breakthroughs in genetics computers helped create new scientific breakthroughs in genetics.
early discoveries in genetics by gregor mendel thomas hunt morgan and others laid the groundwork for more dramatic breakthroughs the discovery of dna by the british scientists oswald avery colin macleod and maclyn mccarty in 1944 and in 1953 the dramatic discovery by the american biochemist james watson and the british biophysicist francis crick of the double helix structure of dna and thus of the key to identifying genetic codes.
from these discoveries emerged the new science and ultimately the new industry of genetic engineering through which new medical treatments and new techniques for hybridization of plants and animals have already become possible.
scientists began to identify specific genes in humans and other living things.
but the identification of genes was painfully slow and in 1989 in an effort to accelerate the process the federal government appropriated 3 billion to fund the national center for human genome project the human genome.
the human genome project formally began its mission to identify and classify all of the more than 100 000 genes in 1990 and declared its work complete in 2003 but genetic research was and continues to be a source of great controversy.
many people feared that the new science might alter aspects of human life that previously seemed beyond human control.
some critics opposed genetic research on religious grounds seeing it as an interference with gods plan for human nature.
still others complained the age of globalization 805 that it equipped humans with immoral powers such that for example parents could design their children and order certain desirable traits.
and a particularly heated controversy emerged over the ways in which scientists obtained genetic material.
one of the most promising sources of genetic research comes from stem cell material from human embryos but the research deeply offends those who believe that the embryo is an earlyaged human life deserving of protection from harm.
in 2001 president bush issued an executive order banning federal funding of research using new sources of human stem cells.
president obama reversed the order in 2009 a changing society the american population changed dramatically in the late twentieth and early twenty first centuries.
it grew larger older and more racially and ethnically diverse.
it debated the success and scope of earlier landmark events such as the civil rights movement and the right to an abortion.
at the same time the nations citizenry confronted powerful new challenges such as the spread of aids the debate over gay rights and same sex marriage and the prospect of dwindling natural resources.
a shifting population decreasing birthrates and growing life spans contributed to one of the most important characteristics of the american population in the early twenty first century its increasing agedness.
the enormous baby boom generation people born in the first ten years after world war ii drove the median age steadily upward from 34 in 1996 to 37 in 2011 to a projected 39 by 2035.
it had important implications for the workforce.
in the last twenty years of the twentieth century the number of people aged 25 54 known statistically as the prime workforce grew by over 26 million.
in the first ten years of the twenty first century the number of american born workers in that age group did not grow at all.
this combination of fewer americans working and more of them retired put enormous stress on the social security and medicare systems to continue to fulfill their financial obligations.
the slowing growth of the native born population and the workforce shortages it helped create was one reason for the rapid growth of immigration.
in 2011 the number of foreignborn residents of the united states was the highest in american history more than 40 million people.
these immigrants came from a wider variety of backgrounds than ever before as a result of the 1965 immigration reform act which eliminated national origins as a criterion for admission.
the growing presence of the foreign born contributed to a significant drop in the percentage of white residents in the united states from 90 percent in 1965 to 80 percent in 2008.
relative to the overall population non hispanic whites constituted just over 65 percent.
latinos and asians were by far the largest groups of immigrants in these years.
but others came in significant numbers from africa the middle east russia and eastern europe.
african americans in the post civil rights era the civil rights movement and other liberal efforts of the 1960s had two very different effects on african americans.
on one hand they increased opportunities for advancement to those in a position to take advantage of them.
and they helped make possible the election of the first black american to the white house an event unthinkable to all but 806 chapter 32 14 0 10 0 8 0 6 0 4 0 immigrant share of the total u s population number of immigrants in millions 12 0 2 0 number of immigrants immigrant share of the total u s population 0 0 this chart shows the tremendous increase in immigration to the united states in the decades since the immigration reform act of 1965.
at what point since 1850 was the immigrant share of the total u s population highest.
when was the last time that the immigrant share was at its current level.
source of data migration policy institute and u s census bureau.
u s immigrant population and share over time 1850 present the most optimistic freedom fighter during the king years.
on the other hand as the industrial economy declined and government services dwindled there was a growing sense of helplessness and despair among large groups of poor nonwhites who continued to find themselves barred from upward mobility.
by the early twenty first century the black middle class constituted over half of the african growth of black middle class american population progress was remarkable in the decades after the high point of the civil rights movement.
disparities between black and white professionals did not vanish but they diminished substantially.
african american families moved into more affluent urban communities and in many cases into suburbs at times as neighbors of whites more often into predominantly black communities.
the percentage of black high school graduates going on to college was virtually the same as that of white high school graduates by the early twenty first century although a smaller proportion of blacks than whites managed to complete high school.
and african americans were making rapid strides in many professions.
a generation earlier they had been barred from many jobs because of segregation.
over half of all employed african americans in the united states had skilled white collar jobs in 2010 there were few areas of american life from which blacks were any longer entirely excluded.
but the rise of the black middle class also accentuated the increasingly desperate plight of less fortunate african americans.
economic growth and the activist programs of the 1960s and beyond had never reached them.
a third of the nations black population was categorized as impoverished often described as the underclass as more successful plight of impoverished people blacks moved out of the inner cities the poor were left behind in their decaying neighborhoods.
less than half of young inner city blacks f inished high the age of globalization 807 school in 2010 more than 60 percent were unemployed.
the black family structure changed as well from the dislocations of urban poverty.
there was a radical increase in the number of single parent female headed black households.
in 1970 59 percent of all black children under eighteen years old lived with both their parents already down from 70 percent a decade earlier.
in 2010 only 35 percent of black children lived in such households compared to 77 percent of non hispanic white children.
nonwhites were also disadvantaged by many other factors in the changing social and economic climate of the late twentieth and early twenty first centuries.
among them was clintons revision of federal welfare policies and a growing impatience with affirmative action.
there was also a steady decline in the number of unskilled jobs in the economy.
not surprisingly then many blacks openly questioned the long term successes of the civil rights movement.
a steady rise in the rate of the incarceration of young black men prompted calls for better schools and intervention programs as well as a review of the justice system as a whole.
signs of popular despair surfaced during moments of racial tension especially after the use of questionable policing tactics left black men dead as in the case of eric garner in new york city in july 2014 and eighteen year old michael brown in ferguson missouri in august 2014 in these highly publicized cases hundreds of blacks took to the streets demanding fairer treatment by local police and decrying a lack of racial respect between americans of different colors.
the abortion debate among the principal goals of the growing power of conservatism as it became more assertive in the late twentieth century was a challenge to feminism and its achievements.
leaders of the new right had campaigned successfully against the proposed equal rights amendment to the constitution.
and they played a central role in the most divisive issue of the late 1980s and 1990s abortion rights.
for women who choose to terminate unwanted pregnancies the supreme courts decision in roe v wade 1973 had seemed to settle the question.
by the 1980s abortion was the most commonly performed surgical procedure in the country.
but at the same time critics of abortion began to build a powerful grassroots movement.
the right to life or pro life movement as it called itself found its most fervent s upporters among catholics and right to life movement indeed the catholic church itself lent its institutional authority to the battle against legalized abortion.
religious doctrine also motivated the anti abortion stance of mormons evangelical christians and other groups.
the opposition of other anti abortion activists had less to do with religion than with their commitment to traditional notions of family and gender relations.
to them abortion was a particularly offensive part of a much larger assault by feminists on the role of women as wives and mothers.
it was also many foes contended a form of murder.
fetuses they claimed were human beings who had a right to life from the moment of conception.
although the right to life movement was persistent in its demand for a reversal of roe v wade or barring that a constitutional amendment banning abortion it also attacked abortion in more limited ways and at its most vulnerable points.
starting in the late 1970s congress and many state legislatures began barring the use of public funds to pay for abortions thereby making them almost inaccessible for many poor women in some states.
the reagan and the two bush administrations imposed further restrictions on federal funding and even on the right of doctors in federally funded clinics to give patients any information on abortion.
extremists in the right to life movement began picketing occupying and at rare times even bombing abortion clinics.
several anti abortion activists murdered doctors who performed abortions others subjected physicians to campaigns of terrorism and harassment.
the shifting composition of the supreme court between 1981 808.

why did paleo indians migrate to the americas.
european civilization in turmoil p 10 how did economic and political changes in europe facilitate overseas expansion.
columbus and the columbian exchange p 16 what was the columbian exchange and how did it affect societies in the americas and europe.
west african worlds p 20 what were the chief similarities and differences between the civilizations of africa and the americas.
european colonization of the atlantic world p 24 how did the different labor systems employed by the spanish french and english affect the indigenous populations of the americas.
c hapter the first americans p 4 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 european civilization in turmoil as the aztec empire was reaching the height of its power at the close of the fifteenth century european society was in the midst of a profound transformation.
this period of cultural intellectual scientific and commercial flourishing is known as the renaissance.
the revival of interest in ancient greek and latin not only led to renewed interest in the civilizations of greece and rome but also caused renaissance thinkers to re examine the early history of the church and its teachings.
reformers drawing on these traditions and reacting to the corruption of the roman catholic church challenged the authority of the church.
the rise of a new strain of christian thought protestantism led to creation of a host of new christian sects.
amid this tumult powerful monarchs across europe forged new nation states out of the relatively weak decentralized governments of europe.
modern nations such as england france and spain were born in this era.
state building required money and the monarchs of these nations were eager to increase their wealth and power a desire that ultimately led to the colonization and exploration of africa and the americas.
the allure of the east and the challenge of islam the leading european powers decision to explore conquer and exploit lands in the atlantic world was facilitated by a host of economic technological and cultural changes.
contact with asia led to major changes in taste and patterns of consumption during the early modern period from the fifteenth through the seventeenth centuries.
europeans looked beyond their borders particularly to china and the far east for spices to enrich their bland foods and for luxury goods especially exotic textiles such as silk and cotton to enliven their fashions.
these commodities not native to europe had to be obtained from asia.
the overland trade routes to the east were controlled by muslims adherents of islam a monotheistic faith shaped by the teachings of the prophet muhammad.
since its emergence in the seventh century middle east muslim influence spread stretching from europe to parts of africa and asia.
europeans resented the economic power of muslim rulers who controlled the lucrative trade routes to the east.
european antagonism toward the muslim world also sprang from an intense religious animosity.
for almost 300 years christian europe had waged a holy war against islam launching crusades to regain control of jerusalem a city sacred to jews christians and muslims.
islams influence in europe was what trade goods from asia were most sought after by europeans.
most pronounced in the ottoman empire whose power eventually spread across the eastern mediterranean and balkans.
trade commerce and urbanization among the important changes in europe during this period was the dramatic growth of the economy.
the black death 1347 1352 ce a pandemic that spread to europe between 1347 and 1352 wiped out about half of europes population.
in the centuries following the black death europes population began to expand again eventually becoming larger than it had been before the epidemic.
the economies of europe also recovered.
by 1400 the italian city states especially venice dominated trade and finance particularly trade with the east.
in part venices dominance resulted from its proximity to the lucrative eastern trade routes.
italy also dominated textile production and florence became europes leading producer of woolen cloth.
slowly the economic center of europe shifted west and north.
by about 1500 the city of antwerp in what is today belgium had become the leading commercial center of europe but was eventually surpassed by the dutch port of amsterdam.
as trade and commerce expanded innovative financial practices and services facilitated continued economic growth.
new accounting methods helped european civilization in turmoil merchants keep track of inventories and profits and losses.
marine insurance reduced the risks of maritime trade.
a more elaborate banking system also helped finance trade.
the growth of deposit banking a system in which merchants could deposit funds with bankers and then draw on written checks instead of presenting gold or silver coins for payment of goods greatly bolstered trade and commerce.
all these developments made economic ventures more secure and encouraged investment some of which was directed toward overseas trade and exploration.
together the new commercial and financial practices were key elements in the growth of capitalism.
simply put capitalism is an economic system in which a market economy geared toward the maximization of profit determines the prices of goods and services.
this new profit driven capitalist ethos slowly transformed european life beginning in the fifteenth century.
capitalism also transformed rural europe.
european culture had always viewed nature as something to be tamed and exploited see competing visions european and huron views of nature page 12.
rather than simply produce food for themselves the new capitalist ethos led some farmers to seek the maximum yield from their land and plant crops that would fetch a higher price at market.
in other cases landowners evicted farmers from their lands so that they could graze sheep on the land and produce wool that would be turned into cloth.
this latter change in agriculture forced many to leave the countryside and seek employment in towns and cities.
migration from the countryside and commercial development led to greater urbanization in europe.
in the two centuries after the black death the population of london increased from 50 000 to more than 200 000 outside of london englands changes were less dramatic but no less significant.
populations mushroomed in ports such as bristol regional market towns such as cambridge and the new textile centers such as norwich.
view the map spread of printing technological improvements and new inventions also spurred economic growth.
the printing press transformed the way knowledge was produced and disseminated.
while a scribe hand copying a book onto parchment might turn out two or three books a year the typical print run of a book produced on paper by a printing press was between 100 and 1 000 printed books not only made it easier to preserve knowledge but also encouraged advances in science and in geographic exploration by making it easier to collect organize and analyze information.
printed texts and engraved images also whet the appetites of europeans for exploration by making accounts of exotic places such as india and china more accessible.
marco polos 1254 1324 influential text about his adventures in china the travels of marco polo circulated widely in manuscript form for more than a century before a printed edition appeared in 1477 printing created an entire new industry for the production dissemination and sale of books.
the new technology also transformed visual culture making it possible to create cheap images.
the new technique of engraving 1 5 was a multistep process.
on the right a skilled craftsman gouges out an image on a copper plate.
in the center the plates are inked and then wiped clean.
on the left the final stages in the engraving process are demonstrated including the giant press used to create the final image.
1 5 copper engraving the many steps used to make an engraving from the artists hand to the final drying of the printed page are illustrated in this early image.
how did printing affect european society.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 west african worlds africa the worlds second largest continent in terms of land mass is home to some of the most ancient civilizations in the world.
the range of societies in africa in the sixteenth century rivaled those of the americas in social complexity and cultural and religious diversity.
africa featured class stratified urban civilizations alongside more simple egalitarian societies.
monotheistic faiths including christianity and islam flourished in parts of africa as did religions closer in principle to the animist beliefs of eastern woodlands indians.
the north african states on the mediterranean had been trading with europe since the founding of the great ancient port of carthage 814 bce near modern tunis.
africans possessed many commodities sought by europeans including salt gold ivory and exotic woods.
but the development of a direct sea route from europe to west africa in the fifteenth century greatly increased trade and contact between europeans and africans.
the most profound consequence of the sea routes to west africa was the development of the international slave trade a process that changed virtually every society in the atlantic world.
west african societies islam and trade the civilizations of africa south of the sahara desert including those with atlantic ports were socially and culturally diverse.
the powerful songhai empire 1370 1591 extended from the atlantic inward to the sudan.
primarily agricultural the empire included urban centers and a highly organized military and administrative bureaucracy.
in the great city of timbuktu an islamic university rivaled many european centers of learning.
other peoples such as the igbos of west africa lived in smaller autonomous villages.
these simpler more egalitarian societies were organized mainly around kinship more like americas eastern woodlands indians than the empires of mesoamerica or the rising nation states of europe.
local rulers consulted with a council of elders before making decisions affecting the community.
societies such as the igbos were matrilineal whereas other african societies traced descent and organized inheritance through the paternal line.
before the seventh century most societies of west africa practiced animist religions.
these polytheistic faiths considered aspects of nature such as the sun wind and animals to be gods and spirits.
ancestor worship also played a prominent role in many west african religious traditions.
but beginning in the mid seventh century the faith of islam what were the major religious traditions of africa.
first established in arabia by muhammad in 622 ce began spreading via trade routes through northern western and eastern africa.
islam eventually became the dominant religion in these areas especially in trading centers.
trade played a key role in the economic life of both north and west africa.
trade goods included salt ivory and precious metals.
while salt was an essential ingredient for cooking and preserving food the other items were sought by artists and artisans who fashioned them into luxury goods such as jewelry.
an extensive network of caravan routes linked west africa to the north african ports of tangier tunis tripoli and alexandria.
but portuguese exploration of the african coast in the late 1400s soon led to the development of direct trade between europeans and africans 1 11.
the portuguese african connection portugal took the lead in exploring an atlantic route to asia which provided europe with spices and exotic fabrics such as silk and cotton.
prince henry the navigator 1394 1460 a member of the portuguese royal family used his wealth and power to encourage exploration of the west african coast.
even after his death portugal continued to explore the west african coast leading to vasco da gamas voyage 1497 1499 around the horn of africa and arrival on the southwest west african worlds portugal azores spain s pa n i s h p o rt u g u e s e lisbon tunis tangier persia madeiras canary is.
morocco china alexandria tripoli egypt diu cape verde is.
timbuktu guinea macao india goa calicut lake chad ethiopia benin pacific ocean cochin ceylon malacca lake victoria mombasa brazil indian atlantic ocean celebes sumatra java timor ocean angola sofala madagascar demarcation line treaty of tordesillas 1494 portuguese trade routes dagama exploration route internal african trade igbo land songhai empire 1 11 internal african trade routes and portuguese trade with africa west african kingdoms were linked by several different inland trade routes to north africa and the mediterranean.
the portuguese traded with the atlantic islands and the west coast of africa.
coast of india 1 11.
portuguese traders then established a lucrative trade with india and began to explore trading possibilities with africa seeking such prized goods as ivory and gold.
after 1470 portuguese trade with west africa increased and within a decade the portuguese had established forts along the african coasts to facilitate further trading opportunities.
at approximately the same time that the portuguese were exploring the african coast they were embarking on an ambitious but ruthless plan of conquest and colonization in the atlantic island groups of the madeiras azores and cape verde 1 11.
these atlantic outposts were converted into sugarproducing plantation economies.
the portuguese also vied with the spanish for pre eminence in the canary islands.
the pope eventually brokered a treaty between these two iberian powers giving control to the spanish.
the biggest losers were the indigenous populations of the canary islands the guanche a north african people who had settled the islands thousands of years earlier.
the semitropical climate of the canaries was ideal for sugar cultivation.
the pope blessed the guanche enslavement which was entirely justified because the guanche were in his words infidels and savages the model developed in the canaries foreshadowed european interactions with the peoples of the americas.
with no previous exposure to the diseases carried by europeans thousands of guanche people became ill and died.
unable to rely on an indigenous source of labor europeans eventually turned to africa for slaves to provide the back breaking labor they demanded for cultivating harvesting and processing sugar.
african slavery slavery was widely practiced in africa long before the arrival of the portuguese.
rival tribes usually took slaves as spoils of war but some prisoners attained privileged positions as petty officials military leaders and in rare cases political advisors to rulers.
in africa slavery was not always a permanent or hereditary condition and slaves were sometimes absorbed into the societies that held them.
what arguments were used to justify the enslavement of the guanche.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 english expansion ireland and virginia although england took advantage of the rich opportunities for fishing provided by the atlantic ocean its exploration of the americas was a relatively low priority for most of the sixteenth century.
three factors explain this lack of interest.
first england faced less economic pressure to find export markets because its primary export wool was in high demand on the european continent.
second england faced a crisis of leadership after the death of henry viii in 1547 he was succeeded by his sickly ten year old son edward vi who died in 1553 only six years into his reign.
next came henrys daughter mary i who tried to reestablish catholicism a campaign that included the intense persecution of protestants.
her reign was also short she died in 1558 finally england was bogged down in a colonial venture closer to home the subjugation of ireland.
spain easily conquered the last moors in spain before moving on to atlantic exploration in 1492 irish resistance to english colonization by contrast tied up english resources for decades.
yet even as the english struggled to colonize ireland these experiences provided a distinctive model for future colonial policy in the new world.
while the spanish set out to conquer and convert the inhabitants of the americas absorbing them into spanish society as a subordinate class at the bottom of the social order the english took a different approach.
rather than attempt to incorporate the irish the english expelled them from their land.
they then repopulated the land with colonists from england and scotland creating plantations or fortified outposts dedicated to producing agricultural products for export.
originally the term plantation simply meant any english settlement in a foreign land but it later became synonymous with a distinctive slave based labor system used in much of the atlantic world.
one source of this policy of exclusion can be traced to the intense religious animosity between protestants and catholics.
the english not only detested the catholic faith of the irish but they also feared the irish would support efforts to reimpose catholicism on england and would assist catholic nations like france and spain if they went to war with england.
expelling the irish and transplanting loyal protestant farmers from england and scotland therefore promised to boost the english economy what lessons did the english learn from their experiences in ireland.
and secure control of a potentially troublesome neighboring island.
this colonial model developed in parts of ireland expulsion and plantation would shape subsequent english experiments in colonization.
economic pressures eventually impelled england to follow its european rivals and engage in the exploration and colonization of the atlantic.
the profitable wool trade with the continent began to decline in the 1550s prompting english merchants to seek new commercial opportunities.
these merchants founded scores of new companies devoted to overseas trade with europe africa and the mediterranean.
in 1558 englands entry into exploration and colonization was also helped when another of henry viiis daughters elizabeth i succeeded bloody mary as protestants called her and quickly established herself as a strong leader determined to project english power overseas.
she eagerly pursued an aggressive policy of expansion challenging spains dominance in the atlantic.
a committed protestant elizabeth viewed spanish power as a threat to her realm.
her religious convictions and foreign policy objectives eventually brought england into direct conflict with spain.
englands support for spains enemies on the continent including the protestant dutch the raids of english pirates and english anticatholicism finally drove king philip ii of spain to take decisive action.
in 1588 spain launched a mighty armada or fleet of warships to invade england and destroy europes most powerful protestant monarchy.
the spanish considered their ships invincible but the armada was routed by the smaller faster ships of the english navy.
weather conditions at sea favored the english and hampered the spanish fleet.
the defeat of the armada shifted the balance of power in the atlantic as england eventually emerged as the major force in the atlantic world.
to commemorate the stunning victory queen elizabeth commissioned a portrait that symbolized englands rise to power in the atlantic world.
in the painting elizabeths hand rests prominently on a globe and the crown a symbol of the monarchy sits perched above the globe 1 17.
in the background the artist includes two scenes depicting the defeat of the armada a further reminder of englands power and naval supremacy.
among the most ardent supporters of expanding englands role in the atlantic world were former privateers.
these were englishmen who engaged in read the document thomas hariot a briefe and true report of the new found land of virginia 1590 european colonization of the atlantic world state sanctioned piracy in the atlantic against spanish treasure fleets returning from south america.
a number of them had grown rich and influential from their successes.
john hawkins for example earned himself a fortune and a knighthood for his daring seizures of spanish ships.
one of the most dashing of these buccaneers sir walter raleigh had participated in the english conquest of ireland and became a favorite of queen elizabeth.
raleigh sought support for a more ambitious plan of colonization in the lands north of spanish america and south of french canada.
queen elizabeth bestowed her blessing on the enterprise but not money.
as a result raleigh and the colonial ventures that followed had to turn to private capital to finance his plan.
in contrast to france and spains state financed model of exploration and colonization england adopted a more capitalist model with private investors forming companies and issuing stock to finance exploration and settlement.
having raised the funds to outfit two ships raleighs expedition arrived in the outer banks regions of what is now north carolina in july 1585 naming the new settlement virginia in honor of elizabeth known widely as the virgin queen because she never married england had finally established its first colony in the new world.
unfortunately for raleigh and the original colonists the first colony at roanoke an algonquian indian name for shell money ended in disaster.
to begin with although the location near the treacherous region of cape hatteras protected the settlement from possible spanish raids it also deterred passing ships from stopping which made reprovisioning the colony difficult.
then conflict with local indians erupted when the colonists accused them of stealing a silver cup.
all the while relief for the colonists was delayed by the outbreak of war with spain.
the english required every available ship to repulse the spanish armada.
when a ship finally arrived three years later the new settlers found the colony deserted.
all 1 17 elizabeths armada portrait in this portrait commemorating englands victory over the spanish armada queen elizabeths hand rests on the globe reaching out to cover much of what is now north america.
in the upper left the spanish fleet sets out toward england while in the upper right the defeated spanish armada flounders.
what is the symbolic importance of the position of queen elizabeths hand in the armada portrait.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 theodore de brys 1619 engraving the chickahominy become new englishmen from his book america portrays treaty negotiations between virginia indians and the english.
captain samuel argall the englishman negotiating the treaty sits on a mat with a tribal elder.
another tribal leader addresses his people informing them about the terms of the treaty which was meant to promote trade and peace between the english and the virginia indians.
as the engraving title which refers to the chickahominy as new englishmen suggests the english insisted that indian tribes submit to english rule and accept the english king as their lord.
by contrast the indians believed that negotiating a treaty with the english did not mean that they had given up control of their own political affairs.
these differing visions of diplomacy led to conflict between native americans and english settlers throughout the seventeenth century.
at the dawn of the 1600s england trailed far behind spain and france in the race to exploit the wealth of the americas.
by 1700 however england had become a formidable colonial power in both north america and the caribbean.
in contrast to spain and france whose colonization efforts relied on active support from the monarchy and church englands first efforts to colonize america relied on joint stock companies which were privately financed commercial ventures.
the two great early english experiments in colonization in virginia and new england faced many challenges in their early years including how to deal with local indian populations.
the solution for the english was not simply rendering the indians politically subservient to the king but also segregating themselves from the indians whenever possible.
relations between settlers and indians complicated colonial politics for most of the seventeenth century.
bacons rebellion 1676 a popular uprising in virginia triggered by colonists conflict over indian policy shook the foundations of the colony.
in new england persistent conflict between indians and settlers exacerbated existing social and economic tensions and contributed to the worst outbreak of witchcraft accusations in colonial america the salem witchcraft hysteria 1692.
the reassertion of political control by england whose glorious revolution 1688 contributed to the emergence of a new more stable colonial world helped facilitate the resolution of the witchcraft crisis.
in the years to come colonists would often invoke the political and constitutional ideas of the glorious revolution to defend their liberties.
our first work is expulsion of the savages to gain the free range of the country.
for it is infinitely better to have no heathen among us who at best are but thorns in our side than to be at peace and league with them virginia governor francis wyatt 1623 1624 chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 what were some of the main ideas of the enlightenment.
african americans in the colonial era p 77 what forces contributed to the growth of the african american population of colonial america.
immigration regional economies and inequality p 83 what role did economic forces play in the emergence of distinctive regional cultures in eighteenthcentury america.
war and the contest over empire p 87 how did the french and indian war transform the map of north america.
life in the seventeenth century american colonies even for the wealthiest was crude and primitive.
beginning in the eighteenth century however a more cosmopolitan and refined culture began to emerge.
prosperous colonists sought out the latest british and european consumer goods such as finely woven turkish or english carpets tea sets and pattern books of english architectural and furniture styles.
captain archibald macpheadris a fur trader in portsmouth new hampshire built an elegant new house in 1716 complete with beautifully executed wall murals signifying his wealth and refinement.
one of the most striking murals depicted two mohawk indian chiefs.
the unknown painter copied these images from an engraving of a group of indians who had traveled to london to meet with queen anne r 1703 1714.
the engraver and the painter included authentic elements such as the tomahawk wielded by the indian on the right.
yet the image of the indians also reflected the conventions of european painting the position of the mohawk indian kings hands at their hip resembled a common aristocratic pose found in english portraits from this period.
books newspapers and letters all were part of the expanding commerce of the atlantic world this economy included a lively exchange of ideas on a wide array of subjects including architecture fashion politics religion science and philosophy.
one highly influential set of ideas was associated with the enlightenment and its ideals of reason and social progress.
these ideas fostered new social experiments such as the founding of the colony of georgia.
religious ideas also crossed the atlantic.
the english evangelical minister george whitefield crisscrossed the colonies from new hampshire to georgia.
his tour helped spread the ideas of the religious revival movement known as the great awakening.
enlightenment ideals of liberty human dignity and progress and new religious ideas led some americans to question the institution of slavery despite its growing importance to the colonial economy.
the stark contrast between the wealthy planters and wretchedly housed slaves was not the only divide in american life.
as the overall wealth of the colonies increased so did the disparity between the wealthy and the poor.
land itself became scarce by the mid eighteenth century.
expansion westward was hampered by the appalachian mountains and the french and a host of indian tribes controlled the rich lands of what is now americas midwest.
ultimately the balance of power in north america was decided by the french and indian war.
in 1740 i dont remember seeing such a thing as a turkish carpet in the country.
now nothing are so common as turkish or english carpets the whole furniture of the roomes elegant every appearance of opulence john wayles future father in law of thomas jefferson 1766 chapter 3 3 11 lamentation moravian painting of christ depictions of the blood of the savior in images such as this made them highly effective tools for moravian missionaries.
here the artist highlights physical pain and stoic endurance two traits that appealed strongly to american indian men.
growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 adopt the new more emotional style old lights continued to favor sermons based on learned explications of biblical texts.
in response to this backlash against the awakening gilbert tennent accused his opponents of lacking the courage or honesty to thrust the nail of terror into sleeping souls one new light preacher james davenport took the emphasis on emotionalism to an extreme urging that books and sermons written by old light ministers be burned.
as congregations divided between new lights and old lights many communities were pulled apart.
indian revivals the great awakening also spilled over into indian country.
indians won over by evangelical efforts often served as cultural mediators between their communities and the colonists.
the moravians german speaking evangelical protestants were particularly effective at evangelizing among indian tribes.
in 1740 many german moravians migrated to pennsylvania where they settled in a town they named bethlehem.
moravians also established communities in the carolinas and georgia.
unlike the calvinist faith of many english colonists which shunned the use of images in their churches the moravians were lutherans and why was moravian art so helpful to missionaries interested in converting american indians.
embraced art as a means of promoting the gospels see chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 envisioning evidence the eighteenth century atlantic slave trade in the eighteenth century the slave trade was the economic cornerstone of the atlantic economy.
it supplied indispensable labor necessary to produce plantation cash crops such as sugar and tobacco in the new world and transporting slaves provided huge profits for those engaged in the brutal forced migration of africans to the americas.
the data presented in this map and the accompanying graph bring into focus an important fact about the atlantic slave trade most of the slaves transported to the americas ended up in the sugar islands of the caribbean or in brazil.
less than 10 percent of the slaves went to british north america.
the experience of the middle passage was horrific a fact underscored by the mortality rates depicted in the pie chart above.
where did most slaves end up and how high were mortality rates during the middle passage.
14 86 e urop e mortality rates for atlantic slave trade 1701 1800 n o rt h amer i ca percent of slaves who died en route to the americas 14 percent of slaves who disembarked in the americas 86 ca a f r i c a ribbean brazil west central africa south am e rica pac i fi c at l ant i c ocean o c ean destinations of slaves imported to the new world 1701 1800 68 608 danish caribbean dutch americas 295 215 british north america 295 482 french caribbean 995 133 spanish america 145 533 portuguese brazil 1 989 017 british caribbean 1 813 323 500 000 1 000 000 1 500 000 2 000 000 number of slaves source adapted from estimates in voyages the trans atlantic slave trade database available at which european nations were most heavily involved in the international slave trade.
view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 african americans in the colonial era members.
slaves might remain housed in these inhumane conditions for months before being boarded on slave ships bound for the americas.
the voyage across the atlantic from africa to the americas known as the middle passage was horrific.
the cramped conditions on these voyages depicted in this antislavery petition barely convey the ordeal 3 12.
typically their captors forced the slaves to remain in shackles during the voyage.
slaves endured meager rations and unsanitary conditions a situation that led those who preferred death to such a life of misery to drown themselves.
mortality rates during the middle passage exceeded 10 percent.
in the seventeenth century most slaves bound for the british mainland colonies in america came first to the caribbean where they were seasoned a process of physical and psychological adjustment to the rigors of slavery.
afterward they would make the final leg of the voyage to the american mainland.
this pattern changed in the eighteenth century when the demand for slave labor increased dramatically and many traders chose to bypass the seasoning process.
thus most slaves arriving in british north america in the eighteenth century were saltwater slaves coming directly from africa.
most slaves arrived at sullivans island in charleston harbor leading scholars to describe it as black americas ellis island page 500.
after being unloaded and quarantined on sullivans island slaves were typically transported for sale in the slave markets of the major ports and cities.
this was often the last time family members would see each other.
after being subjected to a humiliating inspection similar to that used by livestock buyers slaves were auctioned off to their new masters.
even if family members had managed to remain together they now faced permanent separation from their loved ones.
thus the experience of the auction block further traumatized slaves who had already suffered a multitude of horrors on their perilous journey from africa to america.
southern slavery the two regional subcultures in the colonial south the lower and upper south had distinctive slave labor systems and cultures.
slavery in the lower south parts of the carolina and georgia low country had evolved as the region evolved from a frontier settlement to an integrated part of the atlantic slave economy.
in the upper south slavery had gradually replaced indentured servitude p 83 as the main source of labor by 1700.
3 12 tight packing this abolitionist depiction of tight packing shows the cramped conditions on slave ships which maximized the number of bodies carried with no concern for the health of the slaves transported.
the lower south began as a colony of a colony.
carolina was first conceived as a base for supplying food to the caribbean sugar islands.
the colony also traded captured indian slaves and deer hides.
in the 1690s rice was introduced into this region and eventually became its most profitable export.
many slaves had learned to cultivate rice in africa and their knowledge contributed to the increase in rice production from 10 000 pounds in 1698 to 20 million pounds in 1730 in the 1740s another important cash crop indigo was introduced into the region.
by the 1730s when the carolinas had been divided into north and south carolina two thirds of the regions population were african slaves.
most blacks worked under a task system that gave them considerable autonomy over their work.
once their tasks were completed slaves might use the remaining time to hunt fish or tend their own gardens to supplement their meager diets.
what was tight packing.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 olive branch petition asking george iii to intervene on their behalf.
the king rejected the american appeal.
with that rejection the time for reconciliation passed and the supporters of american independence in the continental congress gained momentum.
the push for independence opened a division within colonial society between colonists who supported independence and those who remained loyal to the british.
common sense and the declaration of independence in january 1776 thomas paine a recent immigrant to america from england wrote a pamphlet that argued forcefully for american independence.
in common sense paine not only attacked recent british policy he framed a stinging indictment of monarchy and defended a democratic theory of representative government.
after stating the simple facts plain arguments and common sense of the matter paine concluded that separation from britain was the only action that made sense for america.
paines work was printed in a cheap format that allowed artisans farmers and others with little money to purchase a copy.
he wrote in plain forceful prose avoiding literary and classical allusions that would have required knowledge of latin.
the book was a phenomenal publishing success.
common sense did more than simply fuel americans desire for independence it helped change the framework in which americans thought about politics itself.
before paines pamphlet most americans even those who believed that reconciliation with britain was impossible still maintained a respectful attitude toward george iii.
most americans had grown up in a culture that venerated constitutional monarchy but paines savage critique of this institution had a liberating impact.
paine called monarchy ridiculous after demonstrating that history proved that monarchy was incompatible with liberty paine turned to the current british monarch george iii whom he equated with savagery itself.
he denounced the king for his assaults on american liberty noting that even brutes do not devour their young those who supported reconciliation with britain found paines scathing attacks on george iii appalling.
paine also gave a voice to many who wished to radically transform american political life.
he was unabashedly democratic at a time when many including those most eager to separate from britain viewed democracy as a danger to be avoided what arguments did paines common sense present.
at all cost.
common sense became a blueprint for those who wished to experiment with democratic government although not everyone who ardently supported american independence appreciated paines ideas.
there is something absurd in supposing a continent to be perpetually governed by an island thomas paine common sense 1776 in july 1775 a month after congress drafted the olive branch petition pleading with george iii to abandon the cruel policies of his ministers and such statutes as immediately distress the colonists the king declared that the american colonists were in open and avowed rebellion the prohibitory act which the british parliament enacted into law in december 1775 banned all trade with the thirteen colonies.
word of the ban arrived in america in february 1776 coming on the heels of paines indictment of british tyranny the policy further inflamed american resentments against britain.
after the adoption of the prohibitory act support for independence gained ground.
in may congress instructed the individual colonies to adopt such government as shall in the opinion of the representatives of the people best conduce to the happiness and safety of their constituents congress added a preamble five days later that affirmed the exercise of every kind of authority under the said crown should be totally suppressed although congress had not formally declared independence it had effectively asserted that the colonies had become independent states no longer under the authority of parliament or the king.
richard henry lee of virginia introduced a resolution that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states congress then debated the lee resolution and on june 11 1776 appointed a committee to draft a formal declaration of independence.
with john adams massachusetts as its chair the committee included robert livingston new york thomas jefferson virginia read the document thomas paine common sense patriots versus loyalists roger sherman connecticut and benjamin franklin pennsylvania.
adams designated jefferson to take the lead in drafting the formal resolution.
on june 28 the committee presented the congressional delegates with the draft.
congress cut about a quarter of the text and made some other revisions to the document.
on july 4 1776 congress approved the final text of the declaration of independence a public defense of americas decision to declare independence from britain that was to be printed and sent to the individual states.
copies of the declaration were then widely distributed.
thomas jefferson admitted that his text reflected the sentiments of the day whether expressed in conversation or letters printed essays the introductory paragraph explained the reasons for separating from britain.
the second paragraph provided a powerful defense of the liberty and equality and affirmed that all men are created equal and therefore entitled to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness a long list of grievances against george iii took up the bulk of the text.
printed as a single broadside the indented list of charges against george iii was immediately recognizable 4 9.
the drafters of the declaration of independence aimed it at both a domestic and a foreign audience.
it made the case for independence to the american people and announced to the british government the reasons for taking up arms.
the declaration also sought to help american diplomacy.
if america were to fight the most powerful nation on earth it would need help from other european powers such as holland spain and especially of britains long time rival france.
because a powerful monarch then ruled france the declaration refrained from using the inflammatory antimonarchical rhetoric favored by thomas paine in common sense.
george iiis misdeeds not monarchy itself were to blame for americas demand for independence.
the plight of the loyalists the division between patriots colonists who supported american independence and loyalists those wishing to remain loyal to the king drove a deep wedge in colonial society.
john adams speculated that americans were evenly divided among patriots loyalists and those striving to remain neutral.
although it is difficult to establish hard figures for how colonists divided over 4 9 the declaration of independence the declaration of independence was printed as a broadside.
this single sheet format made it easy to post in public places.
the layout of the declaration the typography and paragraphing guides the reader through the main parts of its argument.
what audiences did the declaration of independence address.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 republicanism and the politics of virtue the american revolution marked a decisive break from ideas and values that had defined british culture for centuries.
monarchy and aristocracy were swept away.
america was now a republic.
republicanism placed a premium on the ideal of virtue.
as the poet playwright and historian mercy otis warren observed americans needed to cherish true genuine republican virtue the postwar period would test this commitment in a host of ways.
george washington the american cincinnatus no individual in america was more closely identified with the ideal of virtue than george washington.
a symbol of the virtuous citizen soldier responding to the summons of his nation and retiring to private life once his service was no longer needed washington was a model of civic virtue.
his reputation for public virtue and ability to command the respect of his troops had helped the beleaguered continental army during some of its more dire campaigns.
in 1783 washington faced a different challenge.
this time it was not the threat of enemy troops but the rumors of a military coup by the continental armys officers.
washington wielded his personal authority to win over disgruntled members of the corps and made an impassioned appeal to reason and virtue crushing the revolt without firing a shot.
washington had learned of rumors that the armys leadership would no longer tolerate congresss failure to deal with complaints about their pay and pensions.
an anonymous essay had circulated among officers suggesting that the time might soon come to turn their arms against congress itself.
the officers anger had been simmering for some time.
frustration with the confederation congress was widespread washington was well aware of the officers grievances.
he had complained about the inefficiency and ineffectiveness of congress on many occasions.
with no power to tax congress had to depend on voluntary contributions from the states.
without reliable revenue it was difficult to wage war or conduct the routine business of governing.
faced with a possible rebellion by his own officers washington resolved to why did americans believe washington was the modern cincinnatus.
address his men in person and persuade them of the folly of their plan.
on a dark wintry day in march 1783 washington traveled to newburgh new york to address the officer corps.
the assembled officers met in a makeshift building that some of them had dubbed the temple of virtue washington prepared to read a letter that he hoped would persuade the officers that their demands would be met.
fumbling to find a pair of glasses he had recently acquired he paused and then addressed the hushed crowd gentlemen you must pardon me.
i have grown grey in your service and now find myself growing blind the impact on his audience was dramatic.
there was something so natural so unaffected in his appeal major samuel shaw later wrote as rendered it superior to the most studied oratory and you might see sensibility moisten every eye washingtons own wartime sacrifices had already provided a powerful role model for the officer corps.
now the figure of their beloved commander growing gray and blind in the service of his country struck a resonant chord.
he exhorted his men to give posterity proof of unexampled patriotism and patient virtue civic virtue had triumphed over corruption and the newburgh conspiracy was crushed without a shot being fired.
another event that enhanced washingtons reputation as the embodiment of republican virtue was the public ceremony of turning over his military commission to congress after the war.
in annapolis maryland where congress was convened washington addressed a room crowded with congressional delegates and a gallery packed with well wishers.
having now finished the work assigned me he informed his audience many of whom were brought to tears i here offer my commission and take read the document george washington the newburgh address 1783 republicanism and the politics of virtue my leave of the employments of public life by abandoning public life and returning to his plow washington was seen as placing the good of the nation ahead of personal glory.
in the publics view washington had transformed himself into the modern cincinnatus an allusion to the ancient worlds great symbol of public virtue the roman general cincinnatus.
after serving the roman republic as its supreme commander cincinnatus had returned to his farm.
after resigning washington went on a triumphal tour of the nation.
in philadelphia he was saluted by cannons and ringing bells from the citys steeples.
he sat for portraits by americas leading painters and enjoyed listening to commemorative verses that compared him to cincinnatus.
well schooled in the history of the ancient roman republic americans understood that a popular military leaders decision to emulate romes dictatorial general julius caesar rather than cincinnatus would lead to despotism.
years later the virginia legislature commissioned the french sculptor jean antoine houdon to create a life sized statue of washington as the modern cincinnatus 5 1.
washington stands before a plow the symbol of the virtuous farmer the ideal embodied by cincinnatus.
no free government or the blessing of liberty can be preserved to any people but by a firm adherence to justice moderation temperance frugality and virtue.
virginia declaration of rights 1776 the politics of virtue views from the states the republican emphasis on virtue suffused american culture.
the first state constitutions drafted after independence used their declarations of rights to outline the rights of citizens and also instruct citizens in the premises of republican government.
in these declarations of rights the ideal of virtue was literally written into american law.
the virginia declaration of rights 1776 asserted that free government could not survive without a virtuous citizenry a point echoed by the massachusetts constitution four years later.
educating citizens in the importance of republican ideals became a priority for the new nation.
art architecture and even fashion were pressed into service to mold the character of a new generation of citizens.
jeffersons design for the new virginia capitol was the most ambitious visible symbol of instilling republican values by reforming architecture.
see the chapter review six years after being proposed america adopts a new symbol for the nation the great seal of the united states a design intended to embody the republican ideals of the nation treaty of paris hostilities between united states and britain conclude and britain recognizes american independence jefferson appointment as french ambassador insulates him from the hysteria surrounding shayss rebellion review questions 1 americans in the post revolutionary era looked to rome for inspiration in building a virtuous republic.
how were these ideas reflected in american art and architecture in this period.
2 what were the most notable achievements and failures of the confederation government.
3 what were the most divisive issues the constitutional convention faced and what compromises did the delegates reach to solve them.
4 which groups in society tended to support or oppose the constitution.
5 anti federalists were alarmed by the power of the federal government.
do you think the antifederalist objections to the constitution have any validity today.
key terms articles of confederation americas first constitutional government in effect from 1781 1788.
the articles created a weak decentralized form of government that lacked the power to tax and compel state obedience to treaties it negotiated.
old northwest the region of the new nation bordering on the great lakes.
northwest ordinance of 1787 one of several laws adopted by the confederation congress designed to provide a plan for the orderly settlement of the northwest territory the area north of the ohio river and west of pennsylvania.
in addition to providing for a plan for self governance the ordinance also prohibited slavery from the northwest territory.
shayss rebellion uprising in western massachusetts in which farmers organized themselves as local militia units and closed down courts to prevent their farms from being seized by creditors.
virginia plan a plan framed by james madison and introduced in the constitution convention by edmund randolph that called on delegations to abandon the government of the articles and create a new strong national government.
new jersey plan proposal made by william patterson of new jersey as an alternative to the more nationalistic virginia plan that would have retained the principle of state equality in the legislature embodied in the articles of confederation.
great compromise compromise plan proposed by roger sherman and oliver ellsworth of connecticut that called for equal representation of each state in the upper house and a lower house based on population.
federalists the name adopted by the supporters of the constitution who favored a stronger centralized government.
anti federalists the name applied to opponents of the constitution who insisted that they not their opponents were the true supporters of the ideal of federalism.
anti federalists opposed weakening the power of the states and feared that the constitution yielded too much power to the new central government.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 r 6 7 map of spanish interests in the southwest spanish control of the mississippi river and new orleans was a source of concern to americans.
the mississippi river was a vital conduit for goods which were then shipped to new orleans.
oh o i virginia st louis kentucky north carolina r tennessee spanish louisiana missis sip pi south fort san fernando carolina georgia atlantic fort nogales ocean natchez st augustine pensacola new orleans gulf of mexico boundary claimed by spain after 1783 boundary set by pinckneys treaty 1795 area disputed by u s and spain spanish fort spanish settlement the respected federalist from new york and chief justice of the supreme court john jay as a special envoy to travel to london to negotiate a settlement.
in 1783 jay had helped negotiate the treaty of paris ending conflict between america and britain.
now in 1794 he negotiated a treaty called jays treaty by which britain agreed to compensate america for cargoes seized in 1793 1794 and to vacate forts in the northwest territory.
however the british refused to accept the right of neutral nations to trade freely with belligerents.
when the details of jays treaty were leaked to the press republicans were outraged finding the treaty too generous to the british.
across the mid atlantic and south where republican sympathies were strongest protesters burned effigies of jay and copies of the treaty.
the treaty also provoked a fierce debate in congress over the role of the house of representatives in foreign affairs.
republican congressmen demanded to see jays negotiating instructions believing that federalists had never intended to exact major concessions from the british.
the house how did french ideas influence american political culture.
spanish even threatened to withhold funding to implement the treaty until the instructions were published.
federalists denounced this as an unconstitutional intrusion on the treaty making powers of the president and the senate.
jay had negotiated with britain from a position of weakness but the american envoy charged with obtaining concessions from spain was in a stronger position.
the u s minister to britain federalist thomas pinckney traveled to spain to begin negotiations about american access to the mississippi and new orleans.
the result was pinckneys treaty 1795 which secured americas right to navigate the mississippi river and use new orleans.
it also settled the boundary between america and spanish florida.
spain had feared that america might try to acquire florida and louisiana by force so it was more than willing to cede favorable terms over trade and negotiate the boundary dispute between the two nations.
florida violence along the frontier securing the western frontier an area that included the northwest territory the tennessee frontier and the mississippi territory meant not only negotiating with britain and spain but also read the document the jay treaty conflicts at home and abroad competing visions jeffersons and hamiltons reactions to the french revolution thomas jefferson and his republican allies embraced the cause of the french revolution.
at the outset even alexander hamilton saw the revolution as a victory for american ideals of liberty.
the radical turn of the revolution however particularly its zealous embrace of violence caused hamilton and other federalists to abandon their support.
despite the increasingly bloody turn of events in france jefferson retained his faith in the essential justice of the revolutions goals.
he believed that the revolutions accomplishments the destruction of the old regime and of the institutions of aristocracy and monarchy were worth the cost in blood.
federalists not only denounced france but they took great pains to contrast anglo american concepts of ordered liberty with the licentiousness of the french revolution.
for jefferson the revolutions contribution to the destruction of tyranny justified whatever means were necessary to accomplish its worthy ends.
he compared the innocent victims of revolutionary justice to the casualties of war.
what does jeffersons dogged support for the french revolution reveal about his vision of politics.
hamiltons revulsion at the excesses of the french revolution was typical of federalists.
what does hamiltons view of the french revolution reveal about his vision of politics.
thomas jefferson to william short philadelphia jan 3.
1793 in the early periods of the french revolution a warm zeal for its success was in this country a sentiment truly universal.
the love of liberty is here the ruling passion of the citizens of the united states pervading every class animating every bosom.
as long therefore as the revolution of france bore the marks of being the cause of liberty it united all hearts and centered all opinions.
but this unanimity of approbation has been for a considerable time decreasing.
the excesses which have constantly multiplied with greater and greater aggravations have successively though slowly detached reflecting men from their partiality for an object which has appeared less and less to merit their regard.
dear sir the tone of your letters had for some time given me pain on account of the extreme warmth with which they censured the proceedings of the jacobins of france in the struggle which was necessary many guilty persons fell without the forms of trial and with them some innocent.
these i deplore as much as any body and shall deplore some of them to the day of my death.
but i deplore them as i should have done had they fallen in battle.
it was necessary to use the arm of the people a machine not quite so blind as balls and bombs but blind to a certain degree.
a few of their cordial friends met at their hands the fate of enemies.
but time and truth will rescue and embalm their memories while their posterity will be enjoying that very liberty for which they would never have hesitated to offer up their lives.
the liberty of the whole earth was depending on the issue of the contest and was ever such a prize won with so little innocent blood.
my own affections have been deeply wounded by some of the martyrs to this cause but rather than it should have failed i would have seen half the earth desolated and an adam and an eve left in every country and left free alexander hamilton unpublished thoughts on the french revolution philadelphia 1794 the tricolor french flag was adopted after the french revolution and became the official flag of the new french republic in 1794 why did republicans oppose jays treaty.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 choices and consequences washingtons decision to crush the whiskey rebellion the armed resistance of western farmers to the detested whiskey tax posed a serious dilemma for washington.
should the president negotiate with the rebels or use force to put down the rebellion.
washingtons cabinet members differed over the best course of action.
the whiskey rebellion tested the new government created by the constitution.
the situation was complicated by uncertainty over the militia.
even if washington wished to use it it was not clear if the militia would respond.
during shayss rebellion chapter 7 jeffersonian america an expanding empire of liberty 1800 1824 an expanding empire of liberty many of jeffersons supporters hoped that the new president would radically restructure the balance of power between the states and the federal government.
mandan w they would be disappointed.
rather than a wholesale assault on the hamiltonian cheyenne sioux system jefferson opted for a more modest less confrontational approach.
the exception was the judiciary.
the federalists had expanded and seeded it with opponents of jefferson presenting him with a major challenge.
still jefferson believed that his election had ushered in a revolutionary change that altered the course of americas future.
jeffersons vision for the future depended on preserving his ideal of a yeoman republic.
perhaps his greatest challenge was posed by the unexpected opportunity to purchase the entire louisiana territory from the french emperor napoleon.
to justify this purchase which required an enormous and unprecedented exercise of federal power jefferson would need to accept a hamiltonian view of the constitution.
jeffersons vision of an expanding empire of liberty peopled by independent yeoman farmers came into conflict with his vision of limited government.
ouri r mandan villages winter quarters 1804 05 dismantling the federalist program jeffersons approach to change in government was moderate and conciliatory.
instead of purging all federalists he dismissed only those who were corrupt inept or who posed serious obstacles to his agenda.
similarly although jefferson had contemplated declaring the sedition act unconstitutional he simply refused to bring forward any new indictments pardoning individuals prosecuted by federalists and allowing the law to expire.
jefferson remained committed to the ideal of a republican system in which the states not the federal government retained most authority.
the powers of the federal government pertained to the external and mutual relations only of these states the states were responsible for the principal care of our persons our property with states rights in mind jefferson reduced the size of the federal government.
he directed secretary of the treasury albert gallatin to eradicate the national debt created by the federalists.
gallatin severed the connection between the bank of the united states and the federal government using the sale of the governments interest in the bank to lower the national debt.
to make up for the loss of income from the repeal of unpopular taxes jefferson relied on the sale of western lands and tariffs on imports.
convinced that the militia could protect americas peacetime interests he slashed the budget of the navy and the army sharply reducing the size of both.
this decision would create problems for jefferson in his second term.
without a powerful navy to protect american merchant ships france and britain could threaten the new nations commerce.
they have retired into the the courts the last bastion judiciary as a stronghold.
there of federalist power the remains of federalism are to early in his first term jefferson told a supporter be preserved and fed from the that the federalists have retired into the juditreasury and from that battery ciary as a stronghold one of the last acts of john federalist administration had been the all the works of republicanism adamss passage of the judiciary act of 1801 which created new circuit and district court judges and are to be beaten down other legal offices such as clerks federal marshals and erased justices of the peace and attorneys.
with new thomas jefferson to john dickinson december 19 1801 was jeffersons election in 1800 a real revolution.
appointments adams had hoped to solidify the federalists control of the judiciary.
the judiciary act also reduced the number of supreme court hear the audio file jefferson and liberty an expanding empire of liberty justices from six to five.
the reduction would take effect upon the death or retirement of one of the sitting justices.
by reducing the number of supreme court justices federalists hoped to minimize the likelihood that jefferson would appoint a justice during his tenure.
jefferson instructed secretary of state james madison to withhold any of the new appointments that arrived after he was to be sworn in as president.
a disappointed office seeker william marbury sued madison seeking a court order to compel jefferson to turn over his commission.
in what became a landmark in american constitutional law marbury v madison 1803 strengthened the powers of the federal judiciary fixing the doctrine of judicial review as a cornerstone of american constitutional law.
see choices and consequences john marshalls predicament on page 196 the louisiana purchase in his first inaugural address jefferson described america as a chosen country with room enough for our descendants to the thousandth and thousandth generation to remain a republic of virtuous yeoman farmers and keep alive the ideal of an empire of liberty the nation he argued would have to expand westward.
jeffersons vision of an expanding empire of liberty however had little room for african americans and demanded that indians either assimilate or perish.
the first test of the limits of the presidents vision especially his concept of liberty became apparent in his response to news of gabriels rebellion the slave uprising in virginia in 1800 see chapter 7 jeffersonian america an expanding empire of liberty 1800 1824 british north america maine admitted as free state 1820 vermont oregon territory joint u s british occupation of disputed territitory new hampshire michigan territory massachusetts new york michigan territory unorganized territory pennsylvania ohio illinois rhode island connecticut new jersey delaware maryland indiana virginia missouri admitted as slave state 1821 kentucky north carolina tennessee missouri compromise line 36 30 south carolina arkansas territory pacific ocean alabama new spain independent mexico 1821 atl antic ocean georgia mississippi louisiana florida territory slave states and territories gulf of mexico free states and territories open to slavery by missouri compromise closed to slavery by missouri compromise missouri compromise line 7 15 the missouri compromise the missouri compromise established a new policy for dealing with slavery in western territories.
the compromise drew an imaginary line across the map of the united states.
land south of this line acquired during the louisiana purchase would be open to slavery whereas territory north of it would be free.
language of the virginia and kentucky resolutions to support the right of the states to decide the slavery question.
a georgia congressman warned that tallmadge had kindled a fire which all the waters of the ocean cannot put out which seas of blood can only extinguish the new yorkers amendment passed the house where the northeast enjoyed a significant majority but was defeated in the senate where the north and south were more closely balanced.
what were the main provisions of the missouri compromise.
to avert a constitutional crisis congress worked out a compromise.
henry clay one of the most influential figures in congress was a key player in negotiating this solution.
the missouri compromise called for the admission of missouri as a slave state.
maine which had been part of massachusetts but had been seeking independence for some time entered as a free state thus preserving the balance between free states and slave states in the senate.
the missouri read the document missouri act 1820 crises and the collapse of the national republican consensus compromise drew an imaginary line across the territory acquired through the louisiana purchase at 36 30 latitude 7 15.
land below this imaginary dividing line would be slave territory land above it would be free.
thomas jefferson wrote to a friend that the crisis struck him as a fire bell in the night being awakened from a sound sleep by a fire alarm the metaphor chosen by jefferson evoked the magnitude of the missouri crisis.
for jefferson the missouri crisis had etched the issue of slavery onto the map of the united states and would make any resolution of it in the future impossible.
the debate over missouri prompted john quincy adams to write in his diary that slavery is the great and foul stain upon the north american union for the moment however most politicians seemed unwilling to contemplate erasing the great stain.
denmark veseys rebellion the problem of slavery resurfaced in summer 1822 newspapers from charleston to boston and as far west as the illinois territory carried the sensational story of denmark vesey a free african american artisan from charleston south carolina who had been arrested tried and executed for so the charges went leading a slave insurrection.
a talented and charismatic man vesey had won a lottery jackpot in 1799 and used his earnings to purchase his freedom and set up a small carpentry shop.
a natural leader he became a prominent member of an african american church that became an important meeting place for free blacks and slaves.
rumors of a slave revolt led authorities to arrest him and charge him with plotting an insurrection the so called denmark vesey uprising said to have been aimed to free slaves in charleston by violence.
modern historians differ over how to interpret the evidence that was used to convict vesey and his alleged followers.
some historians deny that vesey was a revolutionary figure bent on leading an uprising and see him instead as an unfortunate victim a vocal free black leader who became a scapegoat for paranoid charleston whites ever fearful of slave insurrection.
others believe that there was a plot although its scope remains uncertain.
whether the proposed insurrection was real or imagined the evidence gathered to convict vesey provides a window into the way whites perceived slave culture in the charleston region.
according to the trial records urban slaves and free blacks conspired with the many slaves who worked on the plantations surrounding charleston.
the rebels the records suggest were poised to take advantage of the mobility enjoyed by african americans in this region an area in which travel was less restricted than in other parts of the south.
charlestons slaves were often hired out by their masters and often traveled without direct supervision.
the task system employed by carolina plantation owners also provided slaves with considerable autonomy and mobility.
after finishing their days tasks slaves could work their own small plots of land hunt or fish.
slaves not only used this surplus food to supplement their i went up to the capitol and heard mr king in the senate upon what is called the missouri question.
he laid down the position of the natural liberty of man and its incompatibility with slavery in any shape.
he also questioned the constitutional right of the president and senate to make the louisiana treaty.
later we attended an evening party at mr calhouns and heard of nothing but the missouri question and mr kings speeches.
the slave holders cannot hear of them without being seized with cramps.
they call them seditious and inflammatory when their greatest real defect is their timidity john quincy adams reflections on the missouri question 1820 read the document an account of the late intended insurrection among a portion of the blacks of this city 1822 how did the missouri crisis contribute to the climate of fear in charleston during the vesey trial.
chapter review 1814 1815 1819 1822 war of 1812 treaty of ghent missouri compromise united states and britain go to war britain and america sign a treaty ending the war of 1812 james monroe elected president battle of new orleans monroe inaugurates the era of good feelings andrew jackson and his troops defeat the british at battle of new orleans settles the issue of slavery in the territories by drawing an imaginary line across the map of the united states and creating a permanent division between slave and free territory denmark vesey charged with plotting an uprising slaves and free blacks in charleston s c are captured charged with plotting an insurrection tried and executed myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of jeffersonian america.
questions for analysis 1 was jefferson successful at implementing his vision of government.
other resources from this chapter 8.
free southern blacks had to carry identification to prove that they were not slaves.
they could not hold office and in some areas even testify in court against whites.
although life for free blacks in the south was difficult the shortage of skilled artisans in many southern cities enabled them to enter trades such how did the experience of free blacks in the south compare with those in the north.
as cabinet making.
southern cities were also less spatially segregated than northern cities and southern african americans played a prominent role as domestics and in some fields and trades such as tailoring and hair cutting.
the free black community in new orleans was one of the most affluent in the south.
it published its own newspapers and its elite members held lavish balls each year.
religious institutions were also important for the free african american community.
in addition to tending to the spiritual needs of their congregations ministers were often community leaders.
southern black churches had much larger memberships than similar institutions in the north.
thus the largest african american congregation in the north new yorks abyssinian baptist church had a membership of 440 at mid century whereas the first african church of richmond counted 3 160 members.
view the image free black church southern society white southern culture wealthy white southerners in the antebellum years entertained on a lavish scale hosting parties balls fox hunts and horse races.
aristocratic affectations even led some to sponsor medieval tournaments that included jousting.
southerners took pride in their resorts along the gulf coast gracious vacation spots characterized by a quiet ease new orleans gradually replaced new york as the horse racing capital of the nation.
blood sports such as cock fighting also remained popular particularly among less affluent southerners.
reputation and honor were central values in the male oriented southern culture.
an unsullied reputation one observer noted was all that a man required to be on a social level with his fellows a scottish traveler remarked that southern men consider themselves men of honor and more frequently resent any indignity shown them even at the expense of their life or that of those who venture to insult them when a social inferior insulted a gentleman the appropriate response was to cane or horsewhip the offender.
dueling was reserved for settling matters of honor among gentlemen.
in 1838 john wilson a former governor of south carolina published the code of honor or the rules for the government of principals and seconds in duelling which explained such things as the role of seconds and the choice of weapons.
the centrality of honor to southern culture was the chief reason dueling endured in this region long after it had been outlawed in the north.
many of the souths leading politicians including andrew jackson and henry clay had fought duels during their careers.
this contemporary drawing by a northern opponent of slavery 9 14 portrays the south as a culture dominated by dueling brawling and mobbing.
for some northerners especially those opposed to slavery the dueling and other violence they associated with the south were a result of the brutality inherent in slavery.
the connection between slavery and southern violence figures prominently in the image which shows a cruel master whipping a helpless slave child.
9 14 southern violence this northern drawing links the brawling and dueling of southerners with the brutal labor regime of slavery.
abolitionist attacks on southern culture often mentioned the pistol and the lash.
what role did honor play in southern culture.
chapter 9 workers farmers and slaves the transformation of the american economy 1815 1848 1823 1825 lowell mill opens state v mann waltham system at lowell massachusetts becomes showcase for the new model of industrial production decision affirms the idea that the masters control over the slave is absolute steam powered train makes first trip first successful steam powered train tested by the baltimore and ohio railroad nat turners rebellion virginia slave leads the bloodiest slave uprising in u s history erie canal opens chapter 10 revivalism reform and artistic renaissance 1820 1850 in 1832 thomas r dew a young professor at the college of william and mary published his review of the debate in the virginia legislature of 1831 and 1832 in the aftermath of nat turners rebellion the legislature had seriously debated ending slavery but a narrow majority rejected the idea.
dew repudiated the ideas of jefferson and others who agonizing over slavery considered it unjust and recommended its elimination.
dew defended the property rights of slaveholders and dismissed the impracticality of relocating emancipated slaves outside virginia.
he even claimed that slavery was a positive good sanctioned by ancient philosophers such as aristotle and justified by the bible.
in southern colleges proslavery spokesmen championed the religious philosophical and economic benefits of slavery and in the souths leading magazines they defended their new proslavery ideology.
they even argued that slavery was good not only for masters but for slaves.
southern defenders of slavery cast themselves as benevolent patriarchs slaves they argued were the lucky beneficiaries of this system.
this selfserving vision of slavery is reflected in this lithograph appropriately entitled slavery as it exists in america 10 7.
the two shocked northerners depicted express their astonishment that slaves were so well treated and happy.
the artist also singles out the evils of british factories for condemnation.
southerners often made similar points about northern industry which they argued treated its workers more brutally than southern plantation owners treated slaves.
one of the most influential apologists for southern slavery was john c calhoun an eminent south carolina politician.
he argued that the souths peculiar institution which was the term he coined for southern slavery was not an evil a cause of shame but rather a good a positive good to be championed.
10 7 slavery as it exists in america this proslavery cartoon portrays slaves as happy and well cared for by masters who are benign patriarchs.
the peculiar institution of the south that on the maintenance of which the very existence of the slaveholding states depends is pronounced to be sinful and odious in the sight of god and man and this with a systematic design of rendering us hateful in the eyes of the world with a view to a general crusade against us and our institutions john c calhoun speech on abolitionist petitions 1837 what was the proslavery argument.
the cult of true womanhood reform and womens rights the cult of true womanhood reform and womens rights women took a leading role in reform movements.
the most active reformers were members of a growing middle class.
female reformers targeted activities that threatened the family and demeaned womens family role.
prostitution was one prominent target of reformers but hardly the only social problem that attracted notice from female reformers.
they also attacked alcoholism crime illiteracy and even slavery.
the social changes brought about by the market revolution including the rise of the factory system see chapter 10 revivalism reform and artistic renaissance 1820 1850 10 18 and 10 19 greek revival parlor and shaker sitting room the carpets elaborate decoration and elegant furniture in this greek revival parlor contrast sharply with the ascetic furnishings of this shaker sitting room.
shaker furniture was designed to be functional not fancy.
reform american society.
two of the most influential architectural reformers were andrew jackson downing and alexander jackson davis who in the 1840s and 1850s helped popularize the gothic revival which looked to medieval europe for inspiration.
downing authored two popular works on architecture in the early 1840s that went through 20 editions.
downing believed that a properly designed home should serve as a spiritual sanctuary from the commercial world of the market.
his gothic revival homes which incorporated medieval architectural elements such as pointed arches were meant to uplift those who dwelled in them and inspire those who saw them by literally guiding their gaze toward heaven.
the gothic revival also drew on renewed interest in nature that had inspired painters such as thomas cole and the designers of mount auburn cemetery.
rather than embrace the regularity and balance of greek classicism enthusiasts for gothic revival championed a more organic and variegated style that mimicked the irregularities of nature.
at one level the gothic revival was part of the larger reaction against the excesses of jacksonian democracy.
its leading champions such as downing and davis also rejected the democratic values of the greek revival believing that architecture should underscore social position not seek to erase it.
davis believed that housing ought to announce ones what does shaker furniture reveal about shaker values.
status villas for the upper classes cottages for the middle class and farmhouses for the working classes.
he helped plan the nations first suburbs including llewellyn park in orange new jersey.
lyndhurst in tarrytown new york was an opulent gothic revival villa.
compared to the symmetry of greek revival buildings the irregular roofline and different shaped windows of lyndhurst evoked the unpredictability of nature 10 20.
the popular phrenologist orson s fowler championed octagon shaped houses as a cure for americas social ills 10 21.
building on his phrenological theories fowler attacked box like homes and argued that by more closely approximating a circle the octagon encouraged harmony.
although most of these houses were built in the northeast octagon houses dotted the american landscape from watertown wisconsin to natchez mississippi.
unlike reformers who feared progress and believed that the expansion of the market threatened american values fowler believed that the march of civilization was inevitable.
americans needed to accept acquisitiveness as crucial to the marketplace while tempering it with insights gained from new areas of knowledge such as phrenology.
the octagon house he believed would serve both goals admirably well.
the octagon fad dissipated when phrenologys pseudoscientific doctrines were discredited.
view the image shaker village maine 1845 natures nation 10 20 lyndhurst the gothic revival mansion lyndhurst embraced elements of medieval architecture.
gothic revival architectures soaring arches focused the viewers attention on heaven above.
the angular lines were intended to mirror and evoke the awesome power of nature.
10 21 octagon house phrenologist orson s fowler believed that a balcony on a house corresponded to the upper portion of the skull and would encourage higher mental functions.
why did phrenologists favor the octagon as an architectural style.
chapter 11 overspread the continent westward expansion and political conflict 1840 1848 the arrival of the caravan in santa fe produced a great deal of bustle and excitement among the natives.
los americanos la entrada de la caravana the americans.
the caravan has arrived.
josiah gregg commerce of the prairies or the journal of a santa fe trader 1844 11 6 view of the san francisco presidio this depiction of the mission system by a russian artist captures the exploitation of the indian population.
american settlers were an economic boon to the region.
texans exported an estimated 500 000 worth of goods to new orleans mainly cotton and cattle.
additional trade networks developed elsewhere along the mexican american border.
in california new england merchants sought seal and sea otter pelts to sell in china.
in 1821 american traders established a trade route from missouri to santa fe.
far safer and less rugged than the nearly 1 700 mile journey to mexico city the santa fe trail became a thriving trade route.
american traders whose profits on the sale of goods ranging from cloth to what advantages did americans have over mexicans in the lucrative trade with santa fe.
manufactured items such as umbrellas sometimes reached 40 percent were often paid in hard currency.
indeed trade with santa fe became so crucial that the mexican silver peso became the unofficial unit of exchange for much of the western united states.
the clash of interests in texas although mexico benefited from the increased trade with the united states the presence of so many american settlers in texas worried mexican officials.
three issues were particularly troubling.
first the americans flouted the laws requiring they learn spanish and convert to catholicism.
second they brought thousands of slaves into texas at a time when mexico was heading toward the abolition of slavery a goal it achieved in 1829.
third many american settlers did little to conceal their interest in joining the united states.
a small uprising in 1826 of americans hoping to secede was easily crushed by the mexican army.
the mexican government reacted by banning further immigration from the united states.
still americans came and mexico lifted the ban in 1833 before long there were 30 000 americans in texas.
view the image texas home for the emigrant american expansionism into the southwest a well organized effort to separate from mexico occurred in 1834 this time americans took advantage of the instability of mexican politics.
in 1834 mexican general antonio lpez de santa anna staged a coup and assumed dictatorial powers.
when american settlers in texas revolted demanding a restoration of the constitution santa anna decided to crush the rebellion.
the ensuing war between santa annas forces and the american texans was brutal.
one of the bloodiest battles occurred in early 1836 near san antonio at the alamo an old spanish mission defended by a small force of texans including legendary frontiersman and politician davy crockett and jim bowie for whom the bowie knife was named.
historians continue to argue over the exact death toll but few dispute that the fighting was fierce and many died that day.
images such as this woodcut of crocketts death inspired americans whose battle cry for the rest of the war against mexico became remember the alamo 11 7.
even as santa annas forces assaulted the alamo american texans declared independence from mexico march 2 1836 and drafted a new constitution.
meanwhile his victory at the alamo convinced santa anna that the texas forces were no match for his army.
overconfident he recklessly divided his troops leading to his defeat and capture at the battle of san jacinto by the texans under sam houston.
the republic of texas and the politics of annexation the citizens of the now independent republic of texas expected the united states to act quickly and annex texas into the expanding american republic.
they would have to wait nearly a decade however as annexation proved to be a divisive issue in american politics.
opponents of slavery feared annexation would upset the delicate balance between free and slave states.
conversely southerners and others who favored slavery supported texas annexation.
heated debate in 1836 and 1837 died down as both the democrats and whigs sought to avoid the texas issue.
for the moment the economic problems associated with the panic of 1837 see chapter 11 overspread the continent westward expansion and political conflict 1840 1848 the wilmot proviso and the realignment of american politics for a young up and coming whig from illinois the war with mexico was a decisive moment.
abraham lincoln opposed the war and viewed territorial expansion as a threat to americas future.
whigs argued that economic development not geographical expansion was the key to americas prosperity.
in what would become a hallmark of his distinctive rhetoric lincoln translated this whig ideal into a folksy idiom.
whigs did not believe in enlarging our field lincoln observed in 1848 but in keeping our fences where they are and cultivating our present possessions making it a garden improving the morals and education of the people supporters of slavery held a different vision acquiring a huge new swath of territory would be a boon for slavery.
the problem of how to handle slavery in the territories gained from mexico would strain americas new two party system splitting whigs and democrats into northern and southern wings and eventually setting the stage for the emergence of a new political party the republicans.
the wilmot proviso in response to concerns that land seized from mexico would lead to the spread of slavery congressmen david wilmot a pennsylvania democrat introduced a measure the wilmot proviso which would have banned slavery from all territory acquired from mexico.
the bill created a firestorm.
the controversy over the wilmot proviso heightened sectional tensions and conflict over the future of slavery.
southerners denounced it as a thinly veiled attack on slavery whereas northerners insisted that it left slavery untouched where it already existed.
the proviso passed in the house where northern representatives outnumbered southerners but it was defeated in the senate where the balance between slave and free states prevented either side from passing legislation objectionable to the other.
the wilmot proviso shifted american political debate to the problem of slavery in the territories splitting both parties into proslavery and free soil factions.
in response politicians tried to resolve the sectional argument over slavery.
president polk supported a proposal modeled on the missouri compromise see chapter 7 to extend the 36 30 line across the louisiana purchase territories separating free states from slave states to the pacific coast.
northerners opposed this idea because most of the land gained from mexico lay below this line and seemed likely to enter the union why was the wilmot proviso so controversial.
ultimately as slave states.
senator lewis cass of michigan suggested another compromise popular sovereignty which would allow the people in each territory to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery.
hoping to garner both northern and southern supporters he omitted a crucial detail when this decision on slavery would be made.
most northerners believed this decision would be made when a territorial legislature was established.
southerners however accepted john c calhouns interpretation that the decision over slavery would not be made until settlers wrote a state constitution which opponents of slavery feared would allow slaveholders time to firmly establish slavery in a territory.
sectionalism and the election of 1848 the wilmot proviso and slavery defined the presidential election of 1848 both the democratic and whig parties tried to downplay the question of slavery to attract voters in the north and south.
democrats nominated moderate lewis cass champion of popular sovereignty.
the whigs had a more difficult time choosing a candidate.
henry clay had been the clear frontrunner but his adamant opposition to the seizure of lands from mexico was a difficult political position to take.
clay had hoped to avoid having to take a stand on the wilmot proviso and the realignment of american politics 11 12 the candidate of many parties a phrenologist probes general zachary taylors head looking for some sign of what the presidential candidate thought about key issues.
taylors campaign tried to avoid taking stands on issues such as the wilmot proviso that might alienate voters.
this issue but the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo undercut him after the treaty clays policy of non expansion made no sense.
americans had to decide what to do about slavery in the lands won from mexico.
casting clay aside the whigs eventually settled on general zachary taylor a mexican war hero who cast himself as a no party man and a unifier above partisanship.
even more useful to the party because he was a career soldier taylors views on many political issues including the wilmot proviso were unknown.
this humorous political cartoon from the election of 1848 shows a phrenologist see chapter review indians traders and trappers gather to buy sell and promote intercultural exchanges review questions 1 what role did ideas of race play in the theory of manifest destiny.
2 what symbolic function did indians play in american artists representations of the west during the era of expansion.
4 who were the conscience whigs.
5 how did zachary taylors campaign in 1848 deal with the divisive issue of slavery.
3 why did the young whig abraham lincoln oppose the annexation of texas.
key terms rendezvous a festive annual gathering held in the rocky mountains in which indians mountain men and traders gathered together to exchange pelts for a variety of goods.
manifest destiny a term coined by editor and columnist john osullivan to describe his belief in americas divine right to expand westward.
overland trail the 2 000 mile route taken by american settlers traveling to new settlements in oregon california and utah.
liberty party the staunchly antislavery anti annexation party was short lived but captured 62 000 votes a small number but enough some historians argue to effectively rob henry clay of electoral victories in new york and michigan thereby handing polk the presidency in 1844 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo this treaty formally ended the war between the united states and mexico 1848.
in addition to settling the border dispute between texas and mexico the united states gained a significant swath of new territory in the southwest.
wilmot proviso bill introduced by congressman david wilmot would have banned slavery from the territories acquired from mexico.
popular sovereignty an approach to the question of slavery in a newly acquired territory that would have allowed the people in each territory to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery.
chapter 12 slavery and sectionalism the political crisis of 1848 1861 two societies from an economic standpoint the 1850s brought stronger bonds of interdependence between north and south.
northern textile manufacturers depended on a steady supply of southern cotton whereas southerners relied on northern manufactured goods credit and shipping.
yet overshadowing the increased economic integration of north and south was their splitting into two distinct societies.
northeastern and midwestern states industrialized at a stunning pace symbolized by the spread in these regions of the railroad and factory.
in much of the south by contrast economic growth arose from an ever expanding system of staple crop production notably cotton that depended on the labor of four million slaves.
along with these divergent economies north and south developed distinct philosophies that defined their vision of the proper social order.
the industrial north 12 15 the crystal palace 1853 hundreds of thousands of visitors flocked to new york city in 1853 to view the exhibition of the industry of the world in the crystal palace.
the main building itself made of cast iron and glass was an expression of the latest industrial materials and design.
the industrial revolution that began in places like lowell massachusetts in the early 1800s and then staggered after the panic of 1837 reached new heights after the economic recovery in the early 1840s.
centered almost entirely in the north this boom was triggered by three main developments.
first starting in the firearms industry and spreading into clocks sewing machines and farming equipment americans pioneered in the creation of machines made of interchangeable parts thus facilitating the rapid manufacture of inexpensive goods.
second manufacturers began to power their machines with steam an energy source that was more powerful reliable what developments helped spur industrialization in the north.
and flexible than water power provided by rivers.
finally manufacturers benefited from the huge pool of cheap labor provided by a steady influx of immigrants.
manufacturing output soared and by 1860 the total value of all goods produced in the north reached 1 5 billion compared to 483 million for the entire nation in 1840.
the dynamic and innovative character of the northern industrial economy was displayed for all the world to see in 1853 at the crystal palace exhibition in new york city.
modeled on a similar exhibition in london in 1851 the exhibition of the industry of the world as it was officially known featured more than 4 000 exhibits most of them american.
even the building itself 12 15 a monumental cast iron two societies and glass structure reflected the latest trends in architecture design and construction materials.
more than one million people came to see the latest in modern technology including cyrus mccormicks mechanical reaper richard m hoes rotary printing press and elisha otiss elevator.
the only southern exhibitions of new technology were improved versions of the cotton gin.
the same spirit of enthusiasm and confidence that inspired the crystal palace exhibition is also captured in this advertisement for the colt patent fire arms manufactury in 1862 12 16.
samuel colt from connecticut patented a design for a revolver in 1837 and then established an enormously successful firearms manufacturing business in hartford.
the image that dominates the advertisement conveys two main ideas.
first it shows a huge manufacturing establishment the very size of which is intended to suggest strength and power.
second the image shows the modern factory nestled neatly within a small new england town suggesting that industry poses no threat to smalltown american values.
colts was one of many arms manufacturing businesses that flourished in the 1840s and 1850s.
nearly all of them were located in the north accounting for 90 percent of national output.
equally important to the emerging industrial economy was the building of a massive railroad network.
trackage soared from more than 9 000 miles in 1850 to over 30 000 in 1860 because most of this track lay west of pennsylvania it bound the states of the northeast more closely with those in the midwest such as illinois.
trade increasingly moved east to west along railroads and canals rather than north to south along rivers as in earlier decades accentuating the growing sectional divide.
the growth of the railroads along with two additional technological innovations the reaper and the cast steel plow revolutionized northern and western agriculture which was still the foundation of the national economy.
cyrus mccormicks mechanical reaper was a piece of equipment on small wheels pulled by a horse.
as it passed through a field sharp blades moved back and forth severing stalks of wheat.
the harvested grain was then collected in a cradle.
the reaper allowed for a much faster harvest often crucial in times of bad weather and eliminated the need to hire expensive farm labor.
john deeres cast steel plow sliced smoothly through the toughest soil making farming much easier and more efficient.
both inventions allowed farmers to expand the size of their farms knowing they could handle the additional plowing and harvesting.
the railroad also allowed farmers to sell their produce in markets hundreds of miles away and to turn from raising a mixture of animal fruit vegetable and grain products to specializing in single crops such as wheat corn or oats.
rising prices and growing demand from abroad for american grain augmented this trend.
industrialization brought rising wages and opportunity to most northerners but also new levels of poverty especially among unskilled and immigrant workers who formed a growing class of urban poor.
wages in many industrializing sectors such as shoe making and textiles were too low for one earner to support a family.
to increase their familys income growing numbers of women and children worked in factories or performed outwork in their homes often for 60 or 70 hours per week.
many workers became unemployed for 12 16 celebrating northern industry this 1862 advertisement for colts patent fire arms manufactury celebrated the power of american industry.
the image of the factory situated neatly within a new england town also suggested that modern industry posed no threat to american values and lifestyles.
how did new technology transform american agriculture.
chapter 13 a nation torn apart the civil war 1861 1865 the civil war began in 1861 as a conflict over whether southern states possessed the right to secede from the union.
but when lincolns emancipation proclamation took effect on january 1 1863 it became a war against slavery.
the soldiers depicted in this joyous scene were among the nearly 200 000 african american soldiers who contributed to the union armys successful campaign to defeat the confederacy.
in february 1865 a few weeks after the second anniversary of the emancipation proclamation the popular magazine harpers weekly published this drawing entrance of the fifty fifth massachusetts colored regiment into charleston feb 21 1865 the image reflected not merely a growing acceptance of slaverys demise among northerners but also the celebration of emancipation as a noble cause along with restoration of the union that helped the north justify the terrible human cost of the war.
emancipation was but one of the many extraordinary aspects of the civil war that make it the most written about event in american history.
the war pitted american against american in some cases brother against brother.
senator john j crittenden of kentucky for example saw two sons become generals one confederate and the other union.
mary todd lincoln the presidents wife lost three brothers who fought for the confederacy.
the civil war was also an unusually bloody war.
the 618 000 americans who died in the four years of conflict far outnumber the 117 000 lost in world war i and the 417 000 in world war ii.
the war also brought to the fore larger than life personalities such as generals william tecumseh sherman ulysses s grant robert e lee and thomas stonewall jackson and it produced moments of heroism that would become the stuff of legend.
if these aspects of the war explain its popularity as a historical subject they also indicate why the civil war has generated such heated debate.
for generations americans have argued over the true cause of the war and why the north won or as some like to put it why the south lost.
they have debated the significance and wisdom of crucial decisions such as lees move to attack the north in 1863 or union general george meades failure to pursue the weakened confederates after gettysburg.
yet for all this debate few commentators dispute this fact the civil war brought profound social political and economic change to the united states.
most also agree that although the war ended the contentious question of slavery it immediately raised equally challenging questions about racial equality.
war for the destruction of liberty must be met by war for the destruction of slavery african american leader frederick douglass chapter 13 a nation torn apart the civil war 1861 1865 first battle of bull run gen grant captures forts henry and donelson in tennessee mcclellan defeats lee at battle of antietam lee defeats hooker at the battle of chancellorsville victory allows lincoln to issue the emancipation proclamation confederate victory is offset by death of gen thomas stonewall jackson confederacy wins in a clash of inexperienced armies confederate diplomats removed from the british ship trent nearly causes a war between the union and great britain boosts union morale and brings attention to grants military skill lee repulses mcclellans peninsular campaign exposes again the poor military leadership in the union army lee defeats burnside at battle of fredericksburg northern morale boosted after antietam sags once again meade defeats lee at battle of gettysburg turning point in the war ends the confederate gamble of invading the north chapter 14 now that we are free reconstruction and the new south 1863 1890 powerless under the authority of their former masters.
in new orleans home to the souths largest free black population before the war african americans began to demand equal rights for all freedmen including the right to vote and hold office.
although their efforts failed they sparked a national debate over freedmens rights that would dominate reconstruction.
the experiences in the sea islands davis bend louisiana and elsewhere during the war created conflicting visions regarding the rights of freedmen land redistribution and the authority of exslave owners.
yet emancipation also revealed the optimism of the freedmen and their commitment to defend their newly won freedom and make the most of it.
lincolns ten percent plan even as the civil war raged president lincoln had begun to formulate an official reconstruction policy.
in keeping with his moderate political views before the war lincoln proposed a moderate reconstruction policy.
as he suggested so eloquently in his second inaugural address he intended to deal with the defeated south with malice toward none and charity for all to achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves he believed that extending lenient terms to the south would convince confederates to surrender sooner and speed the healing process necessary for the good of the union.
vengeance he held would only delay reconstruction.
it might even inspire defeated confederate soldiers to form renegade bands of insurgents to wage a war of terrorism for years to come.
a more studied outrage on the legislative authority of the people has never been perpetuated wade davis manifesto denouncing lincolns veto of the wade davis bill in december 1863 lincoln issued his proclamation of amnesty and reconstruction also known as the ten percent plan.
intended to establish southern state governments the plan pardoned all southerners except high ranking military officers and confederate officials who what advantages did lincoln see in a moderate reconstruction policy.
took an oath pledging loyalty to the union and support for emancipation.
as soon as 10 percent of a states voters took this oath they could call a convention establish a new state government and apply for federal recognition.
radical republicans offer a different vision lincolns lenient plan enraged many radical republicans.
in july 1864 radical republican leaders senator benjamin wade of ohio and congressman henry w davis of maryland cosponsored the wade davis bill a reconstruction program designed to punish confederate leaders and destroy the souths slave society.
southerners could reestablish new state governments only after a majority of a states voters signed an ironclad oath declaring they never aided the confederate army or government.
southerners who served as high ranking army officers or government officials would be stripped of their citizenship including the right to vote and hold office.
the former confederate states would be readmitted only after a long period of punishment and a clear demonstration of their commitment to the union emancipation and freedmens rights.
lincoln quietly pocket vetoed the bill.
furious radicals sought to replace him as the republican party presidential nominee in 1864 although the effort failed it exposed the deeply divided opinions regarding reconstruction.
lincoln and his fellow republicans did manage to find common ground on two issues.
in late january 1865 at the urging of lincolns administration congress passed the thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery.
the measure ended any ambiguity over the emancipation proclamation abolishing slavery everywhere in the united states and offering no compensation to former slaveholders.
by years end 27 states including eight former confederate states would ratify the amendment.
in march 1865 congress established the bureau of refugees freedmen and abandoned lands.
known simply as the freedmens bureau it became an all purpose relief agency in the war ravaged south distributing food providing emergency services building schools and managing confiscated lands.
it represented the first attempt by the federal government to provide social welfare services and quickly became the bedrock institution for implementing reconstruction policy.
read the document carl schurz report on the condition of the south 1865 the fruits of freedom the fruits of freedom many southerners were stunned by the response of their slaves to freedom.
clinging to self serving paternalistic notions of the plantation as one big family under the benign authority of the master and planter they were taken aback when their slaves refused to obey their orders or exhibited anger or disrespect toward them.
susan bradford a young woman living on a florida plantation wrote in her diary that she was hurt and dazed when one of her former slaves refused to prepare a dinner for her mother.
tell her if she want any dinner sneered the free woman she kin cook it herself i believed that these people were content happy and attached to their masters wrote one south carolina planter in 1865 unable to comprehend why slaves abandoned their masters in their moment of need it would be the first of many such shocking experiences for whites who never imagined that slavery might one day be abolished.
freedom of movement even before the guns of the civil war went silent african americans had begun to explore the meaning of their freedom and formulate their own vision of a reconstructed postwar south both of which included unrestricted mobility.
under slavery movement was sharply limited and few slaves ventured far from their plantations.
in the chaos of war however and later with official emancipation african americans hit the road.
many did so to escape the plantations that were home to their former masters and countless bitter memories.
others simply reveled in free and unfettered movement.
they wandered for the pleasure of it with no particular destination in mind.
as these advertisements 14 3 from the colored tennessean tennessees only african american owned newspaper indicate many freedmen also journeyed in search of loved ones sold away years before.
african american mobility led to a sharp rise in the black population of southern cities.
in contrast to rural life black settlements in cities offered more varied job opportunities albeit nearly always menial difficult and low paid.
urban life also provided freedmen access to strong black institutions such as churches charities and newspapers.
southern whites reacted to black mobility with both alarm and disdain.
just as former slaves equated freedom with mobility their former masters saw in it a shocking reminder that the old order was gone.
as a consequence in one of the first expressions of resistance to black freedom white southerners passed vagrancy laws intended to restrict african american mobility.
read the document james c beecher report on land reform 1865 1866 forty acres and a mule many freedmen also tried to become landowners.
if travel was a symbolic expression of their new freedom land was freedom in concrete form.
land the freedmen believed would give their freedom meaning by providing an independent living free of planter control.
the idea that freedmen would receive land in addition to their freedom originated during the war.
as southerners abandoned their plantations before the advancing union army ex slaves often took control partitioned land and planted crops.
freedmen defended these extralegal actions as simple justice citing the generations of unpaid labor that they and their ancestors had performed on farms and plantations.
the property which they former slaveholders hold asserted a group of freedmen was nearly all earned by the sweat of our brows 14 3 freedmen searching for loved ones sold away during slavery these classified advertisements in the august 12 1865 colored tennessean were just two of thousands published in mainly black owned newspapers during reconstruction.
they vividly highlight the efforts of freed men to overcome one of slaverys harshest legacies.
source t ichi 36218 information wanted of a man by the name of elias lowery mcdermit nashville tennessee 1865 creator the colored tennessean b ichi 36219.
saml dove wishes to know of the whereabouts of his mother utica ny.
aug 5 1865 looking for his mother areno and his sisters and brother.
give us our own land and we take care of ourselves but without land the old masters can hire or starve us as they please a south carolina freedman speaking to a northern journalist 1865 to bring order to these unofficial acts of confiscation general william t sherman issued in early why did freedmen believe they were owed land.
chapter 14 now that we are free reconstruction and the new south 1863 1890 implementing reconstruction as congress engaged in its impeachment struggle with president johnson in 1867 1868 the reconstruction acts took effect.
a coalition of african americans poor up country whites and economically ambitious merchants many originally from the north and white planters formed the republican party in the south.
they seized the opportunity presented by the congressional reconstruction program and dominated the process of electing state governments and gaining readmission to the union.
the task would not be easy especially as their different goals conflicted with each other and with those of most white southerners who would clearly oppose politically economically and violently any attempt to establish what they called negro rule 14 10 the hated scalawag scalawags became despised figures in the popular southern mind.
here a scalawag is depicted as an opportunist seeking political power by manipulating the black vote.
the republican party in the south the process of remaking state governments under the reconstruction acts fell to the republican party in the south an organization comprising three distinct and in some cases antagonistic groups northerners who settled in the south white southerners why did many northerners move south after the civil war.
and former slaves.
northerners who moved south after the war were derided as carpetbaggers by white southerners.
the term suggested they were poor opportunists who carried to the south only a cheap suitcase or carpetbag which they intended to fill with plunder garnered from southerners still reeling from the war.
in reality most were middle class often former union soldiers or merchants ministers artisans and professionals who viewed the south as a region of opportunity where they planned to settle permanently.
others came as idealistic relief workers sent by northern charitable and religious societies intent upon aiding ex slaves in their transition to freedom.
the republican party in the south also contained many white southerners.
most white southerners referred to them derisively as scalawags and considered them traitors to their region and race men eager to accrue riches and power by manipulating black voters 14 10.
most scalawags came from the less developed backcountry regions of the south especially eastern tennessee and kentucky northern alabama and georgia and western north carolina.
like carpetbaggers they believed that the republican party offered them and their region the best chance for economic betterment.
most did not however embrace on the idea of racial equality.
former slaves made up the largest about 80 percent most significant segment of the souths republican party.
empowered with the vote by the civil rights act of 1866 and reconstruction act of 1867 african americans turned out in huge numbers in late 1867 to vote in elections held to select delegates to state constitutional conventions.
for supporters of black suffrage this extraordinary moment persons only recently considered property now exercising for the first time the right to vote was captured in implementing reconstruction but be sure to vote for no southern men that was a rebel or secessionist for if you do you are pulling them hemp to hang yourself with r i cromwell advising his fellow freedmen new orleans tribune april 25 1867 this harpers weekly drawing 14 11.
the dignified scene depicts three voters who symbolically represent a spectrum of blacks that includes common laborers educated blacks who were free before the war and union army veterans.
most african american republican leaders came from the second group.
they tended to come from the north and possessed more wealth and education than the average freedman.
the three factions of the republican party carpetbaggers scalawags and freedmen formed an uneasy alliance as they came together to reestablish southern state governments.
nonetheless their combined votes in the 1867 elections for delegates to state constitutional conventions led to a sweeping republican victory.
white republicans even though they comprised only 20 percent of party membership won most of the seats.
but freedmen won 265 seats overall and a majority of seats in south carolina and louisiana.
creating reconstruction governments in the south republican delegates soon drafted new constitutions for former confederate states according to the guidelines established by the reconstruction acts.
in a few states notably virginia and texas conservatives delayed the process for more than a year.
but by the end of 1868 seven southern states had ratified new constitutions created new governments and been readmitted to the union.
these republican governments achieved remarkable results.
to begin with they represented a revolutionary advance in the status of the freedmen.
held as slaves and denied citizenship only a few years before african americans now enjoyed view the closer look first vote 14 11 casting their first votes for supporters of racial equality like the northern publication harpers weekly whose cover featured this drawing the large turnout of black voters in the 1867 elections was exhilarating.
the right to vote and hold office.
between 1869 and 1901 22 african americans would serve in congress 20 representatives and 2 senators.
more than 600 would win seats in state legislatures and to other state offices.
while embittered white southerners decried what they termed negro rule statistics show that white republicans held a far greater share of offices than blacks.
no african american was elected governor and no state legislature ever had a black majority the south carolina lower house briefly had a black majority.
what white southerners really objected to was republican rule how did african american voting affect the political situation in the south in 1867 1868.
chapter hear the audio file the black laws by bishop b w.
arnett pamphlet excerpt p 433 read the document carl schurz report on the condition of the south 1865 p 408 james c beecher report on land reform 1865 1866 p 409 address of the colored state convention to the people of the state of south carolina 1865 p 414 affidavit of former slave enoch braston 1866 p 415 charles f johnson and t w gilbreth the memphis riot 1866 p 416 hannah irwin describes ku klux klan ride late 1860s p 422 credit mobilier union pacific railroad scandal testimony of c p.
huntington 1873 p 423 blanche k bruce speech in the senate 1876 p 426 r b buckley confederate song im a good old rebel 1866 p 428 view the image cotton plantation united states of america p 429 u s senate regarding the agricultural labor force in the south 1880 p 431 5 what role did violence play in establishing white supremacy in the new south.
hear the audio file a georgia lynch law p 435 view the map interactive map congressional reconstruction p 417 atlas map the rise of tenancy in the south 1880 p 432 watch the video video lectures the schools that the civil war and reconstruction created p 410 p 440 why did so many euro americans settle in the trans mississippi west.
the economic transformation of the west p 447 what major economic pursuits and industries developed in the west.
native americans under siege p 452 why did the federal government pursue a policy of military confrontation and forced assimilation when dealing with native americans.
resistance and romanticism p 461 how did images and myths about the american west develop and persist.
chapter 8 as well as pawnees comanches kiowas southern arapahos and cheyenne.
the plains tribes varied culturally but many shared a similar tribal structure.
most tribes consisted of bands of about 300 500 related men and women each governed by a council that welcomed community involvement in decision making.
the comanches for example divided their population of 7 000 ca.
1870 into 13 bands.
religious beliefs and practices varied among the plains tribes but most shared important fundamental elements beginning with the worship of one primary god whom the sioux called wakan tanka the great spirit.
plains indians also believed in spirits found in everything in creation from the earth itself to plants animals stars the moon and sun and they considered certain places such as burial grounds sacred.
a shaman deemed wakan or blessed led religious ceremonies healed the sick and even decided where to hunt.
many plains tribes lived in settled villages near rivers where they tended fields of corn beans and squash fished and hunted game including bear deer and buffalo.
trade with white settlers explorers and trappers since the eighteenth century had allowed them to procure guns kettles and tools.
these sedentary tribes included the wichitas of northern texas and oklahoma pawnees of western kansas the dakota sioux of minnesota the mandans of north dakota the omahas of nebraska the osages of western missouri and arkansas and the arikawas of south dakota.
although essential aspects of this plains lifestyle had changed little over the centuries some of the largest tribes took to using horses by the eighteenth century and adopted a migratory lifestyle.
these included the crow blackfeet cheyenne arapaho comanche and lakota sioux.
the horse allowed the plains tribes to follow the seasonal migrations of the buffalo whose what is significant about the diversity of native american life in the trans mississippi west.
chapter 15 conflict and conquest the transformation of the west 1860 1900 hunting further limiting options for participants.
despite safeguards white speculators and scammers found ways to con native americans out of their allotted land long before the 25 year term.
the act also allowed as indicated by the poster 15 18 the government to sell land deemed surplus to white settlers.
this poster touts the high quality of the estimated 350 000 acres being offered for sale in 1910 as the map 15 19 shows by the time the dawes act was replaced in 1934 two thirds of native american reservation land had been lost.
15 18 selling off reservation lands this advertisement issued by the federal government in 1911 vividly illustrates the dawes severalty act in action as it exuberantly proclaims a sale of 350 000 acres of indian land.
land transferred from indians to whites land held by or returned to indians 15 19 the loss of native american lands native american land possessions shrank steadily in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries through treaties sales and forced expulsion by white settlers and soldiers.
in 1887 the dawes severalty act accelerated this trend by encouraging the breakup of reservations.
how did the dawes act play a key role in the loss of native american land.
resistance and romanticism resistance and romanticism the surrender of geronimo in 1886 symbolized the end of significant armed resistance by native americans to the euro american settlement of the trans mississippi west.
nonetheless a revival movement called the ghost dance offered one final chance to reverse the fortunes of native americans.
when that effort was brutally crushed by the army at a place called wounded knee native americans turned to more subtle and enduring efforts to preserve their tribes families and culture.
at the same time white americans continued to fashion a pleasing image of the west as a place of adventure heroism individualism and opportunity.
this image found its way into art literature music and popular culture in the twentieth century.
yet historians and activists have offered a corrective to this romantic image that takes into account the experiences of native americans mexicans and women and the impact on the environment.
persecution and persistence the last major form of resistance to the euroamerican conquest of the west emerged in the late 1880s.
the ghost dance movement originated in the 1870s but did not become widely popular until a northern paiute shaman named wovoka began preaching a message of native american revival based on a vision he had experienced during a total eclipse of the sun in 1889 in this vision which he related to his followers a great flood scoured the land clean of all white settlers leaving behind indians who had remained true to traditional teachings and a renewed herd of buffalo.
wovoka told his followers to perform the ghost dance a ritual ceremony where participants donned special shirts and danced in a circle until brought to an ecstatic state that they believed drew to them the spirits of ancestors who would protect them from the white mans bullets.
the hopeful message of the ghost dance spread rapidly among native americans from the rocky mountains to the great plains alarming federal officials who feared it contained the seeds of rebellion.
the director of the pine ridge reservation in south dakota ordered sitting bull arrested.
when he resisted the police shot him dead.
two weeks later on december 29 1890 the army confronted about 300 sioux ghost dancers at wounded knee creek in south dakota.
when one of the indians accidentally fired his gun the soldiers attacked and massacred more than 200 this photograph 15 20 the medicine man taken at wounded knee s d conveyed the brutality of the event.
the date of january 1 1891 on the photograph indicates that bodies were left unattended for days before being interred in a mass grave.
note the rifle placed on the body by a soldier so that the photographer could present an image of a hostile indian.
it was not the bloodiest clash between native americans and the u s army but the wounded knee massacre symbolized the brutality associated with the conquest of the west.
the end of armed conflict did not mean an end to resistance for native americans.
in the coming read the document accounts of the wounded knee massacre 15 20 massacre at wounded knee in an incident that symbolized american brutality toward native americans soldiers killed between 200 and 300 sioux at wounded knee south dakota after a tense standoff over the ghost dance movement.
why was wovokas message so appealing to indians and so frightening to military officials.
chapters 13 and 15.
public officials in an argument later used to justify government support for the interstate highway system and the internet defended this largess by arguing that railroads generated economic growth that benefited everyone from travelers to farmers to manufacturers.
high federal tariffs that raised the price of imported goods thereby helping domestic manufacturers also promoted industrialization.
yet the government also facilitated industrialization by inaction.
public officials business leaders and conservatives subscribed to the philosophy of laissez faire french for let do or leave alone which argued that the government should impose no restraints on business including workers demands for laws to regulate the hours of work safety conditions and wages.
government officials also ignored reformers demands for an income tax and laws curbing cutthroat business read the document thomas edison the success of the electric light october 1880 16 2 the matzeliger lasting machine jan matzeligers complex sewing machine wiped out jobs for skilled shoe lasters who had hand stitched shoe tops to soles but allowed for a huge increase in mechanized shoe production.
as thomas nasts political cartoon vividly shows 16 3 business and government leaders argued that government interference harmed the american economy depicted here as a woman weighed down by government imposed burdens such as income taxes laws regulations and ideal money money not backed by gold.
the closed shop and idle ship in the background and the vultures circling overhead all suggested these policies would kill the economy.
widespread support for laissez faire among lawmakers left capitalists to operate in a market free of the restraints of government regulation.
16 3 defending laissez faire this 1878 cartoon warns that government interference with the economy threatens the well being of the nation.
how did government officials defend the practice of making huge land grants to the railroads.
chapter 16 wonder and woe the rise of industrial america 1865 1900 the railroads the most dramatic change in the late nineteenthcentury industrial economy was the emergence of large corporations business organizations established by a group of individuals and owned by people who buy shares of stock in the company.
before the civil war most american manufacturers were small scale operations with fewer than 25 employees.
they were usually privately owned and sold their products within a few hundred miles of where they were made.
all this changed after 1865 as entrepreneurs seeking bigger markets and greater profits that they could now reach thanks to the railroad and telegraph began to form massive corporations that boasted thousands of employees in a single factory complex operations in several states and millions of dollars of investment capital raised from the sales of stock.
the original big businesses were railroads and they played a key role in transforming the united states into an industrial power.
in 1865 scores of small railroad companies operated throughout the northeast and midwest and to a lesser extent the south.
comprising 35 000 miles of track they serviced small areas and established their own standards for things such as track gauge the distance between the rails.
nearly all suffered from financial instability and poor management.
but by 1900 this haphazard system had developed into a massive consolidated and integrated national railroad network of 193 000 miles dominated by just seven large corporations.
railroads grew at such a ferocious pace because they could be built almost anywhere creating a transportation network no longer confined to meandering rivers and expensive slow to construct canals that often froze in winter.
the railroad also offered another great advantage speed.
people mail and goods traveling by stagecoach might on a good day cover 50 miles.
a steam locomotive pulling many times more people mail and goods could cover the same distance in less than two hours.
and after the completion of the first trans continental line in 1869 see map 15 8 the railroad offered service from coast to coast.
the quicker and cheaper transportation offered by the railroad benefited the national economy.
railroads opened new areas of settlement enticing farmers to settle on nearby land often sold to them by the railroad confident that they could get their produce to market.
shopkeepers artisans laborers and railroad employees one million by 1900 settled in towns that sprang up along the tracks.
in turn they became consumers of finished goods brought by the railroad from eastern manufacturers.
the railroad industry also contributed to the national economy by consuming large quantities of iron steel coal and wood.
fierce competition among railroads initially led to the rapid expansion of lines.
by the 1870s many railroads tried to diminish competition by buying out rivals leading to the creation of giant corporations such as the pennsylvania railroad and the new york central railroad.
both owned thousands of miles of track in many states employed tens of thousands of workers and handled millions of dollars in investment capital and revenue.
modern business practices the success of the large railroad corporations led to the modernization of business practices in two important ways.
first railroad corporations showed other types of businesses the advantages of incorporating and issuing stock.
stock sales allowed corporations to raise capital to expand the business for example to buy new and more efficient equipment or a rival company.
if the company earned a profit stockholders benefited from an increase in the value of the stock which they could sell for a profit and sometimes by earning dividends.
stockholders played no direct role in running a company a professional management team performed that railroad time it appears is to be the time of the future.
and so people will now have to marry and die by railroad time.
ministers will preach by railroad time and banks will be required to open and close by the same time.
the sun is no longer the boss of the job indianapolis sentinel 1883 how did railroad grants both reflect and promote national economic growth.
watch the video video lecture mastering time and space how the railroad changed america the emergence of big business function.
but stockholders also enjoyed limited liability if the company failed they were not liable for any of its debts or obligations they stood to lose only their shares.
by the 1870s many companies involved in manufacturing mining communications and finance had incorporated.
second the sudden emergence of huge railroad corporations encouraged the development of modern sophisticated management practices.
chief among these practices was standardization.
for example in 1883 the nations major railroads established the four time zones that are still in use today.
this decision helped to combat the problem of irregular local time for example when local time in new york city was 12 00 p m it might be 11 55 a m in philadelphia and 11 47 in washington d c that often led to costly accidents between trains sharing a single track or crossing at a junction.
similarly the development of standardized equipment like couplers signals and brakes allowed for easier operation and maintenance of a railroads growing fleet of rolling stock.
in 1886 the railroads also established a standard gauge for track of 4 feet 8 5 inches thereby eliminating costly delays caused by the need to transfer cargo from one train to another wherever tracks of two different gauges met.
as this drawing 16 4 indicates many americans viewed standard gauge as bringing both economic and political benefits to the nation since it promised to create both a more efficient railroad system and greater unity between the less developed south see chapter 16 16 10 the price of child labor because they could pay children less than one half the wages of an adult employers hired more children in the late nineteenth century depriving them of education and often exposing them to industrial hazards.
wonder and woe the rise of industrial america 1865 1900 the machinery a state of affairs they found very demoralizing the industrial workplace was also extremely dangerous.
every year between 1880 and 1900 35 000 workers on average were killed on the job and another 500 000 injured.
this carnage resulted in part from the monotony of factory work which led mind numbed workers to make mistakes or fall asleep.
but most injuries stemmed from the factory owners negligence.
with no laws compelling them to make their workplaces less lethal few industrialists were willing to pay for safety devices or procedures.
not until the early twentieth century did most states begin enacting laws requiring compensation be paid to injured workers or the families of killed workers see chapter 16 wonder and woe the rise of industrial america 1865 1900 most of the regions miners were catholic their sinfulness.
three weeks later on july 14 1877 the largest nineteenth century strike in the world erupted.
the great uprising of railroad workers began in martinsburg west virginia and quickly spread to baltimore philadelphia pittsburgh st louis chicago and other cities.
the strike involved thousands of workers and violence emanated from both sides.
in pittsburgh for example soldiers opened fire on striking workers and their families killing 25 and wounding 29 enraged strikers and their supporters attacked the troops and destroyed all of the pennsylvania railroad terminals buildings and other property.
the mainstream press criticized the railroads for slashing workers wages but most dismissed labor activism as illegal ill informed and un american.
see competing visions the legitimacy of unions.
while workers faced hostility from employers politicians and journalists they also had to contend with animosity within the ranks of labor that often hindered their ability to organize.
deep hostility often existed between skilled and unskilled workers who frequently saw little in common with each other.
workers were also riven by disputes arising from different ideologies including varieties of socialism a theory that rejected capitalism and advocated common ownership of private property and greater social and economic equality.
they also argued the persistent question of whether workers interests were best served by pressuring the major political parties or by forming an independent labor party.
perhaps the most significant divisions among workers centered on race and ethnicity.
a rising tide of immigration in the late nineteenth century increased the ethnic racial and religious diversity of an already diverse workforce making it more difficult to unite them in common cause.
for example when hard times hit during the depression of the 1870s anti chinese sentiment among american workers soared leading to the chinese exclusion act in 1882 barring chinese immigration to the united states.
as the cartoon 16 13 from the wasp demonstrates chinese workers were blamed for taking jobs from americans.
the artist depicts a 12 armed chinese worker drawn in racist caricature laboring maniacally at a dozen tasks while young american born workers stand idly near a factory.
one of the workers is being hauled away by a policeman implying that unemployment has led him to a life of crime.
african american workers also faced racist hostility from white workers especially when they began moving to northern cities in the 1890s.
much of this hostility stemmed from the widely held racist beliefs of the day including the concept that all whites were superior to blacks.
but it also emanated from the fear that african americans would take jobs from white workers a fear exacerbated when employers occasionally used black workers as strikebreakers.
16 13 hard times fuel anti chinese racism during the depression of 1873 1878 workers blamed high unemployment on chinese immigrants whom they accused of working long shifts for low wages.
why were industrial workers so divided.
read the document chinese exclusion act the world of work transformed competing visions the legitimacy of unions although conflict between workers and their employers often centered on wages and hours it also occurred over the legitimacy of labor unions.
many americans denounced unions as illegal foolish and un american.
the editor of scribners monthly writing after the 1877 great uprising of railroad workers reflects this view as does the image from puck.
workers and their advocates like john swinton editor of a pro labor newspaper in new york offered a different vision of labor unions as vital organizations that protected workers from the exploitation.
why did employers find unions so objectionable even dangerous.
what benefits did workers see in unions.
scribners monthly october 1877 john swintons paper january 27 1884 and now that it is over it is a good time to ask once more what good has come from this strike and what good has come of any strike.
the laws of nature which after all govern the laws of trade can never be overcome or circumvented by a strike.
labor will always command its value no more no less strikes are always mistakes they are often crimes.
the day of the inauguration of trades unions and labor organizations in this country was a day the blackest and fullest of menace to the popular prosperity and peace that ever dawned upon the nation.
they have been an unmitigated curse to employers and employed alike.
the nature and purpose of these organizations are simply outrageous.
they have been despotic toward their own members oppressive toward the class in whose interest they pretend to have been established impertinent and intermeddling.
they have assumed the right to control property and business in which they had no more right than if they lived in the moon.
there should be in the good sense of the great mass of laborers a reaction against this wretched crime and this stupendous foolishness.
there are many who cannot understand why trades unions exist here.
they have heard them described as alien to the american craftsman causing strikes and raising ill feeling generally between employer and employe e.
in the present state of industry trade unions are a necessity recognized as such by the great majority of intelligent workmen and securing for their members a partial degree of protection without which they would sink into depths as yet unfathomed.
there is a hue and cry against the unions as agencies that provoke strikes.
in nine cases out of ten strikes are made necessary by circumstances over which the unions have no control whatever sometimes they are a protest against unendurable reductions in wages sometimes by unjust conduct on the part of bosses or corporations.
no union to day orders a strike that can be avoided by reasonable means no union orders a strike without full consideration of the subject and after a fair vote but we are told that no strike ever brings any advantage to the strikers this is a mistake that cannot be made by any one who has observed the results of strikes either in the united states or in any other country but strikes often fail yes it is true.
capital often triumphs in the conflict with labor true again.
yet capital would be even harsher and more exacting than it is if it were not for the protest of the strike and the warning that it gives.
the wages which in many industries are but little above the living point would be put down and kept down to the starvation point if the men accepted with submissive spirit every reduction of wages and all the severe terms that capital tries to enforce.
this puck magazine cartoon from the mid 1880s portrayed labor union officials as tyrants who hurt the interests of workers.
why did labor activists argue that unions were defensive in nature.
chapters also sprang up in most cities in the east.
the city has become a serious menace to our civilization.
it has a peculiar attraction for the immigrant here is heaped the social dynamite here roughs gamblers thieves robbers lawless and desperate men of all sorts congregate men who are ready on any pretext to raise riots for the purpose of destruction and plunder.
josiah strong our country its possible future and its present crisis 1885 in 1890 congress made oversight of immigration a federal responsibility and established immigration depots in most major ports to weed out and reject immigrants with incurable diseases radical beliefs criminal backgrounds or so little money and skills they seemed likely to swell the ranks of the urban poor.
the largest and most famous of these facilities ellis island in new york harbor opened in 1892 many nativists considered this new system too lenient and called for additional restrictions on immigration.
in 1894 several harvard graduates founded the immigration restriction league to lobby for a literacy test for all would be immigrants requiring they demonstrate the ability to read and write in any language.
presidents cleveland taft and wilson vetoed immigrant literacy test bills but congress overrode wilsons veto and it became law in 1917 how did urban reformers try to improve the safety and livability of cities.
a different view urban reforms while some americans believed urban poverty crime disease and overcrowding could be eliminated simply by restricting immigration others developed a range of innovative policies and institutions to solve or at least minimize these problems.
to meet the problem of rising crime most cities followed the lead of new york when in 1845 it replaced the traditional night watch of a few untrained and unarmed men with a paid professional police department.
large cities also disbanded their volunteer fire companies and invested in new fire fighting technology such as steam pumpers and adopted tougher building codes.
more dangerous to a city than fire at least to its inhabitants were the frequent outbreaks of cholera diphtheria typhoid fever and other maladies.
drawing on increasing knowledge about germ theory cities established boards of health and took steps to improve water quality waste removal and street cleaning.
the latter half of the nineteenth century also witnessed a movement to build urban parks to provide the beauty and serenity of nature and offer wholesome and healthy recreation space as opposed to alleys and saloons for all.
new yorks central park built in the 1850s and 1860s proved so successful that nearly every large city commenced its own park projects.
because most of the grand parks were located far from the slums however reformers in the 1890s pushed urban governments to condemn blocks of tenements and build parks within working class neighborhoods.
urban reformers also expanded public education.
compulsory education laws usually requiring schooling until age 14 and a massive building campaign saw public school enrollments surge from 6 9 million to 17 8 million between 1870 and 1910 millions more students attended parochial schools established by the catholic church.
this effort reflected the traditional belief that education made for a productive and informed citizenry.
but as the photograph 17 7 of children reciting the pledge of allegiance illustrates advocates also saw expanded urban public schooling as a means of americanizing the immigrant masses teaching them english and respect for democracy and the law.
the pledge was first published in a youth magazine in 1892 to promote patriotism and civic pride among school children on the eve of the 400th anniversary of read the document proposal to buffalo new york park commission 1888 a search for solutions christopher columbuss arrival in the new world.
educators quickly made its recitation a daily ritual in schools across the country.
this earlier style which required people to end the pledge by extending their arms out straight was abolished in the 1930s because of its similarity to salutes used in fascist germany and italy.
capturing a new view of poverty reformers in the gilded age also developed a new way of thinking about poverty and its causes.
most americans held to the traditional view that poverty was caused by personal or moral failures such as laziness or drunkenness.
the poor as read the document jacob riis how the other half lives horatio alger and others argued so persuasively in popular literature see chapter 17 17 8 the white city designed by some of the nations leading architects chicagos white city consisted of 14 main buildings designed in the beauxarts style set in landscaped grounds featuring waterways and reflecting pools.
becoming a modern society america in the gilded age 1877 1900 frederick law olmsted and architect louis sullivan developed a master plan that called for landscaped grounds featuring waterways and reflecting pools.
around the waterways 17 8 burnham placed 14 main buildings designed in the beaux arts style which emphasized logic harmony and uniformity.
the court of honor buildings shown in the image lined the grand basin that formed the centerpiece of the exposition grounds.
covered in shimmering bright white stucco the buildings of the white city astonished the estimated 27 million visitors who entered through the main gates.
yet as this image indicates burnham and his team sought not simply to wow the public with grand architecture.
they wanted to showcase the potential glory of the modern city.
all cities could be should be as impressive as the white city.
all that was needed were civic leadership and enlightened urban planning.
this grand vision never fully caught on but many of the city beautiful ideals and concepts exhibited in the white city influenced a generation of urban planners and architects committed to making american cities more beautiful healthy and efficient.
how did the white city reflect an optimistic vision of urban life in the future.
new habits roles and lifestyles new habits roles and lifestyles the development of vast working class districts was but one aspect of a broad trend that reshaped urban life in the late nineteenth century.
urban and suburban growth also led to the development of middle class and elite residential neighborhoods and urban central business districts dedicated almost exclusively to commerce.
middle class neighborhoods increasingly reflected the new values of the urban middle class including a growing interest in leisure activities.
the growth of leisure time allowed women to take on significant roles in public life through memberships in socially and politically active clubs.
the new urban landscape the evolution of mass transit systems like horse cars steam railroads and trolleys led to explosive urban growth and specialized districts dedicated to specific functions.
most cities for example developed central business districts where almost no one lived.
instead the high value real estate in downtowns from baltimore to chicago to san francisco was dedicated to commerce banks department stores see chapter 18.
racism led white women to exclude black women from their clubs and the suffrage movement.
nonetheless african american women eslower birth rates and a growing trend for hiring tablished their own clubs to pursue goals such as servants to perform duties like cooking cleaning temperance and womens suffrage.
most of these and laundry left middle class women with more free time.
the dominant notions about gender roles clubs affiliated with the national association however emphasized the need for women to remain of colored women an umbrella group.
some black women pursued goals of particular concern in the home focusing on creating a moral and nurturing environment for their husbands and children.
to african americans.
ida b wells launched a according to this view the outside world of business national campaign against lynching in the 1890s that drew many african american women and and politics was the male sphere full of corruption since water hems in the business center on three sides and the nexus of railroads on the south chicago must grow upward new roles and expectations for women why did public activism among women increase.
read the document susan b anthony the new departure for women 1873 new habits roles and lifestyles men into public activism for reform especially civil rights.
by the 1890s americans had begun to use the term new woman to describe middle class women who pursued higher education engaged in political activism delayed marriage and bore fewer children.
the new woman had a distinct look donning the clothing hair style and air of the so called gibson girl.
a creation of illustrator charles dana gibson in 1890s popular magazines the gibson girl was tall and beautiful with a tightly cinched waist that accentuated her bosom and with hair piled high on her head.
offsetting these traditionally feminine characteristics however was an outgoing even mischievous spirit that reflected the greater independence and activism of younger american women.
symbolic of this attitude was the degree to which young women took part in the great national enthusiasm for bicycling in the 1890s.
note the striking contrast between these two images.
the first from 1886 17 10 shows a traditional victorian era wife in formal attire being carried as a passenger by her husband.
the second image an 1896 advertisement poster for the stearns bicycle company 17 11 shows a self confident and carefree woman in the gibson girl style breezing along on her own bicycle.
many conservative americans condemned the bicycling craze as unnatural and immoral because it allowed young women and men the freedom to pedal off unchaperoned away from the watchful eyes of parents and other guardians of respectability.
17 11 the new woman many americans saw a connection between the growing independence activism and outgoing spirit of young women and their participation in the national enthusiasm for bicycling in the 1890s.
17 10 the traditional woman reflecting victorian values this conservatively dressed woman in 1886 enjoys a bicycle ride only as the passenger of her husband.
view the map atlas map changing lives of american women 1880 1930 what was new about the new woman.
chapters 4 and 5.
labor activists and social critics castigated the ball and high societys rejection of republican simplicity but mrs vanderbilts guests paid no heed.
they reveled past dawn in a party that cost 250 000 in an age when an average worker could expect to earn less than 700 per year.
by the mid 1880s most newspapers featured society columns that devoted extensive coverage to the lives of the wealthy.
while americans followed the exploits of the rich with a certain wonder the public would accept only so much extravagance before expressing how did varied forms of leisure reflect class differences.
chapter 17 17 15 liberty suffocated by big business this 1889 thomas nast cartoon captured the concerns of many that trusts threatened democracy equality and liberty by monopolizing the necessities of life.
becoming a modern society america in the gilded age 1877 1900 did one party control both houses of congress and the presidency.
political inaction in the gilded age also reflected the conservatism of most politicians who clung to longstanding political traditions that celebrated small nonintrusive government especially at the federal level.
for many leaders government regulation of business appeared socialistic and harmful to both the economy and republican principles.
political paralysis stemmed from the power of corporate interests to use huge donations to political parties and bribery of lawmakers to stymie legislation they deemed harmful to their interests.
for example big business interests blocked efforts to lower the tariff because a high tariff protected their manufactures from foreign competition.
the record for 1890 the year congress took up the big issues of tariff currency reform and corporate regulation provides a particularly vivid example of this ineffective political system.
support for corporate regulation reflected rising concern from many why did congress in this period fail to address major social issues.
corners of american society.
industrial workers saw themselves as victims of corporate power that demanded long hours of dangerous toil for low wages.
many other americans as suggested by this 1889 thomas nast cartoon the rising of the usurpers and the sinking of the liberties of the people 17 15 viewed trusts as a threat to democracy and equality.
by monopolizing the necessities of life trusts literally threatened to smother american liberty.
the sherman antitrust act of 1890 promised to empower the federal government to crack down on business practices that diminished competition see chapter 15 formed to alleviate the plight of farmers beset by rising costs and falling prices for their products.
the southern farmers alliance 1877 and northern farmers alliance 1880 grew in the 1880s to a combined membership of more than five million.
excluded by the segregationist doctrines of the post reconstruction south black farmers formed the colored farmers alliance in 1886 and soon had more than 1 25 million members.
the alliances argued that the economic woes of the american farmer were due to exploitive bankers who charged farmers exorbitant interest rates for farm mortgages to railroads that charged them extortionate rates to transport farm produce to market and to commodity brokers on wall street who bought their crops at rock bottom prices and then resold them at many times the original price paid.
to combat this injustice the alliances promoted the establishment of cooperatives that combined the buying and selling power of farmers to gain them better prices for their produce and lower rates for loans and crop insurance.
they also promoted education on agricultural topics.
in 1889 the northern farmers alliance and southern farmers alliance united to form the read the document n a.
dunning ed alliances vision of community 1891 national alliance.
one year later convinced that the only way to combat the power of the monopolies and trusts was to transform the national alliance into a political movement to elect pro farmer candidates to office delegates gathered in ocala florida and drew up a manifesto listing their grievances and proposed reforms.
that fall national alliance backed candidates won complete or partial control of 12 state legislatures and elected 6 governors.
they also sent 50 representatives and 3 senators to congress.
because most of these men were democrats republicans lost control of the house.
these victories convinced many national alliance activists like ignatius donnelly of minnesota and tom watson of georgia that they needed to form a third party and run a slate of candidates in the 1892 presidential contest.
a national alliance convention in st louis in early 1892 led to the formal creation of the peoples party its followers would be known as populists and the adoption of a platform that emphasized the plight of the american farmer and worker at the hands of greedy businessmen and corrupt politicians see competing visions progress or peril.
by now the peoples party movement had begun to alarm the leaders of the mainstream political parties.
worried about the partys potential to determine the winner in 1892 by taking votes from them the major parties launched a campaign to discredit the populists.
in this political cartoon 17 16 which appeared on the cover of judge a pro republican magazine the artist ridicules the populists as a patchwork of strange and dangerous political and ideological movements like socialism and prohibition.
the balloons basket labeled platform of lunacy carried the party leaders depicted as eccentric fools.
in july 1892 the populists nominated union army veteran james b weaver for president and confederate veteran general james g field of virginia for vice president.
their convention adopted a platform aimed at the following eliminating monopolies abolition of national banks and government ownership of railroads and telegraphs protecting small producers free silver coinage and sub treasuries to store surplus farm produce during times of low prices and to allow farmers to borrow money against it at low interest strengthening democracy the popular election of u s senators and the referendum and initiative and promoting fairness a graduated income tax to make the rich pay more of the tax burden.
to create a national base of support among all struggling people not just what grievances led to the rise of farmers alliances.
chapter 18 creating a democratic paradise the progressive era 1895 1915 workers by organizing unions to improve wages and working conditions.
tragedies like the triangle shirtwaist factory fire brought these diverse female factions together even winning support from appalled upper class women.
in the wake of the fire this cross class female coalition focused on bolstering city safety regulations but only the labor activists emphasized the need for unions to end employer exploitation.
one particularly effective cross class female alliance lobbied for legislation to ensure that mothers had clean disease free milk for their children.
these women succeeded in their quest for local laws that prevented distributors from using chalk to make dirty milk appear white.
they successfully rallied for mandatory pasteurization to kill germs and for milk to be transported in refrigerated containers.
femaleled reform campaigns also injected new energy into the suffrage movement.
children need pure milk and good food good schools and playgrounds sanitary homes and safe streets a female trade union activist on why women needed the vote many middle class female progressive reformers and working class labor organizers became convinced that without the right to vote women lacked an essential tool they needed to keep themselves and their families safe.
the national woman suffrage association nwsa achieved notable successes between 1910 and 1917 winning the right to vote in washington california arizona kansas oregon and new york.
defeats in other states however convinced the nwsa to seek a constitutional amendment guaranteeing all women the right to vote a campaign that succeeded in 1920 see chapter 17.
by 1900 supreme court rulings read the document louis brandeis from other peoples money and how bankers use it 1913 reining in big business had essentially stripped the icc of real authority.
during his second administration roosevelt reinstated the power of the icc to regulate railroad monopolies convincing a reluctant congress to pass the 1906 hepburn act.
four years later the mann elkins act further bolstered the rate setting powers of the icc and put the telegraph and telephone communication industries under its purview as well.
taft and wilson competing progressive visions having promised not to run again for president in 1908 roosevelt helped his secretary of war william howard taft secure the republican nomination.
view the image john d rockefeller cartoon 1901 roosevelt believed that taft would continue his efforts to create a stronger regulatory federal government.
the democrats countered by nominating the fiery william jennings bryan for a third time see chapter 19 imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 you had to pray everyday for god to carry you safe and bring you back a black worker on felling giant trees and surviving mudslides while building the panama canal this photo of roosevelt sitting at the controls of a bucyrus steam shovel 19 13 captured the adventurous spirit of an era dedicated to overseas economic expansion technological innovation and world prominence.
the real builder of the panama canal was theodore roosevelt wrote major george w goethals chief engineer on the project.
americans usually 19 13 theodore roosevelt visits the canal zone instead of observing construction of the panama canal from a safe distance roosevelt climbed into the seat of a steam shovel to work its controls.
what does this photograph convey about roosevelt and the feat of building the panama canal.
saw photos of their formally dressed presidents standing on podiums sitting at desks or posing with dignitaries.
in this photograph roosevelt appears as the larger than life personality he was literally building the canal he played such a large part in securing for the united states.
americans solved more than the engineering riddle of constructing the canal.
they also conquered the disease carrying mosquito.
guided by the recent discovery that mosquitoes transmitted malaria and yellow fever dr william c gorgas undertook a relentless fumigation campaign that saved thousands in americas backyard of lives.
nonetheless poor sanitation in the black workers camps which roosevelt criticized during his visit and the dangers posed by mudslides and working with dynamite exacted a toll.
nearly 4 500 foreign black workers and 500 white americans died during the american phase of construction.
the roosevelt corollary the panama canal was a symbol of u s technological achievement naval power and economic strength.
the canal also increased the importance of the caribbean to u s national security.
americas interests in this hemisphere are greater than those of any european power roosevelt stated.
therefore the united states intended to police and protect the canal alone.
roosevelt had reason to worry about european naval incursions into the region.
anxious about overdue debts britain italy and germany blockaded venezuela in 1902 and two years later european nations threatened to intervene in the dominican republic for the same reason.
to head off a european invasion the dominicans asked roosevelt to accept the nation as a protectorate.
roosevelt privately remarked he had about the same desire to annex it as a gorged boa constrictor might have to swallow a porcupine wrong end to he nonetheless agreed to help but only after deciding to use the incident to establish a new principle in u s foreign policy.
to prevent european military incursions into the western hemisphere roosevelt announced a corollary to the 1823 monroe doctrine see chapter 19 imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 key west korea c h i n a weihaiwei jiaozhou japa havana nepal a y a s bhutan c u b a ng es taiwan i a burma hong kong macao guangzhouwan isle of pines 1900 1901 four year depression begins the maine explodes in havana harbor philippine american war begins open door notes major cause of spanish american war ignites debate within united states over keeping philippines as a colony intensifies interest in finding foreign markets for american goods treaty of paris signed chapter review ends war with spain united states gains caribbean and pacific islands protects american access to china market platt amendment cuba becomes a protectorate of the united states review questions 1 what concerns and fears encouraged the united states to look outside its borders in the 1890s.
2 how did americans picture spanish rule in cuba and the american war against spain.
3 how did imperialists and anti imperialists reconcile their ideas with traditional american values.
4 how did american views about race and racial identity shape the nations development as a world power.
5 what different tactics did the united states use to protect its economic and strategic interests in east asia versus those used in the caribbean at the turn of the century.
key terms imperialism the late nineteenth century term for colonizing foreign nations and lands relying primarily on business political and military structures rather than settlers to rule colonized peoples and exploit their resources.
teller amendment 1898 congressional promise to leave the government and control of the cuban island to its people at the end of the spanish american war.
treaty of paris agreement that ended the spanish american war with spain relinquishing its claim to cuba and the united states receiving puerto rico and guam.
in return for 20 million spain turned the philippines over to the united states.
platt amendment granted the united states the right to maintain a naval base at guantnamo bay to intervene militarily in cuban domestic affairs and a privileged trading relationship with cuba.
the cuban government also needed permission from the united states before entering into treaties with other nations.
the white mans burden the anglo saxon quest to better the lives of so called racially inferior peoples by spreading western economic cultural and spiritual values and institutions.
sphere of influence the term used to describe the exclusive political and trading rights that a foreign nation enjoyed within another nations territory.
open door policy a u s sponsored nonbinding international agreement that kept the chinese market open to all foreign nations.
gentlemens agreement 1907 1908 japanese agreement to deny passports to japanese workers intending to immigrate to the united states.
581 panama canal a manmade waterway through panama completed in 1914 to link the pacific and atlantic oceans.
roosevelt corollary 1904 corollary to the 1823 monroe doctrine that announced the u s intention to act as an international police power in latin america.
chapter 20 the great war world war i 1914 1918 the decision for war in the summer of 1914 europe ignited as war swept across the continent 20 1.
instead of the easy victory that many europeans expected the war turned into a prolonged global struggle that took the lives of millions of men.
world war i pitted the allies initially composed of britain france belgium serbia and russia and eventually totaling 18 nations including japan italy and the united states against the central powers of germany and austria hungary who were joined by the ottoman empire and bulgaria.
most europeans rushed into battle without considering what a general war would mean.
americans however followed a completely different road to war openly debating whether this was their war to fight.
it took two and a half years for the united states to enter the war.
by then few illusions remained about the horror of modern warfare.
unlike europeans in 1914 americans knew they were committing to total war and that winning would require the complete economic and psychological mobilization of the home front.
the war in europe on june 28 1914 a 19 year old bosnian serb named gavrilo princip arrived in sarajevo the capital of bosnia as part of a terrorist band that intended to assassinate the heir to the austrohungarian throne archduke franz ferdinand who was also visiting the city.
princip belonged to the black hand a slavic nationalist group based in the neighboring kingdom of serbia that longed to unite bosnia then part of the austro hungarian empire with serbia.
the groups first attempt to assassinate the archduke failed when the bomb that one of princips coconspirators threw at the archdukes motorcade bounced off the side of his car injuring two austrian officers instead.
eluding the police princip disappeared into the crowd.
later in the day the archduke made a fateful decision to visit his injured staff members.
on the way to the hospital the driver made a wrong turn down a narrow street and slowed down to put the car in reverse.
standing at the end of the street was princip who could barely believe his good fortune as he saw the archduke and his wife coming toward him.
seizing the opportunity he stepped forward pulled a pistol from his pocket and fired killing them both.
world war i began with these two deaths and ended four years later with over nine million more.
in responding to the assassination austria hungary russia and germany tried to leverage the crisis to fulfill longstanding territorial ambitions.
these events are summarized on the timeline countdown to war 1914 20 2.
what role did nationalism and imperialism play in bringing about world war i.
mayor it is perfectly outrageous.
we have come to sarajevo on a visit and have had a bomb thrown at us archduke franz ferdinand after surviving the black hands first assassination attempt austria hungary and russia vied for control of the balkans which offered ready access to the mediterranean and the middle east.
germany hoped to become the dominant power in europe and had recently challenged the world dominance of france and britain by building a strong navy acquiring colonies and defeating france in the 1870 1871 franco prussian war.
austria hungary held serbia responsible for the assassination and demanded that the serbian government make amends.
in response serbia chose appeasement over confrontation.
serbia accepted all of austria hungarys demands except the one insisting that austro hungarian judges and police participate in the investigation and trials of any black hand terrorists captured in serbia.
in early july german kaiser wilhelm ii encouraged austriahungary to quickly invade and punish serbia.
but on july 28 when the kaiser finally read the serbian response he jotted in the margins a great moral victory for vienna but with it every reason for war watch the video video lecture the outbreak of world war i the decision for war norway sweden petrograd st petersburg north sea baltic sea denmark great britain moscow sinking of the lusitania may 7 1915 convoy meeting place london netherlands berlin brussels belgium atl antic r u s s i a germany luxembourg paris ocean switzerland au st r i ah u n ga ry ug al france vienna s pa i n it po rt romania sarajevo bosnia rome a montenegro black sea serbia bulgaria ly istanbul albania greece ottoman empire mediterranean sea central powers the allies neutral nations the western front march 1914 the eastern front 1914 1917 territory lost by russia treaty of brest litovsk 1918 allied blockade german unrestricted submarine warfare zone british mined areas of the north sea 20 1 world war i in europe 1914 1918 miscalculations led to a two front war for germany and the creation of the western front in 1914 while the war at sea eventually drew the united states into the conflict.
countdown to war 1914 june 28 gavrilo princip assassinates the archduke franz ferdinand in sarajevo june july 25 serbia accepts all but one ultimatum july july 28 austria hungary declares war on serbia august 1 germany orders full mobilization declares war august 3 on russia germany declares war on france august july 23 austria hungary sends ultimatums to serbia july 27 germany urges austria hungary to invade serbia july 30 russia orders a full mobilization august 4 german soldiers invade beligium implementing schlieffen plan.
britain declares war on germany.
president wilson announces u s neutrality 20 2 timeline after the assassination of the archduke franz ferdinand nations made momentous choices that led to world war i why did the assassination of archduke franz ferdinand spark a global world war.
chapter 20 the great war world war i 1914 1918 is removed his comments came too late.
an hour later on july 28 1914 austria hungary declared war on serbia.
as austro hungarian warships on the danube river bombarded belgrade serbias capital city russia resolved to stand by serbia and defend its own interests in the balkans.
tsar nicolas ii ordered a general mobilization of his army on july 30 1914 it was a momentous decision.
germany viewed russias mobilization as a direct threat.
ever since the 1894 alliance between russia and france germany had worried about fighting a two front war.
in 1905 the german chief of staff alfred von schlieffen developed a plan that called for germany in the event of war to attack and quickly defeat france in the west while the cumbersome russian army mobilized in the east.
the schlieffen plan avoided the well defended border between france and germany and instead sent german troops on a northward arc.
passing quickly through belgium german troops would enter france through its unfortified northern border and capture paris within six weeks.
germany could then turn its full forces against the much larger russian army.
for the schlieffen plan to work germany needed to strike first.
with russia refusing to halt its mobilization germany declared war on russia on august 1 1914 and put a modified version of the schlieffen plan into motion.
two days later germany declared war on france.
when german troops crossed into belgium on august 4 britain declared war on germany fulfilling its 1839 pledge to guarantee belgium independence and neutrality.
the schlieffen plan quickly unraveled.
the germans encountered unexpected resistance from the belgians and had difficulty resupplying a mass army on the move giving the french and british time to mobilize.
in the east russia attacked with its partly mobilized army sooner than germany expected prompting german chief of staff helmuth von moltke to divert troops from france to defend east prussia.
at the marne river 35 miles northeast of paris the french and british successfully stopped the german drive toward paris.
instead of defeating france quickly germanys attack ignited a general european war.
as each army dug defensive trenches in france and belgium the trench deadlock of the western front took shape.
for nearly four years men would live and die in the complex system of earthworks that ran for 460 miles from the north sea to switzerland.
to bolster their forces britain what miscalculations stymied german expectations of a short war.
france and germany began immediately enlisting men and resources from their colonies.
when the ottoman empire which ruled turkey and most of the middle east joined the central powers and japan and italy joined the allies the conflict became a true world war.
american society contained many first and second generation immigrants from both the central powers and the allied nations who disagreed over which nation had started the war.
in 1914 president woodrow wilson believed that all belligerents shared collective responsibility for the war.
wanting both to stay out of the war and prevent bitter divisions from ripping america apart wilson proclaimed the united states neutral.
the perils of neutrality as war engulfed europe wilson advised americans to avoid passionately taking sides and to remain impartial in thought as well as action neutrality however turned out to be a difficult concept for americans to define and maintain.
did it mean trading with both sides selectively or with no one.
did americans have the right as members of a neutral nation to travel wherever they liked without coming under attack.
the conflicting visions that emerged as americans confronted these questions created strident debate as the war wore on.
the dilemma was how to remain neutral without inflicting serious damage on the american economy.
since the 1890s american foreign policy had focused on protecting american business interests abroad see chapter 20 the great war world war i 1914 1918 already decided to resume unrestricted submarine warfare.
having staked everything on germanys willingness to let americans travel unmolested in the war zone wilsons neutrality policy collapsed.
colonial possessions.
carranza had no interest in fighting the united states after the american withdrawal from mexico and germany had no men or munitions to offer.
in one of the wars greatest intelligence coups british intelligence agents intercepted and deciphered the secret telegram.
when the state department released the zimmermann telegram to the press on march 1 many americans viewed it germany expected the allies to capitulate quickly as evidence that germany had hostile intentions once german submarines cut off their lifeline to the against the united states.
antiwar activists deunited states.
even if the resumption of unrestricted nounced the telegram as a forgery but zimmermann submarine warfare brought the united states into the war it would take at least a year for the american gov confessed to sending the note.
with war between ernment to raise train and equip a force to send over germany and the united states growing more likely zimmermann wanted the united states to believe seas.
by then germany expected to have won the war.
the threat was real so it would keep troops at home in early february 1917 wilson pondered whether german violations of american neutrality to protect the border.
despite the outcry over the zimmermann telewere grounds for declaring war.
this cartoon gram wilson hesitated.
the president broke off diplincolns birthday 20 6 compares wilsons lomatic ties with germany but still did not ask for a dilemma to the one that abraham lincoln had declaration of war.
german faced on the eve of the submarines began sinking civil war.
wilson stares over 500 000 tons of allied at the date of lincolns shipping per month and birth while lincolns the allies warned wilson ghost stands stoically that without these supholding a sheet of paper president wilson 1917 war address plies they were doomed.
that reads let us have before congress as german submarines faith that right makes began attacking american might and in that faith let us to the end dare to do our duty as we understand merchant ships wilson agreed to arm these vessels.
finally on april 2 1917 wilson went before congress it.
lincoln unbeknownst to wilson germany to ask for a declaration of war laying out war goals that had already taken steps to defend itself against a went far beyond simply defeating germany.
we are potential american attack.
glad now that we see the facts he proclaimed to in mid february fight thus for the ultimate peace of the world and for wilson learned that the liberation of its peoples for the rights of nations the german foreign great and small and the privilege of men everywhere to minister arthur zimchose their way of life and of obedience mermann had sent the congress declared war with a vote of 90 to 6 in zimmermann telegram the senate and 373 to 50 in the house but a vocal to mexico stating that in minority opposed going to war.
republican senator the event of war with the george w norris from nebraska expressed the rich united states germany mans war poor mans fight sentiment that ran deep would help mexico recover texas new mexico in rural america.
only four days into her term as the first female member of congress jeannette rankin and arizona territory r montana caste her maiden vote against the war.
lost in the nineteenth century if mexico started she lost her seat in 1918 but returned to congress in 1940 sticking to her pacifist principles she was a border war with the the only legislator who voted against entering world united states.
zimmerwar ii after the japanese attacked pearl harbor.
mann also asked mexico critics expressed their opposition freely during the to mediate between gerdebate over declaring war but once the nation was many and japan hoping officially fighting germany most americans rallied to entice japan into attacking americas pacific behind the flag.
america enters the war it is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war 20 6 lincolns birthday this cartoon suggests that wilson like lincoln faced a difficult decision of leading the country into war to defend higher principles.
why did the united states finally decide to fight germany.
read the document the zimmermann telegram the decision for war contradictions in wilsonian idealism.
like other world leaders wilson advanced principles that protected the interests of his own country.
yet he also demanded sacrifices from americans to make wilson claimed that the united states had no this the war to end all wars once they joined the selfish ends to serve by going to war.
skeptical global association of nations that wilson proposed voices from revolutionary russia soon prompted americans would have to modify their traditional wilson to defend this claim.
tsarist russia had desire to act unilaterally in the western hemisphere.
collapsed in february 1917 a weak parliamentary wilsons fourteen points further declared that regime replaced it but on november 7 1917 seven all peoples should enjoy self determination or a months after the united states entered the war voice in selecting their own government.
using the bolshevik revolutionary vladimir lenin seized this principle wilson proposed redrawing the map power in russia with promises of peace land and of eastern and central europe along ethnic lines bread.
lenins communist government immediately and even proposed extending this right to colonial published secret allied treaties revealing that tsarpopulations.
robert lansing who replaced bryan as ist russia britain italy and france had agreed to secretary of state remained dubious.
the principle enlarge their empires at the expense of germany of self determination is simply loaded with dynaaustria hungary and the ottoman empire if they mite lansing noted.
it will raise hopes which can won the war.
this disclosure exposed competing never be realized visions on the allied shortly after wilside wilsons vague son issued his fourteen promises that the war points another model was about democracy emerged for how the war and the now revealed might end when lenin territorial ambitions of negotiated a separate the allies.
the united peace.
the treaty of states never formally brest litovsk officially french prime minister joined the allies.
instead ended the war between it fought on their side as russia and the central george clemenceau 1918 an associated power powers on march 3 trying to bridge 1918 this treaty reflected this gap wilson outlined a broad statement of germanys complete victory over russia and exposed war goals in his fourteen points speech to conthe imperialist thrust of german war goals in the east.
gress on january 8 1918 the fourteen points ukraine parts of poland finland lithuania estonia envisioned a world dominated by democracy free and latvia became german satellite states see 20 1.
trade disarmament self determination resolved with these gains germany intended to eliminate rusterritorial disputes in europe and a league of sia as a rival and expand its empire into resource rich nations to mediate international crises.
wilson lands in eastern europe.
explicitly linked the spread of democracy with the the brest litovsk treaty gave the allies an idea of expansion of capitalism a position that gained the terms that a victorious germany might impose on new urgency as russian communists began conthem.
this knowledge hardened the british and french fiscating private property and promised to redisresolve to achieve total victory and inflict punitive tribute wealth to peasants and workers.
whether terms of their own.
the treaty even convinced wilson spreading democracy meant increasing political that maintaining peace in europe would require weakrights and free trade or reallocating wealth beening germany militarily and economically.
came a cornerstone of the ideological debate bewith russia out of the war germany finally had tween the united states and the new soviet union the opportunity to fight the one front war it had throughout the twentieth century.
sought in 1914 now holding a clear numerical adfree trade and freedom of the seas offered more vantage germany prepared to strike along the westthan an antidote to communism however.
these ern front.
as the american government raced to principles also advanced american economic intermobilize the nations men and industry for total war ests at the expense of imperialist powers like britain many in europe feared that the united states had enand france.
the fourteen points speech revealed tered the war too late to save the allied side.
conflicting views among the allies on the wars purpose god gave us his ten commandments and we broke them.
wilson gave us his 14 points well we shall see read the document woodrow wilsons fourteen points how did the fourteen points lay the foundation for future domestic and international debates.
chapter 20 the great war world war i 1914 1918 archangel i c e l a nd romania soviet union bulgaria ca black sea spi sw ed e n norway helsinki tallinn ic lt a polish corridor netherlands amsterdam lat via cairo iraq kuwait arabia egypt p olan d new nations after world war i french mandate british mandate areas lost by ottoman empire under league of nations mandate after 1920 s ov ie t u n ion c a s s r s ia n se a black sea y ser bia basra transjordan p al suez canal lit h u an ia east prussia berlin warsaw belgium germ any brussels frankfurt kiev brest litovsk lux.
prague lorraine czechoslovakia versailles paris alsace vienna budapest austria sw itz.
f rance h u n gary r om an ia milan yu goslavia bucharest belgrade ug amman jerusalem moscow bu lgar ia sofia rome persia iran baghdad r ian rs f l gu b palestine riga al rt se a eston ia lebanon beirut damascus euphra pe great britain s pa i n syria s denmark mediterranean sea it po cyprus te stockholm london mosul crete r ocean ireland leningrad st petersburg ris oslo nor t h sea turkey fin lan d tig at l a n t i c ea an s istanbul istanbul alban ia t u r k e y ti gr e e c e gr is persia r.
athens iran e up hr at e sr mediterranean sea.
pe areas lost by russian empire to germany 1918 granted independence after world war i areas lost by austro hungarian empire e gyp t rs ian gu lf saudi areas lost by german empire arabia wilsons principle of self determination fulfilling the ambitions of ethnic groups in czechoslovakia poland yugoslavia finland latvia lithuania and estonia to create their own nations 20 16.
but the allies disregarded the desires of german speaking peoples in poland czechoslovakia and the new republic of austria to unite with germany.
these three weak independent states remained vulnerable to german and soviet expansionist schemes.
twenty years later hitler justified his annexations of austria 1938 and czechoslovakia 1938 1939 and his joint invasion of poland with soviet leader josef stalin 1939 as a drive to unite parts of the what significance did the re drawn maps of europe and the middle east have.
german speaking world separated by the terms of the versailles treaty see chapter 23.
the treaty fight at home wilson saw the flaws in the final treaty but he hoped that over time the league of nations could modify the treatys worst excesses.
to counter the initial burst of enthusiasm for joining the league republicans challenged wilsons idealistic pronouncements promising world peace.
are you ready to put your soldiers and your sailors at the disposition of other nations senator lodge asked the american people.
the political cartoon looking 20 16 europe and the middle east after the war.
the victorious allies dismantled the german austrohungarian and ottoman empires to create independent nations in central europe and colonies for themselves in the middle east.
view the image blowing bubbles 1919 peace a gift horse in the mouth 20 17 captured the publics mounting concern about the league.
while wilson tries to assure uncle sam that the league is better than nothing the senate carefully examines the mule.
wary of going against public opinion too strongly lodge did not urge outright rejection of the versailles treaty.
he instead proposed adding 14 american reservations.
the most important one required explicit congressional approval before american troops went overseas.
wilson refused to accept modifications.
instead he tried to create a groundswell of support for the league that would force the republicans to accept the treaty as written.
to reignite public enthusiasm for the league of nations the president traveled 10 000 miles in three weeks by train and made 40 speeches to hundreds of thousands of people.
the political cartoon ratification rapids 20 18 offered a sympathetic portrayal of wilson shown here using all his strength to steer the treaty and league covenant to safety.
in the cartoon a young woman clutches both documents to her breast symbolizing both the besieged nation and innocent victims of war.
wilson dismissed republican concerns about sending american troops throughout the world as impractical.
if you want to put out a fire in utah you dont send to oklahoma for the fire engine.
if you want to put out a fire in the balkans if you want to stamp out the smoldering flames in some part of central europe you dont send to the united states for troops wilson told an audience in salt lake city.
competing visions joining the league of nations page 620 explores the debate between wilson and lodge.
pushing himself to the limit an exhausted wilson paid the price.
on september 25 1919 hours after he reminded a pueblo colorado audience that american soldiers had died to protect the liberty of the world the president fell ill his physician rushed a twitching and nauseous wilson 20 18 ratification rapids this sympathetic portrait of woodrow wilson trying to steer the versailles treaty through the ratification process illustrates how contentious the treaty debate became.
20 17 looking a gift horse in the mouth this political cartoon expresses skepticism about the league of nations.
by taking a closer look the senate realizes that the league represented here as a broken down mule is not strong enough to handle the hard work of keeping the peace.
what competing views do these political cartoons offer on the question of ratifying the versailles treaty.
chapter cars and planes the promise of the twenties p 626 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 21 a turbulent decade the twenties many families chose to take all day drives.
cars let teenagers take their courting out of the family parlor and into the backseat of the family automobile to the dismay of parents everywhere.
the best way to keep children home is to make the home atmosphere pleasant and let air out of the tires quipped author dorothy parker.
automobiles also made it harder for town officials to regulate red light districts causing one judge to declare that the automobile has become a house of prostitution on wheels welfare capitalism and consumer culture during world war i the government had mandated that industrialists with wartime contracts pay high wages provide clean and safe working conditions and allow unions to organize within their factories see chapter 21 21 3 the end of silent films by the end of the decade hollywood began advertising all talking singing movies like cocoanuts a turbulent decade the twenties that deemphasized traditional victorian values of thrift and restraint.
americans instead increasingly relied on credit to buy cars radios and household appliances.
radio played a key role in forging a national mass culture.
over 60 percent of american homes acquired radios in the twenties which until 1924 required headphones.
americans from all walks of life now simultaneously gathered around their radios to learn election results.
baseball fans throughout the nation listened to the play by play of the world series radio broadcasts that made new york yankee player babe ruth a national hero.
farmers closely followed weather reports and bankers digested the days financial news.
there is radio music in the air every night everywhere one newspaper observed.
big companies like walgreen drugs and palmolive soap started sponsoring nationally syndicated radio shows to boost sales of their products.
these weekly comedies and dramas filled with plugs for the sponsors merchandise cultivated shared tastes in entertainment and products.
americans increasingly bought the same brand name toothpaste at a chain store like woolworths.
big business was not alone in recognizing the power of radio however.
local radio shows designed specifically for union members religious groups immigrant communities or african americans helped strengthen bonds within these subcultures as well.
movie stars and athletes enjoyed nationwide adulation in the twenties.
silent film actors like the comedian charlie chaplin the sex symbol rudolph valentino and americas sweetheart mary pickford became household names among a movie going public that avidly purchased fan magazines filled with glossy photos of their favorite stars.
by the end of the decade hollywood was producing films with sound a novelty highlighted in this 1929 poster 21 3 for the marx brothers first film.
the verbal repartee of the comedy trio delighted audiences.
as silent films disappeared so did the careers of many silent film stars whose artistic talents lay in physical not vocal expression.
meanwhile professional sports gave rise to a slew of national sports heroes such as the boxer jack dempsey.
in an era dominated by cultural heroes none rose to greater prominence than the pilot charles a lindbergh.
the age of flight charles a lindbergh the feats of pilot charles a lindbergh ushered the nation into the age of flight.
commentators called the sky the new frontier a label loaded with potent historical significance for americans.
by the late twenties a time when machines seemed to matter more than people the image of the lone pilot against the vast blue sky recalled the pioneer spirit of the nineteenth century.
lindbergh piloted his plane the spirit of st louis on the first ever nonstop solo flight from new york to paris on may 21 1927 flying without the radio or radar that help modern pilots navigate lindbergh relied on a few navigational instruments and looking out the window to locate his position on a paper map as he flew.
sitting in a wicker chair with sandwiches and water under it lindbergh had a rubber raft on board in case he was forced to land in the cold atlantic and a flashlight to examine his wings for ice.
how did a mass popular culture emerge in the twenties.
watch the video video lecture 1920s media cars and planes the promise of the twenties the spirit of st louis is a wonderful plane.
its like a living creature gliding along smoothly happily as though a successful flight means as much to it as to me charles a lindbergh evoking the perfect symmetry between man and machine lindberghs flight lasted 33 5 hours enough time to make him the hero of the decade.
this photomontage a composite photo made by pasting together separate images of the spirit of st louis passing the eiffel tower combined the symbol of paris with the image of lindberghs iconic plane 21 4.
had we searched all america we could not have found a better type than young lindbergh to represent the spirit and high purpose of our people the jubilant american ambassador wired president coolidge amid the celebrations that followed lindberghs landing in paris.
lindberghs triumph assured americans that individual initiative still mattered and that technological advancement benefited humankind at a time when the recent industrialized slaughter on the western front see chapters 17 and 18 took on a new life during world war i wartime temperance propaganda claimed that german brewers in this country have rendered thousands of men inefficient organized wet opposition to the dry campaign materialized slowly partly because critics of the temperance movement could not easily counter its emphasis on health thrift and morals.
some wets focused on personal freedom.
senator james wadsworth contended that it seemed unfair to tell exhausted workers at the end of the day you shall not have a glass of beer other critics felt uneasy about increasing the power of the federal government so it could enforce prohibition.
they argued that a proposed constitutional amendment prohibiting alcohol would violate states rights.
the middle class antisaloon leagues highly structured propaganda and lobbying campaign however easily overpowered this disjointed wet response on the local state and national level.
evangelical preacher billy sunday converted many churchgoers to the temperance cause delivering impassioned sermons on the evils of alcohol.
sunday a former professional baseball player littered his sermons with slang winning a large following among the rural poor and urban working class who flocked to his revival meetings throughout the midwest.
the political elite also embraced the preacher.
sunday often dined at the white house and considered the oil tycoon john d rockefeller a friend.
in his most famous watch the video video lecture post war disillusionment in the 1920s cultural unrest temperance speech sunday urged his listeners in 1908 to get on the water wagon get on for the sake of your wife and babies and hit the booze a blow on december 18 1917 congress approved the eighteenth amendment which banned the sale manufacture and transportation of intoxicating liquors.
by january 16 1919 the required 36 states had ratified it.
by the time every state had voted only rhode island and connecticut had rejected it.
when prohibition went into effect in 1920 congress clarified what constituted an intoxicating beverage in the volstead act 1919 which defined any beverage with more than 0 5 percent alcohol as intoxicating liquor and established criminal penalties for manufacturing transporting or possessing alcohol.
congress never appropriated enough money for wide scale enforcement hampering justice department efforts to curb illegal drinking.
the police raided working class neighborhoods to shut down illegal distilleries but the well to do drank their bathtub gin or homebrewed beer without interference.
many reform goals of the temperance movement remained unmet.
belying the expectation that it would create a more virtuous law abiding society prohibition gave birth to a much more insidious form of crime.
organized crime syndicates ran profitable bootlegging operations that financed beer breweries and liquor distilleries bribed cops and stocked the shelves of illegal bars throughout major metropolitan areas.
trafficking in forbidden alcohol the publicity crazed gangster al capone became a powerful figure in the chicago underworld a position he maintained with unprecedented violence.
in the 1929 st valentines day massacre capones men posing as cops pretended to arrest rival gang members and then lined them up against a wall and mowed them down with machine guns.
tabloid papers vividly recounted every detail of capones new technique of wholesale murder to a shocked public.
suffering from syphilis that he contracted from a prostitute in one of his own brothels capone became increasingly unstable and violent before he went to prison for tax evasion in 1931 secret bars called speakeasies proliferated.
to demonstrate americans widespread disrespect for prohibition federal agent izzy einstein timed how long it took him to find alcohol in most major cities.
it took him 21 minutes in chicago and only 31 seconds in new orleans when he asked a taxi driver where he could get a drink and the man replied right here as he pulled out a bottle.
einstein hear the audio prohibition is a failure personally shut down over 4 000 speak easies nationwide prompting bartenders to post his picture with the caption watch for this man illicit drinking became fashionable among the young urban elite whose escapades lost generation writers helped glamorize.
this image of a welldressed woman barhopping with her male companions 21 5 revealed new social acceptance for public drinking by respectable middle and upper class women.
americans had previously viewed saloons as male establishments that only women of low moral character like prostitutes dared to enter.
the competing visions of whether illegal drinking was harmless fun or a vice that destroyed families kept the political debate over prohibition alive throughout the 1920s.
drys credited prohibition for the prosperous economy.
by putting alcohol aside they claimed workers had become more productive could afford to buy cars and furniture and had more savings.
wets argued that the amendment generated 21 5 well dressed trio entering a speakeasy frequenting speakeasies which patrons entered by giving a secret password to the doorman became fashionable for women during prohibition.
gone was the stigma that had stopped respectable women from drinking in public.
why did americans eventually conclude that national prohibition was a failed experiment.
chapter of the ku klux klan in the 1920s enrolling nearly one half of the read the document the creed of klanswomen 1924 states white male population even though only three percent of the states population was black.
the federal government had suppressed the original ku klux klan during reconstruction see chapter review sanger champions birth control to improve female health and eliminate poverty 1921 1922 first red scare f scott fitzgerald publishes this side of paradise washington conference held anti communist campaign destroys radical political organizations eighteenth amendment ratified popularizes flapper revolt against traditional codes of conduct initiates era of national prohibition disarmament becomes a major goal of american foreign policy unia black star line founded short lived black run steamship operation line embodies marcus garveys ideal of economic self help review questions 1 what features and controversies characterized americas transformation into a car culture in the 1920s.
how did lifestyles and labor relations also change during the decade.
2 compare the various manifestations of cultural conflict in the twenties.
what similar impulses motivated americans to enact prohibition immigration restrictions and laws prohibiting the teaching of darwins theory of evolution.
how did these various reforms affect american society.
3 why were the harlem renaissance and marcus garvey controversial.
4 were the 1920s a time of political economic and social liberation for women.
what traditional concerns or ideas remained intact.
5 how did the united states fashion a new role for itself in world affairs in the twenties.
key terms eighteenth amendment 1919 constitutional amendment that banned the sale manufacture and transportation of intoxicating liquors.
twenty first amendment 1933 constitutional amendment that repealed the eighteenth amendment.
immigration act of 1924 law that allowed unrestricted immigration from the western hemisphere curtailed all asian immigration and used quotas to control how many immigrants emigrated from individual european nations.
first red scare 1919 1920 period when the justice department arrested and deported alien anarchists and communists suspected of trying to destroy american democracy and capitalism.
fundamentalism an evangelical christian theology that viewed the bible as an authentic literal recounting of historical events and the absolute moral word of god.
modernism a liberal christian theology embraced in many urban areas that emphasized the ongoing revelation of divine truth.
harlem renaissance an outpouring of african american artistic expression in the 1920s and 1930s.
universal negro improvement association unia organization founded by marcus garvey to spread his message of racial pride economic self sufficiency and returning to africa.
washington conference 1921 1922 meeting of world powers that resulted in agreements that limited naval arms reaffirmed americas open door policy that kept chinese trade open to all and secured pledges of cooperation among the worlds leading military powers.
kellogg briand pact 1928 treaty that renounced aggressive war as an instrument of national policy.
chapter review great britain allied war debt payments all street bankers reparations debt payments investors u s treasu germany france allied war debt payments immigration act of 1924 scopes trial kellogg briand pact severely reduces immigration and establishes nationality based quota system highlights cultural conflict between religion and science charles a lindbergh flies nonstop from new york to paris dawes plan ku klux klan marches in washington d c reassures americans that man and machine can coexist harmoniously united states uses financial aid to stabilize postwar european economies white instigated racial violence surges as the klan becomes a national organization first feature film with sound america uses world influence to secure global pledges of peace hastens the creation of mass celebrity culture myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan to build your knowledge of a turbulent decade.
questions for analysis 1 what economic and cultural impact did the auto industry have.
watch the video video lecture the rise and fall other resources from this chapter 20 government propaganda focused on hitler and nazism as the enemy not the german people.
internment camps in the immediate wake of the attack on pearl harbor americans were eager for explanations.
rumors circulated that japanese american farmers on hawaii had plowed arrows in their fields to show japanese pilots the way to military installations.
yet no evidence of internal spying ever surfaced and suggestions that the government round up and quarantine these hawaiian residents went nowhere.
composing one third of hawaiis population people of japanese descent were too important to the local economy to deport and there were no ships available to transport replacement workers to the islands.
the 110 000 japanese and japanese americans who lived in california oregon and washington where they were less vital to the economy met a different fate.
the day after the attack on pearl harbor air raid sirens wailed in san francisco.
then when a japanese submarine torpedoed an american ship off the california coast americans feared that the west coast would soon be under attack.
frenzied officials instituted blackouts coast guard units patrolled the seas.
throughout the war west coast defense factories camouflaged their plants as illustrated in these plant camouflage before and after photos 23 8.
this aircraft factory in burbank california stretched a tarp over its facilities to make it look like suburban housing from the air.
the camouflagers hoped to fool an attacking japanese pilot seeking a more recognizable military target.
within this atmosphere of heightened anxiety many viewed japanese immigrants and japanese americans on the west coast as potential enemy agents.
increasingly the larger public and the government believed that their presence near vital ports and military bases posed a threat to national security.
on february 19 1942 president roosevelt signed executive order 9066 permitting the military to declare certain areas off limits to any or all persons.
general john l dewitt head of the western defense command immediately declared the entire west coast a military zone closed to all persons of japanese ancestry both alien and non alien his order called for the evacuation of anyone of japanese descent even orphanages had to relocate japanese american babies.
in mid march 1942 roosevelt created the war relocation authority to oversee the forced removal read the document japanese relocation order february 19 1942 on the home front of 38 000 japanese immigrants and 72 000 japaneseamerican citizens to internment camps where they were held under armed guard.
posted instructions to all persons of japanese ancestry informed japanese inhabitants that they had only a few days to sell their belongings and settle their affairs.
it is difficult to describe the feeling of despair and humiliation experienced by all of us one internee later said as we watched the caucasians coming to look over our possessions and offering such nominal amounts knowing we had no recourse but to accept whatever they were offering evacuees could take only what they could carry.
with numbers pinned on their coats they rode trains to recently abandoned stables or stockyards to await transport to one of ten internment camps in remote areas of the interior west.
offering a conflicting vision that emphasized their loyalty to the united states most japanese and japanese americans complied quietly with the evacuation order.
a few however registered their protest against this wholesale violation of their civil rights.
for propaganda purposes the office of war information hired photographer dorothea lange to document that the government was treating evacuees humanely as it contained this suspect population.
sympathetic to the plight of japanese americans lange managed to capture this scene 23 9 of a japanese american veteran reporting to a santa anita assembly center in his old military uniform a silent demonstration of his longstanding loyalty to the country.
in january 1943 the army decided to recruit nisei men the american born children of japanese immigrants.
while their parents remained in the camps these men joined with japanese americans from hawaii to form the 442nd regimental combat team which became the most decorated american unit in the nations history.
these men opted to prove their loyalty by fighting for their country in europe.
other japanese americans sought redress in the courts but the supreme court upheld the governments evacuation policy in 1944 competing visions civil liberties and national security clash page 696 examines this civil liberties controversy in more detail.
as the tide of the war began to turn in americas favor the justification for interning people of japanese descent weakened.
in 1945 the government let inmates return to the west coast.
in 1948 the government offered some restitution to those who had lost homes or businesses.
it took until 1988 however for congress to offer an apology and a reparation payment of 20 000 to each of the 60 000 surviving internees.
prosperity scarcity and opportunities for women japanese americans were among the few to suffer financially from the war.
for most americans jobs were plentiful and wages high.
during the war the nations gross national product rose 60 percent and 17 million new jobs were created.
to mobilize the economy the government quickly established a slew of agencies to allocate scarce resources help businesses convert factories to a wartime footing and enlist the publics support for the war.
after the difficult years of the depression the war fueled boom was a welcome relief.
people are crazy with money one store owner exclaimed.
they dont care what they buy.
they purchase things just for the fun of spending madison avenue advertising firms assured the public that consumerism was essential to the american way of life.
will you ever own another car asked one ad.
another radio.
another gleaming new refrigerator.
those who live under dictators merely dream of such possessions concerns over unemployment gave way to worries about inflation as the money flowing into the economy sent prices soaring.
the government tried to curb inflation by instituting price and wage controls.
because the nations resources were now being poured into producing military equipment and supplying the troops consumers faced shortages of all kinds.
to deal with the scarcity of resources the government rationed many goods including gas butter and sugar by distributing coupon books that allotted families a set amount of each item.
a japanese american protests internment government officials censored this photograph of a japaneseamerican veteran who reported to the evacuation center in his old uniform.
he gave his name to a japanese american staff member who decided instead to affirm his loyalty by cooperating openly with the authorities.
what competing responses did japanese americans have to internment.
chapter 27.
interest in direct action grew throughout the war.
the fellowship of reconciliations committee on racial justice initiated a wave of sit ins where blacks and whites entered segregated restaurants together and refused to leave when denied service.
in washington d c howard university students picketed segregated restaurants with signs that read we die together.
lets eat together and are you for hitlers way or the american way.
make up your mind nearly one million blacks served in the armed forces during the war including brigadier general benjamin o davis the first african american general in the u s army.
the war department finally agreed to train african american pilots and the tuskegee airmen who received their stateside training at alabamas tuskegee institute amassed an admirable war record in europe.
the military remained segregated however and most black soldiers served in noncombatant units where they cleared beaches in france of mines manned supply lines transporting food and ammunition to front line troops and built roads and railroads for the advancing army.
within the u s black servicemen received daily reminders of their second class status.
when black soldiers entered a whites only restaurant in salina kansas the owner stopped them.
we just stood there inside the door staring at what we had come to see the german prisoners of war who were having lunch at the counter.
this was really happening.
it was no jive talk.
the people of salina would serve these enemy soldiers and turn away black american g i s one soldier recalled.
the proper epitaph to mark each black soldiers grave in the pacific african americans how did african americans challenge racial discrimination during the war.
sarcastically said would be here lies a black man killed fighting a yellow man for the protection of a white man the double victory campaign laid the groundwork for the postwar civil rights movement by pioneering new strategies that would later prove extraordinarily successful.
the accelerated migration northward also created new bases of political power that would aid the civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s.
throughout the war hundreds of thousands of african american civilians hit the road in search of job opportunities in midwestern and western cities.
in 1943 los angeles welcomed 10 000 black migrants a month most from texas and louisiana.
overcrowding and changing demographics created explosive racial situations in many urban areas.
the most serious wartime race riot took place in 1943 in detroit.
home to the nations largest automobile manufacturers detroit became the leading producer of military goods when these companies began manufacturing jeeps and tanks for the military.
plentiful jobs drew thousands of migrants to the city including african americans who had trouble finding adequate lodging in the strictly albeit unofficially segregated city housing market.
white workers resentful of working next to blacks staged slowdowns in the citys wartime defense plants.
to protest racial discrimination some black residents initiated a bumping campaign nudging whites off sidewalks.
the anticipated confrontation finally came on a warm spring afternoon when black and white teenagers tussled at a crowded amusement park on belle isle.
as the violence escalated a mob of 5 000 whites formed to attack blacks as they crossed the bridge back to the mainland.
racial rampaging soon engulfed the city.
hundreds of african americans were injured and 25 were killed before state and federal troops restored order.
nine whites also died in the rioting.
horace pippin a self taught african american painter who rocketed to fame in the late 1930s took note of the racial discord on the home front in his 1943 painting mr prejudice 23 13.
pippins composition expressed doubt that the double v campaign would succeed.
in the painting a racist white worker backed by a klansman hammers a chisel down the center of a v the symbol of victory.
a fellow worker to his left holds a noose a reference to lynching.
the statue of liberty portrayed as an african american woman is toppling down as the dream of racial unity unravels.
the fractured read the document jim crow in the army camps on the home front v threatens to crack into two permanently dividing the friendly white servicemen reaching out to their black comrades in arms a doctor sailor aviator and soldier who are all serving loyally during the war.
african americans were not the only targets of racial violence however.
the same summer that racial rioting rocked detroit white sailors and soldiers on leave in los angeles began a ten day rampage against mexican american zoot suiters youths who wore baggy pants long oversize coats and broad brimmed hats.
the zoot suit was a fashion trend established by african american men in the 1930s.
by the war years white americans viewed zoot suiters at best as juvenile delinquents who refused to dress and act properly and at worst as criminal gangs bent on robbery and rape.
some pachucos as zoot suiters called themselves engaged in criminal activity but most limited their adolescent rebellion to wearing different clothes from adults.
the explosive growth in the mexicanamerican community coupled with a general intolerance for nonconformity during war set the stage for the conflict in los angeles.
street fights between sailors and mexican american men escalated into full scale rioting when organized groups of servicemen began attacking boys as young as 12 and mexican american businesses.
white civilians joined in the rioting and when a mob came upon a zoot suiter they often beat and stripped him and even burned his clothes.
the casualties included more than 100 seriously injured mexican americans and at least 100 more who refused hospital care.
newspapers in los angeles egged on the white crowds by praising their efforts to rid the city of hoodlums and gangsters federal investigators cited racial prejudice as the cause of the riots but los angeles nonetheless prohibited wearing zoot suits on city streets.
the image of mexican americans as disaffected youths belied the reality that 500 000 latinos served alongside whites in the armed forces during the war playing a significant role in the doomed defense of the philippines and winning many medals of honor.
perceived as natural warriors native americans encountered less hostility within the armed forces than blacks or latinos.
more than 25 000 native americans served including the famed navajo code talkers who transmitted secret messages between units in their native language baffling the japanese who never deciphered it.
military service offered many young native americans their first decent wages and a chance to leave the reservation.
government officials expected military service to hasten assimilation since native american soldiers lived among whites.
yet sending men into combat also gave some tribes a reason to resurrect rituals surrounding battle such as requiring returning soldiers to spend time in a sweat lodge to cleanse themselves of the evils associated with war.
serving in the military therefore both expanded veterans knowledge of the wider world and reinforced their own cultural traditions helping them to see themselves and mainstream society in a different light.
23 13 horace pippin mr prejudice 1943 the fractured v in pippins painting suggested that the african american vision of using the war to secure democracy at home and abroad was in jeopardy.
how did the wartime experiences of african americans compare to those of latinos.
chapter read the document franklin d roosevelt the four freedoms 1941 p 692 read the document charles lindbergh japanese relocation order february 19 1942 p 694 radio address 1941 p 689 a philip randolph why should we march 1942 p 699 jim crow in the army camps p 700 2 what values influenced the portrayal of female war workers.
view the closer look competing visions civil liberties and national security clash p 696 view the closer look images as history we can do it visual myths about womens roles during world images as history combat photography p 706 envisioning evidence deciphering the holocaust p 709 war ii p 697 view the image operation overlord normandy 1944 p 707 3 how was childhood militarized during world war i.
view the image get in the scrap poster p 698 view the map interactive map world war ii pacific theater p 702 interactive map world war ii in europe p 703 4 why did u s generals and german civilians visit the liberated concentration camps.
watch the video nazi murder mills p 710 5 what message does this film convey about the atomic bomb.
watch the video atomic bomb at hiroshima p 713 watch the video video lecture hitler and roosevelt p 687 which key foreign policy decisions shaped the early cold war.
fighting communism cold and hot war p 729 what were the causes and outcome of the korean war.
spies in our midst p 737 how did the anti communist crusade affect american politics and culture.
averting nuclear war p 742 how did the united states react to soviet aggression in berlin and cuba.
chapter 24 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 as world war ii ended soviet and american troops converging from different directions met and shook hands on a bridge spanning the elbe river in germany.
each side was pleasantly surprised by this first encounter with their wartime ally.
they looked like ordinary people.
we had imagined something different recalled one soviet soldier of american troops.
i guess we didnt know what to expect from the russians an american soldier said after the meeting.
if you put an american uniform on them they could have been american within two years the lost promise of this friendly encounter was obvious to all.
a 1947 u s propaganda film replayed footage of this historic meeting and struck a lightning bolt across the frozen image of soviet and american soldiers shaking hands.
here two worlds actually met the narrator thundered but this coalition was to be torn asunder by soviet postwar incursions in eastern europe that the united states viewed as part of a soviet plan for global conquest.
in the decade after the allies victory against hitler relations between the united states and the soviet union soured dramatically.
as the contours of the cold war between the united states and the soviet union took shape two competing ideological visions an escalating nuclear arms race and confrontations in europe and asia including a war in korea heightened fears that another world war was in the making.
from 1946 to 1965 most americans viewed the world as sharply divided into free and totalitarian societies.
american leaders proclaimed that the united states was engaged in an epic struggle with the soviet union over the future of humankind.
protecting the world from the menace of sovietled communism became a key american foreign policy goal.
americans also fought the cold war at home where citizens expressed differing views on whether government tactics in rooting out soviet spies undermined american democracy or saved it.
on the other side of the ideological divide soviet leaders developed an abiding distrust of western motives as they sought to counter the american nuclear advantage with territorial and technological gains.
as each nation struggled to extend its world influence americans again confronted the crucial question of defining their nations role in the world.
communism is on the march on a worldwide scale which only america can stop senator arthur vandenberg april 26 1946 chapter 24 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 origins of the cold war the united states and the soviet union worked effectively together in world war ii to defeat adolf hitler but each nation had dramatically different visions of the postwar world.
the united states remained dedicated to free markets and democracy while the soviet union embraced a marxist vision that eschewed private property and celebrated concentrated state authority.
each nation also drew different lessons from the war.
for the soviet leader josef stalin hitlers invasion of the soviet union underscored the need to secure its borders by controlling vast territories in eastern europe.
the united states feared that stalin was a hitler like dictator intent on controlling all of europe.
american political leaders believed that peace in europe hinged on spreading capitalism and democracy.
these differing often conflicting visions triggered an immediate postwar clash between the former allies.
differing goals in the postwar world the origins of the cold war hark back to world war ii.
the victory against hitler came at a huge cost for the soviet union.
an estimated 25 million soviet soldiers and civilians died almost 90 times the 291 551 americans who perished in combat.
germany had attacked russia twice in the 30 years a fact that contributed to stalins obsession with protecting his nation from future attack.
stalin also suspected that the americans and british had delayed opening up a second front in europe see chapter 25 too much for conservatives and too little for liberals also contributed to his poor rating.
korea was the last american war that the public viewed primarily through photographs.
only 34 percent of american homes had television sets in 1952 rising to 86 percent by 1960 in 1950 newsweek published the photograph the price of victory a soldier grieves for his lost buddy 24 9.
one readers suggestion that this image should serve as the iconic photo of the korean war just as old glory goes up on mt.
suribachi iwo jima had served to represent world war ii revealed a significant shift in the publics attitudes over the last five years see images as history combat photography chapter 24 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 reveling in the ability to hold its own against the united states.
the korean war had major geopolitical consequences by turning the cold war into a global conflict.
the war tied south korea and japan economically resurgent thanks to american aid even more closely to the united states and both became staunch allies in creating a defensive perimeter against communism in east asia.
holding the line against communism in korea increased americas interest in other regional civil wars including one underway in vietnam.
the war poisoned relations with china and the two nations did not reestablish diplomatic relations until 1979 pledged to defend south korea the united states still maintains a large military presence along what continues to be the worlds most heavily armed border.
nuclear fallout and fear while soldiers fought and died on the battlefield americans at home waged their own defensive war against nuclear weapons.
the government sponsored atmospheric and underwater tests of nuclear bombs in the 1940s and 1950s both in the united states and on the bikini atoll in the marshall islands in the pacific.
even when the united states had a secure monopoly on nuclear weapons many americans expressed concern about nuclear fallout the deadly pollution that descends through the air after a nuclear explosion.
in the 1950s popular science fiction writers and filmmakers tapped into this preoccupation.
in the japanese film classic godzilla for example a nuclear explosion awakens a fire breathing monster who as the films promotional poster 24 11 illustrated terrorizes tokyo.
like the atomic bombs that ravaged hiroshima and nagasaki godzilla is an unstoppable nuclear force that obliterates everything in his path.
americans however saw only an edited version of the film with all critical commentary on americas ongoing nuclear testing program in the pacific excised.
two popular marvel comic book characters the incredible hulk and spider man were also spawned by contact with radioactive material.
in the incredible hulk a scientist exposed to gamma rays is transformed into a green 300 pound giant while a bite from an irradiated spider turns nerdish lab assistant peter parker into spider man.
teaching americans how to live with the constant threat of nuclear war meant convincing citizens to remain vigilant and calm.
to combat both indifference and panic governmental propaganda underscored the seriousness of the threat while also reassuring the public that they could survive an atomic blast if they took precautionary measures such as building fortified fallout shelters or remembering to duck and cover images as history surviving an atomic bomb blast explores how government generated images presented competing visions that both reassured and frightened americans about the likely effect of a nuclear attack.
24 11 godzilla a 1954 japanese horror film used the ravages of a nuclearspawned dinosaur named godzilla to criticize american use and testing of its nuclear arsenal.
this political message was edited out of the version shown in the united states.
how did popular culture reflect americans concerns about nuclear weapons.
watch the video duck and cover fighting communism cold and hot war images as history surviving an atomic bomb blast how people will react to advice or propaganda can be difficult to predict.
why did the government disseminate images of a possible nuclear attack.
what unintended effects could these images have on the americans viewing them.
by 1950 schoolchildren throughout the nation had learned to jump out of their seats and under their desks with their hands clasped firmly over their heads when their teachers shouted drop during civil defense drills.
in government produced civil defense films and comic books distributed to schools bert the the stick of dynamite dangling from a string symbolized a nuclear attack exactly the kind of danger children needed to learn to recognize.
a catchy jingle accompanied this lesson in civil defense there was a turtle by the name of bert and bert the turtle was very alert when danger threatened him he never got hurt he knew just what to do hed duck and cover duck and cover the intact shell implies that one could safely survive a nuclear attack by hiding under something.
the before blast images portrayed a normal middle class suburban home and yard.
view the closer look images as history surviving an atomic bomb blast turtle instructed children to duck and cover during a nuclear attack.
advocates of this approach argued that flying debris and shattered windows had killed many victims in hiroshima and nagasaki therefore teaching children to duck and cover was practical advice.
to ensure that americans remained vigilant in preparing for a nuclear attack the government also released before and after photographs from a test explosion in the nevada desert on march 17 1953 time magazine estimated that nearly three quarters of the nation saw these pictures.
authorities advised children who did not carry their shelters on their backs like bert to seek protection beside walls and trees or under tables if an atomic bomb hit.
the after blast photographs showed this suburban house engulfed in flames and blown to bits within two seconds of being hit with a nuclear bomb.
this image directly contradicted the vision that one could survive a nuclear attack by seeking shelter under a bed as bert the turtle advised.
what conflicting messages did these images send about surviving a nuclear blast.
chapter 24 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 kennans long telegram truman doctrine marshall plan nato formed makes containing communism a key american goal gives united states a role in helping other nations resist communism grants u s aid to rebuild wartorn europe and prevent spread of communism first formal american military alliance since the revolutionary war berlin airlift provokes fears that communists are winning the cold war huac begins investigating hollywood chapter 25 in a land of plenty contentment and discord 1945 1960 on september 3 1957 a young black teenager elizabeth eckford walked past an angry mob after state troopers refused to let her enter the all white central high school in little rock arkansas.
this photo captures her harrowing ordeal as a young white woman hazel bryan her face contorted with rage screamed at eckford.
in the days that followed a sympathetic white man put an ad in the local newspaper featuring this photograph.
study this picture and know shame he told his neighbors.
instead for years bryan received congratulatory letters from diehard segregationists for her verbal assault on eckford that day.
five years later bryan tracked down eckford in little rock to apologize.
eckford went on to graduate from college served in the army and then became a probation officer.
this photograph challenges the traditional image of the 1950s as a tranquil period of material contentment and ideological consensus.
americans enjoyed unprecedented prosperity during the decade but also experienced domestic discord along racial generational and political lines.
new energy surged into the civil rights movement in the 1950s.
acts of extraordinary bravery by elizabeth eckford and others like her took on new significance in an era when supreme court rulings pushed the federal government to take an active role in protecting the civil rights of african americans.
leadership from black churches and black students infused the movement with an ethos of nonviolent direct action that forced white america to see the injustice of jim crow the southern legal structure that relegated african americans to second class citizenship.
a different type of discord permeated american home life throughout the 1950s.
in many respects families were the focus of american society from 1945 to1960.
enjoying a rising standard of living in generally prosperous times american families grew at an unprecedented rate.
lured to fast growing suburbs by lowcost loans and affordable housing an exploding middle class filled their homes with possessions previously out of reach for most americans.
the baby boom generation those 76 4 million americans born between 1946 and 1964 who were now coming into adolescence embraced new standards in dress music and movies that distinguished the teen generation from their parents.
some teenagers rebelled against authority in more overtly political ways.
high school and college students for instance were the ground troops in many civil rights demonstrations.
others joined the counterculture beat movement to express their rebellion against social norms through poetry novels and art.
from 1945 to 1960 americans debated the divergent political paths that the country could take domestically during the cold war era.
they pondered the effects of new deal programs unions suburbs civil rights and consumption on american society.
the changing american way of life created a sense of both contentment and crisis for the nation.
it was the longest block i ever walked in my whole life elizabeth eckford confronting a mob as she walked from the bus stop to school in little rock arkansas chapter 25 in a land of plenty contentment and discord 1945 1960 1945 1946 five thousand labor strikes sweep the country taft hartley act pollock paints autumn rhythm.
nixons checkers speech puts restrictions on labor unions creates public backlash against unions first levittown built abstract expressionism and beat writing transform the arts first use of television to diffuse a political crisis mass migration to suburbs begins baby boom begins chapter read the document dwight d eisenhower farewell address 1961 p 755 the teenage consumer 1959 p 762 2 what do sit coms reveal about 1950s popular culture.
brown v board of education of topeka kansas 1954 p 765 jo ann gibson robinson bus boycott p 768 view the closer look choices and consequences does father know best p 760 3 what key roles did women play in the civil rights movement.
watch the video video lecture african american women and the struggle for civil rights p 770 view the closer look competing visions suburbs american dream or nightmare p 759 images as history inspiring a new generation to act p 767 envisioning evidence a national snapshot of racial discrimination p 773 view the image kenneth clark testing childrens choices of 4 what challenges did the little rock nine face as high school students.
dolls 1924 p 766 watch the video view the image opposition to integration p 772 5 how did sncc define nonviolence.
read the document sncc statement of purpose 1960 p 775 kennedy nixon debate p 761 video lecture how did the civil rights movement change american schools p 771 how did the united states become involved in vietnam.
fighting in vietnam p 789 what key factors shaped combat in vietnam.
controversy on the home front p 796 why did the war become controversial at home.
the long road to peace p 801 how did the vietnam war finally end.
chapter 25 emphasized rejecting middle class lifestyles more than agitating for political change.
hippies youthful social rebels who renounced material acquisition and used drugs to explore their inner spiritual selves refused to dedicate their lives to acquiring the same suburban home car and corporate job as their parents.
the hippie utopian vision embraced peace pleasure sexual liberation and sharing of material resources an ethos captured in this 1968 photograph 27 10 of a hippie gathering by robert altman who became a renowned filmmaker.
drugs especially marijuana and lysergic acid diethylamide lsd formed an essential part of the countercultures challenge to the values of middleclass society.
rock music exposed many young people to these counterculture ideals.
bob dylan a folk troubadour whose songs had inspired civil rights protesters transformed himself into a rock musician with poetic lyrics steeped in drug references.
the beatles underwent a similar transformation after taking america by storm.
nearly 60 percent of the nation watched the four mop headed british musicians sing their masterful pop concoctions during the bands first televised performance on the ed sullivan show in 1964 in just three years the group underwent a complete makeover with the release of an album sgt.
peppers lonely hearts club band that broadcasted the counterculture message id love to turn you on a reference to taking drugs and having sex.
the heyday of the marriage between rock music and the counterculture was woodstock a free three day drug infused music festival held on a farm in upstate new york in august 1969 new left and young civil rights activists adopted a hippie style of dress and experimented with drugs but unlike hippies they remained dedicated to political activism.
most black civil rights activists rather than rejecting white middle class materialism were fighting for their fair share of the nations wealth and prosperity.
new left radicals shared the hippie belief that acquisitive capitalism bred inequality and injustice but they were committed to social action not tuning out out of the spotlight conservative college students were also active laying the foundation for the coming conservative resurgence within a republican party dominated by moderates.
college students formed the young americans for freedom yaf in 1960 under the guidance of national review founder william f buckley.
throughout the 1960s the radical right yaf attracted more members than the new left sds.
goldwater supporters in 1964 these conservative students championed limited economic regulation states rights respect for law and order and staunch anticommunism.
for the time being however the new left had center stage.
27 10 holding together in their quest to define an alternative lifestyle hippies emphasized love and harmony in their gatherings sometimes wearing clothes sometimes not.
how did the new left civil rights movement and counterculture diverge.
chapter 21.
the revolutionary nationalist rhetoric in malcolm xs fiery 1963 message to the grassroots greatly influenced later advocates of black power.
theres no such thing as a nonviolent revolution.
the only kind of revolution that is nonviolent is the negro revolution.
the only revolution in which the goal is loving your enemy is the negro revolution.
its the only revolution in which the goal is a desegregated lunch counter a desegregated theater a desegregated park and a desegregated public toilet you can sit down next to white folks on the toilet.
thats no revolution.
revolution is based on land.
land is the basis of all independence.
land is the basis of freedom justice and equality whoever heard of a revolution where they lock arms singing we shall overcome.
you dont do that in a revolution.
you dont do any singing youre too busy swinging.
in a conversation with martin luther king march 25 1968 king offered a definition of black power that supported his strategy of nonviolence.
we have always stood up against injustices.
we have done it militantly.
now so often the word militant is misunderstood because most people think of militancy in military terms.
but to be militant merely means to be demanding and to be persistent and in this sense i think the non violent movement has demonstrated great militancy.
it is possible to be militantly nonviolent.
i havent advocated violence because i do not see it as the answer to the problem.
i do not see it as the answer from a moral point of view and i do not see it as the answer from a practical point of view let me briefly outline the positives of black power.
first black power in the positive sense is a psychological call to manhood.
this is desperately needed in the black community because for all too many years black people view the closer look competing visions defining black power have been ashamed of themselves secondly black power is pooling black political resources in order to achieve our legitimate goals thirdly black power in its positive sense is a pooling of black economic resources in order to achieve legitimate power withdrawing economic support from those who will not be just and fair in their dealings is a very potent weapon.
writing to white america in the new york times magazine in 1968 charles hamilton outlined competing views of black power and stressed the importance of maintaining black racial identity.
black power has many definitions and connotations in the rhetoric of race relations today.
to some people it is synonymous with premeditated acts of violence to destroy the political and economic institutions of this country.
others equate black power with plans to rid the civil rights movements of whites who have been in it for years.
the concept is understood by many to mean hatred of and separation from whites it is associated with calling whites honkies and with shouts of burn baby burn some understand it to be the use of pressure group tactics in the accepted tradition of the american political process.
and still others say that black power must be seen first of all as an attempt to instill a sense of identity and pride in black people black power rejects the lessons of slavery and segregation that caused black people to look upon themselves with hatred and disdain.
to be integrated it was necessary to deny ones heritage ones own culture to be ashamed of ones black skin thick lips and kinky hair.
the black man must change his demeaning conception of himself he must develop a sense of pride and self respect.
then if integration comes it will deal with people who are psychologically and mentally healthy with people who have a sense of their history and of themselves as whole human beings why do all three writers emphasize racial pride and manhood.
chapter 27 went to the hospital he had doctors put a large bandage on his broken nose.
landsmark knew that the appearance of severe injuries would draw more press attention.
the portrait of raw racial hatred captured in the photograph and landsmarks heavily bandaged face at how does this photograph compare to the images of racial violence in the south seen in earlier chapter 28 righting a nation adrift america in the 1970s and 1980s negotiations ended with the camp david accords.
israel agreed to give the sinai peninsula back to egypt in 1982 see 28 1.
in return egypt became the first arab state to recognize israels right to exist.
the united states rewarded each side with pledges of substantial military aid support that continues to this day.
befriending egypt neutralized the only credible military threat to israeli security and brought a previous soviet ally into the american fold strengthening the american position in the middle east.
if the middle east gave carter his greatest diplomatic victory it also provided the low point of his presidency.
in 1953 the united states had helped overthrow the left leaning iranian government and reinstated the reliably anti communist shah of iran to ensure american access to iranian oil.
in 1979 radical islamists overthrew the shah who fled the country.
an islamic cleric and revolutionary the ayatollah ruhollah khomeini became the head of the worlds first radical islamist government.
khomeinis intense dark eyes long snowy beard and flowing robes made him appear dark and dangerous to americans who recoiled at his ferocious denunciations of the united states as the great satan in october 1979 carter made a fateful decision when he reluctantly agreed to let the ailing shah of iran who was living in mexico into the united states for medical treatment.
if the united states turned our backs on the fallen shah it would be a signal to the world that the u s is a fair weather friend national security advisor zbigniew brzezinski told carter.
at 3 00 a m on november 4 1979 the state department received a telephone call from panicked officials in the american embassy in teheran the capital of iran reporting that a mob of iranian university students had broken into the compound.
the students proceeded to take embassy employees hostage.
khomeini had not ordered the hostage taking but he supported the students demands that the united states return the shah and his fortune to iran to secure the hostages release.
his government worried that the united states might try to return the shah to power wanted him in hand.
the iranian hostage crisis became the defining event in carters presidency as iranian revolutionaries held 52 americans captive for 444 days.
the media coverage was unprecedented and most reporters viewed the crisis as a humiliating blow to americas honor.
abc news how did carter respond to old and new problems in the middle east.
created a late night show nightline that gave constant updates on america held hostage and repeatedly showed film footage of iranian crowds chanting death to america and the blindfolded captives.
frustration with carters inability to resolve the crisis caused his approval ratings to sink to 28 percent.
how to proceed was not clear however and carters key advisors offered him conflicting recommendations.
secretary of state cyrus vance focused on saving the hostages lives and argued that the united states needed to negotiate patiently no matter how long it took.
national security advisor brzezinski worried more about protecting americas image as a global superpower.
he felt that the longer the crisis lasted the weaker america appeared to the rest of the world emboldening americas enemies.
the soviet the release of the american hostages had become almost an obsession with me president jimmy carter comments on the iran hostage crisis in his memoirs invasion of afghanistan a month into the hostage crisis seemingly corroborated brzezinskis vision.
choices and consequences ending the iranian hostage crisis explores carters options and the repercussions of his decision to try to rescue the hostages.
five months later iraqi ruler saddam hussein launched an invasion of iran to acquire its oil fields and khomeini finally decided to negotiate in earnest.
iran could no longer afford its diplomatic isolation needing to reestablish its global trading networks to fend off the attack.
after months of negotiations the united states agreed to give iran 7 9 billion the estimated value of the shahs holdings in the united states and pledged not to interfere in iranian domestic affairs.
carter hoped to deliver the good news to the american people that the hostages were coming home before he left office on january 20 1981 instead khomeini waited until a few minutes after the new president ronald reagan was sworn into office to release the hostages denying carter a final triumph.
view the image the signing of the camp david accords 1978 a crisis of presidential leadership choices and consequences ending the iranian hostage crisis when iranian students stormed the u s embassy and took americans hostage in 1979 president carter faced a choice over whether to follow the advice of secretary of state cyrus vance who recommended patient negotiations or national security advisor zbigniew brzezinski who favored using force to end the crisis.
for five months carter brokered a compromise between these two positions by freezing iranian financial assets in the united states engaging in secret negotiations and beefing up the american naval presence in the arabian sea.
as carter began his 1980 reelection bid mounting public frustration along with concern that american inaction had encouraged the soviet union to invade afghanistan increased the pressure on carter for decisive action.
choices wait for iran to tire of its diplomatic isolation and then negotiate the hostages release without alienating the rest of the muslim world.
make a show of strength by bombing iranian oil refineries and military bases and mining harbors.
use special forces to rescue the hostages.
decision when an iranian negotiator told the administration that a diplomatic resolution was months away carter decided to act.
in april 1980 while vance was out of town carter authorized a rescue mission by special forces.
consequences swirling desert sands and a collision between american aircraft doomed the rescue mission in its first stages further humiliating the united states.
vance immediately resigned and in july the shah died in egypt ending the question of returning him to iran.
when iraq invaded iran in september seeking oil rich territory khomeini decided to end irans diplomatic isolation.
winning concessions from the united states iran released the hostages on january 20 1981 the day that ronald reagan was inaugurated president.
the ex hostages arrive at frankfurt germany on january 21 1981 the day after their release.
continuing controversies how important was the hostage crisis for the united states in the long term.
some say it was very important.
the hostages prolonged captivity branded carter as inept and contributed to his reelection loss.
to contain iran the united states supported saddam hussein during his eight year war with iran again using a repressive middle eastern dictator to advance american interests.
the hostage crisis also created a negative image of islam in the united states that future islamic terrorist attacks reinforced.
the crisis was not so important others counter rejecting it as a major reason for reagans victory.
in the 1980s the failed soviet invasion of afghanistan the camp david accords and using a secular iraq to contain iranian influence protected u s economic interests in the region diminishing the long term significance of the hostage crisis.
what larger significance did carters advisors attach to the iranian hostage crisis.
chapter a moment rich with promise p 876 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 28 he saw no other option.
his decision angered many conservative republicans and some never forgave him.
read my lips i lied ran one new york post headline.
the combination of a huge deficit and an unfriendly democratic majority in congress discouraged bush from proposing dramatic new domestic initiatives.
a revolution of sorts nonetheless occurred when bush signed the americans with disabilities act a 1990 civil rights law that prohibited discrimination against the disabled in employment public accommodations and telecommunications.
the disabled gained unprecedented freedom of movement as legally required elevators ramps and sloped curbs became commonplace.
which gender and racial issues dominated the headlines in the early 1990s.
during the campaign bush had courted the conservative wing of the republican party by promising to appoint like minded judges.
he fulfilled this pledge by nominating a conservative african american judge clarence thomas to the supreme court when thurgood marshall the courts first african american justice retired.
controversy erupted when anita hill a former colleague accused thomas of sexual harassment and thomas responded by calling the televised confirmation hearings a high tech lynching the senate ultimately confirmed thomas by a narrow majority in 1991 with workplace sexual harassment front page news an unprecedented number of women won congressional seats in the 1992 elections including the first female african american senator carol mosley braun a democrat from illinois.
while the thomas hearings exposed gender discord the 1991 los angeles riots brought simmering racial and ethnic tensions to the surface.
in march a 78 mile car chase along los angeles freeways ended with white police brutally beating rodney king an african american when he resisted arrest for speeding.
a nearby resident captured the incident on film but americans differed on what the video revealed 29 3.
most blacks and some sympathetic whites saw a poorly trained and racist police force that harassed blacks echoing complaints that had set off the watts riots in 1965 see chapter 28 had already established the oil rich persian gulf as a region vital to national economic and strategic interests.
throughout the 1980s iranian financed terrorist attacks and hostage crises in lebanon convinced the u s government that the fundamentalist islamic government in iran not iraq posed the major threat in the persian gulf.
during the eightyear iraq iran war the united states supplied iraq with weapons and intelligence.
oil rich arab nations including saudi arabia and kuwait had also lent iraq billions of dollars to prevent iranian revolutionary religious fervor from spreading to their kingdoms.
when the war ended inconclusively in 1988 after nearly one million combatant deaths saddam demanded that arab nations forgive iraqs debt.
he harbored particular animosity against 29 4 america and the middle east 1980 2003 the united states fought two major wars against iraq one in 1991 and the other beginning in 2003 what problems did the united states face in the middle east from 1980 2003.
chapter 22 to rally popular support for aiding the poor.
president george h w bush responded to the public outcry by sending u s troops to help un peacekeepers restore order aid that incoming president bill clinton continued.
public opinion shifted dramatically in 1993 however when news cameras captured the image of cheering somalis dragging the corpse of an american soldier through the streets of mogadishu the capital city of somalia after rebel somali warlords downed a u s helicopter 29 13.
the new threats in the post cold war world public now demanded an immediate withdrawal and clinton complied.
the un also withdrew its troops and years of anarchy in somalia followed.
reluctant to jeopardize american soldiers lives again clinton proceeded cautiously in april 1994 when hutus the majority ethnic group in rwanda a nation in central africa unleashed a 100 day genocidal rampage that killed 800 000 tutsis a minority ethic group.
this time clinton came under attack for failing to intervene decisively with force.
the photo of somalis desecrating the corpse of an american soldier had other repercussions.
osama bin laden the saudi exile who headed al qaeda a fundamentalist islamic terrorist organization concluded that terrorist attacks against the united states would work because americans had no stomach for casualties.
one american pilot was dragged in the streets of mogadishu and you left.
the extent of your impotence and weaknesses became very clear he jeered in 1996 such pronouncements caused paul watson the photojournalist who took the pulitzer prize winning image to conclude that the storm of outrage over his photo taught terrorists that they could rely on publicity in the western media to amplify the impact of their terrorist attacks.
during his first years in office clinton also had to respond to ethnic cleansing the intentional mass killing of one ethnic group by another in the balkans a mountainous region of southeastern europe.
when communist yugoslavia dissolved in 1991 ethnic and religious differences provoked a civil war among croatia bosnia and serbia all former parts of yugoslavia.
clinton resisted intervening until july 1995 when serbian forces forced 25 000 bosnian muslim women and children to leave the town of srebrenica and murdered the 7 500 muslim men and boys who remained behind.
the united states participated in nato air strikes of serbian military positions and helped broker the 1995 dayton peace accords which settled disputed territorial boundaries and placed nato troops including americans on the ground as peacekeepers.
preoccupied with humanitarian tragedies overseas americans paid less attention in the early 1990s to signs that the terrorist threat was moving closer to home.
many arabs saw the united states and israel as one blaming both for taking away land that belonged to the palestinians.
overseas hostagetakings and plane hijackings in the 1970s and 1980s kept the arab israeli conflict in the news.
in 1993 kuwaiti and iraqi born terrorists exploded a massive car bomb in the parking garage of the world trade center two towering skyscrapers in the heart of new york citys financial district that housed governmental agencies and companies involved in foreign trade.
the explosion killed six people and created a six story hole in the ground.
the fbi captured the culprits easily when one tried to recover his deposit from a car rental agency for the van used in the attack.
reassured that law enforcement agencies had done their job and that the terrorists were inept the public and government quickly forgot the incident.
but al qaeda which maintained training bases in afghanistan resolved to try again.
determined to launch a jihad or holy war against western nonbelievers bin laden relied on his familys fortune and donations from saudi arabians to construct a clandestine terrorist network that recruited disciples from the middle east asia and africa.
not all terrorist threats during this period originated overseas.
on april 19 1995 timothy mcveigh parked a rental truck filled with explosives in front of a federal building in oklahoma city.
the blast killed 168 people including many children in a day care center and wounded 800 mcveigh and his accomplice terry nichols viewed the attack as payback for the federal governments recent assaults against private paramilitary groups and their rural compounds filled with caches of weapons.
militia supporters like mcveigh rejected any legal restriction on their second amendment right to bear arms citing gun laws as just one example of government tyranny.
the bombing remained the deadliest terrorist attack against american civilians until 9 11.
meanwhile al qaeda attacked u s targets overseas.
issuing a fatwa or religious decree declaring war against all americans bin laden demanded that the united states remove its troops from saudi arabia stationed there since the 1991 persian gulf war and end its support of israel.
it is more important for muslims to kill americans than other infidels bin laden declared.
this pronouncement was more than rhetoric.
in august 1998 al qaeda terrorists bombed the u s embassies in nairobi the capital of kenya and dar es salaam a city in tanzania.
clinton ordered an immediate retaliatory attack and tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on eight al qaeda training camps in afghanistan and on a pharmaceutical plant in sudan which was thought to have supplied bin laden with chemical weapons.
his advisors presented clinton with competing views over the next possible step.
his antiterrorist advisor recommended continuing the bombing until the taliban afghanistans fundamentalist islamic why did foreign and domestic terrorists attack americans.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 29 17 obamanania almost overnight barack obama became an american icon a boon to washington d c area gift shops selling souvenirs to the 2 million people who braved freezing temperatures to see obama inaugurated as the nations 44th president on january 20 2009 exuding confidence calm and charm obama amassed an inspired following who put his likeness on posters vans t shirts bridges boats and even tattoos.
the image of obama on the souvenir mugs in this photo 29 17 came from an iconic poster by artist shepard fairey.
the mugs paired obamas silhouette with the campaigns catchphrase change we can believe in by contrast faireys poster carried the single word hope a message that detractors modified into nope on their own tee shirts and bumper stickers.
an intensely disciplined candidate obama stuck to a clear message of economic reform.
the mccain campaign was more erratic one day highlighting economics the next portraying obama as the heir to sixties era radicalism.
thanks to support from swing voters those without strong ideological convictions momentum for obama built throughout the fall.
on november 4 2008 he became the first african american president of the united states by winning a decisive victory 365 to 173 electoral votes and 53 percent of the popular vote.
troubled times obamas emphasis on change during the campaign raised liberals expectations that he would move quickly to regulate wall street enact universal health care end the ban on gays in the military and how did past civil rights activism help make obamas election possible.
withdraw from iraq and afghanistan.
conservatives however adamantly opposed enlarging the role and cost of government.
within this highly contentious partisan environment obama found himself under attack from the right and left.
the economic crisis posed the most immediate challenge for obama.
with the democrats controlling both the house and senate he quickly secured passage of a massive government spending bill to stimulate the economy.
republicans including many who had supported bushs deficit spending vehemently opposed increasing the national debt.
when the economy failed to rebound quickly two competing views on the stimulus spending emerged.
the obama administration asserted that the infusion of government money prevented another great depression by staving off the collapse of the nations financial institutions and averting massive layoffs.
republicans countered that ineffective government interference stymied the recovery leaving taxpayers with a bill that would take generations to pay off.
liberals urged obama to hold wall street accountable for the misdeeds that caused the economic meltdown and congress did strengthen regulatory oversight of financial institutions.
americans increasingly however directed their anger over the ongoing economic crisis at washington.
concerns about the escalating debt and federal power energized watch the video video lecture the connection between obama and lincoln new threats in the post cold war world grassroots conservatives who used social networking media to draw crowds to their initial demonstrations.
the spectacular rise of the tea party movement had begun named to evoke the revolutionary spirit of the 1774 boston tea party.
support from conservative television pundits and high profile politicians like sarah palin also fueled the movements growth.
by actively opposing the presidents health insurance reform initiative the tea party solidified its influence within republican circles.
in pushing for health care reform obama hoped to succeed where truman and clinton had failed.
j r roses 2009 political cartoon aptly captured the political divide that characterized this rancorous debate 29 18.
to marshal support obama cited the many uninsured 16 percent of the population or 47 million people rising health care and insurance costs and troubling industry practices such as lifetime limits on coverage.
opting for a reform of private health insurance practices rather than the single payer government run system liberals favored obama angered his base and did little to assuage conservatives.
health insurance reform legislation passed in 2010 without receiving a single republican vote amid liberal criticism that the law did too little.
the laws requirement that all americans purchase health insurance became a flashpoint for conservatives and independents worried about intrusive governmental power.
states immediately challenged the constitutionality of this mandate.
the mixed rulings in federal district courts suggested that the supreme court would ultimately determine whether obamas attempt to establish universal healthcare would prevail.
sweeping republican victories in the 2010 mid term elections included tea party candidates who vowed to curb the power of government by repealing the healthcare law cutting the federal budget and making bush era tax cuts permanent.
focused on fiscal issues tea party activists had less interest in championing conservatives traditional social and cultural agenda.
instead of rallying supporters to reverse the 2010 repeal of the militarys dont ask dont tell policy that prevented gay servicemen from openly acknowledging their sexual orientation the tea party used its influence within the republican party to demand a permanent reduction in the size and scope of the federal budget.
liberal disenchantment with obama stemmed mainly from his foreign policy decisions especially escalating the war in afghanistan and continued operation of the guantanamo bay prison.
obama prohibited the use of water boarding but reaffirmed the bush era policy of holding prisoners indefinitely without charges.
sending an additional 30 000 troops to afghanistan in october 2009 obama tried to reassure his liberal base by setting a tentative withdrawal date of 2014 from afghanistan.
obama satisfied americans of all political persuasions when he announced on may 2 2011 that u s special forces had tracked down and killed osama bin laden in his pakistani hideout.
documents recovered during the raid provided crucial intelligence that allowed obama to claim that the united states for the moment had the upper hand in the war on terror.
he also moved decisively to draw down forces in iraq.
an influx of u s troops in 2008 had reduced insurgent attacks both improving the publics views of the iraq war and strengthening obamas claim that the war had been won.
in october 2011 obama announced that the u s military would leave iraq by years end.
after nearly nine years americas war in iraq will be over he announced a decision supported by 75 of americans.
a vigorous debate.
during the yearlong debate over health insurance reform democrats and republicans articulated competing visions of the role that the federal government should play in american society.
what challenges did obama confront during his first two years in office.
chapter review al qaeda launches 9 11 attacks iraq war begins economic downturn begins tea party emerges united states begins war on terror overseas and at home preemptive war puts u s troops in iraq indefinitely economists predict worst financial crisis since the great depression grassroots conservative movement emphasizes limited government barack obama elected president health insurance overall congress passes the patriot act americans debate whether law protects nation or violates civil liberties first african american elected president establishes universal healthcare system myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of building a new world order.
questions for analysis 1 why does wilson conclude that class matters more than race in explaining urban poverty.
read the document william julius wilson the urban underclass p 880 2 how did the president justify military action against iraq in 1991.
other resources from this.

how many slaves resisted slavery.
this sounds like a reasonably straightforward question but it is almost impossible to answer with any certainty because the records of slave resistance are spotty and the definition of resistance is a matter of considerable dispute.
even when a set of facts is clear and straightforward historians disagree sometimes quite radically over what they mean.
those disagreements can be the result of political and ideological disagreements.
some of the most vigorous debates in recent decades have been between scholars who believe that economic interests and class divisions are the key to understanding the past and those who believe that ideas and culture are at least as important as material interests.
whites and people of color men and women people from the american south and people from the north young people and older people these and many other points of difference find their way into scholarly disagreements.
debates can also occur over differences in methodology between those who believe that quantitative studies can answer important historical questions and those who believe that other methods come closer to the truth.
most of all historical interpretation changes in response to the time in which it is written.
historians may strive to be objective in their work but no one can be entirely free from the assumptions and concerns of the present.
in the 1950s the omnipresent shadow of the cold war had a profound effect on the way most historians viewed the past.
in the 1960s concerns about racial justice and disillusionment with the vietnam war altered the way many historians viewed the past.
those events introduced a much more critical tone to scholarship and turned the attention of scholars away from politics and government and toward the study of society and culture.
many areas of scholarship in recent decades are embroiled in a profound debate over whether there is such a thing as truth.
the world some scholars argue is simply a series of narratives constructed by people who view life in very different and often highly personal ways.
truth does not really exist.
everything is a product of interpretation.
not many historians embrace such radical ideas most would agree that interpretations to be of any value must rest on a solid foundation of observable facts.
but historians do recognize that even the most compelling facts are subject to many different interpretations and that the process of understanding the past is a forever continuing and forever contested process.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 what are some of the reasons historians so often disagree.
2 is there ever a right or wrong in historical interpretation.
what value might historical inquiry have other than reaching a right or wrong conclusion.
3 if historians so often disagree how should a student of history approach historical content.
how might disagreement expand our understanding of history.
but in the fourteenth century as the maritime capabilities of several western european societies increased and as muslim societies seized control of the eastern routes to asia there began to be serious talk of finding a faster safer sea route to asia.
such dreams found a receptive audience in the courts of the new monarchs.
by the late fifteenth century some of them were ready to finance daring voyages of exploration.
the first to do so were the portuguese.
they were the preeminent maritime power in the fifteenth century in large part because of the work of one man prince henry the navigator.
prince henry henrys own principal interest was not the navigator in finding a sea route to asia but in exploring the western coast of africa.
he dreamed of establishing a christian empire there to aid in his countrys wars against the moors of northern africa and he hoped to find new stores of gold.
the explorations he began did not fulfill his own hopes but they ultimately led farther than he had dreamed.
some of henrys mariners went as far south as cape verde on africas west coast.
in 1486 six years after henrys death bartholomeu dias rounded the southern tip of africa the cape of good hope and in 1497 1498 vasco da gama proceeded all the way around the cape to india.
in 1500 the next fleet bound for india under the command of pedro cabral was blown westward off its southerly course and happened upon the coast of brazil.
but by then another man in the service of another country had already encountered the new world.
christopher columbus christopher columbus who was born and reared in genoa italy obtained most of his early seafaring experience in the service of the portuguese.
as a young man he became intrigued with the possibility already under discussion in many seafaring circles of reaching asia by going not east but west.
columbuss hopes rested on several basic misconceptions.
he believed that the world was far smaller than it actually is.
9 debating the past the american population before columbus wt o one knows how many people lived in the americas in the centuries before columbus.
but jlm o scholars and other researchers have spent more than a century and have written many thousands of pages debating the question nevertheless.
interest in this question survives despite the near impossibility of answering it.
the debate over the pre columbian population is closely connected to the much larger debate over the consequences of european settlement of the western hemisphere.
throughout the nineteenth century native americans spoke often of the great days before columbus when there were many more people in their tribes.
they drew from their own rich tradition of oral history handed down through storytelling from one generation to another.
the painter and ethnographer george catlin spent much time among the tribes in the 1830s painting portraits of a race that he feared was fast passing to extinction.
he listened to these oral legends and estimated that there had been 16 million indians in north america before the europeans came.
other white americans dismissed such claims as preposterous insisting that indian civilization was far too primitive to have been able to sustain so large a population.
in 1928 james mooney an ethnologist at the smithsonian institution drew from early accounts of soldiers and missionaries in the sixteenth century.
he came up with the implausibly precise figure of 1 15 million natives who lived north of mexico in the early sixteenth century.
that was a larger pueblo village 1u c mclntyre photolink getty images rf he also believed that the asian continent extended farther eastward than it actually does.
he assumed therefore that the atlantic was narrow enough to be crossed on a relatively brief voyage.
it did not occur to him that anything lay to the west between europe and asia.
columbus failed to win support for his plan in portugal so he turned to spain.
the spaniards were not yet as advanced a maritime people as the portuguese but they were at least as energetic and ambitious.
and in the fifteenth century the marriage of spains two most powerful regional rulers ferdinand of aragon and isabella of castile had produced the strongest monarchy in europe.
like other young monarchies spain soon grew eager to demonstrate its strength by sponsoring new commercial ventures.
columbus appealed to queen isabella for support for his proposed westward voyage.
in 1492 isabella agreed to columbuss request.
commanding ninety men and three ships the nina the pinta and the santa maria columbus left spain in august 1492 and sailed west into the atlantic on what he iroquois women this 1734 french engraving shows iroquois women at work in a settlement somewhere in what is now upstate new york.
in the foreground women are cooking.
others are working in the fields.
men spent much of their time hunting and fighting battles leaving the women to govern and dominate the internal lives of the villages.
property in iroquois society was inherited through the mother and women occupied positions of great authority within the tribes.
library of congress 10 figure than nineteenth century writers had suggested but still much smaller than the indians themselves claimed.
a few years later the anthropologist alfred kroeber used many of mooney s methods and come up with an estimate of the population of the entire western hemisphere considerably larger than mooney s but much lower than catlin s.
he concluded in 1934 that there were 8 4 million people in the americas in 1492 half in north america and half in the caribbean and south america.
these low early estimates reflected an assumption that the arrival of the europeans did not much reduce the native population.
but in the 1960s and 1970s scholars discovered that the early tribes had been catastrophically decimated by european plagues not long after the arrival of columbus meaning that the numbers europeans observed even in the late 1500s were already dramatically smaller than the numbers in 1492 drawing on early work by anthropologists and others who discovered evidence of widespread deaths by disease historians william mcneill in 1976 and alfred crosby a decade later as well as other scholars produced powerful accounts of the near extinction of some tribes and the dramatic depopulation of others in a pestilential catastrophe with few parallels in history.
almost all scholars now accept that much perhaps most of the native population was wiped out by disease smallpox measles tuberculosis and other plagues imported from europe.
henry dobyns an anthropologist who was one of the earliest scholars to challenge the early low estimates claimed in 1966 that in 1492 there were between 10 and 12 million people north of mexico and between 90 and 112 million in all of the americas.
no subsequent scholar has made so high a claim but most estimates that followed have been much closer to dobyns s than to kroeber s.
the geographer william m denevan for example argued in 1976 that the american population in 1492 was around 55 million and that the population north of mexico was under 4 million.
those are among the lowest of modern estimates but still dramatically higher than the nineteenth century numbers.
the vehemence with which scholars have debated these figures is not just because it is very difficult to determine population size.
it is also because the debate over the population is part of the debate over whether the arrival of columbus and the millions of europeans who followed him was a great advance in the history of civilization or an unparalleled catastrophe that exterminated a large and flourishing native population.
how to balance the many achievements of european civilization in the new world after 1492 against the terrible destruction of native peoples that accompanied it is in the end less a historical question perhaps than a moral one understand analyze and evaluate 1 why is there such interest in and such vehement disagreement about the population of native peoples of the americas in the precontact period.
2 what are some of the difficulties in trying to determine the size of the pre columbian population.
3 what are the advantages and disadvantages of using oral history as a source of information about the past.
thought was a straight course for japan.
ten weeks later he sighted land and assumed he had reached his target.
in fact columbuss an ec on an is an in bahamas.
first voyage when he pushed on and encountered cuba he assumed he had reached china.
he returned to spain in triumph bringing with him several captured natives as evidence of his achievement.
he called the natives indians because he believed they were from the east indies in the pacific.
but columbus had not of course encountered the court of the great khan in china or the fabled wealth of the indies.
a year later therefore he tried again this time with a much larger expedition.
as before he headed into the caribbean discovering several other islands and leaving a small and shortlived colony on hispaniola.
on a third voyage in 1498 he finally reached the mainland and cruised along the northern coast of south america.
when he passed the mouth of the orinoco river in present day venezuela he concluded for the first time that what he had discovered was not an island off the coast of china as he had assumed but a separate continent such a large freshwater stream he realized could emerge only from a large body of land.
still he remained convinced that asia was only a short distance away.
and although he failed in his efforts to sail around the northeastern coast of south america to the indies he was blocked by the isthmus of panama he returned to spain believing that he had explored at least the fringes of the far east.
he continued to believe that for the rest of his life.
columbuss celebrated accomplishments made him a popular hero for a time but he later died in obscurity.
when europeans at last gave a name to the new world they ignored him.
the distinction went instead to a florentine merchant amerigo vespucci a member of a later portuguese expedition to the new world who wrote a series of vivid descriptions of the lands he had visited and who recognized the americas as new continents.
columbus has been celebrated for centuries as the admiral of the ocean sea and as a representative of the new secular scientific impulses of renaissance europe.
but columbus was also a deeply religious man even something of a mystic.
his voyages were inspired as much by his conviction that he was fulfilling a religious divine mission as by his interest in geogra motives for phy ard trade.
a strong believer in biblical exploration prophecies he came to see himself as a man destined to advance the coming of the millennium.
god made me the messenger of the new heaven and the new earth columbus wrote near the end of his life and he showed me the spot where to find it a similar combination of worldly and religious passions lay behind many subsequent efforts at exploration and settlement of the new world.
11 12 chapter 1 aztec empire at the time of spanish conquest inca empire at the time of spanish conquest colonial boundaries and provincial names are for the late 18th century outposts on the northern frontier of new spain not simultaneous through the 18th century t missions forts sometimes with missions a settlements ico city a a tenoctitittan veracruz 1325 1519 pjenmsyla new sf ain guatemala 7 santiago 1514 ak 7 jamaica haiti to britain french 1655 after 1697 caribbean sea espanola 1492 v puerto rico.
cx1502 santo domingo o 1496 pacific ocean caraca ht aracas 1567 trinidad gc498 santa fe de bogota viceroyalty of 1625 r quito new 0ranada l r 634 guayaquil 1535 cuidad de los reyes liman french surinam guiana dutch 1626 7z viceroy lty 7 o new castilla j viceroyalty f t la plat a 5 r o a 7 n t q i valparaiso 1544 santiago 1541 rio de janeiro 1567 a a sao paulo 1554 montevideo j17 4 buenos aires a 1580 v ri de bi plain 17 1 0 7 1 spanish america from the time of columbus s initial voyage in 1492 until the mid nineteenth century spain was the dominant colonial power in the new world.
from the southern regior south america to the northern regions of the pacific northwest spain controlled one of the world s largest empires.
note how much of the spanish empire was simply grafted upon the earlier en of native peoples the incas in what is today chile and peru and the aztecs across much of the rest of south america mexico and the southwest of what is now the united states what characteristics nf snnm oi ij unci icd iviexico and t what characteristics of spanish colonization would account for spain s preference for already settled regions.
the collision of cultures 17 indeed after the era of the conquistadores came to a close in the 1540s the missionary impulse became one of the most import catholic ant motives for european emigration to missions america.
priests or friars accompanied al most all colonizing ventures.
through their zealous work the gospel of the catholic church ultimately extended throughout south and central america mexico and into the south and southwest of the present united states.
northern outposts the spanish fort established in 1565 at st augustine florida became the first permanent european settlement in what is st augustine now the united states.
it served as a military outpost an administrative center for franciscan missionaries and a headquarters for unsuccessful campaigns against north american natives that were ultimately abandoned.
but it did not mark the beginning of a substantial effort at colonization in the region.
a more substantial colonizing venture began thirty years later in the southwest.
in 1598 don juan de onate traveled north from mexico with a party of 500 men.
he claimed for spain some of the lands of the pueblo indians that coronado had passed through over fifty years before.
the spanish migrants established a colony in what is now new mexico modeled roughly on those the spanish had created farther south.
onate distributed encomien das to the spanish settlers.
they were licenses to exact labor and tribute from the natives in specific areas a system first used in dealing with the moors in spain.
the spanish demanded tribute from the local indians and at times commandeered them as laborers.
spanish colonists founded santa fe in 1609 onates harsh treatment of the natives who greatly outnumbered the small spanish population threatened the stability of the new colony and led to his removal as governor in 1606 over time relations between the spanish and the pueblos improved.
substantial numbers of pueblos converted to christianity under the influence of spanish missionaries.
others entered into important trading relationships with the spanish.
the colony remained precarious nevertheless because of the danger from apache and navajo raiders who threatened the spanish and pueblos alike.
even so the new mexico settlement continued to grow.
by 1680 there were over 2 000 spanish colonists living among about 30 000 pueblos.
the economic heart of the colony was not the gold and precious metals the early spanish explorers had tried in vain to find.
it was cattle and sheep raised on the ranchos that stretched out around the small towns spanish settlers established.
in 1680 the colony was nearly destroyed when the pueblos rose in revolt.
in the 1660s and 1670s the spanish priests and the colonial government which was closely tied to the missionaries launched efforts to suppress tribal rituals that europeans considered incompatible with christianity.
the discontent among the natives at this suppression survived for decades.
more important as a cause of the pueblo revolt of 1680 however was a major drought and a series of raids by pueblo revolt of 1680 neighboring apache tribes.
the instability these events produced sparked the uprising.
an indian religious leader named pope led an uprising that killed hundreds of european settlers including twenty one priests captured santa fe and drove the spanish temporarily from the region.
but twelve years later the spanish returned resumed seizing pueblo lands and crushed a last revolt in 1696 spanish exploitation of the pueblos did not end.
but after the revolts many spanish colonists realized that they could not prosper in new mexico if they remained constantly in conflict with a native population that greatly outnumbered them.
they tried to solve the problem in two ways.
on the one hand the spanish intensified their efforts to assimilate the indians baptizing indian children at birth and enforcing observance of catholic rituals.
on the other hand they now permitted the pueblos to own land.
they stopped commandeering indian labor they replaced the encomienda system with a less demanding and oppressive one and they tacitly tolerated the practice of tribal religious rituals.
these efforts were at least partially successful.
after a while there was significant intermarriage between europeans and indians.
increasingly the pueblos came to consider the spanish their allies in the continuing battles with the apaches and navajos.
by 1750 the spanish population had grown modestly to about 4 000 the pueblo population had declined through disease war and migration to about 13 000 less than half what it had been in 1680 new mexico had by then become a reasonably stable but still weak and isolated outpost of the spanish empire.
the empire at high tide spains vast empire by the end of the sixteenth century the spanish empire had become one of the largest in the history of the world.
it included the islands of the caribbean and the coastal areas of south america that had been the first targets of the spanish expeditions.
it extended to mexico and southern north america where a second wave of colonizers had established outposts.
most of all the empire spread southward and westward into the vast landmass of south america the areas that are now chile argentina and peru.
in 1580 when the spanish and portuguese monarchies temporarily united brazil came under spanish jurisdiction as well.
it was however a colonial empire very different from the one the english would establish in north america beginning in the early seventeenth century.
the earliest spanish ventures in the new world had been largely independent of the throne.
but by the end of the sixteenth century the monarchy had extended its authority directly into the governance of local communities.
colonists had few opportunities to establish political institutions independent of spain.
there was also a significant economic difference between the spanish empire and the later british one.
the spanish were far more successful than the british would be in extracting great surface wealth gold and silver from their american colonies.
but they concentrated less energy on making agriculture and commerce 18 chapter 2 king philips war stockade or were killed as they attempted to escape.
those who survived were hunted down captured and sold as slaves.
the pequot tribe was almost wiped out.
the most prolonged and deadly encounter between whites and indians in the seventeenth century began in 1675 a conflict that the english would remember for generations as king philips war.
as in the earlier pequot war in connecticut an indian tribe in this case the wampanoags under the leadership of a chieftain known to the white settlers as king philip and among his own people as metacomet rose up to resist the english.
the wampanoags had not always been hostile to the settlers indeed metacomets grandfather had once forged an alliance with the english and metacomet himself was well acquainted with the colonists.
but by the 1670s he had become convinced that only armed resistance could protect the wampanoags from english incursions into their lands and more immediately from the efforts by the colonial governments to impose english law on them.
a court in plymouth had recently tried and hanged several wampanoags for murdering a member of their own tribe.
for three years the natives well organized and armed with guns terrorized a string of massachusetts towns destroying twenty of them and causing the deaths of as many as a thousand people including at least one sixteenth of the white males in the colony.
the war greatly weakened both the society and economy of massachusetts.
but in 1676 the white settlers fought back and gradually prevailed.
they received critical aid from the mohawks longtime rivals of the wampanoags and guides spies and soldiers recruited from among the so called praying indians christian converts of the region.
while white militiamen attacked indian villages and destroyed native food supplies a group of mohawks ambushed shot and killed metacomet then bore his severed head to boston to present to the colonial leaders.
after that the fragile alliance that metacomet had managed to forge among local tribes collapsed.
europeans were soon able to crush the uprising.
some wampanoag leaders were executed others were sold into slavery in the west indies.
the wampanoags and their allies their populations depleted and their natural resources reduced were now powerless to resist the english.
yet these victories by the white colonists did not end the danger to their settlements.
other indians in other tribes survived and were still capable of attacking english settlements.
the new england settlers also faced competition from the natives and also from the dutch and the french who claimed the territory on which some of the outlying settlements were established.
the french in particular a pequot village destroyed an english artist drew this view of a fortified pequot village in connecticut surrounded by english soldiers and their allies from other tribes during the pequot war in 1637 the invaders massacred more than 600 residents of the settlement.
the library of congress lc usz62 320jj posed a constant threat to the english through their alliance with the algonquins.
in later years the french would join forces with indians in their attacks on the new england frontier.
the character of the pequot war king philips war and many other conflicts between natives and settlers in the years that followed was crucially affected by earlier exchanges of technology between the english and the tribes.
in particular the indians made effective use of a new flintlock weapon introduced to new england by musket miles standish and others the flintlock rifle.
it replaced the earlier staple of colonial musketry the matchlock rifle which proved too heavy cumbersome and inaccurate to be useful in the kind of combat characteristic of anglo indian struggles.
the match lock had to be steadied on a fixed object and ignited with a match before firing the flintlock could be held up with out support and fired without a match.
indians using bows and arrows often outmatched settlers using the clumsy matchlocks.
many english settlers were slow to give up their cumber some matchlocks for the lighter flintlocks.
but the indians recognized the advantages of the newer rifles right away and began purchasing them in large quantities as part of their regular trade with the colonists.
despite rules forbidding colonists to instruct natives on how to use and repair the weapons the natives learned to handle the rifles and even to repair them very effectively on their own.
they even built a substantial orge for shaping and repairing rifle parts.
in king philips war r e yery casualties on both sides were a result of the use ot these more advanced rifles.
transplantations and borderlands 49 indians also used more traditional military technologies in their conflicts with the english especially the construction of forts.
the narragansetts allies of the wampanoags in king philips war built an enormous fort in the great swamp of rhode island in 1675 which became the site of one of the bloodiest battles of the war before english attackers burned it down.
after that a band of narragansetts set out to build a large stone fort with the help of a member of the tribe who had learned masonry while working with the english.
when english soldiers discovered the stone fort in 1676 after the end of king philips war they killed most of its occupants and destroyed it.
in the end the technological skills of the indians both those they borrowed from the english and those they drew from their own traditions proved no match for the overwhelming advantages of the english settlers in both numbers and firepower.
the restoration colonies by the end of the 1630s english settlers had established six significant colonies in the new world virginia massachusetts maryland connecticut rhode island and new hampshire.
maine remained officially part of massachusetts until after the american revolution.
but for nearly thirty years after lord baltimore received the charter for maryland in 1632 the english government launched no additional colonial ventures.
it was preoccupied with troubles of its own at home.
the english civil war englands problems had begun during the rule of james i who origins attracted widespread opposition before he died in 1625 james however did not openly challenge parliament.
his son charles i was not so prudent.
he dissolved parliament in 1629 and began ruling as an absolute monarch steadily alienating a growing number of his subjects especially the members of the powerful puritan community.
finally desperately in need of money charles called parliament back into session and asked it to levy new taxes.
but he antagonized the members by dismissing them again twice in two years.
in 1642 some of them organized a military challenge to the king thus launching the english civil war.
the conflict between the cavaliers the supporters of the king and the roundheads the forces of parliament who were mostly puritans lasted seven years.
finally in 1649 the roundheads defeated the kings forces captured charles himself and in an action that horrified not only much of continental europe at the time but also future generations of english men and women beheaded the monarch.
to replace him they elevated the stern roundhead leader oliver cromwell to the position of protector from which he ruled for the next nine years.
when cromwell died in 1658 his son and heir proved unable to maintain his authority.
two years later king charles ii son of the beheaded monarch returned from exile and claimed the throne.
charles ii faced some of the same problems as his father mostly because of the belief held by many that secretly he was a roman catholic.
the king supported religious toleration which to the dismay of many protestants allowed catholicism in england once again.
the parliament refused to agree and prudently charles did not fight them for the right of catholics to worship openly.
he did however make a private agreement with louis xiv of france that he would become catholic which he did only on his deathbed.
his son james ii continued to face many of the same difficulties.
among the many results of the stuart restoration the return of charles ii a member of the stuart proprietary royal family was the resumption of coloni colonies zation in america.
charles ii quickly began to reward faithful courtiers with grants of land in the new world and in the twenty five years of his reign he issued charters for four additional colonies carolina new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
the new colonies were all proprietary ventures modeled on maryland rather than on virginia and massachusetts thus exposing an important change in the nature of american settlement.
no longer were private companies interested in launching colonies realizing at last that there were no quick profits to be had in the new world.
the goal of the new colonies was not so much quick commercial success as permanent settlements that would provide proprietors with land and power.
the carolinas carolina a name derived from the latinate form of charles was like maryland carved in part from the original virginia grant.
charles ii awarded the territory to a group of eight court favorites all prominent politicians already active in colonial affairs.
in successive charters issued in 1663 and 1665 the eight proprietors received joint title to a vast territory stretching south to the florida peninsula and west to the pacific ocean.
like lord baltimore they received almost kingly powers over their grant.
also like lord baltimore they expected to profit as landlords and land speculators.
they reserved large estates for themselves and they proposed to sell or give away the rest in smaller tracts using a headright system similar to those in virginia and maryland and to collect annual payments quit rents from the settlers.
although committed anglicans themselves they welcomed any settlers they could get.
the charter of the colony guaranteed religious freedom to everyone who would worship as a christian.
the proprietors also promised a incentives for measure of political freedom laws were to settlement be made by a representative assembly.
with these incentives they hoped to attract settlers from the existing american colonies and thus to avoid the expense of financing expeditions from england.
their initial efforts failed dismally and some of the original proprietors gave up.
but one man anthony ashley cooper soon to become the earl of shaftesbury persisted.
cooper convinced his partners to finance migrations to carolina from i 50 chapter 2 colonists as well.
by restricting all trade to british ships the laws encouraged the colonists who were themselves legally british subjects to create an important shipbuilding industry of their own.
and because the english wanted to import as many goods as possible from their own colonies as opposed to importing them from rival nations they encouraged and at times subsidized the development of american production of goods they needed among them iron silk and lumber.
despite the bitter complaints the laws provoked in america in the late seventeenth century and the bitter conflicts they would help to provoke decades later the system of the navigation acts served the interests of the british and the americans alike reasonably well through most of the eighteenth century.
the dominion of new england enforcement of the navigation acts required not only the stationing of customs officials in america but also the establishment of an agency in england to oversee colonial affairs.
in 1679 charles ii attempted to increase his control over massachusetts which behaved at times as if its leaders considered it an independent nation by stripping the colony of its authority over new hampshire and chartering a separate royal colony there whose governor he would himself appoint.
five years later after the massachusetts general court defied instructions from parliament to enforce the navigation acts charles revoked the massachusetts corporate charter and made it a royal colony.
charles ips brother and successor james ii who came to the throne in 1685 went much further.
in 1686 he created a single dominion of new england which combined the government of massachusetts with the governments of the rest of the new england colonies and in 1688 with those of new york and new jersey as well.
he eliminated the existing assemblies within the new dominion and appointed a single governor sir edmund andros to supervise the entire sir edmund region from boston.
andros was an able andros administrator but a stern and tactless man his rigid enforcement of the navigation acts his brusque dismissal of the colonists claims to the rights of englishmen and his crude and arbitrary tactics made him highly unpopular.
he was particularly despised in massachusetts where he tried to strengthen the anglican church.
the glorious revolution0 james ii unlike his father was openly catholic.
not only that he made powerful enemies as he appointed his fellow catholics to high offices.
the restoration of catholicism led to fears among protestants that the pope would soon overtake england and that the king would defer to him.
at the same time james ii tried to control parliament and the courts to make himself an absolute monarch.
by 1688 the opposition to the king was so great that the parliament voted to force james ii from the throne.
james didnt resist giving up the crown remembering his grandfathers execution.
he eventually left the country and spent the rest of his life in france.
his daughter mary ii and her husband william of orange of the netherlandsboth protestants replaced james ii to reign jointly.
no catholic monarch has reigned since.
this bloodless coup came to be known as the glorious revolution when bostonians heard of the overthrow of james ii they moved quickly to unseat his unpopular viceroy in new england.
andros managed to escape an angry mob but he was arrested and imprisoned as he sought to flee the city dressed as a woman.
the new sovereigns in england chose not to con end of the test the topplin8 of andros and quickly ac dominion quiesced in what the colonists had in effect already done abolishing the dominion of new england and restoring separate colonial governments.
they did not however accede to all the colonists desires.
in 1691 they combined massachusetts with plymouth and made it a royal colony.
the new charter restored the general court massachusettss legislature but it gave the crown the right to appoint the governor.
it also replaced church membership with property ownership as the basis for voting and officeholding and required the puritan leaders of the colony to tolerate anglican worship.
andros had been governing new york through a lieutenant governor captain francis nicholson who enjoyed the support of the wealthy merchants and fur traders of the prov ince the same groups who had dominated the colony for years.
other less favored colonists farmers mechanics small traders and shopkeepers had a long accumulation of grievances against both nicholson and his allies.
the leader of the new york dissidents was jacob leisler a german immigrant and a prosperous merchant who had married into a prominent dutch family but had never won acceptance as one of the colonys ruling class.
much like nathaniel bacon in virginia the ambitious leisler resented his exclusion and eagerly grasped the opportunity to challenge the colonial elite.
in may 1689 when news of the glorious revolution in england and the fall of andros in boston reached new york leisler raised a militia captured the city fort drove nicholson into exile and proclaimed himself the new head of government in new york.
for two years he tried in vain to stabilize his power in the colony amid fierce factional rivalry.
in 169l when william and mary appointed a new governor leisler briefly resisted this challenge to his authority.
although he soon yielded his hesitation allowed his many political enemies to charge him with treason.
he and one of his sons in law were hanged drawn and quartered.
fierce rivalry between what became known as the leislerians and the anti leislerians dominated the politics of new york for many years thereafter.
in maryland many people erroneously assumed when they heard news of the glorious revolution that their proprietor transplantations and borderlands 63 john coodes cat ic lorc baltimore who was liv rebellion england had sided with the catholic james ii and opposed william and mary.
so in 1689 an old opponent of the proprietor s government john coode started a new revolt which drove out lord baltimores officials in the name of protestantism.
through an elected convention his supporters chose a committee to run the government and petitioned the crown for a charter as a royal colony.
in 1691 william and mary complied stripping the proprietor of his authority.
the colonial assembly established the church of england as the colonys official religion and forbade catholics to hold public office to vote or even to practice their religion in public.
maryland became a proprietary colony again in 1715 but only after the fifth lord baltimore joined the anglican church.
as a result of the glorious revolution the colonies revived their representative assemblies and successfully thwarted the plan for colonial unification.
in the process they legitimized the idea that the colonists had some rights within the empire that the english government needed to consider their views in making policies that affected them.
but the glorious revolution in america was not as many americans would later come to believe a clear demonstration of american resolve to govern itself or a clear victory for colonial self rule.
in new york and maryland in particular the uprisings had more to do with local factional and religious divisions than with any larger vision of the nature of the empire.
and while the insurgencies did succeed in eliminating the short lived dominion of new england their ultimate results were governments that increased the crowns potential authority in many ways.
as the first century of english settlement in america came to its end and as colonists celebrated their victories over arbitrary british rule they were becoming more a part of the imperial system than ever before.
looking back the english colonization of north america was part of a larger effort by several european nations to expand the reach of their increasingly commercial societies.
indeed for many years the british empire in america was among the smallest and weakest of the imperial ventures there overshadowed by the french to the north and the spanish to the south.
in the british colonies along the atlantic seaboard new agricultural and commercial societies gradually emerged in the south centered on the cultivation of tobacco and cotton and reliant on slave labor and in the northern colonies centered on traditional food crops and based mostly on free labor.
substantial trading centers emerged in such cities as boston new york philadelphia and charles town and a growing proportion of the population became prosperous and settled in these increasingly complex communities.
by the early eighteenth century english settlement had spread from northern new england in what is now maine south into georgia.
but this growing british empire coexisted with and often found itself in conflict with the presence of other europeans most notably the spanish and the french in other areas of north america.
in these borderlands societies did not assume the settled prosperous form they were taking in the tidewater and new england.
they were raw sparsely populated settlements in which europeans including over time increasing numbers of english had to learn to accommodate not only one another but also the still substantial indian tribes with whom they shared these interior lands.
by the middle of the eighteenth century there was a significant european presence across a broad swath of north america from florida to maine and from texas to mexico to california only a relatively small part of it controlled by the british.
but changes were under way within the british empire that would soon lead to its dominance through a much larger area of north america.
key terms people places events anne hutchinson 45 antinomianism 45 bacons rebellion 40 dominion of new england 62 george and cecilius calvert 40 glorious revolution 62 headright 38 jacob leisler 62 james oglethorpe 57 john smith 36 john winthrop 43 king philips war 48 massachusetts bay company 43 mayflower compact 42 metacomet 48 middle ground 60 navigation acts 61 pequot war 47 plymouth plantation 42 powhatan 36 quakers 52 quitrent 38 roger williams 45 sir william berkeley 40 theocracy 44 virginia house of burgesses 38 william bradford 42 william penn 53 64 chapter 3 and families remained until at least the mid eighteenth century the extraordinarily high mortality rate.
under those circumstances the traditional male centered family structure of england by which husbands and fathers exercised firm even dictatorial control over the lives of their wives and children was difficult to maintain.
because so few families remained intact for long rigid patterns of male authority were constantly undermined.
standards of sexual behavior were also more flexible in the south than they were in england or other parts of america.
because of the large numbers of indentured servants who were forbidden to marry until their terms of service expired premarital sexual relationships were frequent.
female servants who became pregnant before the expiration of their terms could expect harsh treatment heavy fines whippings if no one could pay the fines an extra year or two of service added to their contract and the loss of their children after weaning.
bastard children were themselves bound out as indentures at a very early age.
on the other hand a pregnant woman whose term of service expired before the birth of her child or whose partner was able to buy her remaining time from her master might expect to marry quickly.
over a third of chesapeake marriages occurred with the bride already pregnant.
women in the chesapeake could anticipate a life consumed with childbearing.
the average wife became pregnant every two years.
those who lived long enough bore an average of eight children apiece up to five of whom typically died in infancy or early childhood.
since childbirth was one of the most frequent causes of female death relatively few women survived to see all their children grow to maturity.
for all the hardships women encountered in the seventeenth century south they also enjoyed more power and greater independence in the south a greater level of freedom than women in other parts of america or than southern women in later years.
because men were plentiful and women scarce females had considerable latitude in choosing husbands.
they also often had no fathers or other male relatives nearby trying to control their choices.
because women generally married at a much younger age than men they often outlived their husbands even though female life expectancy was somewhat shorter than male.
widows were often left with several children and with responsibility for managing a farm or plantation a circumstance of enormous hardship but one that also gave them significant economic power.
widows seldom remained unmarried for long however.
those who had no grown sons to work the tobacco farms and plantations had particular need for male assistance and marriage was the surest way to secure it.
since many widows married men who were themselves widowers complex combinations of households were frequent.
with numerous stepchildren half brothers and half sisters living together in a single household women often had to play the role of peacemaker a role that may have further enhanced their authority within the family.
by the early eighteenth century the character of the chesapeake population was beginning to change and with it the nature of the typical family.
life expectancy was increasing indentured servitude was in decline and natural repro duction was becoming the principal source revival of r h h patriarchy w ite population increase.
the sex ratio was becoming more equal.
one result of these changes was that life for white people in the region became less perilous and less arduous.
another result was that guide to the seasons among their many purposes almanacs sought to help farmers predict weather and plan for the demands of changing seasons.
this illustration part of a calendar of farming images shows a man and a woman tending fields in july in preparation for the coming harvest.
american antiquarian society society and culture in provincial america 71 women lost some of the power that their small numbers had once given them.
as families grew more stable traditional patterns of male authority revived.
by the mid eighteenth century southern families were becoming highly patriarchal that is dominated by the male head of the family.
women and families in new england in new england where many more immigrants arrived with family members and where death rates declined quickly family structure was much more stable than it was in the chesapeake and hence much more traditional.
because the sex ratio was reasonably balanced most men could expect to marry.
women however remained in the minority and as in the chesapeake they married young began producing children early and continued to do so well into their thirties.
in contrast to the south however northern children were more likely to survive the average family raised six to eight children to maturity and families were more likely to remain intact.
fewer new england women became widows and those who did generally lost their husbands later in life.
hence women were less often cast in roles independent of their husbands.
young women moreover had less control over the conditions of marriage both because there were fewer unmarried men vying for them and because their fathers were more often alive and able to exercise control over their choice of husbands.
among other things increased longevity meant that unlike in the chesapeake where three fourths of all children lost at least one parent before the age of twenty one white parents in new england usually lived to see their children and even their grandchildren grow to maturity.
still the lives of most new england women were nearly as consumed by childbearing and child rearing as those of women in the chesapeake.
even women who lived into their sixties spent the majority of their mature years with young chil dren in the home.
the longer lives in new england also meant that parents continued to control their children far longer than did parents in the south.
although they were less likely than parents in england to arrange marriages for their children few sons and daughters could choose spouses entirely independent of their parents wishes.
men usually depended on their fathers for land generally a prerequisite for beginning families of their own.
women needed dowries from their parents if they were to attract desirable husbands.
stricter parental supervision of children meant too that fewer women became pregnant before marriage than in the south although even in puritan new england the premarital pregnancy rate was not insubstantial as high as 20 percent in some communities.
puritanism placed a high value on the family which was the principal economic and religious unit within every com munity.
at the same time however p p v purinism enforced the dea o need absolute male authority and the assumption of female weakness and inferiority.
women were life spans expected to be modest and submissive.
such popular girls names as prudence patience chastity and comfort suggest something about puritan expectations of female behavior.
a wife was expected to devote herself to serving the needs of her husband and household.
the beginnings of slavery in british america almost from the beginning of european settlement in north america there was a demand for african workers to supplement the always scarce southern labor supply.
the demand grew rapidly once tobacco cultivation became a staple of the chesapeake economy.
but the supply of african laborers was limited during much of the seventeenth century because the atlantic slave trade did not at first serve the english colonies in america.
portuguese slavers who had dominated the trade since the sixteenth century shipped captive men and women from the west coast of africa to the new european colonies in south america and the caribbean.
gradually dutch and french navigators joined the slave trade.
but a substantial commerce in slaves grew up within the americas particularly between the caribbean islands and the southern colonies of british america.
by the late seventeenth century the supply of african workers in north america was becoming plentiful.
as the commerce in slaves grew more extensive and sophisticated it also grew more horrible.
before it ended in the nineteenth century it was responsible for the forced immigration of as many as 11 million africans to the new world.
until the late eighteenth century the number of african immigrants to the middle americas was higher than that of passage europeans.
native african chieftains captured members of enemy tribes in battle tied them together in long lines or coffles and sold them in the flourishing slave marts on the african coast.
then after some haggling on the docks between the european traders and the african suppliers the terrified victims were packed into the dark filthy holds of ships for the horrors of the mid dle passage the journey to america.
for weeks sometimes even months the african prisoners remained chained in the bowels of the slave ships.
conditions varied from one ship to another.
some captains took care to see that their potentially valuable cargo remained reasonably healthy.
others accepted the deaths of numerous africans as inevitable and tried to cram as many as possible into their ships to ensure that enough would survive to yield a profit at journeys end.
on such ships the african prisoners were sometimes packed together in such close quarters that they were unable to stand hardly able to breathe.
some ships supplied them with only minimal food and water.
women were often victims of rape and other sexual abuse.
those who died en route were simply thrown overboard.
upon arrival in the new world slaves were auctioned off to white landowners and transported frightened and bewildered to their new homes.
debating the past the origins of slavery m t t c debate among historians over how and why white americans created a system of slave x h u labor in the seventeenth century and how and why they determined that people of african descent and no others should populate that system has been a long and unusually heated one.
at its center is the question of whether slavery was a result of white racism or whether slavery created racism.
in 1950 oscar and mary handlin published an influential article origins of the southern labor system comparing slavery to other systems of unfreedom in the colonies.
what differentiated slavery from other conditions of servitude they argued was that it was restricted to people of african descent it was permanent and it passed from one generation to the next.
the unique characteristics of slavery the handlins maintained were part of an effort by colonial legislatures to increase the available labor force.
white laborers needed an incentive to come to america black laborers forcibly imported from africa did not.
the distinction between the conditions of white workers and the conditions of black workers was therefore based on legal and economic motives not on racism.
racism emerged to justify slavery it did not cause slavery.
winthrop d jordan was one of a number of historians who later challenged the handlins thesis and argued that white racism more than economic interests produced african slavery.
in white over black 1968 and other works jordan argued that europeans had long viewed people of color and black africans in particular as inferior beings appropriate for serving whites.
those attitudes migrated with white europeans to the new world and white racism shaped the treatment of africans in america and the nature of the slave labor system from the beginning.
george fredrickson echoed jordan s emphasis on the importance of racism as an independent factor reinforcing slavery but unlike jordan he argued that racism did not precede slavery.
the treatment of blacks he wrote engendered a cultural and psycho social racism that after a certain point took on a life of its own racism although the child of slavery not only outlived its parent but grew stronger and more independent after slavery s demise.
in black majority 1974 a study of seventeenth century south carolina peter wood moved the debate away from racism and back toward social and economic conditions.
wood demonstrated that blacks and whites often worked together on relatively equal terms in the early years of settlement.
but as rice cultivation expanded finding white laborers willing to do the arduous work became more difficult.
the forcible importation of african workers and the creation of a system of permanent bondage was a response to a growing demand for labor and to fears among whites that without slavery a black labor force would be difficult to control.
edmund morgan argued similarly in american slavery american freedom 1975 that the southern labor system was at first relatively flexible and later grew more rigid.
in colonial virginia he claimed white settlers did not at first intend to create a system of permanent bondage.
but as the tobacco economy grew and created a high demand for cheap labor white landowners began to feel uneasy about their dependence on a large group of dependent white workers since such workers were difficult to recruit and control.
thus slavery was less a result of racism than of the desire of white landowners to find a reliable and stable labor force.
in the making of new world slavery 1996 robin blackburn argued that while race was a factor in allowing whites to justify to themselves the enslavement of africans the real reasons for slavery were hardheaded economic decisions by ambitious entrepreneurs who realized early on that a slave labor system in the labor intensive agricultural world of the american south and the caribbean was more profitable than a free labor system.
slavery served the interests of a powerful combination of groups planters merchants governments industrialists and consumers.
race may have been a rationale for slavery allowing planters and traders to justify to themselves the terrible human costs of the system.
but the most important reason for the system was not just racism but the pursuit of profit and the success of the system in producing it.
blackburn concluded that slavery was not an antiquated remnant of an older world but rather a recognizably modern labor system that however ugly served the needs of an emerging market economy.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 what do historians say is the relationship between racism and slavery.
2 what are the economic arguments put forward by historians to explain the system of slave labor that developed in america.
do these arguments account fully for the development of slavery.
3 why was slavery more successful than other labor systems in meeting the labor needs of colonial americas market economy.
the first african laborers arrived in english north america before 1620 and as english seamen began to establish themselves in the slave trade the flow of africans to the colonies gradually increased.
but north america was always a much less important market for africans than were other parts of the new world especially the caribbean islands and brazil whose labor intensive sugar economies created an especially large demand for slaves.
less than 5 percent of the africans imported to the americas went directly to the english colonies on the mainland.
most blacks who ended up in what became the united states spent time first in the west indies.
not until the 1670s did traders start importing blacks directly from africa to north america.
even then however the flow remained small for a time mainly because a single group the royal african company of england maintained a monopoly on trade in the mainland colonies and managed as a result to keep prices high and supplies low.
v cunntig uuil m me nistory oi the african population in north america came in the mid 1690s when the roval african companys monopoly was finally broken.
with the trade now opened to english and colonial merchants on a competitive basis prices fell and the number of africans arriving in north america rapidly increased.
by the end of the seventeenth cen growing tury only about one in ten of the residents slave f the colonies were africans about 25 06b population in all.
but because africans were so heavily concentrated in a few southern colo nies they were already beginning to outnumber europeans in some areas.
the high ratio of men to women among african immigrants there were perhaps two males to one female in most areas retarded the natural increase of the black population.
but in the chesapeake at least more new slaves were being born by 1700 than were being imported from africa.
in south carolina by contrast the difficult conditions of rice cultivation and the high death rates of those who worked in the rice fields ensured that the black population would barely be able to sustain itself through natural increase until much later.
between 1700 and 1760 the number of africans in the colonies increased tenfold to about a quarter of a million.
a relatively small number 16 000 in 1763 lived in new england there were slightly more 29 000 in the middle colonies.
the vast majority however continued to live in the south.
by then the flow of free white laborers to that region had all but stopped and africans had become securely established as the basis of the southern workforce.
it was not entirely clear at first that the status of african laborers in america would be fundamentally different from that of white indentured servants.
in the rugged conditions of the seventeenth century south it was often difficult for europeans and africans to maintain strictly separate roles.
in uncertain status some areas south carolina for example where the number of african arrivals swelled more quickly than anywhere else whites and blacks lived and worked together for a time on terms of relative equality.
some blacks were treated much like white hired servants and some were freed after a fixed term of servitude.
a few africans themselves became land owners and some apparently owned slaves of their own.
by the early eighteenth century however a rigid distinction had become established between black and white.
see debating the past above.
masters were contractually obliged to free white servants after a fixed term of servitude.
there was no such necessity to free black workers and the assumption slowly spread that blacks would remain in service permanently.
another incentive for making the status of africans rigid was that the children of slaves provided white landowners with a self perpetuating labor force.
72 73 74 chapter 3 mulberry plantation 1770 this painting of a rice plantation in south carolina is unusual in placing the slave quarters in the forefront of the picture.
the steep roofs of the slave cabins which were built by the slaves themselves reflected african architectural styles.
the high roofs helped keep the cabins cool by allowing the heat to rise into the rafters.
the masters house and adjacent chapel built in conventional european style are in the background.
view of mulberry house and street 1805 by thomas coram american 1756 1811 oil on paper.
image gibbes museum of art carolina art association 1968 18 01 population but it was the planters who dominated the southern agrarian economy.
most landowners lived in rough cabins or houses with their servants or slaves nearby.
few landowners lived in anything resembling aristocratic splendor.
plantation slavery african slaves of course lived very differently than white planters.
on the smaller farms with only a handful of slaves there was not always a rigid social separation between whites and blacks.
but by the mid eighteenth century over three fourths of all blacks lived on plantations of at least ten slaves nearly half lived in communities of fifty slaves or more.
in these larger establishments africans developed a society and culture of their own influenced by their white masters to be sure but also partly independent of them.
although whites seldom encouraged formal marriages among slaves africans themselves developed an elaborate family structure.
this became possible beginning in the eighteenth century as a result of the increased life expectancy of slaves the gradual equalization of the sex ratio and the growth of the population through natural increase.
slaves attempted to construct nuclear families and they managed at times to build stable households even to work together growing their own food in gardens provided by their masters.
but such efforts were in constant jeopardy.
any family member could be sold at any time to another planter even to one in another colony.
as a result the black family developed in ways different from its white counterpart.
africans placed special emphasis on extended kinship networks even creating surrogate relatives for those who were separated from their own families.
they adapted themselves in short to difficult conditions over which they had limited control.
african workers also developed languages of their own.
in south carolina for example the early slaves communicated with one another in gullah a hybrid of english and slave culture african tongues which enabled them to engage in conversations their white masters could not understand.
there emerged too a distinctive slave religion which blended christianity with african folklore.
nevertheless slave society was heavily tied to white society.
african house servants for example at times lived in what was by the standards of slavery great luxury but they were also isolated from their own community and under constant surveillance from whites.
black women were often subjected to unwanted sexual advances from owners and overseers and hence to bearing mulatto children who were rarely recognized by their white fathers but generally accepted as members of the slave community.
on some society and culture in provincial america 85 plantations african workers received kindness and even affection from their masters and mistresses and displayed genuine devotion in return.
on others they encountered physical brutality and occasionally even sadism against which they were powerless.
there were occasional acts of individual resistance by slaves against harsh masters and at least twice during the colonial period there were actual slave rebellions.
in the most import stono ant such revolt the so called stono rebellion rebellion in south carolina in 1739 about 100 africans rose up seized weapons killed several whites and attempted to escape south to florida.
whites quickly crushed the uprising and executed most participants.
the most frequent form of resistance was simply running away but for most slaves that provided no real solu tion either.
there was nowhere to go.
most slaves male and female worked as field hands with women also shouldering the additional burdens of cooking and child rearing.
on the larger plantations that aspired to genuine self sufficiency some slaves learned trades and crafts blacksmithing carpentry shoemaking spinning weaving sewing midwifery and others.
these skilled craftsmen and craftswomen were at times hired out to other planters.
some set up their own establishments in towns or cities and shared their profits with their owners.
on occasion they were able to buy their freedom.
there was a small free black population living in southern cities by the time of the revolution.
the puritan community a very different form of community emerged in puritan new england but one that was also distinctively american.
the characteristic social unit in new england was not the isolated farm but the town.
each new settlement drew up a covenant among its members binding all residents in a religious and so cial commitment to unity and harmony.
some such settlements consisted of people who had emigrated to america patterns of settlement concord lexington lincoln waltham cambridge commonly held land privately held lots john goodnow s holdings residences meetinghouse 1 4 1 2 km the new england town sudbury massachusetts 17th century just as the plantation was a characteristic social form in the southern colonies the town was the th nraanization of sudbury massachusetts a town west of boston in the early years in the seventeenth century note the location of the most common social unit in new england.
this map shows tne orgariizduui i u j houses which are grouped mostly together around a shared pasture or commons and near the church.
note too the outlymg del s which were divided among res ents of the town even though they were often no connected to theland on which they lived.
the gray areas of the map illustrate the holdings of a single resident of sudbury john goodnow whose house was on the common but whose lands were scattered over a number of areas of sudbury.
based on sumner chilton powell puntan ullage.
the format on of a new england town copynght 0 1963 bg wesleyan un vers ty.
f boston newton what aspects of new england life might help explain the clustering of residences at the center of the town.
88 chapter 4 war.
jeremy lister a minuteman in lexington wrote later we got all over the bay and landed on the opposite shore betwixt twelve and one oclock and was on our march by one which was at first through some swamps and slips of the sea till we got into the road leading to lexington soon after which the country people begun to fire their alarm guns light their beacons to raise the country.
to the best of my recollection about 4 oclock in the morning being the 19th of april the 5 front compys.
was ordered to load which we did it was not immediately clear to the british and even to many americans that the skirmishes at lexington and concord were the first battles of a war.
many saw them as simply another example of the tensions that thf revolution had been afflictin anglo american re begins lations for years.
but whether they rec ognized it at the time or not the british and the americans had taken a decisive step.
the war for independence had begun.
looking back when the french and indian war ended in 1763 it might have seemed reasonable to expect that relations between the english colonists in america and great britain itself would have been cemented more firmly than ever.
america and britain had fought together in a great war against the french and their indian allies.
they had won impressive victories.
they had vastly expanded the size of the british empire.
but the end of the french and indian war altered the imperial relationship forever in ways that ultimately drove americans to rebel against english rule and begin another war for independence.
to the british the lesson of the war was that the colonies in america needed firmer control from london.
the empire was now much bigger and it needed better administration.
the war had produced great debts and the americans among the principal beneficiaries of the war should help pay them.
and so for more than a decade after the end of the fighting the british tried one strategy after another to tighten control over and extract money from the colonies all of them in the end failures.
to the colonists this effort to tighten imperial rule was both a betrayal of the sacrifices they had made in the war and a challenge to their long developing assumptions about the rights of english people to rule themselves.
gradually white americans came to see in the british policies evidence of a conspiracy to establish tyranny in the new world.
and so throughout the 1760s and 1770s the colonists developed ever more overt and effective forms of resistance.
by the time the first shots were fired in the american revolution in 1775 britain and america once bonded so closely to one another that most white americans considered themselves just as english as any resident of london had come to view each other as two very different societies.
their differences which came to seem irreconcilable propelled them into a war that would change the course of history.
key t erms people places events albany plan 100 benjamin franklin 100 boston massacre 115 boston tea party 119 charles townshend 114 coercive acts 119 committees of correspondence 123 creoles 101 currency act 111 daughters of liberty 119 first continental congress 123 george grenville 109 impressment 103 iroquois confederacy 101 lord north 115 mutiny act 110 patrick henry 113 proclamation of 1763 109 quebec act 119 samuel adams 116 sons of liberty 122 stamp act 111 stamp act congress 113 sugar act 113 tea act 118 townshend duties 115 virginia resolves 113 william pitt 103 recall and reflect 1 how did the seven years war and its outcome affect britains attitude and policies toward its north american colonies.
2 which native american tribes fought in the french and indian war and how did the wars outcome affect them.
what were the wars effects on native americans.
3 how and why did the colonists attitude toward britain change from the time of the seven years war to the beginning of the american revolution.
4 what were the philosophical underpinnings of the colonists revolt against britain.
5 what did the slogan no taxation without representation mean and why was it a rallying cry for the colonists.
the empire in transition 127 significant events 1754 albany plan for intercolonial cooperation rejected french and indian war begins in north america 1756 seven years war begins in europe 1771 regulator movement quelled in north carolina 1770 boston massacre most townshend duties repealed 1760 george iii becomes king french army surrenders to amherst at montreal 1764 sugar act passed currency act passed 1773 tea act passed bostonians stage tea party 1772 committees of correspondence established in boston gaspee incident in rhode island 1765 stamp act crisis mutiny act passed 1766 stamp act repealed declaratory act passed 1775 clashes at lexington and concord begin american revolution j774 intolerable acts passed first continental congress meets at philadelphia 1767 townshend duties imposed the american revolution looking ahead 1 what were the military strategies both british and american of each of the three phases of the american revolution.
how successful were these strategies during each phase.
surrender of cornwallis on october 19 1781 lord charles cornwallis surrendered to george washington at yorktown.
this painting by james s baillie depicts the event that ended the hostilities between britain and the united states.
gilder lehrman collection new york usa the bridgeman art library 2 how did the american revolution become an international conflict not just a colonial war against the british.
3 how did the new national government of the united states reflect the assumptions of republicanism.
setting the stage two struggles occurred simultaneously during the seven years of war that began in april 1775 one was the military conflict with great britain.
the second was a political battle within america.
the military conflict was by the standards of later wars relatively modest.
by the standards of its own day however it was unusually savage pitting not only army against army but also the civilian population against an external force.
the shift of the war from a traditional conventional struggle to a new kind of conflict a revolutionary war for liberation made it possible for the american army finally to defeat the vastly more powerful british.
at the same time americans were wrestling with the great political questions the conflict necessarily produced first whether to demand independence from britain second how to structure the new nation they had proclaimed and third how to deal with questions the revolution had raised about slavery the rights of indians the role of women and limits of religious tolerance in the new american society.
only the first question had been resolved when the british surrendered at yorktown in 1781 but by then the united states had already established itself as a new kind of nation one dedicated to enlightened ideals.
neither at the time nor later did the united states always follow those ideals.
at the same time that revolutionaries were celebrating the rights of man they were consolidating the enslavement of african americans depriving loyalists american colonists who supported the british during the revolution of rights and property barring women from participation in public life and denying indian tribes the limited rights the british had accorded them.
yet despite these contradictions they believed that the nation should try to live up to the ideals proclaimed in the revolution as a continuing influence on the future history of the united states.
the states united although many americans had been anticipating a military conflict with britain for months even years the actual beginning of hostilities in 1775 found the colonies generally unprepared for the enormous challenges awaiting them.
america was an unformed nation with a population less than a third as large as the 9 million of great britain and with vastly inferior economic and military resources.
it faced the task of mobilizing for war against the worlds greatest armed power at the same time americans were deeply divided about what they were fighting for.
defining american war aims three weeks after the battles of lexington and concord the second continental congress met in the state house in philadelphia with delegates from every colony except georgia which sent no representative until the following autumn.
the members agreed to support the war but they disagreed at times profoundly about its purpose.
at one pole was a group led by the adams cousins john and samuel richard henry lee of virginia and others who favored complete independence from great britain.
at the other pole was a group led by such moderates as john dickinson of pennsylvania who hoped for modest reforms in the imperial relationship that would permit an early reconciliation with great britain.
most of the delegates tried to find some middle ground between these positions.
they demonstrated their uncertainty in two very different declarations which they adopted in quick succession.
they approved one last conciliatory appeal to the king the olive branch ch petition which the british government rejected.
then on july 6 1775 they adopted an antagonistic declaration of the causes and necessity of taking up arms it proclaimed that the british government had left the american people with only two alternatives unconditional submission to the tyranny of irritated ministers or resistance by force 129 130 chapter 5 the battle of germantown the battle of germantown a campaign intended by washington to liberate philadelphia from british occupation took place on october 4 1777 in this painting by alonzo chappel 1828 1887 battle of germantown attack on judge chews house 1860 washington s much larger force cannot defeat the 120 british infantrymen who barricaded themselves in the summer home of loyalist benjamin chew.
twelve thousand american troops were forced to retreat into nearby montgomery county.
chicago history museum usa the bridgeman art library british take rejected howes offer and chose to con new york tinue the war a decision that led inevitably to a succession of rapid defeats.
the british pushed the defenders off long island compelled them to abandon manhattan and then drove them in slow retreat over the plains of new jersey across the delaware river and into pennsylvania.
for eighteenth century europeans warfare was a seasonal activity.
fighting generally stopped in cold weather.
the british settled down for the winter at various points in new jersey leaving an outpost of hessians german mercenaries at trenton on the delaware river.
but washington did not sit still.
on christmas night 1776 he boldly recrossed the icy river surprised and scattered the hessians and occupied the town.
then he advanced to princeton and drove a british force from their base in the college there.
but washington was unable to hold either princeton or trenton and he finally took refuge for the rest of the winter in the hills around morristown new jersey.
for their campaigns of 1777 the british devised a strategy to cut the united states in two.
howe would move north from britains new york city up the hudson to albany strategy while another british force would come south from canada to meet him.
one of the younger british officers the dashing john burgoyne secured command of this northern force and planned a two pronged attack along both the mohawk and the upper hudson approaches to albany.
but after setting this plan in motion howe himself abandoned it.
he decided instead to launch an assault on the rebel capital philadelphia an assault that would he hoped discourage the patriots rally the loyalists and bring the war to a speedy conclusion.
he removed the bulk of his forces from the american revolution 137 british forces american forces british victory the revolution in the north 1775 1776 after initial battles in and around boston the british forces left massachusetts and after a brief stay in halifax canada moved south to new york.
in the meantime american forces moved north in an effort to capture british strongholds in montreal and quebec with little success.
why would the british have considered new york a better base than boston.
new york by sea landed at the head of the chesapeake bay brushed washington aside at the battle of brandywine creek on september 11 and proceeded north to philadelphia which he was able to occupy with little resistance.
meanwhile washington after an unsuccessful october 4 attack at germantown just outside philadelphia went into winter quarters at valley forge.
the continental congress now dislodged from its capital reassembled at york pennsylvania.
howes move to philadelphia left burgoyne to carry out the campaign in the north alone.
burgoyne sent colonel barry st leger up the st lawrence river toward lake ontario and the headwaters of the mohawk while burgoyne himself advanced directly down the upper hudson valley.
he got off to a flying start.
he seized fort ticonderoga easily and with it an enormous store of powder and supplies this caused such dismay in congress that the delegates removed general philip schuyler from command of american forces in the north and replaced him with horatio gates.
by the time gates took command burgoyne had already experienced two staggering defeats.
in one of them at oriskany new york on august 6 a patriot band of german farmers led by nicholas herkimer held off a force of indians and tories commanded by st leger.
that gave benedict arnold time to go to the relief of fort stanwix and close off the mohawk valley to st legers advance.
in the other battle at bennington vermont on august 16 new england militiamen under the bunker hill veteran john stark severely mauled a british detachment that burgoyne had sent out to seek supplies.
short of materials with all help cut off burgoyne fought several costly engagements and then withdrew to saratoga where gates surrounded him.
on october 17 1777 burgoyne ordered what was left of his army nearly 5 000 men to surrender to the americans.
to the patriots and peoples watching from around the patriot world the new york campaign was a remarkable victory.
the british surrender at saratoga became a major turning point in the war above all perhaps because it led directly to an alliance between the united states and france.
the british failure to win the war during this period a period in which they had overwhelming advantages was in large part victory at saratoga british a result of their own mistakes.
and in assess blunders ing them the role of william howe looms large.
he abandoned his own most important strategic initiative the northern campaign leaving burgoyne to fight alone.
and even in pennsylvania where he chose to 138 chapter 5 significant events.
1775 second continental congress meets george washington appointed to command american forces battle of bunker hi 1781 cornwallis surrenders at yorktown articles of confederation ratified thomas paine s common j778 sense published batt e of trenton declaration of independence first state constitutions written debated and signed july 2 4 1781 1784 states cede western lands to confederation 1777 articles of confederation adopted washington camps at valley forge for winter burgoyne surrenders to gates at saratoga 1784 1785 first ordinances establishing procedures for settling western lands enacted 1783 treaty of paris with great britain recognizes american independence slavery abolished in massachusetts 1778 french american alliance established war shifts to the south 1787 northwest ordinance enacted 1786 1787 shays s rebellion in massachusetts 1780 cornwallis defeats gates at camden south carolina massachusetts state constitution ratified slavery abolished in pennsylvania patriots defeat tories at king s mountain south carolina 1794 anthony wayne defeats indians in ohio the constitution and the new republic the american star frederick kemmelmeyer painted this tribute to george washington sometime in the 1790s.
it was one of many efforts by artists and others to create an iconography for the new republic.
private collection photo boltin picture library the bridgeman art library looking ahead 1 what were the most important questions debated at the constitutional convention of 1787 and how were they resolved.
2 what were the main tenets of the federalist and antifederalist arguments on ratification of the constitution.
3 what were the origins of america s first party system.
setting the stage by the late 1780s most americans had grown deeply dissatisfied with the confederation government with its inability to deal with factions and instability its powerlessness as shown in dealing with shays s rebellion and its failure to handle economic problems effectively.
a decade earlier americans had deliberately avoided creating a strong national government fearing that it would encroach on the sovereignty of the individual states.
now they reconsidered.
in 1787 they produced a new constitution that created a new powerful national government the new government created in 1787 has survived for more than two centuries as one of the stablest and most successful in the world.
many americans have described the constitution s provisions as unassailable fundamental law from which all public policies all political principles all solutions of controversies must spring.
yet the adoption of the constitution did not complete the creation of the republic it only defined the terms in which debate over the future of government would continue.
americans may have agreed that the constitution was a nearly perfect document but they disagreed at times fundamentally on what that document meant.
they still do.
out of such disagreements emerged the first great political battles of the new nation.
framing a new government so unpopular and ineffectual had the confederation congress become by the mid 1780s that it began to lead an almost waiflike existence.
in 1783 its members timidly withdrew from philadelphia to escape from the clamor of army veterans demanding back pay.
they took refuge for a while in princeton a weak new jersey then moved to annapolis and in 1785 settled in new york.
through central delegates were often conspicuous largely by their absence.
only government with great difficulty did congress secure a quorum to ratify the treaty with great britain ending the revolutionary war.
eighteen members representing only eight states voted on the confederation s most important piece of legislation the northwest ordinance.
in the meantime a major public debate was beginning over the future of the confederation.
advocates of centralization weak and unpopular though the confederation was it had for a time satisfied a great many probably a majority of the people.
they believed they had fought the revolutionary war to avert the danger of what they considered remote and tyrannical authority now they wanted to keep political power centered in the states where they could carefully and closely control it.
but during the 1780s some of the wealthiest and most powerful groups in the country began to clamor for a more genuinely national government capable of dealing with the nations problems supporters of particularlv rhe economic problems that most directly afflicted them.
some a strong military men many of them members of the exclusive and hereditary society of national tlle cincinnati formed by revolutionary army officers in 1783 were disgrun government tied at the refusal of congress to fund their pensions.
they began aspiring to in fluence and invigorate the national government some even envisioned a form of military dictatorship and flirted briefly in 1783 in the so called newburgh conspiracy with a direct challenge to congress until george washington intervened and blocked the potential rebellion.
american manufacturers the artisans and mechanics of the nations cities and towns wanted to replace the various state tariffs with a uniformly high national duty merchants and shippers wanted to replace the thirteen different and largely ineffective state commercial policies with a single national one.
land speculators wanted the indian menace finally removed from their western tracts.
people who were owed money wanted to stop the states from issuing paper money which would lower the value of what they received in payment.
investors in confederation securities wanted the government to fund the debt and thus enhance the value of their securities.
large property owners looked for protection from the threat of mobs a threat 160.
the constitution and the new republic 161 george washington at mount vernon washington was in his first term as president in 1790 when an anonymous folk artist painted this view of his home at mount vernon virginia.
washington appears in uniform along with members of his family on the lawn.
after he retired from office in 1797 washington returned happily to his plantation and spent the two years before his death in 1799 amusing myself in agricultural and rural pursuits he also played host to an endless stream of visitors from throughout the country and europe.
courtesy national gallery of art washington that seemed particularly menacing in light of such episodes as shayss rebellion.
this fear of disorder and violence expressed a tension between the resolute defense of individual rights which was a core principle of the revolution and found reflection in the bill of rights p 168 and the public concern for safety and security which the occasional chaos of the confederation period had reinforced.
frequent conflicts between liberty and order became and remain a central feature of american democracy.
by 1786 these diverse demands had grown so powerful that the issue was no longer whether the confederation should be changed but how drastic the changes should be.
even the defenders of the existing system reluctantly came to agree that the government needed strengthening at its weakest point its lack of power to tax.
the most resourceful of the reformers was alexander hamilton political genius new york lawyer onetime military aide to general washington and illegitimate son of a scottish alexander merchant in the west indies.
from the be hamilton ginning hamilton had been unhappy with the articles of confederation and the weak central government they had created.
he now called for a national convention to overhaul the entire document.
he found an important ally in james madison of virginia who persuaded the virginia legislature to convene an interstate conference on commercial questions.
only five states sent delegates to the meeting held in annapolis maryland in 1786 but the delegates approved a proposal drafted by hamilton who was representing new york recommending that congress call a convention of special delegates from all the states to gather in philadelphia the next year and consider ways to render the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the union at that moment in 1786 there seemed little possibility that the philadelphia convention would attract any more interest than the meeting at annapolis had attracted.
only by winning the support of george washington the centralizers believed could they hope to prevail.
but washington at first showed little interest in joining the cause.
then early in 1787 the news of shayss rebellion spread throughout the nation.
thomas jefferson then the american minister in paris was not alarmed.
t hold he confided in a letter to james madison that a little rebellion now and then is a good thing and as necessary in the political world as storms in the physical but washington took the news less calmly.
in may he left his home at mount vernon in virginia for the constitutional convention in philadelphia.
his support gave the meeting immediate credibility.
162 chapter 6 agents of the french foreign minister prince talleyrand demanded a loan for france and a bribe for french officials before any negotiations could begin.
pinckney responded no.
not a sixpence when adams heard of the incident he sent a message to congress denouncing the french insults and urging preparations for war.
he then turned the report of the american commissioners over to congress after deleting the names of the the xyz three french agents and designating them affair only as messrs x y and z when the re port was published it created widespread popular outrage at france s actions and strong support for the federalists response.
for nearly two years after the xyz affair as it became known the united states found itself en gaged in an undeclared war with france.
adams persuaded congress to cut off all trade with france and to authorize american vessels to capture french armed the quasi ships on the high seas.
in 1798 congress war created a department of the navy and ap propriated money for the construction of new warships.
the navy soon won a number of duels with french vessels and captured eighty five ships including armed merchantmen.
the united states also began cooperating closely with the british and became an ally of britain in the war with france.
in the end france chose to conciliate the united states before the conflict grew.
adams sent another commission to paris in 1800 and the new french government headed now by first consul napoleon bonaparte agreed to a treaty with the united states that canceled the old agreement of 1778 and established new commercial arrangements.
as a result the quasi war came to a reasonably peaceful end.
repression and protest the conflict with france helped the federalists increase their majorities in congress in 1798 armed with this new strength alien and they be8an to consider ways to silence the sedition acts republican opposition.
the result was some of the most controversial legislation in american history the alien and sedition acts.
the alien act placed new obstacles in the way of foreigners who wished to become american citizens and it strengthened the presidents hand in dealing with aliens.
the sedition act allowed the government to prosecute those who engaged in sedition against the government.
in theory only libelous or treasonous activities were subject to prosecution but since such activities were open to widely varying definitions the law made it possible for the federal government to stifle almost any opposition.
the republicans interpreted the new laws as part of a federalist campaign to destroy them and fought back.
president adams signed the new laws but was cautious in implementing them.
he did not deport any aliens and he the xyz affair directory of the french government he s demanding money money money from the three diplomats at left who le p cen er represen s he monster at the top right is operating a guillotine a symbol of the violence and terror of the later staoes nf h c u pans representi 9 the united stales.
the stages of the french revolution.
0 the granger collection new york.
the constitution and the new republic 177 prevented the government from launching a major crusade against the republicans.
but the legislation had a significant repressive effect nevertheless.
the alien act helped discourage immigration and encouraged some foreigners already in the country to leave.
and the administration made use of the sedition act to arrest and convict ten men most of them republican newspaper editors whose only crime had been to criticize the federalists in government.
republican leaders pinned their hopes for a reversal of the alien and sedition acts on the state legislatures.
the supreme virginia and court had not yet established its sole right kentucky to nullify congressional legislation and resolutions there were many republican leaders who believed that the states had that power too.
the republicans laid out a theory for state action in two sets of resolutions in 1798 1799 one written anonymously by jefferson and adopted by the kentucky legislature and the other drafted by madison and approved by the virginia legislature.
the virginia and kentucky resolutions as they were known used the ideas of john locke to argue that the federal government had been formed by a compact or contract among the states and possessed only certain delegated powers.
whenever the federal government exercised any undelegated powers its acts were unauthoritative void and of no force if the parties to the contract the states decided that the central government had exceeded those powers the kentucky resolution claimed they had the right to nullify the appropriate laws.
such claims emerged again in the south in the decades before the civil war.
the republicans did not win wide support for nullification only virginia and kentucky declared the congressional statutes void.
the republicans did however succeed in elevating their dispute with the federalists to the level of a national crisis.
by the late 1790s the entire nation was deeply and bitterly divided politically.
state legislatures at times resembled battlegrounds.
even the united states congress was plagued with violent disagreements.
in one celebrated incident in the chamber of the house of representatives matthew lyon a republican from vermont responded to an insult from roger griswold a federalist from connecticut by spitting in griswolds face.
griswold attacked lyon with his cane.
lyon fought back with a pair of fire tongs and the two men ended up wrestling on the floor.
the revolution of 1800 these bitter controversies shaped the 1800 presidential election.
adams and jefferson were again the opposing candidates.
but the the election campaign of 1800 was very different from of 1800 the one preceding it.
indeed it may have been the ugliest in american history.
adams and jefferson themselves displayed reasonable dignity but their supporters showed no such restraint.
the federalists accused jefferson of being a dangerous radical and his followers of being wild men who if they came to power would bring on a reign of terror comparable to that of the french revolution.
the republicans portrayed adams as a tyrant conspiring to become king and they accused the federalists of plotting to subvert human liberty and impose slavery on the people.
there was considerable personal invective as well.
for example it was during this campaign that the story of jeffersons romantic involvement with a slave woman on his plantation was first widely aired.
recent dna evidence has proven that the story was true.
the election was close and the crucial contest was in new york.
there aaron burr had mobilized an organization of congressional brawlers this cartoon lampoons a celebrated fight on the floor of the house of representatives in 1798 between matthew lyon a republican from vermont and roger griswold a federalist from connecticut.
the conflict began when griswold insulted lyon by attacking his military record in the revolutionary war.
lyon replied by spitting in griswolds face.
two weeks later griswold attacked lyon with his cane and lyon seized a pair of fire tongs and fought back.
that later scene is depicted and ridiculed here.
other members of congress are portrayed as enjoying the spectacle.
on the wall is a picture titled royal sport showing animals fighting.
the library of congress lc dig ppmsca 31832 178 chapter 7 at baton rouge and asked the federal government to annex the captured territory to the united states.
president madison happily agreed and then began planning to get the rest of florida too.
the desire for florida became yet another motivation for war with britain.
spain was britains ally and a war with britain might provide a pretext for taking spanish territory.
by 1812 war fever was growing on both the northern and southern borders of the united states.
in the congressional elections of 1810 voters from these regions elected a large number of representatives of both parties eager for war with britain.
they became known as the war hawks some of them were ardent nationalists fired by passion for territorial expansion among them two men who would play a great role war hawks in nationa politics for much of the next four decades henry clay of kentucky and john c calhoun of south carolina.
others were men impassioned in their defense of republican values.
together they formed a powerful coalition in favor of war.
clay became speaker of the house in 1811 and he filled committees with those who shared his eagerness for war.
he appointed calhoun to the crucial committee on foreign affairs and both men began agitating for the conquest of canada.
madison still hoped for peace.
but he shared the concerns of other republicans about the dangers to american trade and he was losing control of congress.
on june 18 1812 he gave in to the pressure and approved a declaration of war against britain.
the war of 1812 preoccupied with their struggle against napoleon in europe the british were not eager for a conflict with the united states.
even after the americans declared war britain largely ignored them for a time.
but in the fall of 1812 napoleon launched a catastrophic campaign against russia that left his army in disarray and his power in europe diminished.
by late 1813 with the french empire on its way to final defeat britain was able to turn its military attention to america.
battles with the tribes americans entered the war of 1812 with great enthusiasm but events on the battlefield soon cooled their ardor.
in the summer of 1812 american forces invaded canada through detroit.
they soon had to retreat back to detroit and in august surrendered the fort there.
other invasion efforts also failed.
in the meantime fort dearborn chicago fell before an indian attack.
things went only slightly better for the united states on the seas.
at first american frigates won some spectacular victories over british warships and american privateers destroyed or captured many british merchant ships occasionally early defeats braving the coastal waters of the british isles themselves and burning vessels within sight of the shore.
but by 1813 the british navy now less preoccupied with napoleon was counterattacking effectively driving the american frigates to cover and imposing a block ade on the united states.
the united states did however achieve significant early military successes on the great lakes.
first the americans took command of lake ontario which permitted them to raid and burn york now toronto the capital of canada.
american forces then seized control of lake erie mainly through the put in bay work of the youthful oliver hazard perry who engaged and dispersed a british fleet at put in bay on september 10 1813 this made possible another invasion of canada by way of detroit which americans could now reach easily by water.
william henry harrison the american commander in the west pushed up the thames river into upper canada and on october 5 1813 won a victory notable for the death of tecumseh who was serving as a brigadier general in the british army.
the battle of the thames weakened and disheartened the native americans of the northwest and greatly diminished their ability to defend their claims to the region.
in the meantime another white military leader was striking an even harder blow at the tribes of the southwest.
the creeks whom tecumseh had aroused on a visit to the south and whom the spanish had supplied with weapons had been attacking white settlers near the florida border.
andrew jackson a wealthy tennessee planter and a general in the state militia temporarily abandoned plans for an invasion of florida and set off in pursuit of them.
on march 27 1814 in the battle of horseshoe bend jacksons men took terrible revenge on the indians slaughtering women and children along with warriors and broke the resistance of the creeks.
the tribe agreed to cede most of its lands to the united states and retreated westward farther into the interior.
the battle also won jackson a commission as a major general in the united states army.
in that capacity he led his men farther south into florida and on november 7 1814 seized the spanish fort at pensacola.
battles with the british the victories over the tribes were not enough for the united states to win the war.
after the surrender of napoleon in 1814 the british england prepared to invade the united invasion states.
a british armada sailed up the patuxent river from chesapeake bay and landed an army that marched a short distance overland to bladensburg on the outskirts of washington where it dispersed a poorly trained force of american militiamen.
on august 24 1814 the british troops entered washington and set fire to several public buildings including the white house in retaliation for the earlier american burning of the canadian capital at york.
this was the low point of american fortunes in the war.
leaving washington in partial ruins the british army proceeded up the bay toward baltimore.
but baltimore harbor guarded by fort mchenry was prepared.
to block the the jeffersonian era 209 atlanti c ocean the americans during the war of 1812 it shows all the theaters of the war from new orleans to southern lakes and the fighting around washington and baltimore.
note how in all these theaters there are about the same spanish mexico u s forces british forces british blockade 4 u s victory 4 british victory indian victory territory ceded or annexed by u s 1810 1819 the war of 1812 this map illustrates the military maneuvers of the british and canada the extended land and water battle along the canadian border and in the great number of british and american victories.
what finally brought this inconclusive war to an end.
approaching fleet the american garrison had sunk several ships to clog the entry to the harbor thus forcing the british to bombard the fort from a distance.
through the night of september 13 francis scott key a washington lawyer who was on board one of the british ships trying to secure the release of an american prisoner watched the bombardment.
the next morning by the dawn s early light he could see the flag on the fort still flying he recorded his pride in the moment by scribbling a poem the star spangled banner on the back of an envelope.
the british withdrew from baltimore and keys words were soon set to the tune of an old english drinking song.
in 1931 the star spangled banner became the official national anthem.
meanwhile american forces repelled another british invasion in northern new york at the battle of plattsburgh on september 11 1814 which turned back a much larger british naval and land force and secured the northern border of the battle of united states.
in the south a formidable new orleans array f battle hardened british veterans fresh from the campaign against the french in spain landed below new orleans and prepared to advance north up the mississippi.
awaiting the british was andrew 210 chapter 8 an early mill in new england this early folk painting of about 1814 shows the small town of east chelmsford massachusetts still primarily agrarian with its rural houses open fields and grazing livestock but with a small textile mill already operating along the stream at right.
a little more than a decade later the town had been transformed into a major manufacturing center and renamed for the family that owned the mills lowell.
part of the town of chelmsford.
by miss warren.
abby aldrich rockefeller folk art museum colonial williamsburg foundation williamsburg va abby aldrich rockefeller folk art museum the colonial williamsburg foundation wiilliamsburg va growth of the textile industry unskilled labor and inexperienced management new factories could start operations virtually assured of quick profits.
the american textile industry experienced a particularly dramatic growth.
between 1807 and 1815 the total number of cotton spindles increased more than fifteenfold from 8 000 to 130 000 until 1814 the textile factories most of them in new england produced only yarn and thread families operating hand looms at home did the actual weaving of cloth.
then the boston merchant francis cabot lowell after examining textile machinery in england developed a power loom that was better than its english counterpart.
in 1813 lowell organized the boston manufacturing company and at waltham massachusetts founded the first mill in america to carry on spinning and weaving under a single roof.
lowells company was an important step in revolutionizing american manufacturing and in shaping the character of the early industrial workforce.
but the end of the war suddenly dimmed the prospects for american industry.
british ships determined to recapture their lost markets swarmed into american ports and unloaded cargoes of manufactured goods many priced below cost.
as one english leader explained to parliament it was well worth while to incur a loss upon the first exportation in order by the glut to stifle in the cradle those rising manufactures in the united states the infant industries cried out for protection against these tactics arguing that they needed time to grow strong enough to withstand the foreign competition.
in 1816 protectionists in congress won passage of a tariff law that effectively limited competition from abroad on a wide range of items the most important of which was cotton cloth.
there were objections from agri a ptarw ive cultural interests who would have to pay higher prices for manufactured goods as a result.
but the nationalist dream of creating an important american industrial economy prevailed.
transportation the nations most pressing economic need in the aftermath of the war was for a better transportation system.
without one manufacturers would not have access to the raw materials they needed or to domestic markets.
so an old debate resumed should the federal government help to finance roads and other internal improvements.
the idea of using government funds to finance road building was not new.
when ohio entered the union in 1803 the federal government agreed that part of the proceeds non intercourse panic of 1819 followed by american imports and exports 179o lron tu.
820 this chart shows the pattern of qoods imported to and exported from the united states the level of foreiqn trade and thp halanro l j 1 u americans were heavily dependent on britain and eu one in t h a 9ds bu9ht 9ds s y uepenoent on br tarn and europe or finished or manufactured goods in these years and as you can see imports grew as rapidly as and often even more ranidlv m y euronpan nowj c jk l.
p d ly than exports note how the nation s disputes with european powers depressed both exports and imports from about 1808 to 1814 how does this chart help explain congress passage of a protective tariff ioi w in 1816.
from the governments sale of public lands should finance road construction.
in 1807 jeffersons secretary of the treasury albert gallatin proposed that revenues from the ohio land sales should help finance a national road from the potomac river to the ohio river.
both congress and the president approved.
after many delays construction of the national road finally began in 1811 at cumberland maryland on the potomac and by 1818 this highway with government a crushed stone surface and massive funded roads stone bridges ran as far as wheeling virginia on the ohio river.
meanwhile the state of pennsylvania gave 100 000 to a private company to extend the lancaster pike westward to pittsburgh.
over both of these roads a heavy traffic soon moved stagecoaches conestoga wagons private carriages and other vehicles as well as droves of cattle.
despite high tolls the roads made transportation costs across the mountains lower than ever before.
manufactures particularly textiles moved from the atlantic seaboard to the ohio valley in unprecedented quantities.
varieties of american nationalism 217 at the same time on the rivers and the great lakes steam powered shipping was expanding rapidly.
the development of steamboat lines was already well under way before the war of 1812 thanks to the technological advances introduced by robert fulton and others.
the war had retarded expansion for a time but by 1816 river steamers were beginning to journey steamboats up an own mississippi t0 ohio river and up the ohio as far as pittsburgh.
within a few years steamboats were carrying far more cargo on the mississippi than all the earlier forms of river transport flatboats barges and others combined.
they stimulated the agricultural economy of the west and the south by providing much readier access to markets at greatly reduced cost.
and they enabled eastern manufacturers to send their finished goods west.
despite the progress with steamboats and turnpikes there remained serious gaps in the nation s transportation network as the war of 1812 had shown.
once the british blockade cut off atlantic shipping the coastal roads became choked by the unaccustomed volume of north south traffic.
long lines of steamboats on the hudson inventor robert fulton developed powered vessels first built in 1807 were the first large and reliable enough to an engine that could propel a boat from manhattan to albany a distance of about 150 miles in thirty two hours.
his steam be commercially valuable.
photo tarker the bridgeman art library 218 chapter 8 vetoing internal improvements wagons waited for a chance to use the ferries that were still the only means of crossing most rivers.
oxcarts pressed into emergency service took six or seven weeks to go from philadelphia to charleston.
in some areas there were serious shortages of goods that normally traveled by sea and prices rose to new heights.
rice cost three times as much in new york as in charleston flour three times as much in boston as in richmond all because of the difficulty of transportation.
there were military consequences too.
on the northern and western frontiers the absence of good roads had frustrated american campaigns.
in 1815 with this wartime experience in mind president madison called the attention of congress to the great importance of establishing throughout our country the roads and canals which can be best executed under the national authority and suggested that a constitutional amendment would resolve any doubts about congresss authority to provide for their construction.
representative john c calhoun promptly introduced a bill that would have used the funds owed the government by the bank of the united states to finance internal improvements.
let us then bind the republic together with a perfect system of roads and canals calhoun urged.
let us conquer space congress passed calhouns internal improvements bill but president madison on his last day in office march 3 1817 vetoed it.
he supported the purpose of the bill he explained but he still believed that congress lacked authority to fund the improvements without a constitutional amendment.
it remained for state govern ments and private enterprise to undertake the tremendous task of building the transportation network necessary for the growing american economy.
expanding westward one reason for the growing interest in internal improvements was the sudden and dramatic surge in westward expansion in the years following the war of 1812.
old america seems to be breaking up and moving westward wrote an english observer at the time.
by the time of the census of 1820 white settlers had pushed well beyond the mississippi river and the population of the western regions was increasing more rapidly than that of the nation as a whole.
almost one of every four white americans lived west of the appalachians in 1820 ten years before only one in seven had resided there.
the great migrations reasons for westward expansion the westward movement of the white american populatior was one of the most important developments of the nine teenth century.
it had a profound effect ot the nations economy bringing vast nev regions into the emerging capitalist sys tern.
it had great political ramifications which ultimately became a major factor in the coming of th civil war.
and like earlier movements west it thrust peoples of different cultures and traditions into intimate and often disastrous association with one another.
there were several important reasons for this expansion.
the pressures driving white americans out of the east came in part from the continued growth of the nation s population both through natural increase and through immigration.
between 1800 and 1820 the population nearly doubled from 5 3 million to 9 6 million.
the growth of cities absorbed some of that increase but most americans were still farmers.
the agricultural lands of the east were by now largely occupied and some of them were exhausted.
in the south the spread of the plantation system and of a slave labor force limited opportunities for new settlers.
at the same time the west itself was becoming increasingly attractive to white settlers.
the war of 1812 had helped diminish although it did not wholly eliminate one of the traditional deterrents to western expansion native american opposition.
and in the aftermath of the war the federal government continued its policy of pushing the remaining tribes farther and farther west.
a series of treaties in 1815 wrested more land from the indians.
in the meantime the government was erecting a chain of stockaded forts along the great lakes the factor an mississippi to protect the frontier.
system it a so created a factor system by which government factors or agents supplied the tribes with goods at cost.
this not only worked to drive canadian traders out of the region it also helped create a situation of dependency on the factors that made native americans easier to control.
now that fertile lands were secure for white settlement migrants from throughout the east flocked to the old northwest now called the midwest.
the ohio and monongahela rivers were the main routes westward until the completion of the erie canal in 1825 once on the ohio the migrants floated downstream on flatboats bearing all their possessions then left the river often at cincinnati which was becoming one of the regions and the nations principal cities and pressed on overland with wagons handcarts packhorses cattle and hogs.
the plantation system in the southwest in the southwest the new agricultural economy emerged along different lines.
the principal attraction was cotton.
the cotton lands in the uplands of the old south had lost much of their fertility through overplanting and erosion.
but the market for cotton continued to grow so there was no lack of ambitious farmers seeking fresh soil in a climate suitable for the crop.
in the southwest there were vast tracts of land appropriate for growing cotton.
they included what would become known as the black belt of central alabama and mississippi 3 large region with a dark productive soil of rotted limestone.
the growth of southern settlement spread cotton plantations and slavery.
the first arrivals in an uncultivated region varieties of american nationalism 219 ifm.
ji za h v 1.
fort snelling this is an 1838 sketch of fort snelling at the juncture of the minnesota and mississippi rivers containing instructions for reaching it from st louis.
it was one of a string of fortifications built along the western edge of european settlement along the great lakes and the upper mississippi in the first three decades of the nineteenth century.
the forts were designed to protect the new white communities from hostile indians.
fort snelling stands today in minnesota as a living history site.
fort snelling from the east.
smithsonian institution archives.
record unit 7290 carl andreas geyer journal 1838 negative sa 861.
verc usually small farmers who made rough clearings in the r forest.
but wealthier planters soon fol the expansion lowed.
they bought up cleared or partially of slavery cleared land and the original settlers moved farther west and started over again.
the large planters made the westward journey in a style quite different from that of the first pioneers.
over the alternately dusty and muddy roads came great caravans consisting jf herds of livestock wagonloads of household goods long lines of slaves and at the rearthe planter s family riding in carriages.
success in the wilderness was by no means ensured sven for the wealthiest settlers.
but many planters soon expanded small clearings into vast cotton fields.
they replaced the cabins of the early pioneers with sumptuous log dwellings and ultimately with imposing mansions that symbolized the emergence of a newly wealthy class.
in later years these western planters would assume the airs of a long standing aristocracy.
but by the time of the civil war few planter families in the southwest had been there for more than one or two generations.
the rapid growth of the northwest and southwest resulted in the admission of four new states to the union in the immediate aftermath of the war of 1812 indiana in 1816 mississippi in 1817 illinois in 1818 and alabama in 1819 trade and trapping in the far west not many anglo americans had much knowledge of or interest in the far western areas of the continent.
but a significant trade nevertheless developed between these far western regions and the united states beginning early in the nineteenth century and growing steadily for decades.
mexico which controlled texas california and much of the rest of the southwest won its independence from spain in 1821 almost immediately it opened its northern territories to trade with the united states.
american traders poured into the region overland into texas and new mexico by sea into california.
merchants from the united states quickly displaced both indian and mexican traders who had previously dominated trade.
a steady traffic of commercial wagon trains was moving back and forth along the santa fe trail between missouri and new mexico.
fur traders created a wholly new commerce with the west.
before the war of 1812 john jacob astors american astors ur company had established astoria as a american fur trading post at the mouth of the columbia company river in oregon.
but when the war came astor sold his suddenly imperiled interests to the northwestern fur company a british concern operating out of canada.
after the war astor centered his operations in the great lakes area and eventually extended them westward to the rockies.
other companies carried on operations up the missouri and its tributaries and into the rocky mountains.
at first fur traders did most of their business by purchasing pelts from the indians.
but increasingly white trappers entered the region and began to hunt beaver on their own.
substantial numbers of anglo americans and french canadians moved deep into the great lakes region and beyond to join the iroquois and other indians in pursuit of furs.
as the trappers or mountain men moved west from the great lakes region they began to establish themselves in what is now utah and in parts of new mexico.
in 1822 andrew henry and william ashley founded the rocky mountain fur company and recruited white trappers to move permanently into the rockies in search of furs which were becoming increasingly scarce farther east.
henry and ashley dispatched supplies annually to their trappers in exchange for furs and skins.
the arrival of the supply train became the occasion for a gathering of scores of mountain men some of whom lived much of the year in considerable isolation.
but however isolated their daily lives these mountain men were closely bound up with the expanding market economy the fur of the united states.
some were employees trade and the of the rocky mountain fur company or market some other similar enterprise earning a economy f salary in return for providing a steady 220 chapter 9 tot.
otw fall of ssothbr bastw.
downfall of mother bank this 1832 cartoon celebrates andrew jacksons destruction of the bank of the united states.
the president is shown here driving away the banks corrupt supporters by ordering the withdrawal of government deposits.
the library of congress lc usz62 809 charles river bridge v warren bridge of 1837 the case involved a dispute between two massachusetts companies over the right to build a bridge across the charles river between boston and cambridge.
one company had a long standing charter from the state to operate a toll bridge and claimed that this charter guaranteed it a monopoly of the bridge traffic.
another company had applied to the legislature for authorization to construct a second competing bridge that would since it would be toll free greatly reduce the value of the first company s charter.
the first company contended that in granting the second charter the legislature was engaging in a breach of contract and noted that the marshall court in the dartmouth college case and other decisions had ruled that states had no right to abrogate contracts.
but now taney speaking for the democratic majority on the court supported the right of massachusetts to award the second charter.
the object of government taney maintained was to promote the general happiness an object that took precedence over the rights of contract and property.
a state therefore had the right to amend or abrogate a contract if such action was necessary to advance the well being of the community.
such an abrogation was clearly necessary in the case of the charles river bridge he argued because the original bridge company by exercising a monopoly was benefiting from unjustifiable privilege.
it did not help the first company that its members were largely boston aristocrats closely associated with harvard college the challenging company by contrast consisted largely of newer aspiring entrepreneurs the sort of people with whom jackson and his allies instinctively identified.
the decision reflected one of the cornerstones of the jacksonian ideal that the key to democracy was an expansion of economic opportunity which would not occur if older corporations could maintain monopolies and choke off competition from newer companies.
the changing face of american politics jacks on s lorcelul some people claimed tyrannical crushing first the nullification movement and then the bank o the united states helped galvanize a growing birto of the opposition coalition that by the mid 1830 was ready to assert itself in national poimu jacksonian america 245 denouncing the president as king andrew i they began to refer to themselves as whigs after the party in england that had traditionally worked to limit the power of the king.
with the emergence of the whigs the nation once again had two competing political parties.
what scholars now call the second party system began what turned out to be its relatively brief life.
democrats and whigs the two parties were different from one another in their philosophies in their constituencies and in the character of their democrats emphasis on opportunity leaders.
but they became increasingly alike in the way they approached the process of electing their followers to office.
democrats in the 1830s envisioned a future of steadily expanding economic and political opportunities for white males.
the role of government should be limited they believed but it should include efforts to remove obstacles to opportunity and to avoid creating new ones.
that meant defend ing the union which jacksonians believed was essential to the dynamic economic growth they favored.
it also meant attacking centers of corrupt privilege.
as jackson himself said in his farewell address the society of america should be one in which the planter the farmer the mechanic and the laborer all know that their success depends on their own industry and economy in which artificial privilege would stifle no ones opportunity.
among the most radical members of the party the so called locofocos mainly workingmen and small businessmen and professionals in the northeast sentiment was strong for a vigorous perhaps even violent assault on monopoly and privilege far in advance of anything jackson himself ever contemplated.
the political philosophy that became known as whiggery was very different.
it favored expanding the power of the fed whigs call eral 8overnment encouraging industrial for economic an commercial development and knitting union the country together into a consolidated economic system.
whigs embraced material progress enthusiastically but unlike the democrats they were cautious about westward expansion fearful that rapid territorial growth would produce instability.
their vision of america was of a nation embracing the industrial future and rising to world greatness as a commercial and manufacturing power.
thus while democrats were inclined to oppose legislation establishing banks corporations and other modernizing institutions whigs generally favored such measures.
the whigs were strongest among the more substantial merchants and manufacturers of the northeast the wealthier planters of the south those who favored commercial development and the strengthening of ties with the north and the ambitious farmers and rising commercial class of the west usually migrants from the northeast who advocated internal improvements expanding trade and rapid economic progress.
the democrats drew more support from smaller merchants and the workingmen of the northeast from southern planters suspicious of industrial growth and from westerners usually with southern roots who favored a predominantly agrarian anti masons economy and opposed the development of powerful economic institutions in their region.
whigs tended to be wealthier than democrats to have more aristocratic backgrounds and to be more commercially ambitious.
but whig and democratic politicians alike were more interested in winning elections than in maintaining philosophical purity.
and both parties made frequent adjustments in their public postures to attract the largest possible number of voters.
in new york for example the whigs worked to develop a popular following by making a connection to a movement known as anti masonry.
the anti mason movement had emerged in the 1820s in response to widespread resentment against the secret exclusive and hence supposedly undemocratic society of freemasons.
such resentments greatly increased in 1826 when a former mason william morgan mysteriously disappeared and was assumed to have been murdered from his home in batavia new york shortly before he was scheduled to publish a book exposing the supposed secrets of freemasonry.
whigs seized on the anti mason frenzy to launch harsh attacks on jackson and van buren both freemasons implying that the democrats were part of the antidemocratic conspiracy.
in the process the whigs presented themselves as opponents of aristocracy and exclusivity.
they were attacking the democrats with the democrats own issues.
religious and ethnic divisions also played an important role in determining the constituencies of the two parties.
irish and german catholics among the largest of the recent immigrant groups tended to support the democrats who appeared to cultural share their own vague aversion to commer issues cial development and entrepreneurial prog ress and who seemed to respect family and community centered values and habits.
evangelical protestants gravitated toward the whigs because they associated the party with constant development and improvement goals their own faith embraced.
these and other ethnic religious and cultural tensions were often more influential in determining party alignments than any concrete political or economic proposals.
the whig party was more successful at defining its positions and attracting a constituency than it was in uniting behind a national leader.
no single person was ever able to command the loyalties of the party in the way andrew jackson did the democrats.
instead whigs tended to divide their loyalties among three figures each of whom was so substantial a figure that together they became known as the great triumvirate henry clay daniel webster and john calhoun.
clay won support from many of those who favored his program for internal improvements and economic development what he called the american system but his image as a devious operator and his identification with the west proved to be serious liabilities.
he ran for president three times and never won.
daniel webster the greatest orator of his era won broad support with his passionate speeches in defense of the constitution and the union but his close connection with the bank of the united states and the protective clays american system 246 chapter 9 tariff his reliance on rich men for financial support and his excessive and often embarrassing fondness for brandy prevented him from developing enough of a national constituency to win him the office he so desperately wanted.
john c calhoun the third member of the great triumvirate never considered himself a true whig and his identification with the nullification controversy in effect disqualified him from national leadership in any case.
but he had tremendous strength in the south supported a national bank and shared with clay and webster a strong animosity toward andrew jackson.
the problems that emerged from this divided leadership became particularly clear in 1836 the democrats were united behind andrew jacksons personal choice for president martin van buren.
the whigs could not agree on a single candidate.
instead they ran several candidates hoping to profit from the regional strength of each.
webster represented the party in new england hugh lawson white of tennessee ran in the south and the former indian fighter and hero of the war of 1812 william henry harrison from ohio was the candidate in the middle states and the west.
party leaders hoped the three candidates election of 1836 candidate party electoral vote popular vote martin van buren 170 765 483 democrat 50 9 w h harrison 73 550 816 whig 36 6 hugh l white 26 146 107 whig 9 7 daniel webster 14 41 201 whig 2 7 w p magnum 11 independent the election of 1836 martin van buren who had served as vice president and secret of state for andrew jackson was the democratic candidate for president in 1836 his connection to the revered jackson helped him easily defeat his whig opponent william henry harrison.
four yea later the same two men contested the presidency but that time it was harrison who won.
together might draw enough votes from van buren to prevent his getting a majority and throw the election to the house of representatives where the whigs might be able to elect one of their own leaders.
in the end however van buren won easily with 170 electoral votes to 124 for all his opponents combined.
van buren ano the panic of 1837 andrew jackson retired from public life in 1837 beloved by most americans.
martin van buren was very different from his predecessor and far less fortunate.
he was never able to match jacksons personal popularity and his administration encountered economic difficulties that devastated the democrats and helped the whigs.
van burens success in the 1836 election was a result in part of a nationwide economic boom that was reaching its height in that year.
canal and railroad builders were at a peak of activity.
prices were rising money was plentiful and credit was easy as banks increased their loans and notes with little regard to their reserves of cash.
the land business in particular was booming.
between 1835 and 1837 the government sold nearly 40 million acres of public land nearly three fourths of it to speculators who purchased large tracts in hopes of reselling them at a profit.
these land sales along with revenues the government received from the tariff of 1833 created a series of substantial federal budget surpluses and made possible a steady reduction of the national debt something jackson had always advocated.
from 1835 to 1837 the government for the first and only time in its history was out of debt with a substantial surplus in the treasury.
congress and the administration now faced the question of what to do with the treasury surplus.
reducing the tariff was not an option since no one wanted to raise that thorny issue again.
instead support grew for returning the federal surplus to distribution t ie states 1836 congress passed a dis act tribution act requiring the federal government to pay its surplus funds to the states each year in four quarterly installments as interest free unsecured loans.
no one expected the loans to be repaid.
the states spent the money quickly mainly to encourage construction of highways railroads and canals.
the distribution of the surplus thus gave further stimulus to the economic boom.
congress did nothing to check the speculative fever with which many congressmen themselves were badly infected.
webster for one was buying up thousands of acres in the west.
but jackson always suspicious of paper currency was unhappy that the government was selling good land and receiving in return various state bank notes worth no more than the credit of the issuing bank.
in 1836 not long before leaving office he issued a presidential order the specie circular it provided that in payment for public lands the government would accept only gold or silver coins or currency securely backed by gold or silver.
jackson was right to fear the speculative fever but wrong m thinking the specie circular would cure it.
on the contrary it produced a financial panic that began in the first months of jacksonian america 247 the times 1837 this savage caricature of the economic troubles besetting the united states in 1837 illustrates among other things popular resentment of the hard money orthodoxies of the time.
a sign on the custom house reads all bonds must be paid in specie.
next door the bank announces no specie payments made here women and children are shown begging in the street while unemployed workers stand shoeless in front of signs advertising loans and grand schemes.
museum of the city of new york usa the bridgeman art library panic of 1837 van burens presidency.
hundreds of banks and businesses failed.
unemployment grew.
bread riots broke out in some of the larger cities.
prices fell especially the price of land.
many railroad and canal projects failed.
several of the debt burdened state governments ceased to pay interest on their bonds and a few repudiated their debts at least temporarily.
it was the worst depression in american history to that point and it lasted for five years.
it was a political catastrophe for van buren and the democrats.
both parties bore some responsibility for the panic.
but the depression was only partly a result of american policies.
england and western europe were facing panics of their own which caused european and especially english investors to withdraw funds from america putting an added strain on american banks.
a succession of crop failures on american farms reduced the purchasing power of farmers and required increased imports of food which sent more money out of the country.
but whatever its actual causes the panic of 1837 occurred during a democratic administration and the democrats paid the political price for it.
the van buren administration which strongly opposed government intervention in the economy did little to fight the depression.
some of the steps it took borrowing money to pay government debts and accepting only specie for payment of taxes may have made things worse.
van buren did succeed in establishing a ten hour workday on all federal projects by presidential order but he had only a few legislative achievements.
the most important and controversial of them was the creation of a new financial system to replace the bank of the united states.
under van burens plan known as the independent treasury or subtreasury system the government would independent place its funds in an independent treasury treasury at washington and in subtreasuries in other cities.
no private banks would have the governments money or name to use as a basis for specula tion the government and the banks would be divorced van buren called a special session of congress in 1837 to consider the proposal which failed in the house.
in 1840 the last year of van burens presidency the administration finally succeeded in driving the measure through both houses of congress.
the log cabin campaign as the campaign of 1840 approached the whigs realized that they would have to settle on one candidate for president this time if they were to have any hope of winning.
as a 248 chapter 10 1620 1650 1680 1710 1740 1770 1800 1830 1860 year population growth 1620 1860 from its tiny beginnings in the seventeenth century the american population grew rapidly and dramatically so that by 1860 with more than 31 million people the united states was one of the most populous countries in the world.
how did this growing population contribute to the nation s economic transformation.
total immigration during 347 five year periods in thousands 41 1821 1825 1826 1830 1831 1835 1836 1840 year immigration 1821 1840 among the sources of the nations growing population in the nineteenth century was rapidly increasing immigration.
this graph shows how rapidly immigration to the united states increased in the 1820s and 1830s.
the 347 000 immigrants in the second half of the 1830s were almost nine times the number in the first half of the 1820s.
where did most of these new immigrants settle.
immigration choked off by wars in europe and economic crises in america contributed little to the american population in the first three decades of the nineteenth century but rapidly revived beginning in the 1830s.
of the total 1830 population of nearly 13 million the foreign born numbered fewer than 500 000 but the number of immigrants climbed by 60 000 in 1832 and nearly 80 000 in 1837 reduced transportation costs and increasing economic opportunities helped stimulate the immigration boom as did deteriorating economic conditions in some areas of europe.
the migrations introduced new groups to the united states.
in particular the number of immigrants arriving from the southern counties of ireland began to grow marking the beginning of a tremendous influx of irish catholics that would continue through the three decades before the civil war.
much of this new european immigration flowed into the rapidly growing cities of the northeast.
but urban growth was a result of substantial internal migration as well.
as the agricultural regions of new england and other areas grew less profitable more and more people picked up stakes and moved some to more promising agricultural regions in the west but many to eastern cities.
in 1790 one person in thirty had lived in a city defined as a community of 8 000 or more in 1820 one in twenty and in 1840 one in twelve.
the rise of new york city was particularly dramatic.
by 1810 it was the largest city in the united states.
that was partly a result of its superior natural harbor.
it was also a result of the erie canal completed in 1825 which gave the city unrivaled access to the interior and of liberal state laws that made the city attractive for both foreign and domestic commerce.
immigration and urban growth 1840 1860 the growth of cities accelerated even more dramatically between 1840 and 1860 the population of new york for exam rapid ple rose from 312 000 to 805 000.
new urbanization yorks population would have numbered 1 2 million in 1860 if brooklyn which was then a separate municipality had been included in the total.
philadelphia s population grew over the same twenty year pe riod from 220 000 to 565 000 bostons from 93 000 to 177 000 by 1860 26 percent of the population of the free states was living in towns places of 2 500 people or more or cities 8 000 people or more up from 14 percent in 1840 that percentage was even higher for the industrializing states americas economic revolution 257 1 all others sources of immigration 1820 1840 this pie chart shows where the large numbers of immigrants portrayed in the previous chart came from.
note the very large number of irish immigrants.
why were the irish among the most likely immigrant groups to become part of the industrial workforce.
of the northeast.
in the south by contrast the increase of urban residents was only from 6 percent in 1840 to 10 percent in 1860.
the booming agricultural economy of the western regions of the nation produced significant urban growth as well.
between 1820 and 1840 communities that had once been small western villages or trading posts became major cities st louis pittsburgh cincinnati louisville.
all of them benefited from strategic positions on the mississippi river or one of its major tributaries.
all of them became centers of the growing carrying trade that connected the farmers of the midwest with new orleans and through it the cities of the northeast.
after 1830 however substantial shipping began from the mississippi river to the great lakes creating major new urban centers that gradually superseded the river ports.
among them were buffalo detroit milwaukee cleveland and most important chicago.
the enlarged urban population was in part a reflection of the growth of the national population as a whole which rose by more than a third from 23 million to over 31 million in the decade of the 1850s alone.
by 1860 the american population was larger than britains and quickly approaching that of france and germany.
urban growth was also a result of the increasing flow of people into cities from the farms of the northeast.
american population density 1820 the population of the united states in 1820 populated really densely states although settlement was growing in the ohio river valley to the west.
note how few areas of the country populated really densely.
around new york city and the area in maryland adjoining baltimore.
what accounts for the density in these areas.
still overwhelmingly rural and agrarian and was still concentrated largely in the original thirteen small area in northeastern massachusetts the area 258 chapter 10 ja n ur rz r broadway in 1836 this image of the area of new york city s broadway in what is now lower manhattan suggests the way in which new york was becoming an increasingly important center of trade and commerce and a densely urban place in the 1830s.
the granger collection new york 1 llibllblil.
p cinc ocean x persons per square mile hj 90 and over 18 89 2 17 fewer than 2 n gulf of mexico q 5 0 mi 500 1000 km american population density 1860 by 1860 the population of the united states had spread more evenly across the entire country.
communities that had once been small trading posts emerged as major cities.
among them were st louis pittsburgh cincinnati and louisville.
in the meantime the erie canal had opened up a large and prosperous market area for new york city.
note the larger and more numerous areas of dense population including many in the midwest.
what accounts for the growing population density in some areas of the south.
americas economic revolution 259 immigration from abroad continued to increase as well.
between 1840 and 1850 more than 1 5 million europeans moved to surging america three times the number of arrivals immigration in the 1830s.
still greater numbers arrived in the 1850s over 2 5 million.
almost half the residents of new york city in the 1850s were recent immigrants.
in st louis chicago and milwaukee the foreign born outnumbered those of native birth.
few immigrants settled in the south.
only 500 000 lived in the slave states in 1860 and a third of these were concentrated in missouri mostly in st louis.
the newcomers came from many different countries and regions england france italy scandinavia poland and holland.
german and but the verwhelming majority came from irish ireland and germany.
in 1850 the irish immigrants constituted approximately 45 percent and the germans over 20 percent of the foreign born in america.
by 1860 there were more than 1 5 million irish born and approximately 1 million german born people in the united states.
in germany the economic dislocations of the industrial revolution had caused widespread poverty and the collapse of the liberal revolution there in 1848 also persuaded many germans to emigrate.
in ireland the oppressiveness and unpopularity of english rule drove many people out.
but even more important was the greatest disaster in irelands history a catastrophic failure of the potato crop and other food crops that caused the devastating potato famine of 1845 1849 nearly a million people died of starvation and disease.
well over a million more emigrated to the united states.
the great majority of irish immigrants settled in the eastern cities where they swelled the ranks of unskilled labor.
most german immigrants moved on to the northwest where they became farmers or went into business in the western towns.
one reason for the difference was wealth german immigrants generally arrived with at least some money the irish had practically none.
another important reason was gender.
most german immigrants were members of family groups or were single men for whom movement to the agricultural frontier was both possible and attractive.
many irish immigrants were young single women for whom movement west was much less plausible.
they were more likely to stay in the eastern cities where factory and domestic work was available.
the rise of nativism some native born americans welcomed the new immigration which provided a large supply of cheap labor that they believed would help keep wage rates low.
land speculators and others with investments in the sparsely populated west hoped that immigrants would move into the region and help expand the population and thus the market for land and goods there.
political leaders in western states and territories wanted the im migrants to swell their population which would increase the political influence of the region.
wisconsin for example permit ted foreign born residents to become voters as soon as they had declared their intention of seeking citizenship and had resided m the state for a year other western states soon followed its lead.
in eastern cities too urban political organizations eagerly courted immigrant voters hoping to enhance their own political strength.
other americans however viewed the growing foreign born population with alarm.
their fears led to the rise of what is known as nativism a defense of native born people and a hostility to the foreign born usually combined with a desire to stop or slow immigration.
the emerging nativism took many forms.
some of it was a result of simple racism.
many nativists conveniently overlooking their own immigrant heritage argued that the new immigrants were inherently inferior to older stock americans.
some viewed them with the same contempt and prejudice and the same low estimate of their potential abilities with which they viewed african americans and indians.
many nativists avoided racist arguments but argued nevertheless that the newcomers were socially unfit to live alongside people of older stock that they did not bring with them sufficient standards of civilization.
evidence for that they claimed was the wretched urban and sometimes rural slums in which they lived.
many nativists seemed to assume that such wretchedness was something immigrants chose rather than the result of their extreme poverty.
others especially workers complained that because foreigners were willing to work for low wages they were stealing jobs from the native labor force.
protestants observing the success of irish catholics in establishing footholds in urban politics warned that the catholic church and the pope were gaining a foothold in total immigration during 1 748 1841 1845 1846 1850 1851 1855 1856 1860 year immigration 1841 1860 immigration continued to increase in the forty years before the civil war.
this chart illustrates the much higher levels of growth than in the previous forty years.
the low point in this era was the first half of the 1840s in which 430 000 new immigrants entered the united states.
that was significantly higher than the largest number of the previous twenty years.
in the early 1850s the number of immigrants grew to nearly 2 million.
comstock images alamy what events in europe contributed to this increase in immigration.
consider the source imiifiiimiiiimiiiiiiiitiimimmmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniimimiimimuiiitmiihiiittitmimti lljtlliliilillllillll anti immigration sentiment nativism and anti immigration sentiment and nativism have long been present in the nation as indicated by the first two items below an 1852 broadside announcing publication of the american patriot a nativist newspaper and a cartoon from 1850 the broadside issues a dire warning already the enemies of our dearest institutions like the foreign spies in the trojan horse of old are within our gates.
they are disgorging themselves upon us at the rate of hundreds of thousands every year.
they aim at nothing short of conquest and supremacy over us fast forward to april 2010 when arizona senate bill 1070 was signed into law by governor jan brewer.
provisions of the law include the right of law enforcement agents to ask for a person s immigration documents during routine stops and a mandate that any illegal immigrant convicted of a crime or misdemeanor be turned over to federal immigration agents.
critics claim that the law is a product of nativism and anti immigration sentiment directed specifically at those of hispanic origin which will result in persecution of both legal and undocumented immigrants.
some of the most insightful critiques of the law have come from political cartoonists.
see two examples on p 261 american citizens.
pa in thv tr jtn h r p i reman cathuheiim.
foreigners holding nunneriea and the jeauiu.
to u used for the support of foreign f f ra mitllona of dollars yearly.
thepatmoti l f r s l dlr 1 w are burdened with taaea by foreigner we are corrupted m the moral of oar youth.
we are interfered with in our government.
we are forced into eollbdona with other naliona.
m e arc tampered with in our religion v we are injured in our labor.
h e are aaaailrd in our freedom of sjwech.
historicus inc anti immigration sentiment 1850 1852 and germans steal the ballot box the granger collection new york understand analyze and evaluate 1 what complaints against immigrants are stated in the broadside.
to whom in particular is the american patriot opposed.
why is there such strong opposition to these immigrants.
2 what does the depiction of the immigrants in the cartoon suggest about them.
what specific grievance against the immigrants is expressed.
reactions to arizona senate bill 1070 2010 activities arouse suspicion by nick anderson nick anderson editorial cartoon used with the permission of nick anderson the washington post writers group and the cartoonist group all rights reserved.
and liberty by daryl cagle source 2010 daryl cagle msnbc and make connections 1 what attitude toward the arizona law is reflected in these two cartoons.
do the cartoons suggest the same attitude toward the law.
what differences if any do you detect.
2 how do the cartoonists portray immigrants or those most affected by the arizona law.
3 in what ways does the nativist sentiment reflected in the nineteenth century documents differ from the attitude toward immigration behind the arizona law.
261 262 chapter 11 before but only about 2 percent of the value of the raw cotton exported that year.
to the degree that the south developed a nonfarm commercial sector it was largely to serve the needs of the plantation economy.
particularly important were the brokers or factors who marketed the planters crops.
these merchants tended to live in such towns as new orleans charleston mobile and savannah where they worked to find buyers for cotton and other crops and where they purchased goods for the planters they served.
the south had only a very rudimentary financial system and the factors often also served the planters as bankers providing them with credit.
planters frequently accumulated substantial debts particularly during periods when cotton prices were in decline and the southern merchant bankers thus became figures of considerable influence and importance in the region.
there were also substantial groups of professional 1820 areas of cotton production slave distribution one dot approximates 200 slaves slavery and cotton in the south 1820 and 1860 these two maps show the remarkable spread of cotton cultivation in the south in the decades before the civil war.
both maps show the areas of cotton cultivation the green colored areas as well as areas with large slave populations the brown dotted areas.
note how in the top map which represents 1820 cotton production is concentrated largely in the east with a few areas scattered among alabama mississippi louisiana and tennessee.
slavery is most concentrated along the georgia and south carolina coast areas in which long staple cotton was grown with only a few other areas of highly dense slave populations.
by 1860 the south had changed dramatically.
cotton production had spread throughout the lower south from texas to northern florida and slavery had moved with it.
slavery was also much denser in the tobacco growing regions of virginia and north carolina which had also grown.
how did this economic shift affect the white south s commitment to slavery.
areas of cotton production slave distribution one dot approximates 200 slaves 0 cotton slavery and the old south 297 people in the south lawyers editors doctors and others.
in most parts of the region however they too were closely tied to and dependent on the plantation economy.
however important manufacturers merchants and professionals might have been to southern society they were relatively unimportant in comparison with the manufacturers merchants and professionals of the north on whom southerners were coming more and more and increasingly unhappily to depend.
the primitive character of the regions banking system matched a lack of development in other basic services and structures necessary for industrial development.
perhaps most notable was the souths inadequate transportation system.
in the north in the antebellum period enormous sums were invested in roads canals and above all railroads to knit the region together into an integrated market.
in the south there were no such investments.
canals were almost nonexistent most roads were crude and unsuitable for heavy transport and railroads although they expanded substantially in the 1840s and 1850s inadequate regional transportation system failed to tie the region together effectively.
such towns as charleston atlanta savannah and norfolk had direct connections with memphis and thus with the northwest and richmond was connected via the virginia central with the memphis and charleston railroad.
in addition several independent lines furnished a continuous connection between the ohio river and new orleans.
most of the south however remained unconnected to the national railroad system.
most lines in the region were short and local.
the principal means of transportation was water.
planters generally shipped their crops to market along rivers or by sea most manufacturing was in or near port towns.
perceptive southerners recognized the economic subordination of their region to the north.
from the rattle with which the nurse tickles the ear of the child born in the south to the shroud that covers the cold form of the dead everything comes to us from the north the arkansas journalist albert pike lamented.
perhaps the most prominent advocate of southern economic independence was james b d de bow a resident of new orleans.
he published a magazine advocating j t iph view of plantation lands along a stretch of the mississippi river between new orleans and baton rouge louisiana.
note plantations in louisiana 1858 this map provides a e a designed to give as many planters as possible frontage on the river which they needed to transport their crops to the long narrow shapes of these landholdings known as long lots.
is sys em which cu tivation of crops easier note how towns stores and churches all are near the market and to receive goods in return.
the river also deposited rich soi on t e riverbank so planters and others living on plantations nearby could reach them yy how is this landscape different from that of the newly opened federal lands in the west.
298 chapter 12 than half of those who contracted the disease survived.
thousands of people died of cholera during its occasional outbreaks and in certain cities new orleans in 1833 and st louis in 1849 the effects were truly catastrophic.
nearly a quarter of the population of new orleans died in the 1833 epidemic.
many municipalities pressured by reformers established city health boards to try to find solutions to the problems of epidemics.
but the medical profession of the time unaware of the nature of bacterial infections had no answers and the boards therefore found little to do.
instead many americans turned to nonscientific theories for improving health.
affluent men and especially women flocked to health spas for the celebrated water cure which purported to improve health through immersing people in hot or cold baths or wrapping them in wet sheets.
although the water cure delivered few of the benefits its promoters promised it did have some therapeutic value some forms of hydrotherapy are still in use today.
other people adopted new dietary theories.
sylvester graham a connecticut born presbyterian minister and committed reformer won many followers with his prescriptions for eating fruits vegetables and bread made from coarsely ground flour a prescription not unlike some dietary theories today instead of meat.
the graham cracker is made from a kind of flour named for him.
graham accompanied his dietary prescriptions with moral warnings about the evils of excess and luxury.
perhaps strangest of all to modern sensibilities was the widespread belief in the new science of phrenology which appeared first in germany and became popular in the united states beginning in the 1830s through the efforts of orson phrenology and lorenzo fowler publishers of the phrenology almanac.
phrenologists argued that the shape of an individuals skull was an important indicator of his or her character and intelligence.
they made elaborate measurements of bumps and indentations to calculate the size and they claimed the strength of different parts of the brain each of which they argued controlled a specific kind of intelligence or behavior.
for a time phrenology seemed to many americans an important vehicle for improving society.
it provided a way of measuring an individuals fitness for various positions in life and seemed to promise an end to the arbitrary process by which people matched their talents to occupations and responsibilities.
the theory is now universally believed to have no scientific value.
medical science in an age of rapid technological and scientific advances the science of medicine sometimes seemed to lag behind.
in part that was because of the greater difficulty of experimentation in medicine which required human subjects as compared to other areas of science and technology that relied on inanimate objects.
in part it was because of the character of the medical profession which in the absence of any significant regulation attracted many poorly educated people and many quacks in addition to trained physicians.
efforts to regulate the profession bath at warm springs among the many fads and theories about human health to gain currency in the 1830s and 1840s one of the most popular was the idea that bathing in warm sulphurous water was restorative.
visitors to warm springs all over the united states and europe took the baths drank the foul smelling water and sometimes stayed for weeks as part of a combination vacation and cure this 1837 drawing is by sophie dupont a visitor to a popular spa.
she wrote to a friend that the water notwithstanding its odour of half spoiled eggs and its warmth is not very nauseous to the taste courtesy of hagley museum and library were opposed in the 1830s and 1840s by those who considered the licensing of physicians to be a form of undemocratic monopoly.
the prestige of the profession therefore remained low and it was for many people a career of last resort.
the biggest problem facing american medicine however was the absence of basic knowledge about disease.
the great medical achievement of the eighteenth century the development of a vaccination against smallpox by the english physician edward jenner came from no broad theory of infection but from a brilliant adaptation of folk practices among country people.
the development of anesthetics came not from medical doctors at first but from a new england dentist william morton who was looking for ways to help his patients endure the extraction of teeth.
beginning in 1844 morton began experimenting with using sulphuric ether.
john warren a boston surgeon soon began using ether to sedate surgical patients.
even these advances met with stiff resistance from traditional physicians some of whom continued to believe that all medical knowledge derived from timeless truths and ancient scholars and who mistrusted innovation and experimentation.
others rejected scientific advances because of unorthodox and untested medical techniques popularized by entrepreneurs many of them charlatans.
in the absence of any broad acceptance of scientific methods and experimental practice in medicine it was very diffi cult for even the most talented doctors to succeed in treating disease.
even so halting progress toward the discovery of the germ theory did occur in antebellum america.
in 1843 the antebellum culture and reform 325 phrenology this lithograph illustrates some of the ideas of the popular science of phrenology in the 1830s.
drawing from the concepts of the german writer johann gaspar spurzheim american phrenologists promoted the belief that a person s character and talents could be understood by the formation of his or her skull that the brain was in fact a cluster of autonomous organs each controlling some aspect of human thought or behavior.
in this diagram the areas of the brain that supposedly control identity acquisitiveness secretiveness marvelousness and hope are clearly identified.
the theory has no scientific basis.
the library of congress boston essayist poet and physician oliver wendell holmes discovery of published his findings from a study of large contagion numbers of cases of puerperal fever septicemia in children and concluded that the disease could be transmitted from one person to another.
this discovery of contagion met with a storm of criticism but was later vindicated by the clinical success of the hungarian physician ignaz semmelweis who noticed that the infection seemed to be spread by medical students who had been work ing with corpses.
once he began requiring students to wash their hands and disinfect their instruments the infections vir tually disappeared.
reforming education one of the outstanding reform movements of the mid nineteenth century was the effort to produce a system of universal pub ic education.
as of 1830 no state yet had such a system although some states such as massachusetts had supported a limited version for many years.
in the 1830s however interest in public education grew rapidly.
it was a reflection of the new belief in the innate capacity of every person and of societys obligation to tap that capacity but it was a reflection too of the desire to expose students to stable social values as a way to resist instability.
the greatest educational reformer was horace mann the first secretary of the massachusetts board of education which was established in 1837 to mann and his followers education was the only way to counterwork this tendency to the domination of capital and the servility of labor the only way to protect democracy mann believed was to create an educated electorate.
he reorganized the massachusetts school system lengthened the academic year to six months doubled teachers salaries although he did nothing to eliminate the large disparities between the salaries of male and female teachers enriched the curriculum and introduced new methods of professional training for teachers.
other states experienced similar expansion and development.
they built new schools created teachers rapid growth of public colleges and offered large new groups of education children access to education.
henry barnard helped produce a educational system in connecticut and rhode island.
pennsylvania passed a law in 1835 appropriating state funds for the support of universal education.
governor william seward of new york extended public support of schools throughout the state in the early 1840s.
by the 1850s the principle of tax supported elementary schools had been accepted in all the states and all were making at least a start toward putting the principle into practice.
yet the quality of the new education continued to vary widely.
in some places massachusetts for example where mann established the first american state supported teachers college in 1839 and where the first professional association of teachers was created in 1845 educators were usually capable men and women often highly trained and with an emerging sense of themselves as career professionals.
in other areas however teachers were often barely literate and limited funding for education restricted opportunities severely.
in the newly settled regions of the west where the white population was highly dispersed many children had no access to schools.
in the south the entire black population was barred from formal education although approximately 10 percent of the slaves achieved literacy anyway and only about a third of all white children of school age actually enrolled in schools in 1860 in the north the percentage was 72 percent but even there many students attended classes only briefly and casually.
the interest in education was visible too in the growing movement to educate american indians in the antebellum period.
some reformers held racist assumptions about the un redeemability of nonwhite peoples but even many who accepted that idea about african americans continued to believe that indians could be civilized if only they could be taught the ways of the white world.
efforts to educate native 326 chapters of the societies by 1838 there were 1 350 chapter 13 by the autumn of 1846 he had completed the conquest of california.
the united states now controlled the two territories for which it had gone to war.
but mexico still refused to concede defeat.
at this point polk and general winfield scott the commanding general of the army and its finest soldier launched a bold new campaign.
scott assembled an army at tampico which the navy transported down the mexican coast to veracruz.
with an army that never numbered more than 14 000 scott advanced 260 miles along the mexican national highway toward mexico city kept american casualties low and never lost a battle before finally seizing the mexican capital.
a new mexican government took power and announced its willingness to negotiate a peace treaty.
president polk was now unclear about his objectives.
he continued to encourage those who demanded that the united states annex much of mexico itself.
at the same time concerned about the approaching presidential election he was growing anxious to finish the war quickly.
polk had sent a special presidential envoy nicholas trist to negotiate a treaty of settlement.
on february 2 1848 trist guadalupe reached agreement with the new mexican hidalgo government on the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo by which mexico agreed to cede california and new mexico to the united states and acknowledge the rio grande as the boundary of texas.
in return the united states promised to assume any financial claims its new citizens had against mexico and to pay the mexicans 15 million.
trist had obtained most of polks original demands but he had not satisfied the new more expansive dreams of acquiring additional territory in mexico itself.
polk angrily claimed that trist had violated his instructions but he soon realized that he had no choice but to accept the treaty to silence a bitter battle growing between ardent expansionists demanding the annexation of all mexico and antislavery leaders charging that the expansionists were conspiring to extend slavery to new realms.
the president submitted the trist treaty to the senate which approved it by a vote of 38 to 14 the war was over and america had gained a vast new territory.
but it had also acquired a new set of troubling and divisive issues.
pacific ocean limit of spanish territory established by treaty of 1819 boundary established by treaty of guadalupe hidalgo 1848 texas annexed by united states 1845 disputed by texas and mexico later by united states and mexico ceded by mexico 1848 additional territory ceded by mexico to united states 1848 gadsden purchase by united states from mexico 1853 san franciscc g n f of i 1 ca ico southwestern expansion 1845 1853 the annexation of much of what is now texas in 1845 the much larqer territorial u additional land from mexico in 1853 completed the present continental border of the united states 9 rntorial gains won in the mexican war in 1848 and the what great event shortly after the mexican war contributed to a rapid eastern united states.
r i the sectional debate ames polk tried to be a president whose policies transcended sectional divisions.
but conciliating the sections was becoming an almost impossible task.
polk gradually earned the enmity of northerners and westerners alike who believed his policies particularly his enthusiasm for territorial expansion in the southwest favored the south at their expense.
slavery and the territories in august 1846 while the mexican war was still in progress polk asked congress to appropriate 2 million for purchasing peace with mexico.
representative david wilmot of pennsylvania an antislavery democrat introduced an amendment to the appropriation bill prohibiting slavery in any territory acquired from mexico.
the so called wilmot proviso wilmot passed the house but failed in the senate.
proviso it would be called up debated and voted on repeatedly for years.
southern militants in the meantime contended that all americans had equal rights in the new territories including the right to move their property slaves there.
as the sectional debate intensified president polk supported a proposal to extend the missouri compromise line through the new territories to the pacific coast banning slavery north of the line and permitting it south of the line.
other politicians supported a plan originally known as squatter sovereignty and later by the more dignified phrase popular sovereignty which would allow the people of each territory acting through their legislature to decide the status of slavery there.
the debate over these various proposals dragged on for many months and the issue remained unresolved when polk left office in 1849 the presidential campaign of 1848 dampened the controversy for a time as both democrats and whigs tried to avoid the slavery question.
when polk in poor health declined to tun again the democrats nominated lewis cass of michigan a dull aging party regular.
the whigs nominated general zachary taylor of louisiana hero of the mexican war but a man with no political experience.
opponents of slavery found the choice of candidates unsatisfying and out of their discontent emerged the new free soil party which drew from the existing liberty party and the antislavery wings of the whig and democratic parties and which endorsed the wilmot proviso.
its candidate was former president martin van buren.
taylor won a narrow victory.
but while van buren failed to carry a single state he polled an impressive 291 000 votes 10 percent of the total and the free soilers elected ten members free soil t0 congress.
the emergence of the free soil party party as an important political force li e the emergence of the know nothing and liberty parties before it signaled the inability of the existing parties to contain the political passions slavery was creating.
competing plans the impending crisis 351 the california gold rush by the time taylor took office the pressure to resolve the question of slavery in the far western territories had become more urgent as a result of dramatic events in california.
in january 1848 james marshall a carpenter working on one of rancher john sutters sawmills found traces of gold in the foothills of the sierra nevada.
sutter tried to suppress the news fearing a gold rush would destroy his own substantial empire in the region.
but by may word of the discovery had reached san francisco by late summer it had reached the east coast of the united states and much of the rest of the world.
almost immediately hundreds of thousands of people from around the world began flocking to california in a frantic search for gold.
californias non indian population increased nearly twentyfold in four years from 14 000 in 1848 to over 220 000 in 1852 the atmosphere in california at the peak of the gold rush was one of crazed excitement and greed.
for a short time san francisco was almost completely depopulated as residents raced to the mountains to search for gold the citys principal newspaper which had been criticizing the gold mania had to stop publication because it could no longer find either staff or readers.
nothing but the introduction of insane asylums can effect a cure one visitor remarked of the gold mania.
most pre gold rush migrants to the far west had prepared carefully before making the journey.
but the gold rush mi forty niners 8rants known as forty niners threw caution to the winds.
they abandoned farms jobs homes families they piled onto ships and flooded the overland trails many carrying only what they could pack on their backs.
the overwhelming majority of the forty niners perhaps 95 percent were men and the society they created on their arrival in california was unusually volatile because of the absence of women children and families.
the gold rush also attracted some of the first chinese migrants to the western united states.
news of the discoveries created great excitement in china particularly in impoverished areas where letters from chinese already in california and reports from americans visiting in china spread the word.
it was of course extremely difficult for a poor chinese peasant to get to america but many young adventurous people mostly men decided to go anyway believing that they could quickly become rich and then return to china.
emigration brokers loaned many migrants money for passage to california which the migrants would pay off out of their earnings there.
the migration was almost entirely voluntary unlike the forced movement of kidnapped coolies to such places as peru and cuba at about the same time.
the chinese in california were therefore free laborers and merchants looking for gold or more often hoping to profit from other economic opportunities the gold boom was creating.
the gold rush created a serious labor shortage in california as many male workers left their jobs and flocked to the gold fields.
this shortage created opportunities for many people who needed work including chinese immigrants.
it also led to an overt exploitation of indians that resembled slavery in all.
352 chapter 14 wilsons creek mcdowell was unable to reorganize them and he had to order a retreat to washington a disorderly withdrawal complicated by the presence along the route of many civilians who had ridden down from the capital picnic baskets in hand to watch the battle from nearby hills.
the confederates as disorganized by victory as the union forces were by defeat and short of supplies and transportation did not pursue.
the battle was a severe blow to union morale and to president lincolns confidence in his officers.
it also dispelled the illusion that the war would be a brief one.
elsewhere in 1861 union forces were achieving some small but significant victories.
in missouri rebel forces gathered behind governor claiborne jackson and other state officials who wanted to secede from the union.
nathaniel lyon who com manded a small regular army force in st louis moved his troops into southern missouri to face the secessionists.
on august 10 at the battle of wilsons creek lyon was defeated and killed but not before he had seriously weakened the striking power of the confederates.
union forces were subsequently able to hold most of the state.
meanwhile a union force under george b mcclellan moved east from ohio into western virginia.
by the end of 1861 it had liberated the anti secession mountain people of the region.
they created their own state government loyal to the union and were admitted to the union as west virginia in 1863 the occupation of western virginia was of limited military value since the mountains cut the area off from the rest of virginia.
it was however an important symbolic victory for the north.
the western theater after the first battle of bull run military operations in the east settled into a long and frustrating stalemate.
the first decisive operations in 1862 occurred in the west.
union forces were trying to seize control of the southern mississippi river which would divide the confederacy and give the north easy transportation into the heart of the south.
northern soldiers advanced on the river from both the north and south moving downriver from kentucky and upriver from the gulf of mexico toward new orleans.
in april a union squadron of ironclads and wooden vessels commanded by david g farragut gathered in the gulf of mexico then smashed past weak confederate forts near the kt mouth of the mississippi and from there captured sailed up to new orleans which was defenseless because the confederate high command had expected the attack to come from the north.
the city surrendered on april 25 the first major union victory and an important turning point in the war.
from then on the mouth of the mississippi was closed to confederate trade and the souths largest city and most important banking center was in union hands.
farther north in the western theater confederate troops under the command of albert sidney johnston were stretched out in a long defensive line centered at two forts in tennessee fort henry and fort donelson on the tennessee and cumberland rivers respectively.
but the forts were well behind the main southern flanks a fatal weakness that union commanders recognized and exploited.
early in 1862 ulysses s grant attacked fort henry whose defenders awed by the ironclad riverboats accompanying the union army surrendered with almost no resistance on february 6 grant then moved both his naval and ground forces to fort donelson where the confederates put up a stronger fight but finally on february 16 had to surrender.
by cracking the confederate center grant had gained control of river communications and forced confederate forces out of kentucky and half of tennessee.
with about 40 000 men grant now advanced south along the tennessee river to seize control of railroad lines vital to the confederacy.
from pittsburg landing he marched to shiloh nearby shiloh tennessee where a force almost equal to his own commanded by albert sidney johnston and p g t beauregard caught him by surprise.
the result was the battle of shiloh april 6 7 in the first days fighting during which johnston was killed the southerners drove grant back to the river.
but the next day reinforced by 25 000 fresh troops grant recovered the lost ground and forced beauregard to withdraw.
after the narrow union victory at shiloh northern forces occupied corinth mississippi the hub of several important railroads and established control of the mississippi river as far south as memphis.
braxton bragg who succeeded johnston as commander of the confederate army in the west gathered his forces at chattanooga in eastern tennessee which the confederacy still controlled.
he hoped to win back the rest of the state and then move north into kentucky.
but first he had to face a union army commanded by don carlos buell and later william s rosecrans whose assignment was to capture chattanooga.
the two armies maneuvered for advantage inconclusively in northern tennessee and southern kentucky for several months until they finally met december 31 january 2 in the battle of murfreesboro or stones river.
bragg was forced to withdraw to the south his campaign a failure.
by the end of 1862 union forces had made considerable progress in the west.
but the major conflict remained in the east where they were having much less success.
the virginia front 1862 union operations were being directed in 1862 by george b mcclellan commander of the army of the potomac and the most controversial general of the war.
mcclellan was a superb trainer of men but he often appeared reluctant to commit his troops to battle.
opportunities for important engagements came and went and mcclellan seemed never to george ta e advantage of themclaiming always mcclellan r at his preparations were not yet complete or that the moment was not right.
the civil war 389 200 mi pmm.
200 400 km ohio texas illinois indiana zv missouri springfield wilson s creek august 10 1861 pea ridge march 7 8 1862 arkansas cairo island no.
10 7 v i ft ponew april 8 1862 k fehruaiy it fl e dnashvi memphis.
june 6 1862 vicksburg bombarded june 26 1862 c mobilex louisiana new orleans april 25 1862 st.
louis ohio io k cv perryville october 8 1862 virginia alabama gulf of mexico union forces union victories confederate forces confederate victories union held territory at start of war union gains confederate states.
x ir ninia wppp meetina with repeated frustrations the union armies in the west were scoring notable successes in the first two e war in the west 1861 1863 whi e the un on arnttes r wrgtma e rneehng w rs of the war.
this map shows a series of union drives in e wes fjpratp armv out of kentucky and western tennessee.
these battles culminated in the union victory at shiloh which le forces farther north under the command of ulysses s grant drove the confederate army to union control of the upper mississippi river.
vas control of the mississippi so important to both sides.
the winter of 1861 1862 mcclellan concentrated on his army of 150 000 men near washington.
finally gned a spring campaign whose purpose was to cap e confederate capital at richmond.
but instead of 1 overland directly toward richmond mcclellan a complicated roundabout route that he thought circumvent the confederate defenses.
the navy carry his troops down the potomac to a peninsula east htond between the york and james rivers.
the army approach the city from there.
it became known as the alar campaign.
mcclellan began the campaign with only part of his army.
approximately 100 000 men accompanied him down the potomac.
another 30 000 under general irvin mcdowell remained behind to protect washington.
mcclellan insisted that washington was safe as long as he was threatening richmond and finally persuaded lincoln to promise to send him the additional men.
but before the president could do so a confederate army under thomas j.
stonewall jackson changed his plans.
jackson staged a rapid march north through the shenandoah valley as if he were planning to cross the potomac and attack washington.
alarmed lincoln dispatched 390 chapter 16 carlisle indian school government authorities and private philanthropists tried in many ways to encourage indians to assimilate into mainstream white american society after the end of the indian wars of the late nineteenth century.
the carlisle indian industrial school founded by captain richard henry pratt in 1879 was the first federally funded native american off reservation boarding school.
educators there believed that native americans were the equals of people from european backgrounds.
the curriculum was designed to help native americans gain the skills necessary to advance in mainstream american society.
the library of congress lc usz62 55422 barbed wire ineffective as barriers to cattle.
in 1873 however two illinois farmers joseph h glidden and i l ellwood solved this problem by developing and marketing barbed wire which became standard equipment on the plains and revolutionized fencing practices all over the country.
the second problem was water.
much of the land west of the mississippi was considerably more arid than the lands to the east.
some of it was literally desert.
as a result the growth of the west depended heavily on irrigation providing water from sources other than rainfall.
water was diverted from rivers and streams and into farmlands throughout the west in california and in the southwest more than anywhere else.
in other areas farmers drilled wells or found other methods of channeling water onto their lands.
the search for water and the resulting battles over control of water between different landowners and even between different states became a central and enduring characteristic of western life.
in the plains states the problems of water created an epic disaster.
after 1887 a series of dry seasons began and lands that had been fertile now returned to semidesert.
some farmers dealt with the problem by using deep wells pumped by steel windmills by turn ing to what was called dryland farming a system of tillage drought hard times for farmers designed to conserve moisture in the soil by covering it with a dust blanket or by planting drought resistant crops.
in many areas of the plains however only large scale irrigation could save the endangered farms.
but irrigation projects of the necessary magnitude required government assistance and neither the state nor federal governments were prepared to fund the projects.
most of the people who moved into the region had previously been farmers in the midwest the east or europe.
in the booming years of the early 1880s with land values rising the new farmers had no problem obtaining extensive and easy credit and had every reason to believe they would soon be able to retire their debts.
but the arid years of the late 1880s during which crop prices were falling while production was becoming more expensive changed that prospect.
tens of thousands of farmers could not pay their debts and were forced to abandon their farms.
there was in effect a reverse migration white settlers moved back east sometimes turning once flourishing communities into desolate ghost towns.
those who remained continued to suffer from falling prices for example wheat which had sold for 1 60 a bushel at the end of the civil war dropped to 49 cents in the 1890s and persistent indebtedness.
4 the conquest of the far west 455 commercial agriculture american farming by the late nineteenth century no longer bore much relation to the comforting image many americans continued to cherish.
the sturdy independent farmer of popular myth was being replaced by the commercial farmer attempting to do in the agricultural economy what industrialists were doing in the manufacturing economy.
commercial farmers were not self sufficient and made no effort to become so.
they specialized in cash crops which they sold in national or world markets.
they did not make their own household supplies or grow their own food but bought them instead at town or village stores.
this kind of farming when it was successful raised the farmers living standards.
but it also made them dependent on bankers and interest rates railroads and freight rates national and european markets world supply and demand.
and unlike the capitalists of the industrial order they could not regulate their production or influence the prices of what they sold.
between 1865 and 1900 agriculture became an international business.
farm output increased dramatically not only in the united states but also in brazil argentina canada australia new zealand russia and elsewhere.
at the same time modern forms of communication and transportation the telephone telegraph steam navigation railroads were creating new markets around the world for agricultural goods.
american commercial farmers constantly opening new lands produced much more than the domestic market could absorb they relied on the world market to absorb their surplus but in that market they faced major competition.
cotton farmers depended on export sales for 70 percent of their annual income wheat farmers for 30 to 40 percent but the volatility of the international market put them at great risk.
beginning in the 1880s worldwide overproduction led to a drop in prices for most agricultural goods and hence to great economic distress for many of the more than 6 million american farm families.
by the 1890s 27 percent of the farms in the country were mortgaged by 1910 33 188tt 25 p f all farms had been operated by tenants by 1910 the proportion had grown to 37 percent.
commercial farming made some people fabulously wealthy.
but the farm economy as a whole was suffering a significant decline relative to the rest of the nation.
the farmers grievances american farmers were painfully aware that something was wrong.
but few yet understood the implications of national and world overproduction.
instead they concentrated their attention and anger on immediate comprehensible and no less real problems inequitable freight rates high interest charges and an inadequate currency.
the farmers first and most burning grievance was against the railroads.
in many cases the railroads charged higher freight rates for farm goods than for other goods and higher rates in the south and west than in the northeast.
railroads also controlled elevator and warehouse facilities in buying centers and charged arbitrary storage rates.
farmers also resented the institutions controlling credit banks loan companies insurance corporations.
since sources of credit in the west and south were few farmers had to take loans on whatever terms they could get often at interest rates ranging from 10 to 25 percent.
many farmers had to pay these loans back in years when prices were dropping and currency was becoming scarce.
increasing the volume of currency eventually became an important agrarian demand.
a third grievance concerned prices both the prices farmers received for their products and the prices they paid for goods.
farmers sold their products in a competitive world market over which they had no control and of which they had no advanced knowledge.
a farmer could plant a large crop at a moment when prices were high and find that by harvesttime the price had declined.
farmers fortunes rose and fell in response to unpredictable forces.
but many farmers became convinced often with valid reason that middlemen speculators bankers regional and local agents were combining to fix prices so as to benefit themselves at the growers expense.
many farmers also came to believe again not entirely without reason that manufacturers in the east were conspiring to keep the prices of farm goods low and the prices of industrial goods high.
although farmers sold their crops in a competitive world market they bought manufactured goods in a domestic market protected by tariffs and dominated by trusts and corporations.
the agrarian malaise these economic difficulties produced a series of social and cultural resentments.
farm families in some parts of the coun try particularly in the prairie and plains regions isolation.
c where large farms were scattered over vast areas were virtually cut off from the outside world and human companionship.
during the winter months and spells of bad weather the loneliness and boredom could become nearly unbearable.
many farmers lacked access to adequate education for their children to proper medical facilities to recreational or cultural activities to virtually anything that might give them a sense of being members of a community.
older farmers felt the sting of watching their children leave the farm for the city.
they felt the humiliation of being ridiculed as hayseeds by the new urban culture that was coming to dominate american life.
the result of this sense of isolation and obsolescence was a growing malaise among many farmers a discontent that would help create a great national political movement in the 1890s.
it found reflection too in the literature that emerged from rural america.
late nineteenth century writers often romanticized the rugged life of the cowboy and the western miner.
for the farmer however the image was often different.
hamlin garland for example reflected the growing disillusionment in a series of novels and short stories.
in the past garland wrote in the introduction to his novel 456 chapter 17 i spindle boys young boys some of them barefoot clamber among the great textile machines in a georgia cotton mill adjusting spindles.
many of them were the children of women who worked in the plants.
the photograph is by lewis hine.
e lewis hine corbis industrial worker was 597 for a woman it was 314.
even highly skilled women workers made about half what men doing the same job earned.
advocates of a minimum wage law for women created a sensation when several women testified at a hearing in chicago that low wages and desperate poverty had driven them to prostitution.
the testimony was not however sensational enough for the illinois legislature which promptly defeated the bill.
at least 1 7 million children under sixteen years of age were employed in factories and fields in 1900 more than twice the number of thirty years before.
ten percent of all girls aged ten to fifteen and 20 percent of all boys held jobs.
this was partly because some families so desperately needed additional wages that parents and children alike were pressed into service.
it was also because in some families the reluctance to permit wives to work led parents to send their children into the workforce to avoid forcing mothers to go.
this did not however prevent reformers from seeing children working in factories as a significant social problem.
under the pressure of outraged public opinion thirty eight state legislatures passed child labor laws in the late nineteenth century but these laws were of limited impact.
sixty percent of child workers were employed in agriculture which was typically exempt from the laws such children often worked twelve hour days picking or hoeing in the fields.
and even for children employed in factories the laws merely set a minimum age of twelve years and a maximum workday of ten hours standards that employers often ignored.
in the cotton mills of the south children working at the looms all night were kept awake by having cold water thrown in their faces.
in canneries little girls cut fruits and vegetables sixteen ineffective child labor laws hours a day.
exhausted children were particularly susceptible to injury while working at dangerous machines and they were maimed and even killed in industrial accidents at an alarming rate.
as much as the appalling conditions of women and child workers troubled the national conscience conditions for many men were at least equally dangerous.
in mills and mines and on the railroads the american accident rate was higher than that of any industrial nation in the world.
as late as 1907 an average of twelve railroad men a week died on the job.
in factories thousands of workers faced such occupational diseases as lead or phosphorus poisoning against which few employers took precautions.
the struggle to unionize labor leaders attempted to fight back against the poor conditions in the workplace by adopting some of the same tactics their employers had used so effectively creating large combinations or unions.
but by the end of the century their efforts had met with little success.
there had been craft unions in america representing small groups of skilled workers since well before the civil war.
alone however individual unions could not hope to exert national significant power in the new corporate labor union economy and in the 1860s some labor leaders began to search for ways to combine the energies of the various labor organizations.
the first attempt to federate separate unions into a single national organization came in 1866 when william h sylvis founded the national labor union a polyglot association claiming 640 000 members that included a variety of reform groups having lirie j industrial supremacy 479 i kehoe hanged.
last scenes in the life of the king of the molly maguires.
i am not guilty.
history of kehoes prominent share in the many murders in the gcal reaion.
0 evidence from spies.
workers agreed that man should be the breadwinner as one female union organizer said.
but many argued that as long as conditions made it impossible for men to support their families women should have full and equal opportunities in the workplace.
unions faced special difficulties during the recession years of the 1870s.
not only was there widespread unemployment there was also widespread middle class hostility toward the unions.
when labor disputes with employers turned bitter molly and vio ent as they occasionally did much maguires of the public instinctively blamed the workers or the radicals and anarchists they believed were influencing the workers for the trouble rarely the employers.
particularly alarming to middle class americans was the emergence of the molly maguires a militant labor organization in the anthracite coal region of pennsylvania.
the mollies operated within the ancient order of hibernians an irish fraternal society.
they attempted to intimidate the coal operators through violence and occasionally murder and they added to the growing perception that labor activism was motivated by dangerous radicals.
much of the violence attributed to the molly maguires however was instigated or performed by informers and agents employed by the mine owners who wanted a pretext for ruthless measures to suppress unionization.
little excitement in pottsville on the occasion of the execution by telegraph to the herald.
pottsville pa dec 18 1878 the people of pottsville have become so accustomed to executions of molly maguires that there is no excitement attendant upon this occasion.
jack kehoe the terror of the coal fields the braggart and desperado passed a most miserable night the guards say that he only got a few moments sleep.
he i j molly mcguires the molly maguires were known for their harsh intimidating and at times violent tactics against the owners and managers of anthracite coal mines.
this newspaper notice announces the execution of jack kehoe both high constable of mahanoy county in pennsylvania and a member of the molly mcguires who was found guilty of multiple murders in this coal producing region.
he was posthumously pardoned of these crimes in 1979 suggesting that his cry i am not guilty was indeed true.
american antiquarian society worcester massachusetts usa the bridgeman art library direct relationship with labor.
after the panic of 1873 the national labor union disintegrated and disappeared.
the national labor union like most of the individual unions that joined it excluded women workers.
male workers argued not entirely incorrectly that women were used to drive down their wages and they justified their hostility by invoking the ideal of domesticity.
woman was created to be mans companion a national labor union official said to be the presiding deity of the home circle most women the great railroad strike excitement over the molly maguires paled beside the near hysteria that gripped the country during the railroad strike of 1877 which began when the eastern railroads announced a 10 percent wage cut and which soon expanded into something approaching a class war.
strikers disrupted rail service national frm baltimore to st louis destroyed strike equipment and rioted in the streets of pittsburgh and other cities.
state militias were called out and in july president hayes ordered federal troops to suppress the disorders in west virginia.
in baltimore eleven demonstrators died and forty were wounded in a conflict between workers and militiamen.
in philadelphia state militia opened fire on thousands of workers and their families who were attempting to block the railroad crossings and killed twenty people.
in all more than 100 people died before the strike finally collapsed several weeks after it had begun.
the great railroad strike was americas first major national labor conflict and it illustrated how disputes between workers and employers could no longer be localized in the increasingly national economy.
it illustrated as well the depth of resentment among many american workers toward their employers and toward the governments allied with them and the lengths to which they were prepared to go to express that resentment.
and finally it was an indication of the frailty of the labor movement.
the failure of the strike seriously weakened the railroad unions and damaged the reputation of labor organizations in other industries as well.
480 chapter 20 woodrow wilson woodrow wilson the 28th president of the united states was a virginian the first southerner to be elected president since before the civil war a professor of political science and later president of princeton university governor of new jersey and known as a brilliant progressive.
his election to the presidency brought the first democrat to the white house since 1896.
the library of congress 3a21763v the federal reserve act which congress passed and the president signed on december 23 1913 it created twelve regional banks each to be owned and controlled by ffufrai reserve act inc ivi ual banks of its district.
the re gional federal reserve banks would hold a certain percentage of the assets of their member banks in reserve they would use those reserves to support loans to private banks at an interest or discount rate that the federal reserve system would set they would issue a new type of paper currency federal reserve notes that would become the nations basic medium of trade and would be backed by the government.
most important they would be able to shift funds quickly to troubled areas to meet increased demands for credit or to protect imperiled banks.
supervising and regulating the entire system was a national federal reserve board whose members were appointed by the president.
nearly half the nations banking resources were represented in the system within a year and 80 percent by the late 1920s.
in 1914 turning to the central issue of his 1912 campaign wilson proposed two measures to deal with the problem of monopoly.
in the process he revealed how his own approach to the issue was beginning to change.
there was a proposal to create a federal agency through which the government would help business police itself a regulatory commission of the type roosevelt had advocated in 1912 there were also proposals to strengthen candidate party electoral vote popular vote woodrow wilson democratic theodore roosevelt progressive bull moose mg wi 11 iam h taft hhb republican eugene v debs socialist 6 293 454 41 9 4 119 538 27 4 3 484 980 23 2 900 672 6 0 other parties noc nic prohibition socialist labor 58 8 of electorate voting election of 1912 the election of 1912 was one of the most unusual in american history because of the dramatic schism within the republican party.
two republican presidents william howard taft the incumbent and theodore roosevelt his predecessor ran against each other in 1912 opening the way for a victory by the democratic candidate woodrow wilson who won with only about 42 percent of the popular vote.
a fourth candidate the socialist eugene v debs received a significant 6 percent of the vote.
what events caused the schism between taft and roosevelt.
the governments ability to break up trusts a decentralizing approach characteristic of wilsons 1912 campaign.
the two measures took shape as the federal trade commission act and the clayton antitrust act.
the federal trade commission act created a regulatory agency that would help businesses determine in advance whether their actions would be acceptable to the government.
the agency would also have authority to launch prosecutions against unfair trade practices and it would have wide power to investigate corporate behavior.
wilson signed the federal trade commission bill happily.
but he seemed to lose interest in the clayton antitrust bill and did little to protect it from conservative assaults which greatly weakened it.
the future he had apparently decided lay with government supervision.
retreat and advance by the fall of 1914 wilson believed that the program of the new freedom was essentially complete and that agitation for reform would now subside.
he refused to support the movement for national woman suffrage.
deferring to southern democrats and reflecting his own southern background he condoned the reimposition of segregation in the agencies of the federal government in contrast to roosevelt who had ordered the elimination of many such barriers.
when congressional progressives attempted to enlist his support for new reform legislation wilson dismissed their proposals as unconstitutional or unnecessary.
the congressional elections of 1914 however shattered the presidents complacency.
democrats suffered major losses in congress and voters who in 1912 had supported the progressive party began returning to the republicans.
wilson would not be able to rely on a divided opposition when he ran for reelection in 1916 by the end of 1915 therefore wilson had begun to support a second flurry of reforms.
in january 1916 he appointed louis brandeis to the supreme court making him not only the first jew but also the most progressive justice to serve there.
later he supported a measure to make it easier for farmers to receive credit and one creating a system of workers compensation for federal employees.
wilson was sponsoring measures that expanded the powers of the national government in important ways.
in 1916 the progressives 581 for example he supported the keating owen act the first federal law regulating child labor.
the laws measure prohibited the shipment of goods produced by underage children across state lines thus giving an expanded importance to the constitutional clause assigning congress the task of regulating interstate commerce.
the president similarly supported measures that used federal taxing authority as a vehicle for legislating social change.
after the court struck down keating owen a new law attempted to achieve the same goal by imposing a heavy tax on the products of child labor.
the court later struck it down too.
and the smith lever act of 1914 demonstrated another way in which the federal government could influence local behavior it offered matching federal grants to support agricultural extension education.
over time these innovative uses of government overcame most of the constitutional objections and became the foundation of a long term growth in federal power over the economy.
looking back the powerful surge of reform efforts in the last years of the nineteenth century and the first years of the twentieth reforms intended to help the united states deal with the extraordinary changes and the vexing problem of the modern industrial era caused many americans to come to identify themselves as progressives that label meant many different things to many different people but at its core was a belief that human effort and government action could improve society.
the reform crusades gained strength steadily driven by both men and women and by people of many races and ethnicities.
by the early twentieth century progressivism had become a powerful transformative force in american life.
this great surge of reform eventually reached the federal government and national politics as progressives began to understand the limits of state and local reform.
success they came to believe required the engagement of the federal government.
two national leaders theodore roosevelt and woodrow wilson contributed to a period of national reform that made the government in washington a great center of power for the first time since the civil war a position it has never relinquished.
progressivism did not solve the nations problems but it gave movements organizations and governments new tools to deal with them.
key t erms people places events jane addams 553 louis brandeis 570 muckrakers 553 naacp 566 new freedom 579 new nationalism 578 prohibition 567 alice paul 560 bull moose party 579 eugenics 568 gifford pinchot 574 hetch hetchy 575 hull house 553 iww wobblies 569 recall and reflect 1 what moral crusades did progressives undertake m their efforts to reform the social order.
2 how did w e b du boiss philosophy on race relations differ from that of booker t washington.
what were some of the approaches progressives used to challenge the power and influence of capitalist corporate america.
robert la follette 563 social gospel 553 triangle shirtwaist company fire 564 w e b du bois 566 4 what was theodore roosevelts new nationalism.
5 what was woodrow wilsons new freedom.
582 chapter 22 prohibition 1921 a new york city police commissioner oversees agents pouring illegal liquor into the street.
this raid occurred in the early months of prohibition when the battle against alcohol was still popular hence the eagerness of the commissioner to appear in the photograph.
the library of congress lc usz62 123257 and eastern europeans in the country.
what immigration there was in other words would heavily favor northwestern europeans people of nordic or teutonic stock.
five years later a further restriction set a rigid limit of 150 000 immigrants a year.
in the years that followed immigration officials seldom permitted even half that number actually to enter the country.
but the nativism of the 1920s extended well beyond restricting immigration.
among other things this nativism helped instigate the rebirth of the ku klux kian as a major force in american society.
the first kian founded during reconstruction had died in the 1870s.
but in 1915 another group of white southerners the new klan 5 e met on stone mountain near atlanta and established a new version of the society.
nativist passions had swelled in georgia and elsewhere in response to the case of leo frank a jewish factory manager in atlanta convicted in 1914 on very flimsy evidence of murdering a female employee a mob stormed franks jail and lynched him.
the premiere also in 2 64 total immigration during five year periods in millions 1921 1926 1931 1936 1941 1946 1951 1956 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 year total immigration 1920 1960 after many years of extremely high rates of immigration from europe and elsewhere the united states experienced several decades of much lower immigration beginning in the 1920s.
immigration restriction legislation passed in 1921 and 1924 was one important reason for the decline.
what other factors depressed immigration in the 1930s and 1940s.
i nis cnari snows a signincam cndiiyc in the so ces of immigration between 1920 and 1960 a direct result of the national origins act k t ic establlshed nat onal quotas for immigrants to the united states based on the num er o such immigrants who had been in the country in 1890 note the shift back toward nor ern an western europe and away from italy and other southern and eastern european na ions w ic a not been heavily represented in the immigration of the 1890s.
but the most c ange was the huge increase in the proportion of immigrants from latin america a region explictly exempted from the quota system established in 1924 law in these years.
mencons treted differentl9 than europeans in immigration the new era 633 atlanta of d w griffiths film the birth of a nation which glorified the early klan also helped inspire white southerners to form a new one.
at first the new klan like the old was largely concerned with intimidating african americans who according to klan leader william j simmons were becoming insubordinate.
and at first it remained small obscure and almost entirely southern.
after world war i however concern about african americans became secondary to concern about catholics jews and foreigners.
at that point membership in the klan expanded rapidly and dramatically not just in the small towns and rural areas of the south but also in industrial cities in the north and midwest.
indiana had the largest klan membership of any state and there were substantial kians in chicago detroit and other northern industrial cities.
the klan was also strong in the west with particularly large and active chapter 22 second rater harding appointed capable men to the most important cabinet offices and he attempted to stabilize the nation s troubled foreign policy.
but even as he attempted to rise to his office he seemed baffled by his responsibilities as if he recognized his own unfitness.
i am a man of limited talents from a small town he reportedly told friends on one occasion.
i dont seem to grasp that i am president hardings intellectual limits were compounded by personal weaknesses his penchant for gambling illegal alcohol and attractive women.
harding lacked the strength to abandon the party hacks who had helped create his political success.
one of them harry daugherty the ohio party boss principally responsible teapot dome or is meteoric political ascent he appointed attorney general.
another new mexico senator albert b fall he made secretary of the interior.
members of the so called ohio gang filled important offices throughout the administration.
unknown to the public and perhaps also to harding daugherty fall and others were engaged in fraud and corruption.
the most spectacular scandal involved the rich naval oil reserves at teapot dome wyoming and elk hills california.
at the urging of fall harding transferred control of those reserves from the navy department to the interior department.
fall then secretly leased them to two wealthy businessmen and received in return nearly half a million dollars in loans to ease his private financial troubles.
fall was ultimately convicted of bribery and sentenced to a year in prison daugherty barely avoided a similar fate for his part in another scandal.
in the summer of 1923 only months before senate investigations and press revelations brought the scandals to light a tired and depressed harding left washington for a speaking tour in the west.
in seattle late in july he suffered severe pain which his doctors wrongly diagnosed as food poisoning.
a few days later in san francisco he suffered two major heart attacks and died.
in many ways calvin coolidge who succeeded harding in the presidency was utterly different from his predecessor.
where harding was genial garrulous and coolidge debauched coolidge was dour silent even puritanical.
and while harding was if not perhaps personally corrupt then at least tolerant of corruption in others coolidge seemed honest beyond reproach.
in other ways however harding and coolidge were similar figures.
both took an essentially passive approach to their office.
like harding coolidge had risen to the presidency on the basis of few substantive accomplishments.
elected governor of massachusetts in 1919 he had won national attention with his laconic response to the boston police strike that year.
that was enough to make him his partys vice presidential nominee in 1920 three years later after hardings death he took the oath of office from his father a justice of the peace by the light of a kerosene lamp.
if anything coolidge was even less active as president than harding partly as a result of his conviction that government should interfere as little as possible in the life of the nation.
in 1924 he received his partys presidential nomination virtually unopposed.
running against john w davis he won a comfortable victory 54 percent of the popular vote and 382 of the 531 electoral votes.
robert la follette the candidate of the reincarnated progressive party received 16 percent of the popular vote but carried only his home state of wisconsin.
coolidge probably could have won renomination and reelection in 1928 instead in characteristically laconic fashion he walked into a press room one day and handed each reporter a slip of paper containing a single sentence i do not choose to run for president in 1928 harding and friends president warren g harding center left holding a rod poses with companions during a fishing trip to miami in 1921 he enjoyed these social and sporting events with wealthy friends and political cronies.
two of his companions here attorney general harry daugherty to the left of harding and interior secretary albert fall at far right were later principal figures in the scandals that rocked the administration before and after harding s death.
bettmann corbis the new era 637 calvin coolidge at leisure coolidge was a silent man of simple tastes.
but he was not really an outdoorsman despite his efforts to appear so.
he is shown here fishing in simsbury connecticut carefully attired in suit tie hat and rubber boots.
bettmann corbis government and business the story of harding and coolidge themselves however is only a part and by no means the most important part of the story of their administrations.
however passive the new era presidents may have been much of the federal government was working effectively and efficiently during the 1920s to adapt public pol andrew icy to the widelv accepted oal of the time mellon helping business and industry operate with maximum efficiency and productivity.
the dose relationship between the private sector and the federal government that had been forged during world war i continued.
secretary of the treasury andrew mellon a wealthy steel and aluminum tycoon devoted himself to working for substantial reductions in taxes on corporate profits personal incomes and inheritances.
largely because of his efforts congress cut them all by more than half.
mellon also worked closely with president coolidge after 1924 on a series of measures to trim dramatically the already modest federal budget.
the administration even managed to retire half the nations world war i debt.
the most energetic member of the cabinet was commerce secretary herbert hoover who considered himself and was considered by others a notable progressive.
during his eight years in the commerce department hoover encouraged voluntary cooperation in the private sector as the best avenue to stability.
but the idea of voluntarism he believed did not require that the government remain passive on the contrary public institutions hoover insisted should play an active role in creating the new cooperative order.
above all hoover became the champion of the concept of business associationalism a concept that envisioned the creation of national organizations of businessmen in particular industries.
through these trade associations private entrepreneurs could hoover believed stabilize their industries and promote efficiency in production and marketing.
many progressives derived encouragement from the election of herbert hoover to the presidency in 1928 hoover easily defeated a1 smith the democratic candidate.
and he entered office promising bold new efforts to solve the nations remaining economic problems.
but hoover had few opportunities to prove himself.
less than a year after his inauguration the nation plunged into the severest and most prolonged economic crisis in its history a crisis that brought many of the optimistic assumptions of the new era crashing down and launched the nation into a period of unprecedented social innovation and reform.
hoovers associationalism looking back the remarkable prosperity of the 1920s a prosperity without parallel in the previous history of the united states shaped niuch of what exuberant contemporaries liked to call the new era in the years after world war i america created a vibrant and extensive national culture.
its middle class moved increasingly to embrace consumerism.
its politics reorganized around the needs of a booming interdependent industrial economy rejecting many of the reform crusades of the previ us generation but also creating new institutions to help promote economic growth and stability.
beneath the glittering surface of the new era however were roiling controversies and timeless injustices clamoring for redress.
although the prosperity of the 1920s was more widely shared than at any other time in the nations industrial history more than half the population failed to achieve any real benefits from the growth.
a new optimistic secular culture was attracting millions of urban middle class people.
but many other americans looked at this culture with alarm and fought against it with great fervor.
few eras in modern american history have seen so much political and cultural conflict.
chapter 24 huey long what he claimed was the presidents failure to deal harshly enough with the money powers in the spring of 1935 he established his own political organization the national union for social justice.
he was widely believed to have one of the largest regular radio audiences of anyone in america.
more alarming to the administration was the growing national popularity of senator huey p long of louisiana.
long had risen to power in his home state through his strident attacks on the banks oil companies and utilities and on the conservative political oligarchy allied with them.
elected governor in 1928 he launched an assault on his opponents so thorough and forceful that they were soon left with virtually no political power.
many critics in louisiana claimed that long had in effect become a dictator.
but he also maintained the overwhelming support of the louisiana electorate in part because of his flamboyant personality and in part because of his solid record of conventional progressive accomplishments building roads schools and hospitals revising the tax codes distributing free textbooks lowering utility rates.
barred by law from succeeding himself as governor he ran in 1930 for a seat in the u s senate and won easily.
long like coughlin supported franklin roosevelt in 1932 but within six months of roosevelts inauguration he had broken with the president.
as an alternative to the new deal he advocated a drastic program of wealth redistribution a program he ultimately named the share our wealth plan.
the government he claimed could end the depression easily by using the tax system to confiscate the surplus riches of the wealthiest men and women in america and distribute these surpluses to the rest of the population.
that would he claimed allow the government to guarantee every family a minimum homestead of 5 000 and an annual wage of 2 500.
in 1934 long established his own national organization the share our wealth society which soon attracted a large following through much of the nation.
a poll by the democratic national committee in the spring of 1935 disclosed that long might attract more than 10 per cent of the vote if he ran as a third party candidate possibly enough to tip a close election to the republicans.
share our wealth society the second new deal roosevelt launched the so called second new deal in the spring of 1935 in response both to the growing political pressures and to the continuing economic crisis.
the new proposals represented if not a new direction at least a shift in the emphasis of new deal policy.
perhaps the most conspicuous change was in the administrations attitude toward big business.
symbolically at least the president was now willing to attack corporate interests openly.
in march for example he proposed to congress an act designed to break up the great utility holding companies and he spoke harshly of monopolistic control of their industry.
the holding company act of 1935 was the result although furious lobbying by the utilities led to amendments that sharply limited its effects.
huey long few public speakers could arouse a crowd more effectively than huey long of louisiana known to many as the kingfish a nickname borrowed from the popular radio show amos n andy.
it was longs effective use of radio however that contributed most directly to his spreading national popularity in the early 1930s.
archive photos getty images equally alarming to affluent americans was a series of tax reforms proposed by the president in 1935 a program conservatives quickly labeled a soak the rich scheme.
apparently designed to undercut the appeal of huey longs share our wealth plan the roosevelt proposals called for establishing the highest and most progressive peacetime tax rates in history although the actual impact of these rates was limited.
me supreme court decision in 1935 to strike national labor relations board national industrial recovery act also invalidated section 7 a of the act which had guaranteed workers the right to organize and bargain collectively.
a group of progressives in congress led by senator robert f wagner of new york introduced what became the national labor relations act of 1935 the new law popularly known as the wagner act provided workers with a crucial enforcement mechanism missing from the 1933 law the national labor relations board nlrb which would have power to compel employers to recognize and bargain with legitimate unions.
the president was not entirely happy with the bill but he signed it anyway.
that was in large part because american workers themselves had by 1935 become so important and vigorous a force that roosevelt realized his own political future would depend in part on responding to their demands.
the new deal 671 labor militancy the emergence of a powerful trade union movement in the 1930s was one of the most important social and political developments of the decade.
it occurred partly in response to government efforts to enhance the power of unions but it was also a result of the increased pressure from american workers and their leaders.
the growing labor militancy first became obvious in 1934 when recently organized workers many of them inspired by the collective bargaining provisions of the national industrial recovery act demonstrated a new assertiveness.
it was soon clear however that without stronger legal protection most organizing drives would end in frustration.
once the wagner act became law the search for more effective forms of organization rapidly gained strength in labor ranks.
the american federation of labor afl remained committed to the idea of the craft union organizing workers on the basis of their skills.
but that concept had little to offer unskilled laborers who now constituted the bulk of the industrial work industrial frce during the 1930s therefore a newer unionism concept of labor organization challenged the craft union ideal industrial unionism.
advocates of this approach argued that all workers in a particular industry should be organized in a single union regardless of what functions the workers performed all autoworkers should be in a single automobile union all steelworkers should be in a single steel union.
united in this way workers would greatly increase their power.
leaders of the afl craft unions for the most part opposed the new concept.
but industrial unionism found a number of important advocates most prominent among them john l lewis the talented flamboyant and eloquent leader of the united mine workers.
at first lewis and his allies attempted to work within the afl but friction between the new industrial organizations lewis was promoting and the older craft unions grew rapidly.
at the 1935 afl convention lewis became embroiled in a series of angry confrontations and one celebrated fistfight with craft union leaders before finally walking out.
a few weeks later he created the committee on industrial organization.
when the afl expelled the new committee and all the industrial unions it represented lewis renamed the committee the congress of industrial organizations cio established it in 1936 as an organization directly rivaling the afl and became its first president.
the cio expanded the constituency of the labor movement.
it was more receptive to women and to blacks than the afl had been in part because women and blacks were more likely to be relegated to unskilled jobs and in part because cio organizing drives targeted previously unorganized industries textiles laundries tobacco factories and others where women and minorities constituted much of the workforce.
the cio was also a more militant organization than the afl.
by the time of the 1936 schism it was already engaged in major organizing battles in the automobile and steel industries.
cio organizing battles out of several competing auto unions the united auto workers uaw was gradually emerging preeminent in the early and mid 1930s.
but although it was gaining recruits it was making little sit down progress in winning recognition from the strike automobile corporations.
in december 1936 however autoworkers employed a controversial and effective new technique for challenging corporate opposition the sit down strike.
employees in several general motors plants in detroit simply sat down inside the plants refusing either to work or to leave thus preventing the company from using strikebreakers.
the tactic spread to other locations and by february 1937 strikers had occupied seventeen gm plants.
while male workers remained in the factories female supporters relatives friends and coworkers of the strikers demonstrated on behalf of the strikers lobbied on their behalf with state and local officials and provided food clothing and other necessities to the men inside.
the strikers ignored court orders and local police efforts to force them to vacate the buildings.
when michigans governor frank murphy a liberal democrat refused to call up the national guard to clear out the strikers and when the federal government also refused to intervene on behalf of employers general motors relented.
in february 1937 gm became the first major manufacturer to recognize the uaw other automobile companies soon did the same.
the sit down strike proved effective for rubber workers and others as well but it survived only briefly as a labor technique.
its apparent illegality aroused so much public opposition that labor leaders soon abandoned it.
in the steel industry the battle for unionization was less easily won.
in 1936 the steel workers organizing committee swoc later the united steelworkers of america began a major organizing drive involving thousands of workers and frequent at times bitter strikes.
in march 1937 u s steel the giant of the industry recognized the union rather than risk a costly strike at a time when it sensed itself on the verge of recovery from the depression.
but the smaller companies known collectively as little steel were less accommodating.
on memorial day 1937 a group of striking workers from republic steel gathered with their families for a picnic and demonstration in south chicago.
when they attempted to march peacefully and legally toward the steel plant police opened fire on them.
ten demonstrators were killed another ninety were wounded.
despite a public outcry against the memorial day massacre the harsh tactics of little steel companies succeeded.
the 1937 strike failed.
but the victory of little steel was one of the last gasps of the kind of brutal strikebreaking that had proved so effective in the past.
in 1937 alone there were 4 720 strikes over 80 percent of them settled in favor of the unions.
by the end of the year more than 8 million workers were members of laboixrapid unions recognized as official bargaining growth units by employers compared with 3 million in 1932.
by 1941 that number had expanded to 10 million and included the workers of little steel whose employers had finally recognized the swoc.
672 chapter in the history of reform but one that worked within rigid occasionally crippling limits.
much of the recent work on the new deal has focused on the constraints within which it was operating.
the sociologist theda skocpol along with other scholars has emphasized the issue of state capacity as an important new deal constraint ambitious reform ideas often foundered she argued because no government bureaucracy had sufficient strength and expertise to shape or administer them.
james t patterson barry karl mark leff and others have emphasized the political constraints the new deal encountered.
both in congress and among the public conservative inhibitions about government remained strong.
frank freidel ellis hawley herbert stein and many others point as well to the ideological constraints affecting franklin roosevelt and his supporters.
alan brinkley in the end of reform 1995 described an ideological shift in new deal liberalism that shifted from the initial regulatory view of government to one that envisioned relatively little direct governmental interference in the corporate world and centered instead on keynesian welfare state programs.
david kennedy in freedom from fear 1999 argued by contrast that the aggressive anticapitalism of early new deal liberalism actually hampered the search for recovery.
only when roosevelt twentieth century.
eleanor roosevelt spoke throughout the 1930s on behalf of racial justice and put continuing pressure on her husband and others in the federal government to ease discrimination against blacks.
she was also partially responsible for what was symbolically at least one of the most important events of the decade for african americans.
when the renowned african american concert singer marian anderson was refused permission in the spring of 1939 to give a concert in the auditorium of the daughters of the american revolution washingtons only major concert hall eleanor roosevelt resigned from the organization and then along with interior secretary harold ickes another champion of racial equality helped secure government permission for her to sing on the steps of the lincoln memorial.
andersons easter sunday concert attracted 75 000 people and became in effect one of the first modern civil rights demonstrations.
the president himself appointed a number of black officials to significant second level positions in his administration.
roosevelt appointees such as robert weaver william hastie and mary mcleod bethune created an informal network of black officeholders who consulted frequently cabinet with one another and who became known us the ublack cabinet eleanor roosevelt harold ickes and harry hopkins all made efforts to ensure that new deal relief programs did not exclude blacks and by 1935 perhaps a quarter of all african americans were receiving some form of government assistance.
one result was a historic change in black electoral behavior.
as late as 1932 most african americans were voting republican as they had since the civil war.
by 1936 more than 90 percent of them were voting democratic the beginnings of a political alliance that would endure for decades.
680 fdr in albany before he became president franklin roosevelt served as governor of new york where he developed a reputation of being an activist working to confront the great depression.
in this 1930 photograph he is sitting at his desk in the state capitol.
two years later he would be elected president.
afp getty images embraced measures that unleashed the power of the market did prosperity begin to return.
the phrase new deal liberalism has come in the postwar era to seem synonymous with modern ideas of aggressive federal management of the economy elaborate welfare systems a powerful bureaucracy and large scale government spending.
many historians of the new deal however would argue that the modern idea of new deal liberalism bears only a limited relationship to the ideas that new dealers themselves embraced.
the liberal accomplishments of the 1930s can be understood only in the context of their own time later liberal efforts drew from that legacy but also altered it to fit the needs and assumptions of very different eras.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 what is the conservative view of the new deal.
2 how did the political atmosphere of the 1930s limit the new deal.
3 did the new deal save capitalism.
if so how and why.
african americans supported franklin roosevelt because they knew he was not their enemy.
but they had few illusions that the new deal represented a major turning point in american race relations.
for example the president was never willing to risk losing the backing of southern democrats by supporting legislation to make lynching a federal crime.
nor would he endorse efforts in congress to ban the poll tax one of the most potent tools by which white southerners kept blacks from voting.
new deal relief agencies did not challenge and indeed reinforced existing patterns of discrimination.
the civilian conservation corps established separate black camps.
the nra codes tolerated paying blacks less than whites doing the same jobs.
african americans were largely excluded from employment in the tva.
the federal housing administration refused to provide mortgages to african existing discrimination reinforced americans moving into white neighborhoods and the first public housing projects financed by the federal government were racially segregated.
the wpa routinely relegated black hispanic and asian workers to the least skilled and lowest paying jobs or excluded them altogether when funding ebbed nonwhites like women were among the first to be dismissed.
the new deal was not hostile to african americans and it did much to help them advance.
but it refused to make the issue of race a significant part of its agenda.
the new deal and the indian problem in many respects government policies toward the indian tribes in the 1930s were simply a continuation of the long established effort to encourage native americans to assimilate indian reorganization act 682 chapter 26 the war and the west the impact of government spending was perhaps most dramatic in the west which had long relied on federal largesse more than other regions.
the west coast naturally became the launching point for most of the naval war against japan and the government created large manufacturing facilities in california and elsewhere to serve the needs of its military.
altogether the government made almost 40 billion worth of capital investments factories military and transportation facilities highways power plants in the west during the war more than in any other region.
ten percent of all the money the federal government spent between 1940 and 1945 went to california.
other western states also shared disproportionately in war contracts and government funded capital investments.
by the end of the war the economy of the pacific coast and to a lesser extent other areas of the west had been transformed.
the pacific coast had become the center of the growing american aircraft industry.
new yards in southern california washington state and elsewhere made the west a center of the shipbuilding industry.
los angeles formerly a medium sized city notable chiefly for its film industry now became a major industrial center as well.
once a lightly industrialized region parts of the west were now among the most important manufacturing areas in the country.
once a region without adequate facilities to support substantial economic growth the west now stood poised to become the fastest growing region in the nation after the war.
labor and the war instead of the prolonged and debilitating unemployment that had been the most troubling feature of the depression economy the war created a serious labor shortage.
the armed forces took more than 15 million men and women out of the civilian workforce at the same time that the demand for labor was rising rapidly.
nevertheless the civilian workforce increased by almost 20 percent during the war.
the 7 million people who had previously been unemployed accounted for some of the increase the employment of many people previously considered inappropriate for the workforce the very young the elderly and most important several million women accounted for the rest.
the war gave an enormous boost to union membership which rose from about 10 5 million members in 1941 to more union gains r an 13 mi ion in 1945 but a so created important new restrictions on the ability of unions to fight for their members demands.
the government was principally interested in preventing inflation and in keeping production moving without disruption.
it managed to win important concessions from union leaders on both scores.
one was the so called little steel formula which set a 15 percent limit on wartime wage increases.
another was the no strike pledge by which unions agreed not to stop production in wartime.
in return the government provided labor with a maintenance of membership agreement which insisted that the thousands of new workers pouring into unionized defense plants would be automatically enrolled in the unions.
the agreement ensured the continued health of the union organizations but in return workers had to give up the right to demand major economic gains during the war.
many rank and file union members and some local union leaders resented the restrictions imposed on them by the government and the labor movement hierarchy.
despite the no strike pledge there were nearly 15 000 work stoppages during the war mostly wildcat strikes strikes unauthorized by the union leadership.
when the united mine workers defied the government by striking in may 1943 congress reacted by passing over roosevelts veto the smith connally act or the war labor disputes act which required unions to wait thirty days before striking and empowered the president to seize a struck war plant.
in the meantime public animosity toward labor rose rapidly and many states passed laws to limit union power.
stabilizing the boom the fear of deflation the central concern of the 1930s gave way during the war to a fear of inflation particularly after prices rose 25 percent in the two years office of rice j administration before the attack on pearl harbor.
in october 1942 congress grudgingly responded to the presidents request and passed the anti inflation act which gave the administration authority to freeze agricultural prices wages salaries and rents throughout the country.
enforcement of these provisions was the task of the office of price administration opa led first by leon henderson and then by chester bowles.
in part because of its success inflation was a much less serious problem during world war ii than it had been during world war i even so the opa was never popular.
there was widespread resentment of its controls over wages and prices.
and there was only grudging acquiescence in its complicated system of rationing scarce consumer goods coffee sugar meat butter canned goods shoes tires gasoline and fuel oil.
blackmarketing and overcharging grew to proportions far beyond opa policing capacity.
from 1941 to 1945 the federal government spent a total of 321 billion twice as much as it had spent in the entire 150 years of its existence to that point and ten times as much as the cost of world war i the national debt rose from 49 billion in 1941 to 259 billion in 1945 the government borrowed about half the revenues it needed by selling 100 billion worth of bonds some sold to ordinary citizens but most to financial institutions.
much of the rest it raised by radically increasing income taxes through the revenue act of 1942 which established a 94 percent rate for the highest brackets and for the first time imposed taxes on the lowest income families as well.
to simplify collection congress enacted a withholding system of payroll deductions in 1943 america in a world at war 713 mobilizing production the search for an effective mechanism to mobilize the economy for war began as early as 1939 and continued for nearly four years.
one failed agency after another attempted to bring war rder to the mobilization effort.
finally in production january 1942 the president responded to board widespread criticism by creating the war production board wpb under the direction of former sears roebuck executive donald nelson.
in theory the wpb was to be a superagency with broad powers over the economy.
in fact it never had as much authority as its world war i equivalent the war industries board.
and the genial donald nelson never displayed the administrative or political strength of his 1918 counterpart bernard baruch.
the wpb was never able to win control over military purchases the army and navy often circumvented the board entirely in negotiating contracts with producers.
it was never able to satisfy the complaints of small business which charged correctly that most contracts were going to large corporations.
gradually the president transferred much of the wpbs authority to a new office located within the white house the office of war mobilization directed by former supreme court justice and south carolina senator james f byrnes.
but the owm was only slightly more successful than the wpb.
despite the administrative problems the war economy managed to meet almost all the nation s critical war needs.
enormous new factory complexes sprang up in the space of a few months many of them funded by the federal governments defense plants corporation.
an entire new industry producing synthetic rubber emerged to make up for the loss of access to natural rubber in the pacific.
by the beginning of 1944 american factories were in fact producing more of most goods than the government needed.
their output was twice that of all the axis countries combined.
there were even complaints late in the war from some officials that military production was becoming excessive that a limited resumption of civilian production should begin before the fighting ended.
the military staunchly and successfully opposed almost all such demands.
defense research committee wartime science and technology more than any previous american war world war ii was a watershed for technological and scientific innovation.
that was partly because the american national government poured substantial funds into research and development beginning in 1940 in that year the government created the national defense research committee ided by the mit scientist vannevar bush who had been a neer in the early development of the computer.
by the end the war the new agency had spent more than 100 million research more than four times the amount spent by the ernment on military research and development in the pre us forty years.
in the first years of the war all the technological advantages seemed to lie with the germans and japanese.
germany had made great advances in tanks and other mechanized armor in the 1930s particularly during the spanish civil war when it had helped arm francos fascist forces.
it used its armor effectively during its blitzkrieg in europe in 1940 and again in north africa in 1942 german submarine technology was significantly advanced compared to british and american capabilities in 1940 and german u boats were for a time devastatingly effective in disrupting allied shipping.
japan had developed extraordinary capacity in its naval air technology.
its highly sophisticated fighter planes launched from distant aircraft carriers conducted the successful raid on pearl harbor in december 1941 but britain and america had advantages of their own which quickly helped redress these imbalances.
american techniques of mass production the great automotive assembly lines in particular were converted efficiently to military production in 1941 and 1942 and soon began producing airplanes ships tanks and other armaments in much greater numbers than the germans and japanese could produce.
allied scientists and engineers moved quickly as well to improve anglo american aviation and naval technology particularly to improve the performance of submarines and tanks.
by late 1942 allied weaponry was at least as advanced as that of the enemy.
in addition each technological innovation by the enemy produced a corresponding innovation to limit the damage of the new techniques.
american and british physicists made rapid advances in improving radar and sonar technologytaking advantage of advances in radio technology in the 1920s radar and anb beyond which helped allied naval sonar forces decimate german u boats in 1943 and effectively end their effectiveness in the naval war.
particularly important was the creation in 1940 of centimetric radar which used narrow beams of short wavelength that made radar more efficient and effective than ever before as the british navy discovered in april 1941 when the instruments on one of its ships detected a surfaced submarine ten miles away at night and on another occasion spotted a periscope at three quarters of a mile range.
with earlier technologies the sub and periscope would have been undetectable.
this new radar could also be effectively miniaturized which was critical to its use on airplanes and submarines in particular.
it required only a small rotating aerial and it used newly advanced cavity magnetron valves of great power.
these innovations put the allies far in advance of germany and japan in radar and sonar technology.
the allies also learned early how to detect and disable german naval mines and when the germans tried to counter this progress by introducing an acoustic mine which detonated when a ship came near it not necessarily just on contact the allies developed acoustical countermeasures of their own which transmitted sounds through the water to detonate mines before ships came near them.
anglo american antiaircraft technology both on land and on sea also improved although never to the point where it 714 chapter 28 interstates the interstate highway system changed the physical landscape of the united states.
its great sprawling ribbons of concrete such as this photograph that shows the hollywood freeway harbor freeway and arroyo seco freeway intersecting on multiple levels sliced through cities towns and rural areas.
but its biggest impact was in facilitating the movement of urban populations out of cities and into increasingly distant suburbs.
photo by j r eyerman time life pictures getty images provided families with larger homes than they could find or afford in the cities.
many people were attracted by the idea of living in a community populated largely by people of similar age and background and found it easier to form friendships and social circles there than in the city.
women in particular often valued the presence of other nonworking mothers living nearby to share the tasks of child raising.
another factor motivating white americans to move to the suburbs was race.
there were some african american suburbs but most suburbs were restricted to whites both because relatively few blacks could afford to live in them and because formal and informal barriers kept out even prosperous african americans.
in an era when the black population of most cities was rapidly growing many white families moved to the suburbs to escape the integration of urban neighborhoods and schools.
suburban neighborhoods had many things in common with one another.
but they were not uniform.
levittowns and inexpensive developments like them ultimately became the homes of mainly lower middle class people one step removed from the inner city.
other more affluent suburbs became enclaves of wealthy families.
in virtually every city a clear hierarchy emerged of upper class suburban neighborhoods and more modest ones just as such gradations had emerged years earlier among urban neighborhoods.
the suburban family for professional men many of whom worked in cities at some distance from their homes suburban life generally meant a rigid division between their working and personal worlds.
for many middle class married women it meant increased isolation prevailing from the workplace.
the enormous gender roles cultural emphasis on family life in reinforced t e 1950s strengthened popular prejudices against women entering the professions or occupying any paid job at all.
many middle class husbands considered it demeaning for their wives to be employed.
and many women shied away from the workplace when they could afford to stay at home full time with their children.
one of the most influential books in postwar american life was a famous guide to child rearing dr benjamin spocks baby and child dr benjamin care first published in 1946 and reissued and revised repeatedly for decades thereafter.
dr spocks approach to raising babies was child centered as opposed to parent centered.
the purpose of motherhood he taught was to help children learn and grow and realize their potential.
all other considerations including the mothers own physical and emotional requirements should be subordinated to the needs of the child.
dr spock at first envisioned only a very modest role for fathers in the process of child rearing although he changed his views on this and on many other issues over time.
women who could afford not to work faced pressures to remain in the home and concentrate on raising their children.
but as expectations of material comfort rose many middle class families needed a second income to maintain the standard of living they desired.
as a result the number of married women working outside the home actually increased in the postwar years even as the social pressure for them to stay out of the workplace grew.
by 1960 nearly a third of all married women were part of the paid workforce.
the birth of television television the most powerful medium of mass communication in the second half of the twentieth century was central to the culture of the postwar era.
experiments in broadcasting pictures along with sound had begun as early as the 1920s but commercial television began only shortly after world war ii.
its growth was phenomenally rapid.
in 1946 there were only 17 000 sets in the country by 1957 there were 40 million television sets in use almost as many sets as there were families.
more people had television sets according to one report than had refrigerators.
the television industry emerged directly out of the radio industry and all three major networks the national broadcasting company the columbia broadcasting system and the american broadcasting company had started as radio companies.
like radio the television business was driven by advertising.
the need to attract advertisers determined most programming decisions and in the early days of television sponsors often played a direct powerful and continuing role in determining the content of the programs they chose to the affluent society 765 ozzie and harriet in addition to depicting american life as predominantly white middle class and suburban television in the 1950s and 1960s often portrayed americans as optimistic and upwardly mobile.
here the nelson family characters from the show the adventures of ozzie and harriet enjoys time together in their backyard pool.
abc photofest sponsor.
many early television shows bore the names of the corporations that were paying for them the ge television theater the chrysler playhouse the camel news caravan and others.
some daytime serials were actually written and produced by procter gamble and other companies.
the impact of television on american life was rapid pervasive and profound.
by the late 1950s television news had replaced newspapers magazines and radios as the nations most important vehicle of information.
television advertising social helped create a vast market for new fash consequences ions ancl products televised athletic events of television gradually made professional and college sports one of the most important sources of entertainment and one of the biggest businesses in america.
television entertainment programming almost all of it controlled by the three national networks and their corporate sponsors replaced movies and radio as the principal source of diversion for american families.
much of the programming of the 1950s and early 1960s created a common image of american life an image that was predominantly white middle class and suburban and that was epitomized by such popular situation comedies as ozzie t.
and harriet and leave it to beaver.
homogenizing programmins also reinforced the concept message f gender roles that most men and many women unthinkingly embraced.
most situation comedies in particular showed families in which as the title of one of the most popular put it father knows best and in which most women were mothers and housewives striving to serve their children and please their husbands.
but television also conveyed other images gritty urban working class families in jackie gleasons the honeymooners the childless show business family of the early i love lucy unmarried professional women in our miss brooks and my little margie hapless african americans in amos n andy.
television not only sought to create an idealized image of a homogeneous suburban america.
it also sought to convey experiences at odds with that image but to convey them in warm unthreatening terms.
yet television also inadvertently created conditions that could accentuate social conflict.
even those unable to share in the affluence of the era could through television news and other venues acquire a vivid picture of how the rest of their society lived.
and at the same time that television was reinforcing the homogeneity of the white middle class it was also contributing to the sense of alienation and powerlessness among groups excluded from the world it portrayed.
travel outdoor recreation and environmentalism the idea of a paid vacation for american workers and the association of that idea with travel entered american culture beginning in the 1920s.
but it was not until the postwar years that vacation travel became truly widespread among middle income americans.
the construction of the interstate highway system contributed dramatically to the growth of travel.
so did the increasing affluence of workers which made it possible for them to buy cars.
nowhere was this surge in travel and recreation more visible than in americas national parks which experienced the 766 chapter 30 the indian civil rights movement like other civil rights movements of the same time fell far short of winning full justice and equality for its constituents.
to some indians the principal goal was to defend tribal autonomy to protect the right of indians and more to the point individual tribal groups to remain separate and distinct.
to others the goal was equality to win for indians a place in society equal to that of other groups of americans.
because there was no single indian culture or tradition in america the movement never united all indians.
important legal victories for all its limits however the indian civil rights movement helped the tribes win a series of new legal rights and protections that gave them a stronger position than they had enjoyed at any previous time in the twentieth century.
latino activism far more numerous than indians were latinos or hispanic americans the fastest growing minority group in the united states.
they were no more a single cohesive group than the indians were.
some including the descendants of early spanish settlers in new mexico had roots as deep in american history as those of any other group.
others were men and women who had immigrated since world war ii.
large numbers of puerto ricans had migrated to eastern cities particularly new york city.
south florida s substantial cuban population began with a wave of middle class refugees fleeing the castro regime in the early 1960s followed by a second much poorer wave of cuban immigrants in 1980 the so called marielitos named for the port from which they left cuba.
later in the 1980s large numbers of immigrants both legal and illegal began to arrive from the troubled nations of central and south america from guatemala nicaragua el salvador peru and others.
but the most numerous and important latino group in the united states was mexican americans.
during world war ii large numbers of mexican americans had entered the country in response to the labor shortage and many had remained in the cities of the southwest and the pacific coast.
after the war when the legal agreements that had allowed mexican contract workers to enter the country expired large numbers of immigrants continued to move to the united states illegally.
in 1953 the government launched what it called operation wetback to deport the illegals but the effort failed to stem the flow of new arrivals.
by 1960 there were substantial mexican american neighborhoods barrios in american cities from el paso to detroit.
the largest with more than 500 000 people according to census figures was in los angeles which had a bigger mexican population than any other place except mexico city.
but the greatest expansion in the mexican american popu lation was yet to come.
in 1960 the census reported slightly more than 3 million latinos living in the united states the surging latino immigration great majority of them mexican americans.
by 1970 that number had grown to 9 million and by 2009 to 48 million.
since there was also an uncounted but very large number of illegal immigrants in those years the real number was undoubtedly larger.
by the late 1960s mexican americans were one of the largest population groups in the west outnumbering african americans and had established communities in most other parts of the nation as well.
they were also among the most urbanized groups in the population almost 90 percent lived and worked in cities.
many of them particularly members of the older and more assimilated families of mexican descent were affluent and successful.
wealthy cubans in miami filled influential positions in the professions and local government in the southwest mexican americans elected their own leaders to seats in congress and to governorships.
but most newly arrived mexican americans and other hispanics were less well educated than either anglo or african americans and hence less well prepared for high paying jobs.
some of them found good industrial jobs in unionized industries and some mexican americans became important labor organizers in the afl cio.
but many more including most illegal immigrants worked in low paying service jobs with few if any benefits and no job security.
partly because of language barriers partly because the family centered culture of many latino communities discouraged effective organization and partly because of discriminate tion mexican americans and other chicano activism hispanics were slower to develop political 1 influence than other minorities.
but some did respond to the highly charged climate of the 1960s by strengthening their ethnic identification and organizing for political and economic power.
young mexican american activists began to call themselves chicanos once a term of derision used by whites as a way of emphasizing the shared culture of spanish speaking americans.
some chicanos advocated a form of nationalism not unlike the ideas of black power advocates.
the texas leaders of la raza unida a chicano political party in the southwest called for the creation of an autonomous mexican american state within a state it demonstrated significant strength at the polls in the 1970s.
one of the most visible efforts to organize mexican americans occurred in california where an arizona born latino farmworker cesar chavez created an effective union of itinerant farmworkers.
in 1965 his united farm workers ufw a largely mexican american organization launched cesar chavez a prolonged strike against growers to demand recognition of their union and increased wages and benefits.
when employers resisted chavez enlisted the cooperation of college students churches and civil rights groups including core and sncc and organized a nationwide boycott first of table grapes and then of lettuce.
in 1968 chavez campaigned openly for robert kennedy.
two years later he won a substantial victory when the growers of half of california s table grapes signed contracts with his union.
the crisis of authority 817 kennedy and chavez cesar chavez the magnetic leader of the largely mexican american united farm workers a union that represented mostly migrant workers staged a hunger strike in 1968 to demand that its members receive better treatment by growers.
robert f kennedy just beginning his campaign for the presidency paid him a visit in delano california to show his support.
chavez who had by then been fasting for many weeks looks visibly weak here.
kennedy s visit helped persuade him to end the fast.
photo by michael rougier time life pictures getty images latino americans were at the center of another controversy of the 1970s and beyond the issue of bilingualism.
it was a question that aroused the opposition not only of many whites but of some hispanics as well.
supporters of bilingualism in education argued that non english speaking americans were entitled to schooling in their own language that otherwise they would be at a grave disadvantage in comparison with native english speakers.
the u s supreme court confirmed the right of non english speaking students to schooling in their native language in 1974 opponents cited not only the cost and difficulty of bilingualism but also the dangers it posed to students ability to assimilate into the mainstream of american culture.
gay liberation another important liberation movement that made gains in the 1960s was the effort by homosexuals to win political and economic rights and equally important social accep tance.
homosexuality and lesbianism had been unacknowl edged realities throughout american history not until many years after their deaths did many americans know for example that revered cultural figures such as walt whitman and horatio alger were homosexuals.
but by the late 1960s the liberating impulses that had affected other groups helped mobilize gay men and lesbians to fight for their own rights.
on june 27 1969 police officers raided the stonewall inn a gay bar in new york citys greenwich village and began arresting patrons simply for frequenting the place.
the raid was not unusual police had been harassing gay bars and homosexual men and women for years.
riot the accumulated resentment of this long history of assaults and humiliations caused the extraordinary response that summer night.
gay onlookers taunted the police then attacked them.
someone started a blaze in the stonewall inn almost trapping the policemen inside.
rioting continued throughout greenwich village a center of new yorks gay community through much of the night.
the stonewall riot helped make the gay liberation movement a movement that had been gaining strength since 818.
chapter 30 industries that would ultimately drive an extraordinary if unbalanced economic revival in the 1980s and 1990s.
but many industrial workers were poorly equipped to move into those jobs.
the result was a growing pool of unemployed and underemployed workers the virtual disappearance of industrial jobs from many inner cities where large numbers of minorities lived and the impoverishment of communities dependent on particular industries.
some of the nation s manufacturing sectors ultimately revived but few regained the size and dominance they had enjoyed in the 1950s and 1960s.
inequality inequality in income and wealth is a characteristic of every nation but in the last four decades that inequality has become dramatically more unequal in the united states.
from the end of world war ii to the middle of the 1970s increases in incomes and to a lesser extent increases in total wealth grew at about the same rate across the range of incomes.
people in the bottom 20 percent of the income scale saw their incomes increase at about the same rate that people in the top 20 percent of the income scale did.
but beginning in about 1973 that pattern began to change dramatically.
the top 20 percent of earners saw their incomes rise at a much higher rate than did the earners below them.
the top 5 percent did even better.
and the top 1 percent did far better still earning 24 percent of total income.
at the same time people in the bottom 20 percent saw their incomes slowly decrease while the middle class earners saw their earnings remain relatively stagnant with incomes rising at about the same rate as inflation.
there are many explanations for this growing inequality.
the decline of industry in the united states has pushed many once well paid workers into much lower paid nonunion jobs.
income tax reductions have increased the incomes of the wealthiest americans much more rapidly than they have increased the incomes of lower income people.
the growth of the financial sector and the extraordinary wealth that many financiers have accumulated in recent decades has helped concentrate income and wealth at the top in unprecedented ways.
whether this inequality is a danger to american democracy as many people believe or a product of economic success that has improved or will improve the lot of everyone as many others believe it is nevertheless the case that the incomes in the united states are far more unequal today than they were a generation or more ago.
the nixon response the nixon administration responded to these mounting economic problems by focusing on the one thing it thought it could control inflation.
placing conservative economists at the head of the federal reserve board he ensured sharply higher interest rates and a contraction of the money supply.
but the tight money policy did little to curb inflation the cost of living rose a cumulative 15 percent during nixons first two and a half years in office.
economic growth in the mean time declined.
the united states was stagflation encountering a new and puzzling dilemma stagflation a combination of rising prices and general economic stagnation.
in the summer of 1971 nixon imposed a ninety day freeze on all wages and prices at their existing levels.
then in november he launched what he called phase ii of his economic plan mandatory guidelines for wage and price increases to be administered by a federal agency.
inflation subsided temporarily but the recession continued.
fearful that the recession would be more damaging than inflation in an election year the administration reversed itself late in 1971 interest rates were allowed to drop sharply and government spending grew.
the new tactics helped revive the economy in the short term but inflation rose substantially particularly after the administration abandoned the strict phase ii controls.
in 1973 prices rose 9 percent in 1974 after the arab oil embargo and the opec price increases they rose 12 percent the highest rate since the relaxation of price controls shortly after world war ii.
the value of the dollar continued to slide and the nations international trade continued to decline.
the watergate crisis although economic problems greatly concerned the american people in the 1970s another stunning development almost entirely preoccupied the nation beginning early in 1973 the fall of richard nixon.
the scandals nixons crisis was in part a result of long term changes in the presidency.
public expectations of the president had increased yhe dramatically in the years since world war changing vet t ie constraints placed on the author presidency ity f the office had grown as well.
in response a succession of presidents had sought new methods for the exercise of power often stretching the law occasionally breaking it.
nixon greatly accelerated these trends.
facing a democratic congress hostile to his goals he attempted to find ways to circumvent the legislature whenever possible.
saddled with a federal bureaucracy unresponsive to his wishes he constructed a hierarchy in which virtually all executive power became concentrated in the white house.
operating within a rigid even autocratic staff structure the president became a solitary at times brooding figure.
unknown to all but a few intimates he also became mired in a pattern of illegalities and abuses of power that in late 1972 began to break through to the surface.
early on the morning of june 17 1972 police arrested five men who had broken into the offices of the democratic national committee in the watergate office building in the crisis of authority.
833 the washington d c two others were seized bre hc in15 a shrt time later and charged with super vising the break in.
when reporters for the washington post began researching the backgrounds of the culprits they discovered that among those involved in the burglary were former employees of the committee for the re election of the president.
one of them had worked in the white house.
moreover they had been paid to execute the break in from a secret fund of the reelection committee a fund controlled by members of the white house staff.
public interest in the disclosures grew slowly in the last months of 1972 early in 1973 however the watergate burglars went on trial and under relentless prodding from federal judge john j sirica one of the defendants james w mccord agreed to cooperate both with the grand jury and with a special senate investigating committee.
mccords testimony opened a floodgate of confessions and for months a parade of white house and campaign officials exposed one illegality after another.
foremost among them was a member of the inner circle of the white house counsel to the president john dean who leveled allegations against nixon himself.
two different sets of scandals emerged from the investigations.
one was a general pattern of abuses of power involving both the white house and the nixon campaign committee which included but was not limited to the watergate break in.
the other scandal and the one that became the major focus of public attention for nearly two years was the way in which the administration tried to manage the investigations of the watergate break in and other abuses a pattern of behavior that became known as the cover up there was never any conclusive evidence that the president had planned or approved the watergate burglary in advance.
but there was evidence that he had been involved in illegal efforts to obstruct investigations and withhold information.
testimony before the senate provided evidence of the complicity of dean attorney general john mitchell top white house assistants h r haldeman and john ehrlichman and others.
as interest in the case grew to some cover up thing approaching a national obsession the investigation focused increasingly on a single question in the words of senator howard baker of tennessee what did the president know and when did he know it nixon accepted the departure of those members of his administration implicated in the scandals.
but he continued to insist that he himself was innocent.
there the matter might have rested had it not been for the disclosure during the senate hearings of a white house taping system that had recorded virtually every conversation in the president s office during the period in question.
all the groups investigating the scandals sought access to the tapes nixon pleading executive privilege refused to release them.
a special prosecutor appointed by the president to handle the watergate cases harvard law professor archibald cox took nixon to court in october 1973 in an effort to force him to relinquish the recordings.
nixon fired cox and suffered the humiliation of watching saturday night massacre both attorney general elliot richardson and his deputy resign in protest.
this saturday night massacre made the presidents predicament infinitely worse.
not only did public pressure force him to appoint a new special prosecutor texas attorney leon jaworski who proved just as determined as cox to subpoena the tapes but the episode also pre cipitated an investigation by the house of representatives into the possibility of impeachment.
the fall of richard nixon nixons situation deteriorated further in the following months.
late in 1973 vice president spiro agnew became embroiled in a scandal of his own when evidence surfaced that he had accepted bribes and kickbacks while serving as governor of maryland and even as vice president.
in return for a justice department agreement not to press the case agnew pleaded no contest to a lesser charge of income tax evasion and resigned from the government.
with the controversial agnew no longer in line to succeed to the presidency the prospect of removing nixon from the white house became less worrisome to his opponents.
the new vice president the first appointed under the terms of the twenty fifth amendment which had been adopted in 1967 was house minority leader gerald ford an amiable and popular michigan congressman.
in april 1974 in an effort to head off further subpoenas of the tapes the president released transcripts of a number of relevant conversations claiming that they proved his innocence.
but even these edited tapes seemed to suggest nixons complicity in the cover up.
in july the crisis reached a climax.
first the supreme court ruled unanimously in united states v richard m nixon that the president must relinquish the tapes to special prosecutor jaworski.
days later the house judiciary committee voted to recommend three articles of impeachment charging that nixon had first obstructed justice in the watergate cover up second misused federal agencies to violate the rights of citizens and third defied the authority of congress by refusing to deliver tapes and other materials subpoenaed by the committee.
even without additional evidence nixon might well have been impeached by the full house and convicted by the senate.
early in august however he provided at last what many wavering members of congress had begun to call the smoking gun among the tapes that the supreme court compelled nixon to relinquish were several that offered apparently incontrovertible evidence of his involvement in the watergate cover up.
only days after the burglary the recordings disclosed the president had ordered the fbi to stop investigating the break in.
impeachment and conviction now seemed inevitable.
for several days nixon brooded in the white house.
finally on august 8 1974 he announced his resignation the first president in american history ever to nixon resigns do sq at noon the next while nixon u s v richard m nixon 834.

chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the life and culture among the first north americans and later the independent development of cultures among native americans europeans and africans before the encounters of 1492 the peopling of north america describe what the archeological record tells about the arrival development and cultures of the first peoples of i north america.
the diverse communities of the americas in the 1400s describe the diversity of american indian cultures in the united states on the eve of their encounter with europeans.
a changing europe in the 1400s describe the changes in europe that led to columbus s voy ages and that shaped european attitudes when encountering the peoples of the americas.
africa in the 1400s describe the political cultural and religious developments in africa that would shape contact between europeans and africans in the americas.
asia in the 1400s contrast developments in asia with those in europe at the time when europeans first reached the americas.
the navajo people or dine as they prefer to be called tell a story ot their coming into this world.
the story begins in a world of darkness nihodilhil because of the strife in the first world first man atse i lastin first woman atse estsan and the coyote called first angry followed by all the others climbed up from the world of darkness and dampness to the second or blue world.
from this dark or black world the people emerged through the blue and yellow worlds before finally making their way to the bright white world where they live today the locust was the first to reach the next world.
he looked around and saw that the world was covered with water that glittered and everything looked white.
this is why they call it the glittering world or white world nihalgai.
soon first man and first woman began to make things the way they were supposed to be.
the holy people helped them.
their first job was to rebuild the mountains then the people made a fire.
to start it they used flint first man and first woman wanted a hogan talking god helped to build the first hogan this was the place where the people lived and worked.
by now first man and first woman had become human.
they were like us.
2 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 iff navajo art regularly portrayed the many different gods that in navajo tradition accompanied human beings in their emergence into the world.
the navajo believed that these gods could help hinder or occasionally play tricks on people in their daily lives.
after this there were four seasons.
in the spring the plants came up from the ground.
in the winter the plants died and were hidden under the snow.
then in the spring they came up again.
the plants grew into crops like corn beans and squash.
source ihere are many versions of the navajo creation story.
this account was provided by harry benally a navajo carver and silversmith from sheep springs new mexico and harold carey a navajo historian from malad city idaho downloaded february 14 2013 other north american tribes had their own stories of how their people emerged onto the earth from a region below or arrived through the water or came down from the clouds.
all believed that some ancient pilgrimage had brought them to the place where their tribe resided and would with divine favor reside forever.
modern anthropologists tend to trace the path of early human immigration from asia either on foot across what was sometimes dry land between what is now russian siberia and alaska or by small boats that hugged the coast of the two continents beginning some 25 000 or even 35 000 years ago.
hunters from siberia may have followed their animal prey across solid land and then fanned out across the americas.
seafaring travelers might have followed the fish from alaska down the coast of north and south america.
perhaps both forms of migration took place.
while the ancestors of modern american indians were building their communities establishing their culture and engaging in extended trade with other native americans other humans in other parts of the world were developing their own often quite different cultures.
carvings found in southern france and north africa date from the same period as the earliest settlements of the americas.
although contact between the rest of the world and the americas was at best minimal the people who lived in africa asia and europe maintained some level of contact with one another over thousands of years even as they developed their own languages as well as agricultural and social systems.
the arrival of europeans in the americas after 1492 led to dramatic transformations of the cultures of all of these places.
peoples who had developed very different cultural norms as well as different ways of viewing the world suddenly came into contact with each other.
understanding the independent development of people and cultures on both sides of the atlantic is essential to understanding how contact between them would significantly change them all.
significant dates approx.
30 000 years earliest signs of settlement in western alaska and california stone age ago carvings dating to this era found in france and north africa c 750 mound building cultures expand in the mississippi river valley 850 1100s rise and decline of the anasazi in chaco canyon founding of acoma pueblo 950 1400 rise and decline of cahokia 1101 norse colony of vineland established in north america 1142 possible date for the founding of the iroquois confederacy 1324 pilgrimage of mansa musa emperor of mali to mecca 1325 rise of aztec empire founding of tenochtitlan mexico city 1348 1350s bubonic plague begins in europe 1415 portuguese begin exploration of the atlantic coast of africa 1421 1423 chinese explore the indian ocean and east africa 1453 ottoman turks capture constantinople end of the hundred years war between france and england 1458 songhay empire captures timbuktu 1469 marriage of isabella of castile and ferdinand of aragon 1485 king henry vii ends the war of the roses unified england 1488 bartolomeu dias rounds cape of good hope 1492 granada falls to christians ending islamic rule in spain christopher columbus sails from spain to the americas 1493 1528 askia muhammad rules songhay empire at its height 1498 vasco da gama reaches india from portugal chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 31 european diseases especially smallpox killed more of the original inhabitants of the americas than any other cause.
this illustration originally done by aztec scribes before their conquest described a great sickness that came with sores so terrible that the victims could not lie face down nor on their backs nor move from one side to the other.
the making of an ocean world the atlantic and columbian exchange silk road the overland trading route first established by the venetian trader marco polo in the late 1200s.
news of the new contact with the americas changed the way many people looked at the world.
most educated europeans already believed that the world was round and not flat.
but until 1492 they were concerned primarily with the land.
traders had long gone over land on the silk road established between venice and china by marco polo between 1271 and 1295 that brought luxury goods to europe from asia.
portuguese sailors stayed close to the coast of africa as they sailed around that continent to asia.
norse sailors had explored the far north atlantic hopping from iceland to greenland and on to the nearest parts of north america seeking new fishing opportunities.
but columbus and his successors did something different they sailed directly across the ocean with no landmarks to guide their journey.
soon after that journey the oceans the atlantic the indian and very soon the pacific became the primary trade routes for europeans americans and increasing numbers of unwilling africans.
nations that had ports on the atlantic especially spain portugal and england moved from the margins of a land focused europe to become the key points of contact with an ocean focused world.
ihe shift from primarily land based or near shore sea trade to trade spanning the worlds oceans was a revolution in the way people thought and it had winners and losers.
i the trade and cultural exchanges across the interconnected continents of europe j asia and africa and did not end after 1492 but the relationships were different.
portugal and spain replaced genoa and venice as the primary european links to asia.
portuguese and spanish ships dominated the indian ocean.
many other spanish explorers followed columbus in very short order.
in addition to those who explored the atlantic i coast vasco nunez de balboa reached the isthmus of panama in 1513 and became the first european to view the pacific.
in 1519 five ships and their crews commanded by ferdinand magellan began a journey that led them around the tip of south america in 1520 and across the pacific to the philippines where magellan himself was killed.
three years after they had departed a handful of the explorers on one ship became the first contact and exploration 1491 1607 people to circumnavigate the globe arriving back in spain in 1522 spanish galleons not only brought silver mined in the americas across the atlantic to spain but soon also brought silver across the pacific to manila in the philippines.
manila itself was founded by spanish traders in 1571.
the world of the 1500s was becoming an oceanic world including the atlantic the indian ocean and the pacific.
the atlantic ocean that had been the great barrier on the western edge of europe suddenly became the great highway connecting known and previously unknown continents.
portugal and spain were the first european states to establish trading routes across the oceans but during the 1500s england france and holland also assumed major roles in the new trade.
as europeans came to terms with the americas the people of the americas also had to come to terms with europe.
for each there were gains and losses.
what became known as the columbian exchange the interchange of diseases plants animals and human cultures between new and old worlds after 1492 reflected some of these changes.
the most tragic loss occurred with the transmission of disease bearing microbes that devastated populations in the americas.
new populations began to emerge after 1492 when the peoples who met in the americas produced offspring that carried the biological traits and the cultures of their ancestors from vastly different parts of the world.
the exchange also changed the eating habits of almost every person on the planet.
in europe asia and africa foods such as corn beans peanuts potatoes cassava columbian exchange the transatlantic exchange of plants animals and diseases that occurred after the first european contact with the americas.
table 2 1 the columbian exchange from the americas to europe africa arid asia from europe africa and asia to the americas from the americas to europe africa and asia from europe africa and asia to the americas plants corn maize wheat animals turkeys chickens potatoes barley llamas donkeys i i sweet potatoes rye cattle peanuts oats goats pumpkins apples horses pineapples peaches pigs guava pears sheep squash plums cats tomatoes apricots peppers cherries disease syphilis syphilis was also smallpox the single most deadly disease among papayas bananas american indians known in the ancient avocados coffee eurasian world and has measles beans tea been found in egyptian mummies but a new influenza cassava sugarcane melons and virulent form of the disease was brought yellow fever blueberries to europe from the typhus tobacco lemons americas.
scarlet fever cocoa oranges diphtheria vanilla cabbage carrots sometimes multiple diseases from this list affected an american grapes indian community at the same time.
lettuce onions garlic chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 35 this statue of bartolome de las casas stands in a prominent place in modern mexico city as recognition of the respect in which he is held by many of the indigenous people of mexico and the americas.
encomienda in the spanish colonies the grant to a spanish settler of a certain number of american indian subjects who would pay him tribute in goods and labor.
conquistadores the name given to the early spanish conquerors of mexico and peru.
bartolome de las casas and the voices of protest spains treatment of the american indians did not occur without protest.
on hispaniola it was denounced within less than 20 years.
in 1511 on a sunday before christmas antonio de montesinos a dominican priest asked his spanish congregation tell me by what right do you keep these indians in cruel servitude.
you are in mortal sin for the cruelty and tyranny you deal out to these innocent people bartolome de las casas 1484 1566 may have heard montesinoss sermon.
certainly he had heard of it.
las casas edited the log of columbuss journey and moved to hispaniola to make his own fortune in 1502 although he became a priest in 1510 he participated in the conquest of cuba in 1512 and was rewarded with a large ranch or encomienda worked by indian slaves.
but his conscience bothered him.
in 1514 he gave up the land and the slaves and began preaching and writing against the oppression of the indians which he continued to do for the next 50 years.
las casas documented in detail the cruelty of the spanish conquerors begging the spanish crown to stop the conquistadores the soldiers who were creating the spanish empire in the americas.
las casas also left an important record of the life and customs of the first peoples of the americas.
he wrote that among them marriage laws are nonexistent men and women alike choose their mates and leave them as they please without offense jealousy or anger they live he wrote in large communal bell shaped buildings housing up to 600 people at one time made of very strong wood and roofed with palm leaves they prize bird feathers of various colors beads made offish bones and green and white stones with which they adorn their ears and lips but they put no value on gold and other precious things they are extremely generous with their possessions and by the same token covet the possessions of their friends and expect the same degree of liberality.
if they worshipped at all it was not in a form that this catholic priest recognized.
nevertheless the key purpose of all of las casass writings was to ask the spanish authorities to intervene to protect the indians.
he described seeing native people worked although he never left europe theodore de bry 1528 1598 spent many years drawing illustrations of european indian encounters based on first hand reports including this one showing the attack by spanish soldiers on an indian village.
36 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 to death in the mines when moderate labor turned into labor fit only for iron men mountains are stripped from top to bottom and bottom to top a thousand times they dig split rocks move stones and carry dirt on their backs to wash it in rivers while those who wash gold stay in the water all the time with their backs bent so constantly it breaks them las casas always believed or at least hoped that if the spanish monarchs only knew the truth spain s rulers would intercede.
at times the distant monarchs seemed to heed him.
shortly before her death isabella ordered that the indians must be treated as freemen and not as slaves they must be given wages they must be treated well christians should receive better treatment than non christians las casas was determined to show just how far reality departed from these orders.
while las casas may have led the spanish authorities to make a few reforms the biggest effect of his work was not what he expected.
he was writing during the protestant reformation and protestants far more than catholics republished his words creating what came to be known as the black legend for the color of the priests robes of unique spanish cruelty.
history would show that the spanish were not unique in their treatment of american indians but the legend of their special cruelty persisted even as other europeans adopted the same techniques and attitudes.
2 1 quick review which factor do you believe was most responsible for the destruction of native populations.
justify your answer with evidence from the chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 39 exploration and encounter in north america the spanish 23 kntiylq early spanish exploration of america north of mexico.
23 conquests of the aztec and inca empires produced extraordinary wealth for spain.
exploration further north in the americas in the future united states was secondary for the conquistadores and much less lucrative for spain.
in spite of the wealth being generated from the empires in mexico and peru for more than a century most europeans showed more interest in getting through or around north america and on to asia than in exploring the lands north of new spain.
nevertheless the unknown lands north of mexico beckoned to some spaniards in the 1500s even if they were not considered as exciting as central and south america see map 2 3.
ponce de leon in florida 1513 1521 juan ponce de leon who had been part of the spanish army that conquered muslim granada in 1492 led the first known european expeditions to puerto rico and florida.
in 1508 1509 he founded the first spanish community near what would become san juan and was named governor of puerto rico.
in 1513 he led an expedition from puerto rico that arrived in what he thought was another island which he named la florida.
legend says he was seeking a fountain of youth that would keep him forever young.
certainly he was seeking an expansion of spains empire in the americas and greater wealth for himself.
ponce de leon was accompanied by free africans whose families were slaves in spain.
europeans africans and the native peoples of the americas first met on the soil of the future united states when ponce de leon landed.
in 1521 ponce de leon returned to florida with some 200 followers europeans africans and indians from puerto rico.
the native americans in florida did not welcome them.
ponce de leon was wounded by a poisoned arrow and died soon thereafter.
but the first of many contacts between native peoples and travelers from europe and africa in what are now the 50 united states had been made in florida.
narvaez 1528 coronado 1540 1542 cabeza de vaca drake 1577 1580 and esteban 1528 1536 map 2 3 north american exploration.
in the first one hundred years after columbus european exploi trave ed alon9 doth the atlantlc and pacific coasts and through much of the interior of what almost two hundred years later would become the united states.
by 1592 however most europeans had concluded that there was no easy route through north america to asia and little gold to be found so they lost intere in the regions north of mexico.
7 artl contact and exploration 1491 1607 1 exploring texas by accident cabeza de vaca 1528 1536 in 1528 there was another ill fated effort to colonize florida.
panfilo de narvaez sailed to tampa bay with about 400 men europeans and a few africans.
the narvaez expedition was a disaster.
leaving the ships in tampa bay about 300 men spent months tramping through swamps seeking gold and soon merely food and water.
along the way american indians attacked them shooting arrows that penetrated their heavy spanish armor.
the attackers quickly vanished into the forests and swamps while the surviving spaniards tramped on wearing 50 to 60 pounds of heavy armor.
finally ill under attack and starving the survivors decided to build new boats and leave.
years later one of them remembered this seemed impossible to all because we did not know how to build them nor were there one of all the things that are necessary nor anyone who would know any way to apply ingenuity.
and above all there was nothing to eat.
nevertheless they built five barges and 250 men set out for what they hoped would be home.
instead the currents winds and a hurricane took them west.
two or three of the five barges survived the storm and came ashore near what is now galveston texas.
american indians gave the survivors food water and shelter.
of the 80 explorers who survived the journey across the gulf of mexico only 15 lived through the first winter on the texas coast see map 2 2.
the others died of cold and disease.
many of the american indian hosts also died of european diseases that the spanish brought with them and the surviving indians grew hostile to these intruders who had brought so much disease and trouble.
while others from the narvaez expedition may have lived out their lives among the american indians of the texas coast only four of them three spaniards alvar nunez cabeza de vaca andres dorantes alonso del castillo maldonado and an african muslim slave from north africa named esteban decided to literally walk home to mexico city.
thus like florida texas was explored by europeans and africans together providing the indians there with their first exposure to both.
the foursomes 8 year adventure took them through southern texas the northern states of mexico and eventually to the pacific coast and on to mexico city.
the four travelers found villages developed a reputation as healers and traders and collected a trove of information about american indians who lived in permanent houses and had a good supply of corn and beans.
later cabeza de vaca described the ways of the people he met when indian men get into an argument in their villages they fist fight until exhausted then separate.
sometimes the women will go between and part them but men never interfere.
no matter what the disaffection they do not resort to bows and arrows all these plains tribes are warlike and have as much strategy for protection against enemies as if they had been reared in italy in continual feuds whoever fights them must show no fear and no desire for anything that is theirs i believe these people see and hear better and have keener sense in general than any in the world.
they know great hunger thirst and cold as if they were made for enduring these more than other men by habit and nature.
cabeza de vaca also described a big copper rattle that was given to them it had a face represented on it and the natives prized it highly it had been brought from the north where there was a lot of it replied the natives who considered copper very valuable.
wherever it came from we concluded the place must have a foundry to have cast the copper in hollow form.
the american indians refused to believe these men were of the same race as the spaniards they had previously known.
as cabeza de vaca wrote the four explorers appeared to be distinct from earlier spanish invaders because we cured the sick and they killed those who were healthy and that we came naked and barefoot and they 1 i i chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 45 23 have the same opportunities to acquire land and the wealth that went with it.
some would opt to spend their lives in the church but many would opt to spend their lives as soldiers where through conquest of new lands they might be rewarded.
unlike mexico and peru the spanish colonies in florida were settled by soldiers who did not want to create a vast empire but valued the independence that distance from imperial authorities gave them and by families of artisans and farmers who meant to build a richer life than they could have in spain.
as citizens on the border between european settlement and american indian territory these settlers wanted to enjoy the municipal liberties that the free cities of castile had enjoyed when they had represented the border between christian and muslim spain.
they also wanted to avoid the tightly ordered hierarchical society that was evolving in mexico.
the cities and the farms in florida prospered.
one settler recorded i have planted with my own hands grapevines pomegranates orange trees and figs wheat barley onions garlic and many vegetables that grow in spain the colonists quickly took to the corn that was the staple of the indian diet.
there were also slaves in st augustine from the beginning.
although his royal commission had authorized him to bring up to 500 african slaves to st augustine de aviles actually brought only about 50 in time spanish florida had a black militia and included both african slaves and free africans.
there was also intermarriage and more casual sexual encounters among europeans native americans and africans in spanish florida.
in this outpost the races blended creating a new culture and new bloodlines.
in addition st augustine became a place where europeans from other nations settled.
some settled of necessity after their ships were wrecked on the florida coast.
others came to escape legal problems military commitments or families.
despite strict rules issued in madrid isolated places like st augustine reflected considerable diversity including jews escaping an increasingly intolerant europe as well as french flemish and german immigrants escaping religious persecution or simply wanting a new start in life.
after its founding in 1565 and up until 1705 st augustine was home to a large scale effort to send franciscan missionaries into the surrounding native american territories.
the franciscans who traveled into the interior of florida and georgia to make converts also sought alliances with the indians.
tribal leaders came to st augustine to trade and negotiate and they accepted however casually spanish rule.
eventually about 80 mission centers were established from the savannah river in georgia to as far south as modern daytona beach.
the franciscans however also brought european diseases along with their preaching and the american indian population fell drastically.
nevertheless for a century native americans missionaries and soldiers traded religious and cultural ideas as well as the tools of commerce and war.
they intermarried and substantially influenced each other and their offspring in florida.
despite occasional battles with the american indians raids by european navies and hurricanes life in spanish florida continued more or less uninterrupted well into the 1700s.
while the english focused their efforts further north and the spanish empire centered on mexico central and south america those who were in florida were left alone.
except for a brief period of british rule between 1763 and 1784 florida remained a spanish colony until it was ceded to the united states in 1821 256 years after the founding of st augustine.
settling new mexico 1598 after coronados expedition to explore the north american southwest returned to mexico city in 1542 there was little further exploration of new mexico for over half a century.
then in 1598 the spanish viceroy in mexico city decided it was time for another look at the lands of the north and appointed a new governor for what was called new mexico the rumors that great wealth existed there had never died.
more pragmatically the spanish were worried about the protestant english.
in 1579 francis 46 exploration 1491 1607 drake an english privateer a pirate working for the government sailed up the coast of california duplicating cabrillos route and his failure to find san francisco.
drake then turned west and duplicated the route of an earlier spanish explorer ferdinand magellan sailing across the pacific and on around the world before returning to london in 1580 to the authorities in spain this achievement was a real threat.
settling the interior of north america suddenly seemed imperative.
don juan de onate was appointed governor of new mexico with instructions not to follow the harsh policies of cortes or pizarro.
the kings appointment letter said you will endeavor to attract the natives with peace friendship and good treatment and to induce them to hear and accept the holy gospel a succession of spanish monarchs never approved of the viciousness of the conquistadors though they accepted the gold and silver that flowed back to spain without asking too many questions about how it was acquired.
onates expedition included 400 men women and children among them a few spanish soldiers franciscan friars and indians along with supply wagons cattle sheep and mules.
onates wife isabel tolosa cortes montezuma was herself a granddaughter of cortes and a great granddaughter of the aztec emperor montezuma.
on april 30 1598 the expedition stopped on the banks of the rio grande and claimed all of the lands and peoples to the north for spain.
onate named the place where he crossed the river el paso del norte the pass to the north since coronados day the pueblo indians had seen spanish soldiers and missionaries come and go.
the spanish could be ruthless but they also seemed to have little staying power.
with the onate expedition spanish occupation of new mexico would come closer to being permanent.
onate sought political allegiance from the pueblos of southern new mexico.
in july 1598 he asked pueblo chiefs to swear allegiance to spain and convert to christianity.
onate chose to interpret their lack of hostility as agreement.
he also built a capital which he named san gabriel.
something resembling a permanent settlement of 400 europeans in the middle of thousands of pueblo indians took shape.
at first all was peaceful.
onate divided new mexico into administrative districts each with a priest in each to try to convert the american indians to christianity.
he allowed self government to continue in each pueblo he had little choice but insisted that each one must have a political governor.
he was more interested in exploring for the gold silver or pearls which he was sure were just over the horizon and did not try to force the native americans to labor for the spanish.
the peace did not last however.
zutucapan the leader of the acoma pueblo had avoided meeting onate because he did not want to cede any authority to the spaniards.
late in 1598 he attacked a spanish scouting party and in 1599 onate struck back.
after a fierce battle the spaniards whose guns swords and horses gave them a huge advantage burned acoma to the ground.
one thousand of its residents were killed and the remaining 500 were taken as slaves.
the male captives had one foot cut off.
when the jumano indians also resisted onate he hanged their chiefs and burned their village.
onates cruelty and his failure to find riches led to his recall in 1609 the new royal governor don pedro de peralta moved the capital further north to a new town that he created and named santa fe inl610.
there peralta built the oldest public building still standing in the united states the governors mansion.
the colonys attention turned from gold to farming.
churches were built at the center of each pueblo.
the spanish hoped these churches would become new centers of indian life and faith but tensions would continue that would eventually culminate some 50 years later in a surprising revolt.
quick review how did spanish exploration in north america change overtime.
what was different between the exploration that took place between 1513 and 1543 and the latter developments between 1565 and 1598.
identify and explain factors that most contributed to this evolution.
chapter review 2 5 how did european politics economics and religious issues lead to exploration and settlement in america.
of these three which is the single most important category.
the english settle in north america explain why the english began to settle in north america and how slavery was introduced in the english colonies.
when james i became king of england in 1603 he was anxious to make peace with spain.
he quickly ended the royal support for legalized piracy that queen elizabeth i had provided though piracy itself flourished throughout the 1600s.
but many in england wanted a larger role in the americas.
if they were not going to steal americas wealth from the spanish on the seas then they would need to find other ways to gain it.
investors seeking financial gain created the virginia company.
they told those they sent to america to try if they can find any mineral and to seek passage to the other sea the longed for shortcut to china.
the investors also advised them to build settlements at some distance from the coast to avoid a spanish attack and to gain as much knowledge and food from the indians as possible before that they perceive you mean to plant among them within about 30 years england had settled or claimed large territories and their claims continued to expand into the 1700s see map 3 1.
3 1 significant oates 3 1 1607 jamestown virginia founded by english 1608 i s quebec founded by french 1610 santa fe founded as spanish capital of j j new mexico 1619 african slaves sold in jamestown 1620 plymouth massachusetts founded by bj english pilgrims 1624 fort orange later albany new york founded by the dutch 5 1626 new amsterdam later new york city founded by dutch 1630 boston massachusetts founded by english puritans 1634 maryland founded by lord baltimore as a haven for english catholics 1636 rhode island founded 1637 pequot war in new england 1638 first african slaves brought to boston massachusetts 1639 fundamental orders of connecticut confirm government for hartford based colony founded in 1637 1642 1649 english civil war 1649 1658 england governed as a puritan commonwealth 1660 charles ii begins to rule in england 1661 maryland law defines slavery as lifelong and inheritable 1663 carolina colony founded by england 1664 english capture new netherlands colony rename it new york 1675 king philip s war in massachusetts 1676 bacon s rebellion in virginia 1680 pueblo indian revolt in new mexico 1681 pennsylvania founded by william penn as a haven for english quakers 1682 lasalle claims the mississippi river valley for france 1718 french establish new orleans spanish found san antonio texas colonizing virginia jamestown in 1607 105 men from the virginia company arrived in north america.
they named their new community jamestown in honor of king james the company appomted a council of six to govern the colony and left t to the council to elect its own president.
but things in jamestown did not go well.
i6 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 61 3 1 this modern recreation of the pilgrim village at plimoth plantation note old style spelling has been built using extensive original records from 1627 seven years after the colony s founding when life had reached a bit of stability on the site of the first pilgrim colony in plymouth massachusetts.
then in spring 1621 their luck changed.
an indian walked very boldly into the heart of the small plymouth community.
and when he arrived to their utter amazement he said welcome englishmen the visitor was samoset a native of what is now maine where english fishermen had been landing for a century hence his knowledge of the language.
more important he had been asked to visit them by massasoit the ruler of the wampanoag indians of the area.
massasoit was also familiar with english ships that had sailed along the coast and had sent exploring parties ashore.
he was now ready to make contact.
soon after samosets visit massasoit himself arrived with many warriors and a translator named squanto who had been captured by previous english explorers and who had lived in london.
he became a go between for massasoit with the pilgrim community even though neither side ever fully trusted him.
squanto surprised the pilgrims when he described parts of london and more important when he taught them how to find hibernating eels in nearby creeks.
they had their best meal in months that evening.
he also taught them to catch herring in the town brook and use them as fertilizer for planting corn.
it proved to be the salvation of the colony.
the pilgrims concluded an agreement with massasoit that led to 54 years of peace an amazing development in the americas.
in the fall of 1621 with peace concluded and the first successful harvest accomplished governor bradford announced that it was time to rejoice together with the people who had helped indeed allowed them to survive.
the first thanksgiving the pilgrims never actually used that word was a weeklong time of feasting on the fruits of the harvest and on turkeys ducks geese deer and stews.
the pilgrims were recreating something they knew well a traditional english harvest festival.
most of those present at the first thanksgiving however were wampanoags including massasoit himself who brought gifts of freshly killed deer to the festivities.
part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 american voices of plymouth plantation by william bradford 1630 1651 ufiham bradford was one of the original pilgrims.
he wrote his tw classic book over a period of many years to inform an english audience and english investors of the state of the new colony or plantation.
being thus arrived in a good harbor and brought safe to land they fell upon their knees and blessed the god of heaven who had brought them over the vast and furious ocean and delivered them from all the perils and miseries thereof again to set their feet on the firm and stable earth being thus passed the vast ocean and a sea of troubles before in their preparation as may be remembered by that which went before they had now no friends to welcome them nor inns to entertain or refresh their weatherbeaten bodies nor houses or much less towns to repair to to seek for succor and for the season it was winter and they that know the winters of that country know them to be sharp and violent and subject to cruel and fierce storms besides what could they see but a hideous and desolate wilderness full of wild beasts and wild men and what multitudes there might be of them they knew not but that which was most sad and lamentable was that in two or three months time half of their company died being infected with the scurvy and other diseases which this long voyage had brought upon them so there died sometimes two or three of a day in the aforesaid time that of 100 and odd persons scarce fifty remained the spring now approaching it pleased god the mortality began to cease amongst them and the sick and lame recovered afterwards they began to plant their corn in which service squanto stood them in great stead showing them both how to set it and after how to dress and tend it and where to get other provisions necessary for them all which they found true by trial and experience they began now to gather in the small harvest they had and to fit up their houses and dwellings against winter being well recovered in health and strength and had all things good plenty.
source william bradford a history of plymouth plantation boston massachusetts historical society 1856 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what challenges did the first plymouth settlers face.
2 historical interpretation what does bradford s account tell us about the importance of native american peoples to the initial survival of the settlement.
another group of religious dissidents from england were not far behind plymouths pilgrims.
puritan reformers who wanted to stay within the church of england and change it were also having a hard time in the 1620s.
king charles i r 1625 1649 was extremely hostile to the puritans.
advocating reform within the established church became more difficult and dangerous.
the puritans however were not without resources.
a group of them controlled a corporation the massachusetts bay company to explore and settle north america.
it was similar to the virginia company except that puritans led it.
they planted their first colony in salem just north of present day boston in 1629 and soon wanted to expand.
in late 1629 someone realized that wording in the charter would allow them to move the whole company its charter and the control that went with it out of england and into the colony that the massachusetts bay company controlled.
if successful this move would create not only a self governing puritan company but also a company thousands of miles from the king and his bishops who were making things so difficult for puritans in england.
john winthrop an ardent puritan was invited to be the governor of the new colony.
in spring 1630 14 ships left england for massachusetts bay with their new governor and their charter on board.
by the end of the summer more than 1 000 people and 200 cattle had landed in the massachusetts colony.
in the next decade known as the great migration some 20 000 people followed.
the puritan massachusetts bay colony soon had more people than plymouth and jamestown combined.
the massachusetts puritans also had a clear sense of purpose.
as winthrop said our immediate object is to seek out a new home under a due form of government both civil and ecclesiasticall we shall be as a citty upon a hill.
the eyes of all people are upon us.
the puritan commonwealth in new england could also be a new model for old england.
puritans a name given to those more extreme protestants within the church of england who wanted to stay in the church but purify it of what they saw as roman catholic ways.
chapter 3 1 la salle s party 1687 iberville 1699 st denis 1714 la harpe 1719 french for f spanish missions 1716 1717 si spanish settlements present state boundaries provided for orientation la salle 1670 jolliet and marquette 1673 la salle 1679 1682 la salle and colonists from france 1685 map 3 3 france in the american interior 1670 1720 as this map shows french exploration and claims to montreal the saint lawrence river valley the great lakes and the mississippi river all the way to the gulf of mexico gave it claim to the heart of north america but also completely encircled the english colonies on the atlantic coast and challenged the spanish for control of texas.
captives they now had european weapons acquired through trades that further fueled the warfare.
for the first time tribes seemed bent on annihilating their opponents.
even though the french and british fur traders preferred to make alliances with the indians rather than enslave them the results for many tribes were nevertheless disastrous.
the trade in beaver pelts also encouraged europeans to make permanent settlements.
samuel de champlain began exploring the st lawrence river in 1603 and founded the city of quebec in 1608 as a representative of a private fur company just 1 year after the english founded jamestown.
with only 28 men in his colony champlain knew that he needed alliances if quebec was to succeed.
so he joined the montagnais and hurons in a war against the iroquois and solidified an alliance that would be the foundation of quebecs trade.
the huron alliance also allowed champlain to travel further west.
he spent 1615 1616 exploring the great lakes.
after 1612 champlain was also appointed as the kings viceroy for new france uniting his commercial and governmental positions.
as late as 1635 when champlain died quebec had a population of only 300 but it was there to stay.
montreal was part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 this picture of champlain and a group of hurons attacking the iroquois was published with champlain s account of the battle.
it is unlikely that champlain was as heroic as the picture implies or that there were any palm trees in what is now canada.
settled in 1642 to expand trade.
jesuit missionaries arrived and lived among the hurons learning their ways and seeking to convert them to catholic christianity.
new france and the missions it sponsored were as deeply catholic as most of the english settlements were protestant fueling tensions between the french and english colonies that would last throughout their histories.
during the early 1600s quebec and montreal were small french towns thousands of miles from any other such town but with their own european families parishes and culture.
these isolated centers were surrounded by villages of french farmers who had decided to make a life in new france.
new france came close to being wiped out in the late 1640s when the iroquois confederation overran huron villages torturing killing or taking prisoner everyone in sight.
jesuit missionaries died along with their huron hosts.
once a nation of over 10 000 people the hurons disappeared as a recognizable group after 1648 the defeat of the hurons was a huge blow to french missionaries and to the fur trade that was the economic anchor of new france.
ihe iroquois also attacked french villages and besieged montreal itself.
two hundred french settlers were killed.
many more of the villagers left for france as quickly as they could.
the future of new france was far from clear in 1650 montreal and quebec however remained militarily secure and the algonquians replaced the hurons as the major french allies and the source of access to the fur trade.
exploring and claiming the mississippi river valley in 1663 louis xiv made new france into a royal province and sent 1 000 french soldiers to protect quebec from iroquois attack and establish it once and for all as the seat of what he expected to be a vast french empire.
plans were laid to make this expansion happen.
in 1672 governor louis de frontenac sent louis joliet who spoke a number of indian languages and father jacques marquette a jesuit missionary to find and explore a great waterway spoken of in indian stories the mississippi or mitchisipi great water which he hoped might be the route to china.
in june 1673 marquette and joliet paddled into the mississippi the first europeans known to do so.
early in their trip they were welcomed by the illinois tribe and given a great feast.
the encounter was the beginning of a long term french indian alliance in the region.
joliet and marquette determined that the mississippi flowed south into the gulf of mexico not west to the pacific and china as had been hoped.
but they understood that they were in the midst of a land of great potential.
they could develop a french colony that would allow a rich trade with the indians and block the expansion of the english.
chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 79 1 i 33 fear of hostile tribes and of being captured by the spanish led joliet and marquette to turn back before reaching the mouth of the mississippi.
on the return trip they visited other indian villages including a miami indian village of checagou or chicago.
joliet returned to quebec to report and draw maps of their travels.
marquette continued his missionary work until he died in 1675 what would some two centuries later become the midwest of the united states was first described for europeans and mapped by these two explorers.
while the authorities in france wanted to strengthen the settlements in the st lawrence river valley surrounding montreal and quebec before expanding further governor frontenac had no patience with such caution.
in young robert de la salle he found a perfect ally for exploring the mississippi valley.
la salle led a much larger expedition than that of joliet and marquette down the illinois and mississippi rivers in 1679 la salles goals were to build an alliance with the illinois and other tribes against the iroquois and to establish a permanent french presence throughout the mississippi valley.
in 1681 1682 he and his men traveled down the mississippi to the gulf of mexico.
in the name of king louis xiv he claimed possession of this country of louisiana and of the seas harbors ports bays adjacent straits and all the nations peoples provinces cities towns villages mines minerals fisheries streams and rivers within it it was a claim to more than one third of north america.
not content with reaching the mouth of the mississippi la salle then continued as far west on the gulf of mexico as texas.
eventually he pushed his followers too hard and some of them murdered him in 1687 american voices journal of the voyage of father jacques gravier of the society of jesus jesuits in 1700 from the country of the illinois to the mouth of the mississippi river the jesuit relations was a publication that gave regular reports on jesuit missionary work and provided an extraordinary glimpse of the countryside and of the people who lived together along the mississippi from modern day wisconsin to the gulf of mexico between the 1690s and the mid 1700s.
i started in 1700 on the 8th of september to come here i was accompanied by 5 canoes manned by frenchmen we made only 4 leagues the 1 st day because one of our canoes was split by a snag hidden in the water and we had to halt in order to repair it i embarked in my canoe to visit monsieur davion a missionary priest who was sick in his mission 3 different languages are spoken the lakou with 30 cabins the ounspik with 10 or 12 cabins and thetoumika who are in 7 hamlets consisting in all of 50 or 60 small cabins another village is on the crest of a steep mountain precipitous on all sides.
there are 80 cabins in it and in the middle of the village is a fine and very level open space where from morning to night young men exercise themselves.
they run after a flat stone which they throw in the air from one end of the square to the other and try to make it fall on two cylinders which they roll wherever they think the stone will fall.
there is nothing fine about the temple except the vestibule which is embellished with the most pleasant and best executed grotesque figures that one can see the old man who keeps up the fire the name of which he told us was louak ouloughe the sacred fire.
since we have left the natches we have lived only on indian corn with a few squashes for it is a long time since either wild oxen deer or bears have been seen in this quarter and if we have found a few bustards or wild geese they have been so lean that they were as tasteless as wood this has caused our canoemen very often to sigh for the river of the illinois and the beauty of the country and of the landing places and for the numbers of wild oxen and deer and all kinds of fat and excellent game.
the navigation of the mississippi is very slow and tedious and very difficult especially in ascending it.
it is also very troublesome on account of the gnats and other insects called mosquitoes midges and black flies at last on the 17th of december i reached fort mississippi after 68 days of navigation in descending the river the commandant monsieur de bienville has there a small and very neat house.
source reuben gold thwaites editor travels and explorations of the jesuit missionaries in new france 1610 1791 vol.
lxv lower canada mississippi valley 1696 1702 cleveland the burrows brothers 1900 pp.
101 105 127 129 145 147 159 161 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what kinds of communities did father gravier encounter on his journey.
2 historical interpretation what does father gravier s account suggest about the nature of french settlement along the mississippi river in 1700.
ml 80 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 other french explorers and settlers followed in la salles wake.
working independently french trappers and traders known as coureurs de bois or runners of the woods established relationships with various native american tribes and brought wealth back to new france.
some of them established a base called fort arkansas at the confluence of the arkansas and mississippi rivers.
french jesuits built a mission at chicago.
inl698 the bishop of quebec appointed missionary priests to a new mission at the natchez post on the arkansas river.
the french communities that dotted the mississippi in the late 1600s and early 1700s were small.
they included american indians and french trappers families and missionaries.
but they were there to stay.
creating the french gulf coast biloxi mobile and new orleans as a result of the reports from explorers and missionaries louis xiv decided to secure the french claim to the mouth of the mississippi.
pierre dlbreville was commissioned in 1698 to scout the area.
diberville landed on the east bank of the mississippi river and built a fort near a bilochi indian settlement which came to be called biloxi.
diberville and his crew moved up the mississippi river until they found a trail connecting the mississippi to lake ponchartrain and promised to return.
to his surprise diberville also found a group of free blacks who were living with indians and who did not take kindly to the arrival of europeans.
queen annes war of 1702 1713 see chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 81 3 1 32 33 3 4 heavily in the new orleans venture and were desperate for the new colony to succeed.
most of the early immigrants from france were prostitutes and criminals who literally left france in chains.
many died in transit but by 1721 new orleans had 178 european residents who enjoyed the freedom their isolation gave them.
the french also introduced african slavery into the mississippi valley.
while there had been slaves in quebec none of the early explorers coming south from canada brought african slaves with them.
but after 1700 slavery grew in french louisiana.
ihe first slave ships arrived in new orleans in 1719 in 1721 ships brought 925 slaves from haiti.
a census in 1732 indicated that of the 471 people living in the french towns in the illinois river country 168 were africans.
most slaves brought to new orleans were from senegal in west africa.
these africans if not muslim themselves were familiar with islam and muslim music that used chanting accompanied by stringed instruments.
this music became part of the culture of new orleans.
the senegalese also knew how to cultivate indigo which thrived in louisiana and how to process it into dye.
in addition early slave ships brought sugar and rice which the slaves also knew how to grow.
europe and africa had been shaping each others cultures for generations by the time new orleans was founded but the mix was especially deep in that city.
with the french securely in control of both the headwaters and the mouth of the mississippi river france was in a strong position to be the dominant european power in north america just as spain was dominant further south.
3 3 quick review how did france s role in north america evolve from small settlements in canada to become the dominant european power.
justify your answer.
developments in spanish colonies north of mexico 3 4 analyze the impact of indian uprisings and the expansion of other european powers on spain s colonies in new mexico texas and california.
spain had established the first permanent settlements in the future united states florida in 1565 and new mexico in 1598 both remained isolated but while st augustine florida remained small spain claimed vast lands in new mexico surrounding the new capital they built at santa fe in 1610 from santa fe which was close to many of the indian pueblos over which spain claimed authority the spanish ruled with an iron hand demanding more and more work from the indians and trying to stamp out traditional indian religious practices.
for many years the spanish seemed to accomplish their goals but eventually to the surprise of the spanish the result was a large scale rebellion.
while the spanish authorities reasserted their presence in new mexico they also worried about the territorial claims that england and france were making to other parts of north america.
to counter those claims the government of new spain established small but permanent colonies across the southwest from texas to california see map 3 4.
the pueblo revolt new mexico 1680 pueblo revolt rebellion in 1680 of pueblo indians in new mexico against their spanish overlords sparked by spanish suppression of native religious activity and excessive spanish demands for indian labor.
in august 1680 an uprising of the normally peaceful pueblo indians of northern new mexico led by a charismatic leader pope resulted in the greatest defeat of a european colony in the history of the americas.
in the pueblo revolt nearly all of the spanish who lived on isolated ranches and farms were killed.
survivors from the outlying communities poured into santa fe which was then besieged.
the indians cut the citys water supply and burned outlying buildings.
on august 21 governor antonio de otermin decided to retreat to mexico with the survivors.
during the retreat one indian told otermin that the revolt happened because his people were tired of the work they had to do for the spaniards and the clergy who did not allow them to plant to do other things for their own needs another old man 1754 82 part ii settlements old and new 1607 southwest in the era of the pueblo revolt hhi spanish colonization up to 1680 m pueblo revolt 1680 navajo settlements 1600 hm navajo settlements 1800 i fr.
kinos missionary travels 1681 1711 navajo reservation boundaries 2000 indian pueblos spanish towns mission at san xavier del bac present state names and boundaries are provided for orientation and navajo indian relocation is shown over 400 years map 3 4 changes in the southwest.
the heart of spain s empire in the americas always remained south of the future united states in mexico and peru.
however by the 1600s authorities based in mexico had authorized the development of an important spanish colony in territory they called new mexico among the pueblo indians in the area around santa fe and taos.
spanish settlers also established a mission near the future tucson arizona though it would be after 1700 before there was spanish settlement in texas or california.
told the governor that it was because the spaniards had tried to take away the ways of their ancestors the faith by which they have lived and thrived.
both of these grievances the harsh workloads and religious repression were crucial in fueling the revolt as was hope that life might return to a happier day before the spanish arrived.
after the success of the revolt indian leaders lived in the governor s mansion in santa fe.
churches were leveled statues destroyed.
pueblo life returned more or less to what it had been before 1598 the distant and defeated spanish were mocked.
the spanish eventually regained control of new mexico but it took 12 years.
nowhere else in the americas not even among the powerful aztecs and incas was a revolt so successful or long lasting.
in 1690 the spanish viceroy in mexico city appointed a new governor for new mexico don diego de vargas who had an ability to compromise that many of his predecessors had lacked.
vargas left el paso with his army in 1692 he offered each pueblo a fall pardon in exchange for their reconversion to christianity but he did not try to stamp out tribal religion.
the indians could retain both faiths and agreed to his terms.
f uumiicugiu chapter 4 creatingthecultureof british north america 89 4t 4 2 other protestants were free to build churches at their own expense and worship freely but everyone paid taxes to support the congregationalists and catholic worship was not allowed in new england.
in new york news of the change in england brought a general uprising.
those on the bottom of the social order merchants dockworkers and traders seized power under the leadership of a german immigrant jacob leisler.
leisler held power for 2 years but when he was slow in ceding power to the new royal governor appointed by william and mary he was arrested and executed for treason.
however those loyal to leisler remained a faction in new york politics for a generation to come.
in maryland there was also an uprising.
the catholic proprietor was driven from office and lost ownership of the colony.
maryland became a royal colony with a governor appointed by the king and queen and the anglican church of england became the colonys official church.
after the glorious revolution maryland a colony that had been chartered in 1632 to protect catholics excluded catholics from public office.
in the americas the glorious revolution produced winners and losers.
after 1689 independent corporations like the virginia company and the massachusetts company as well as colonial proprietors like lord baltimore or william penn faced a decline in power.
catholics in england and maryland lost hard won political rights as the new monarchs asserted englands status as a protestant nation.
all protestants gained rights and protestant men who had been excluded from the voting lists because they belonged to a dissenting religious group could now vote.
elected legislatures elected by landowning white males competed with royal governors to make the laws governing each colony.
in all the colonies changing ones social and economic status was becoming more difficult.
an english colonial elite supported by english military authority now dominated colonial life.
the british communities became larger more secure and wealthier.
quick review 1 how do the colonists reactions to the glorious revolution reflect their sense of connection to ideas and events in england.
2 based on what you read for whom in the british colonies did the glorious revolution have a positive effect.
a negative effect.
the plantation world from a society with slaves to a slave society 4 2 explain why and how slavery developed as it did in the late 1600s and early 1700s.
fit amid all the talk of the rights of englishmen one group of north american residents lost rights after the 1680s african slaves.
all of the british colonies had slaves in the late 1600s but the institution of slavery changed most dramatically in the southern colonies maryland virginia and soon also the carolinas.
bacons rebellion brought great changes to virginia and its neighbor maryland after 1676 once the planter elite had defeated bacons ragtag militia they quickly consolidated their power.
they did not want another rebellion like the one they had just lived through in which poor whites allied with africans slave and free.
having decided that slaves would make better and more dependable workers than indentured servants this planter elite wrote new slave codes that more clearly made slavery an inherited and permanent status.
they also imported many more african slaves and reduced the numbers of english indentured servants allowed into these colonies.
historian ira berlin described this shift a society with slaves gave way to a slave society it was a significant change from a society in which slavery existed to a society in which the institution of slavery dominated all aspects of society particularly for those who were enslaved.
although this shift began in virginia and maryland its effects would eventually extend to other southern colonies.
art ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 seeking stability by creating a slave society as the institution of slavery came to be more rigidly defined it also came to be linked more closely to race.
africans were seen as slaves.
europeans even the poorest europeans were seen as free.
more and more indians were simply excluded from the colonies.
those africans who had already achieved their freedom and those few who did so during the 1700s lived in a dangerous world.
while anthony johnson had moved from slavery to freedom and prosperity in the virginia of the mid 1600s see chapter 5 the making of a revolution 127 name of act the sugar act of 1764 the currency act of 1764 the stamp act of 1765 the declaratory act of 1766 the revenue act of 1766 the second revenue act of 1767 also known as the townshend duties after charles townshend chancellor of the exchequer the tea act of 1773 table 5 1 parliamentary acts that fueled colonial resistance description increased duties and strengthened collection of customs on rum and molasses which particularly affected merchants and importers prohibited the colonies from issuing their own paper money as legal tender for public or private debts to britain taxed all legal and commercial documents creating an immediate hardship for business leaders and building resentment in many ports where people depended on those businesses for jobs repealed the stamp act but said parliament could legislate for the colonies in all cases whatsoever restricted trade in sugar which helped british and caribbean merchants at the expense of north american merchants placed new duties on paper lead paint glass and tea.
all but the tax on tea were repealed in 1770 the same day as the boston massacre.
the intolerable acts of 1774 allowed the british east india company to ship tea to the colonies without having to pay normally required duties making it cheaper than most smuggled tea.
the townshend tea tax would still apply once it reached the colonies.
the act supported the east india company almost bankrupt because so many customers were purchasing cheaper smuggled tea from elsewhere.
parliament s response to the tea riots they closed the port of boston expanded the royal governor s authority shifted control of the ohio river country to the british governor in quebec the quebec act and allowed british troops to use any uninhabited building as a barracks without the owner s authorization the quartering act.
sons of liberty secret organizations in the colonies formed to oppose the stamp act.
from 1765 until independence members spoke wrote and took direct action against british measures especially the stamp tax and the tax on tea.
128 part iii a nev g of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 a year later resistance to the stamp act of 1765 was stronger and it united colonists of many social classes.
the act required legal and commercial documents including magazines newspapers and playing cards to be printed on special paper showing an official stamp.
payment for the stamped paper had to be in british currency.
in the spring of 1765 patrick henry asked virginias legislature the house of burgesses to pass resolutions that came to be known as the virginia resolves opposing the tax.
middling and upper class new yorkers including lawyers and merchants who would have had to pay the highest taxes if the law was enforced began writing articles against the tax in the citys many newspapers which circulated widely.
some also formed a new secret organization the sons of liberty which sent delegates to all the colonies to create a kind of underground resistance to the tax a tax they described as a sign of british tyranny.
nine colonies sent delegates to a gathering known as the stamp act congress in new york city in october 1765 there they issued a declaration of rights and grievances which said that parliament had no right to tax the colonies and they petitioned for a repeal of the stamp and sugar acts.
more important than the petition was the fact that leaders of the growing resistance movement met together and began to sense their unity.
as one of the organizers of the congress said there ought to be no new england men no new yorker etc.
known on the continent but all of us americans this appeal to unity was a new sentiment in colonies that had up until now jealously guarded their independence from each other.
britain s parliamentary action had provoked this increasing unity.
while colonial leaders met and wrote petitions some of the strongest resistance to the stamp tax developed in the working class taverns where laborers and sailors gathered.
poor people had little reason to actually pay the tax because they did not use many legal documents or paper products that would require the stamped paper but the tax was a symbol of british arrogance and threatened to slow the colonial economy which could put sailors and laboring people out of work.
to the poor the haughty british authorities were becoming intolerable.
when lieutenant governor cadwallader colden placed the embossing stamps in fort george at the tip of manhattan until the new tax went into effect on november 1 1765 public protests mounted into what came to be known as the new york stamp act riot.
new york merchants and groups like the sons of liberty agreed not to import any british goods while the stamp act was in force.
in taverns across the city angry citizens shared their discontent with the british.
on the evening of november 1 a crowd paraded around the city with torches as well as effigies of the lieutenant governor and the devil.
they dared the british troops to fire on them and burned coldens coach.
next the crowd broke into the home of major james of the royal artillery drank his considerable supply of liquor and burned the house.
calling themselves the sons of neptune to distinguish themselves from the more middle class sons of liberty the crowd resisted efforts to end the violence.
months later when news reached new york in may 1766 that the stamp act had been repealed celebrating crowds fired guns broke windows and erected a liberty pole to taunt british authorities.
similar riots by the lower sorts took place in other colonial cities.
in boston a mob ransacked the governors home and in annapolis maryland a crowd burned the stamp distributors warehouse and forced him to flee the colony.
in wilmington north carolina a mocking angry crowd paraded the stamp collector through the streets.
and in charleston south carolina a crowd of workers and seamen burned effigies of the stamp distributor.
in response to the unrest british authorities under the new prime minister the marquess of rockingham decided to repeal the stamp and sugar taxes but also to show force.
in 1766 while repealing the taxes parliament also voted the declatory act which claimed its right to tax and regulate the colonies in all cases whatsoever in addition parliament passed the revenue act of 1766 restricting trade in sugar which helped british and caribbean merchants at the expense of colonial merchants.
a year later charles townshend chancellor of the exchequer treasurer in a new british government imposed new taxes on lead paint paper and tea known as the second revenue act of 1767 also known as the townshend duties of 1767.
the new british government was desperate to find a way to pay off the war debt but also wanted to assert parliaments authority over the colonies.
in particular parliament wanted to curtail smuggling by some of the most prosperous colonial merchants and to control the mobs that kept rioting in boston and new york.
in september 1768 the warships of the royal navy arrived in boston and british troops marched through town in a show of the governments authority.
according to paul revere the troops formed and marched with insolent parade drums beating fifes playing and colours flying up king street the presence of so many troops created a sense of siege in boston.
a year and a half later british soldiers were still stationed in boston creating constant tensions with residents who resented their presence.
one source of the tension was the fact that off duty soldiers were allowed to work on their own part time increasing competition with colonists for jobs by accepting lower wages.
on the evening of march 5 1770 an angry crowd began to throw snowballs at british soldiers.
they taunted the lone british sentry at the state house private hugh white.
as the crowd around white grew more people joined in the taunting or watched from the sidelines.
john adams called the crowd a motley rabble but they had strong support in a city tired of the presence of so many soldiers.
british captain thomas preston sent more soldiers to support white while the crowd grew to 300 or 400 preston asked the crowd to disperse assuring them that the soldiers would not fire since he himself was standing directly in front of them.
however someone threw something that knocked one of the soldiers down and some of the soldiers started firing even though no one heard preston give any orders.
three men were killed including a seaman crispus attacks a former slave who was part african and part american indian and who would be celebrated as the first man and first black hs.
tutm i v x this picture titled the bostonians paying the excise man shows many forms of resistance to british taxes that developed including the mob actions that sometimes coated an offending tax collector with tar and feathers or forced him to drink boiling tea.
in the background a liberty tree symbol of freedom sports a hangman s noose and colonists dump tea off a ship.
chapter 6 creating a nation 157 joseph brant or thayendanegea was a leader among the mohawks who convinced many in the iroquois federation to support the british cause during the revolution and oppose american expansion after the war as he negotiated for native american rights.
he was one of the very few people of any race to meet with both george washington and king george iii.
after the treaty of fort stanwix was signed brant sailed for london where he met with many high ranking british officials and had an audience with king george iii.
he sought financial support for his people as compensation for their role on the british side in the revolution and he and his british hosts also seem to have devel oped a plan for indian resistance to the new american nation.
in 1785 and 1786 brant began to create an indian confederation that could successfully resist the united states.
the confederation included not only representatives of the iroquois but also many other tribes who had been traditional enemies of the iroquois as well as cherokees from much further south and smaller tribes who resided in the ohio river valley.
it would be one of the most unified and effective adversaries that the united states would face.
the indians demanded that the congress ensure that white settlement ended at the ohio river.
while the indians and congress negotiated fitfully the frontier remained a violent place.
in the late 1780s 1 500 white settlers and at least as many indians in ohio and kentucky were killed see map 6 5.
the united states had no intention of ceding as much land to the indians as they demanded but under the articles of confederation it was difficult to organize an army to enforce the governments claims.
the need to create a government strong enough to counter the indians led many to support the constitution in 1787 for slaves former slaves and those who claimed ownership of them in 1791 benjamin banneker a free african american whose parents had been slaves wrote to thomas jefferson then washingtons secretary of state reminding him that in 1776 jefferson had written that all men are created equal and that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights banneker continued b ut sir how pitiable is it to reflect that although you were so fully convinced of the benevolence of the father of mankind you should counteract his mercies in detaining by fraud and violence so numerous a part of my brethren under groaning captivity and cruel oppression that you should be found guilty of that most criminal act which you professedly detested in others with respect to yourselves.
banneker would not let jefferson forget the contradiction at the heart of the new american enterprise and jeffersons own life.
as bannekers letter indicates many slaves and former slaves understood that the words freedom and liberty also ought to count for them.
by the end of the revolution many whites agreed.
back in 1775 thomas paine asked how americans could complain about british tyranny while they hold so many hundreds of thousands in slavery the issue of freedom and liberty seemed to be gaining ground for some slaves after 1776 news traveled slowly but word spread that in 1794 in the midst of the french revolution the french national convention had abolished slavery and then that slaves in france s most lucrative caribbean colony had won independence for what became the black led republic of haiti.
when cornwallis surrendered at yorktown in 1781 he had between 4 000 and 5 000 former slaves with his army.
many more were in other british held areas especially new york city.
as the war ended the british returned some slaves to old masters gave others to new masters in the caribbean or simply abandoned them.
but many former slaves also sailed with the british when they left the colonies some settling as free people in canada england or west africa.
a former slave named boston king wrote that the english had compassion upon us in the day of distress.
soon after ships were fitted out and furnished with every necessary for conveying us to nova scotia.
life was not easy for african americans in nova scotia but they were free.
by the time george washington was inaugurated president in 1789 slavery had been abolished in massachusetts new hampshire and vermont and was dying though slowly throughout the north.
northern slaves worked as household help and j 58 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 i i major southeastern indian groups f i attempted state of franklin spanish boundary claim u s boundary set in 1783 treaty with england spanish louisiana eastern boundary spanish east florida northern boundary spanish west florida natchez trace 6 1 6 2 map 6 5 tribal land claims 1783 1788 especially in the southwest of the new united states strong native american tribes clamed large areas and did not much care whether the u s or spain claimed the territory since they did not want settlers from either country.
labored in factories and farms.
new york had the most slaves in the north concentrated in manhattan but also working on the great estates of the hudson valley.
new jersey and rhode island were next in number.
in the north however more money was made on the slave trade than on slave labor.
the northwest ordinance prohibited slavery in the ohio region.
many thought slavery would also die out in delaware maryland and virginia.
only in the carolinas georgia and the new western areas of kentucky and tennessee was slavery still strong.
despite the regional differences by 1789 1 in 10 african americans was a free person.
some had won their freedom through the army.
some had won through state action.
some had been set free by individual slave owners.
but in 1789 one could not assume that to be black was to be a slave.
that truth was a significant change from 1776 when free blacks were a definite exception in every one of the 13 colonies.
chapter review does the constitution created in philadelphia in 1787 embody or contradict the goals of the revolution.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 201 uu american voices the kentucky resolutions of 1798 congress passed the alien and sedition acts in 1798 a ww firestorm of protest broke out.
leaders of the democratic republican party saw the new laws as a direct attack on freedom of speech a bedrock of democracy.
they also opposed the legislation because they feared it would foster war with france and expand the army navy and federal power in general.
in response they sought to undermine the laws.
jefferson secretly drafted the resolutions below which were adopted by the kentucky legislature in november 7 798 while madison drafted similar resolutions for virginia.
these kentucky and virginia resolutions not only attacked the alien and sedition acts but also declared that since the federal government was a compact of the states any state could declare any federal law unconstitutional within the bounds of that state.
this claim would have far reaching implications in the decades leading up to the civil war.
although most historians see the alien and sedition acts as a dangerous attack on free speech they also see the resolutions as an equally dangerous effort to undermine national unity.
1 resolved that the several states composing the united states of america are not united on the principle of unlimited submission to their general government but that by compact under the style and title of a constitution for the united states and of amendments thereto they constituted a general government for special purposes delegated to that government certain definite powers reserving each state to itself the residuary mass of right to their own self government and that whensoever the general government assumes undelegated powers its acts are unauthoritive void and of no force that to this compact each state acceded as a state and is an integral party that this government created by this compact was not made the exclusive or final judge of the extent of the powers delegated to itself since that would have made its discretion and not the constitution the measure of its powers but that as in all other cases of compact among powers having no common judge each party has an equal right to judge for itself as well of infractions as of the mode and measure of redress.
2 resolved therefore also the same act of congress passed on the 14th day of july 1798 and entitled an act in addition to the act entitled an act for the punishment of certain crimes against the united states the sedition act and all other their acts which assume to create define or punish crimes other than those so enumerated in the constitution are altogether void and of no force and that the power to create define and punish such other crimes is reserved and of right appertains solely and exclusively to the respective states each within its own territory.
source library of congress thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what argument did jefferson make in favor of a state s right to nullify federal legislation.
2 historical interpretation in what ways did jefferson s position constitute a threat to national unity.
of his own party.
he also pardoned john fries who had led a nonviolent rebellion against federal war taxes in pennsylvania in 1799 and had been sentenced to death for treason.
these actions cost adams dearly particularly among his own federalists.
but he considered the choice for peace against war his crowning achievement and ordered that his gravestone read here lies john adams who took upon himself the responsibility for peace with france in the year 1800 the election of 1800 the political differences between the two leading candidates for president in 1800 president john adams and vice president thomas jefferson could not have been clearer.
but the methods for actually selecting the next president and vice president in 1800 could not have been more convoluted.
none of the problems with the electoral college that were seen in 1796 had been resolved.
at that time political parties had been informal alliances of like minded individuals.
by 1800 however the federalists and democratic republicans were much better organized.
they had come to represent 202 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 two distinct philosophies and sets of personal allegiances.
nevertheless americans still distrusted formal political parties.
within the parties advocates of different positions schemed to defeat not only the other party but also rivals within their own party.
in december 1799 just as the maneuvering for the 1800 election was starting news came that george washington had died at his home in mount vernon virginia.
people of all political factions mourned the loss of a unifying leader but also knew that the next election would be more divisive than ever.
despite the fact that most of the constitutions authors did not want nominations of presidential candidates to occur before the selection of presidential electors in 1800 each partys congressional delegations nominated the candidates in semisecret caucuses.
when the democratic republican caucus met on may 11 1800 it was clear that jefferson would be their nominee for president.
several candidates were considered for vice president but the democratic republicans wanted someone who would help them win new york which they saw as the key to the white house.
the man to deliver new yorks votes was aaron burr.
few politicians including jefferson trusted or respected burr but jefferson did not intend to lose the presidency twice.
in an ill fated decision the caucus and party leaders pledged that every elector would vote for both jefferson and burr.
everyone simply assumed that somehow jefferson would receive the most votes and become president with burr the runner up becoming vice president but that assumption proved to be a serious mistake.
federalist maneuvering was equally complicated.
there was general agreement that failure to support adams would fatally split the party.
but the caucus also chose charles cotesworth pinckney of south carolina the brother of their 1796 vice presidential nominee to be vice president in part because he was known to be loyal to hamilton and in part because his refusal to give a bribe to france in the xyz affair had made him a hero.
behind the scenes hamilton hoped as he had in 1796 that he could somehow engineer pinckneys election as president.
once again adams found out about hamiltons plans and was furious.
because the constitution gave each state the right to choose its presidential electors any way it wished the actual voting for those electors was spread out over most of the year.
in an early but crucial test burr was able to ensure new yorks electoral votes for the jefferson burr ticket.
pennsylvanias democratic republican governor also promised to deliver its electoral votes for the jefferson burr ticket or if that failed to simply prevent a vote to choose electors from taking place in that state so adams could not receive any votes there.
as other states continued to select their presidential electors in the summer and fall of 1800 the contest remained fierce.
a federalist newspaper said a vote for the democratic republicans was a vote for the tempestuous sea of anarchy and misrule for arming the poor against the rich for fraternizing with the foes of god and man while a democratic republican paper asked people to choose between peace or war happiness or misery opulence or ruin the sedition act made direct attacks on president adams dangerous but the press was far from neutral and anger at that act added fuel to the democratic republican fire.
slaves could not vote and slavery had not been a major issue in the previous presidential campaigns but it was in 1800 gabriel prosser and jack bowler were slaves on a virginia plantation not far from the state capital in richmond.
throughout the summer they were planning a slave uprising.
prosser promised death to all whites except quakers methodists and french people that is whites known to support abolition.
over 1 000 slaves were involved forging swords from sickles making their own bullets and designing a flag that read death or liberty the uprising was set for saturday august 30 when they planned to meet at the prosser plantation kill the white owners and march on richmond.
however a terrible storm on august 30 scattered the slave army and governor james monroe discovered the plan and called out the state militia.
the leaders of the uprising were quickly tried and executed but the prospect of a slave uprising terrified the southern states.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 203 campaign banners were popular in the 1800 campaign including this streamer that says t jefferson president of the united states of america john adams no more.
the issue of slavery also complicated the presidential campaign.
both political parties were divided internally over it.
adams hated slavery but pinckney his running mate was one of the largest slave owners in south carolina.
both jefferson and burr owned slaves jefferson many of them.
but jefferson had also written in opposition to slavery.
he needed northern democratic republican votes in pennsylvania and new york where abolitionism was gaining ground.
governor monroe and jefferson feared that too many slave executions would spark an abolitionist upheaval and cost them votes.
on the other hand leniency could cost them votes in the fearful southern states where adams and pinckney suddenly looked like the forces of stability.
some slaves saw the ironies of the situation.
most of those arrested including prosser simply remained silent knowing that nothing they said would save them.
one however calmly told the judges i have nothing more to offer than what general washington would have had to offer had he been taken by the british officers and put to trial by them.
i have ventured my life in endeavouring to obtain the liberty of my countrymen and am a willing sacrifice to their cause and i beg as a favour that i may be immediately led to execution.
i know that you have predetermined to shed my blood why then all this mockery of a trial.
the tension between american freedom and american slavery which was at the heart of the republic surfaced in the 1800 contest.
jeffersons religious beliefs also became a major election topic.
yales president timothy dwight gave a speech asking whether the country was going to elect men who set truth at nought who doubt the being and providence of god everyone knew who dwight was talking about given jeffersons liberal religious views.
many clergy and laypeople claimed that jefferson had renounced the basic beliefs of christianity.
in fact jefferson was a deist who believed that god tended to leave the universe on its own.
adams himself who tended to agree with jefferson in religious matters though he was more discreet and more often seen in established churches privately expressed indignation at the charge of irreligion but did not say anything publically during the heat of the campaign.
204 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 ihe hamilton adams feud could not be kept so quiet.
in the summer of 1800 hamilton wrote a letter from alexander hamilton concerning the public conduct and character of john adams esq president of the united states.
hamilton seems to have meant the 54 page document for the private use of a few electors whom he was attempting to switch from adams to pinckney but a delighted democratic republican press found the document and it became public.
in words that could ironically have been prosecuted under the sedition act hamilton attacked adams for his great intrinsic defects of character including his disgusting egotism eccentric tendencies bitter animosity and ungovernable temper ihe split among the federalists was complete.
noah webster a tough federalist from connecticut and author of the first american dictionary wrote to hamilton that if jefferson was elected as a result of this federalist split the fault will lie at your door and your conduct on this occasion will be discerned little short of insanity.
in 1800 the candidates campaigned openly unlike 1796 the ever diffident adams surprisingly seemed to enjoy campaigning giving speeches in key states.
jefferson considered similar campaign stops but was dissuaded by virginias governor monroe.
instead he engaged in a nonstop correspondence with supporters and in less public forms of campaigning offering financial and editorial advice to friendly newspaper editors.
given the advantages that the democratic republicans held ranging from the unpopularity of the alien and sedition acts to the split among the federalists the election was surprisingly close.
adams swept new england and most of the northern states while jefferson held strong in new york and pennsylvania and most of the southern states.
ihe three fifths clause which counted slaves in the population though they were not allowed to vote gave the southern states an advantage in the electoral college that ultimately tipped the election for jefferson.
ihe last state to vote was south carolina and when the jefferson burr ticket carried every electoral vote in that state the new washington d c democratic republican paper the national intelligencer ran a headline on december 12 splendid intelligence mr jefferson may be considered as our future president but it was not to be so simple see map 7 2.
because the democratic republicans had been so well organized jefferson and burr each received 73 electoral votes putting them well ahead of adams and pinckney.
but because jefferson and burr had each received 73 votes the house of representatives would now have to decide between two candidates who had tied in the election.
in addition though the democratic republicans had also won a majority in the new congress the old congress with a federalist majority would decide the election.
many democratic republicans including jefferson thought that burr had engineered this outcome to make himself president.
many federalists suddenly gave burr a second look.
as far as anyone knows burr did not negotiate with the federalists.
but he also did not give way to jefferson.
ihe country was stuck.
when congress heard the tally of electoral votes the outcome was 73 for jefferson 73 for burr 65 for adams 64 for pinckney and one for john jay.
ihe house then began to vote between the top two.
but it remained deadlocked.
finally hamilton who had fought for so long with thomas jefferson on almost every major government policy convinced his fellow federalists that burr whom he knew all too well from new york politics was a dangerous man of too much ambition and too little morality.
on february 17 thomas jefferson was elected president by a vote a a j k 3 gulf of moxie electoral vote ibillipi 53 65 47 sdr 5 f5 dr 8 f4 atlantic ocean 4 3 x pacific ocean m nonvoting territories thomas jefferson jeffersonian republican john adams federalist map 7 2 the 1800 presidential election.
the 1800 electoral contest between incumbent john adams and thomas jefferson reflected regional differences adams carried all of new england and jefferson most of the south but middle states especially new york decided the outcome.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 207 chapter 7.
like the letter that washington and a national identity 1800 1848 part iv crafting a nation people land wrote jefferson s letter was written to a specific audience but unlike washington jefferson sought a change in government policy specifically state government policy in new england.
in 1802 when he wrote the letter connecticut was one of four states that still had an official state supported church a so called religious establishment connecticut required all of its citizens including its baptists and nonbelievers to pay taxes to support the states congregational churches as did new hampshire and massachusetts.
maryland required support for the episcopal church.
when it was adopted in 1791 the first amendment to the u s constitution indeed all of the bill of rights amendments applied only to the federal government.
states could do as they pleased in church state matters.
only after the civil war was the reach of the bill of rights broadened.
long before the revolution all of the states had stopped requiring church attendance or prosecuting people for heresy but the clergy in the four states of connecticut new hampshire massachusetts and maryland were still civil servants supported by the state government.
some of the governed including connecticuts baptists and marylands catholics resented paying a tax that benefited other religious bodies but not their own.
so in the 1802 letter jefferson was telling these connecticut baptists just what they wanted to hear.
not surprisingly some of the congregational leaders in connecticut did not agree.
the separation of church and state at the state level jefferson along with james madison had convinced the virginia legislature to end public financial support for the episcopal church in that state in 1786 5 years before madison helped shepherd the first amendment through congress.
that victory had not been an easy one.
the fiercest battle over state support for specific churches however was fought in connecticut.
timothy dwight who became president of yale in 1795 was a firm federalist who hated jeffersons republicanism and who could not imagine good government or moral citizens without a state church.
one of dwights students at yale lyman beecher organized the connecticut society for the suppression of vice and the promotion of good morals and published the connecticut evangelical magazine and religious intelligencer in an effort to maintain the special status of the congregationalist churches.
but he lost.
in 1817 oliver wolcott who opposed a state supported church in connecticut defeated a federalist for governor and connecticut would end its state support for all religious bodies.
beecher was heartbroken.
years later however he changed his mind the injury done to the cause of christ as we then supposed was irreparable.
for several days i suffered what no tongue can tell for the best thing that ever happened to the state of connecticut.
by voluntary efforts societies missions and revivals they clergy exert a deeper influence than ever they could by queues and shoe buckles and cocked hats and gold headed canes.
religion in connecticut as beecher noted actually survived and flourished without state support and not long afterward massachusetts the last holdout followed the same path to separate church and state.
new religious expressions direct government support for churches disappeared in the early 1800s but the importance of religious freedom did not.
the ideals of individual freedom in all areas of life generated an amazing growth in religious organizations and ideas in the same era.
church attendance in america dropped during and after the revolution.
many of the elite like jefferson were deists who saw god as at most a distant force in human affairs many working people ignored religious matters altogether.
during jeffersons presidency however americans participated in an outpouring of evangelical religious establishment the name given to a state church or to the creation of an established church that might play a role in and expect support and loyalty from all citizens.
deist one who has a religious orientation that rejects divine revelation and holds that the workings of nature alone reveal god s design for the universe.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 279 10 1 10 j 10 j in the meantime the sac and fox tribes which had already been exiled to the indian territory as a result of earlier removals from the old northwest were not too happy about life there.
in april 1832 a chief named black hawk led 1 000 2 000 sac and fox people back east across the mississippi closer to their old homelands.
the sac and fox indians were moving mostly to escape from hostile sioux groups on the great plains and iowa territory.
the illinois governor took the tribes move into illinois as an attack called out the militia and asked for federal troops.
in black hawk s war federal and state troops on the east side of the mississippi and sioux warriors on the west virtually annihilated the fox and sac tribes to the delight of whites who were happy to see these tribes completely out of their way.
in fact jackson had meant to use the removal law for georgia to force all indians east of the mississippi out of their lands.
when the forced exile finally reached its goal by the end of the 1830s only the iroquois in new york a few cherokees in north carolina and scattered small communities remained legally east of the mississippi although others like the seminoles simply melted into the woods and could not be found by the government.
all in all 46 000 indians were forcibly removed during the jackson administration and subsequent administrations removed as many more.
the cherokees and other tribes tend to disappear from the history books after the trail of tears.
but the cherokees choctaws and creeks were resilient people.
forced onto an inhospitable and alien land they sought to reestablish their communities and culture.
to a surprising degree they succeeded.
as the last cherokees arrived in indian territory in 1839 the tribe adopted a new constitution and established tahlequah as their capital.
in 1844 they began publishing the cherokee advocate in both english and cherokee.
they also set up a school system with elementary schools as well as higher education institutes and seminaries to prepare teachers european and cherokee for their schools.
in the u s civil war parts of the tribe favored each side and the divided tribe fought internally.
but again they rebuilt after the war.
today there are some 200 000 to 300 000 cherokees of whom 70 000 live within the cherokee nation in northeast oklahoma and the rest are scattered around the country making them the largest federally recognized tribe today.
jacksonian economics the war on the bank of the united states the second bank of the united states a national bank chartered by congress in 1816 with extensive regulatory powers over currency and credit.
in his campaign for president jackson pledged to do something about the bank of the united states which he and many others blamed for the panic of 1819 and saw as an elitist threat to a democracy.
the second bank of the united states was patterned on the first bank of the united states that had been a cornerstone of alexander hamiltons economic plans for the new nation see chapter 9 new industries new politics 265 9 3 1 and alabama where some people were growing rich on farmlands that jackson had j wrested from their indian owners he was a local hero.
particularly in a country where an elites economic decisions had hurt many farmers and workers a candidate who had been born in a log cabin and grown up poor though he had become wealthy as an adult had deep appeal.
popular appeal had not been a major factor in the elections of madison and monroe but it was the factor in 1824 in the 1824 election jackson won the popular vote.
calhoun who had withdrawn from the campaign after deciding that jackson was too popular to beat was easily elected as vice president since the twelfth amendment ratified in 1804 in the after math of the jefferson burr fiasco mandated that presidential electors cast separate ballots for presidential and vice presidential candidates.
in addition to pennsylvania jackson easily carried the black belt states of georgia alabama mississippi and louisiana as well as most of the rest of the south a region benefitting from its population of nonvoting slaves which strengthened its electoral votes as a result of the three fifths clause to the constitution.
jackson defeated adams in new jersey crawford in north carolina and clay in indiana and illinois.
adams carried new england some of the mid atlantic region and the northwest.
however although jackson won the most popular votes no one had the 131 electoral votes needed for a majority jackson 99 electoral votes adams 84 electoral votes crawford 41 electoral votes clay 37 electoral votes clays prediction was right the election had been tossed into the house of representatives.
not since 1800 had the house of representatives been called on to decide the outcome of a presidential contest.
ironically however since the constitution required the house to choose from among the top three candidates clay himself had been eliminated.
moreover although his supporters had kept it hidden crawford had had a stroke and could not possibly assume the presidency.
so the election came down to jackson and adams and adams was determined to fight for the office despite ranking second in the popular and electoral votes.
the constitution mandated a process and adams wanted to follow it.
many of adamss followers and the supporters of other candidates saw jackson as a would be american napoleon who would undermine american democracy.
no one held that concern more strongly than henry clay who was master of the house and determined that jackson should not be president.
when the house met on february 9 1825 adams was elected president by a vote of 13 states with seven states for jackson and four for crawford.
on the evening of the vote outgoing president monroe held a party at the white house.
jackson approached adams and they greeted each other with considerable formality.
observers thought jackson was genial and gracious while adams was stiff rigid cold as a statue.
the two would not often meet again but the interaction that night imprinted an image on the public that would follow them to jacksons benefit for the next 4 years and beyond.
whether adams had made any secret agreement with clay will never be known.
but 5 days after the vote adams appointed clay to be his secretary of state and thus his successor if the previous pattern held true.
jackson denounced both men for making a corrupt bargain resigned from the senate and returned to his home in nashville to begin what was essentially a 4 year campaign against adams clay and their administration as well as a campaign for his own election to the office that he and his followers believed he had won in 1824 adams and clay had underestimated the popular feeling for jackson.
the animosity of the campaign and jacksons rancor would make the next 4 years difficult for an administration led by two of the nation s most gifted political and diplomatic leaders.
266 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 the adams clay agenda in his inaugural address in march 1825 adams acknowledged that he came to the presidency less possessed of your confidence in advance than any of my predecessors nevertheless it was his goal to unify the nation and improve all parts of the country.
he was the last president to believe that the baneful weed of party strife might be avoided and he struggled unsuccessfully to avoid the creation of political parties and permanent national divisions.
adams proposed a list of national improvements to be implemented by the federal government.
support for federally funded improvements such as roads canals and so on would be a hallmark of the adams administration.
an emerging political faction that supported national development and strong federal actions to deal with national problems agreed with the direction that the adams administration was taking.
jackson and another emerging faction would strongly oppose this sort of activist federal government advocating instead for states rights.
improvement both personal and political was a popular ambition in the 1820s.
adams worried about becoming a better person and he swam naked in the potomac every day to improve his body.
but he also wanted to improve the country and he saw the money freed from paying off the revolutionary war debt and the income from sales of federal lands as the perfect opportunity for investing in the country.
the general survey conducted by army engineers when john c calhoun was secretary of war was the blueprint.
adams with an eye to southern voters proposed a second national road to link washington d c to new orleans.
he proposed and congress approved building the chesapeake and ohio canal that would connect with the original national road and link the potomac with the ohio and mississippi rivers.
postmaster general john mclean built post offices in rural areas and subsidized the stagecoach industry to carry the mail and connect the nations far flung people to one another.
adams also proposed a new national university to be based in washington and a national observatory a lighthouse of the skies all of these activities were designed to knit the nation together advancing knowledge and making it easier to transport goods.
in addition the intent was to unite the nation in a single political entity and a market economy especially after the divisions sparked by the debates around the missouri compromise see map 9 4 on page 256.
secretary of state clay was involved in all these efforts and in fact during the presidential campaign had described a program of internal improvements and protective tariffs that came to be known as the american system in clays mind the american system would reduce poverty by linking all americans all white americans clay considered neither his own 50 slaves nor others slaves to be americans in a prosperous commercial community.
the system was american because it made the federal government an agent of economic development.
clay believed that the roads and canals as well as the support of interstate commerce that he and adams wanted to foster on a federal level would make a stronger and more united america commercially geographically and socially.
ultimately clay wanted transportation and commerce to bridge traditional sectional divides and create a thriving commercial nation that was united by common national investments.
moreover the system was potentially a way to protect the country by building an infrastructure that could serve military needs allowing troops to move quickly from one part of the country to another when necessary.
finally the american system would protect infant american industries through a strong tariff that would allow them to develop and thus reduce american dependence on cheaper foreign imports.
in one of his last acts as speaker in 1824 clay led an effort to increase the average tariff from 20 percent to 35 percent.
the new higher tariff made him a hero to new england mill owners and their workers whose jobs it protected.
it was also popular in commercial centers like cincinnati ohio and clays hometown of lexington kentucky where new industries needed protection.
but the improvements and tariffs 93 american system the program of government subsidies to improve roads and canals and to foster economic growth and protect domestic manufacturers from foreign competition.
chapter 10 democracyinthe age of andrew jackson 273 nullification a constitutional doctrine holding that a state has a legal right to declare a national law null and void within its borders.
martin van buren architect of jacksons 1828 campaign for president became secretary of state.
but jacksons other cabinet officers were less talented and jackson often ignored them.
instead he surrounded himself with informal advisors who came to be known as his kitchen cabinet longtime friends and advisors who worked closely with the president particularly to accomplish removing indians from wanted lands revoking the charter for the second bank of the united states and preserving the authority of the federal union against radical supporters of states rights.
jackson s presidential agenda jackson had several interlocking but not entirely consistent priorities.
he distrusted government at all levels but had unbounded trust in his own ability to govern.
he meant not only to be an activist president john quincy adams and other presidents had also followed strong agendas but also to make the presidency the center of the american government.
he would not defer to congress in ways that all of his predecessors had done.
he vetoed more congressional bills than all of his predecessors combined and made it clear that congress would have to reckon with him.
as he had announced before the election he was determined to force the indians who lived in northern georgia alabama and mississippi to move west to clear the land for white settlement.
although he supported a modified tariff he meant to scale back the size of the federal government.
he hated the bank of the united states and was determined to destroy it.
he saw its charter as an inappropriate use of federal authority and was convinced probably rightly that the bank had contributed to adamss campaign.
and perhaps most of all jackson was determined to preserve the union at a time when southern leaders were insisting that each state had the right of nullification the right to declare that specific federal legislation was null and void within its borders.
jackson was a slaveholder and a defender of slavery but if slaveholders threatened national unity they would have to deal with him.
in his two terms as president jackson realized most of his goals despite fierce opposition.
he established permanent precedents for presidential authority.
he was a hero to some and an evil genius to others.
for most historians he remains one of the most complex american leaders expanding the roles of poor and working class whites in the political process and of the presidency in american life while reducing the rights of indians slaves federal employees bankers and indeed anyone who disagreed with him.
five civilized tribes the cherokees chickasaws choctaws creeks and seminoles who had established treaty agreements with the united states in the late 1700s or early 1800s lived in peace with their neighbors and adopted more of the ways of the whites than most native americans.
the indian removal act the trail of tears and the settlement of oklahoma for some white americans indian removal jacksons policy of forcing the cherokee nation and other tribes to move to reservations in distant oklahoma or indian territory as it was called was a great achievement.
for the tribes caught in jacksons web the policy led to war within the tribes terrible losses resistance resignation and reinvention.
their white supporters though passionate were ineffective against jackson.
known as the five civilized tribes the cherokees chickasaws choctaws creeks and seminoles had for generations lived in the region known as the old southwest georgia alabama mississippi as well as in arkansas and florida.
these tribes had traded and fought with spanish french and english settlers and had sold or ceded much of their land but based on treaties with the u s government they still owned huge tracts of land in the heart of the cotton growing south.
far more than the indians of the northwest or the west the five civilized tribes had adopted many white ways and customs intermarried with whites and created a unique culture based on farming and trade.
of the five tribes the cherokee nation had the most sophisticated political economic and cultural institutions.
stretching over northwest georgia alabama tennessee and north carolina 274 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 the cherokees expected to be treated as a sovereign country.
the cherokees who had supported the british during the revolution had signed a treaty with the new united states government in 1785 and never again waged war against the united states.
they supported jackson in his battle with the creeks and lived at peace with their neighbors but that did them little good once jackson determined his course of action.
after making peace with the united states in the 1780s the cherokees took well to the european style of communication and farming.
in 1821 a cherokee warrior sequoyah intrigued by what he called the markings of written english invented an 86 character alphabet that represented the syllables of spoken cherokee.
the new alphabet caught on quickly not only in handwritten form but also in typeface for printing.
the cherokee phoenix published in both english and cherokee became an important means of communication.
sequoyah who never learned english created a similar alphabet for the choctaw language.
his achievement to invent a written language while being illiterate in all languages had never before been done.
in addition the cherokees set up a large and effective trading network with other tribes and the white community.
in 1827 they adopted a written constitution for the cherokee republic.
beginning in the 1790s christian missionaries came to live among the cherokees.
the cherokees welcomed them though most never became christians.
using sequoyahs alphabet the missionaries translated the bible into cherokee and later became some of the most heroic defenders of cherokee rights.
cherokees also cultivated cotton as their white neighbors did and some owned african slaves.
an 1825 census counted 13 563 cherokees 220 whites some of whom were married to cherokees and 1 277 african slaves in the cherokee republic.
of all the american indian tribes the cherokees were the model of assimilation that presidents from washington to jefferson claimed to want.
but white settlers and president jackson decided to ignore the assimilation.
they wanted the land.
georgia took the lead in seizing indian land.
in 1824 governor george troup announced that he was ending treaty rights for the cherokee and creek tribes.
when president john quincy adams opposed him citing the tribes treaties with the u s government troup and his successor john forsyth campaigned for jackson in 1828 in december 1828 the georgia legislature declared that starting in june 1830 georgia state laws would extend to all parts of the cherokee republic despite federal treaty agreements to the contrary.
white georgians then began moving onto cherokee lands and jackson withdrew u s troops that had been protecting the cherokees.
it was in this context that jackson addressed congress advocating an indian removal act to protect the cherokees from georgia laws.
the president gave the tribes what seemed like a choice voluntarily move west to new lands where their independence would be honored or choose to stay where they were.
but if they chose to stay they would be subject to the laws of georgia laws that said indians could not vote own property testify against a white person in court or obtain credit.
it was not much of a choice as jackson himself said in private.
the land that the government offered the tribes was completely unfamiliar to the tribes of the old southwest.
most people thought of it as simply a desert where farming would be impossible.
indian territory which eventually became the state of oklahoma was a portion of the louisiana purchase just north of texas.
the land was not empty though the government tended to treat it that way.
some of the plains tribes the wichitas kiowas kiowa apaches and especially osages had lived there for generations.
some tribes from the ohio illinois area shawnees delawares lenapes miamis kickapoos sacs and fox had been relocated to that territory after defeats by the u s army.
in addition there were a few white settlers and some slaves and former slaves seeking refuge in the region.
nevertheless under jacksons plan the government was now offering the territory to the cherokees and others of the five civilized tribes see map 10 1.
while cherokee creek chickasaw choctaw and seminole leaders had long feared just such a move and had been protesting against it many whites now rallied to their side.
in congress and the national press indian removal became a major fight.
chapter 10 chapter 8.
the oregon territory stretched along the pacific coast from the northern border of spanish mexican california to the southern border of what was then russian america now alaska and included the present u s states of oregon washington and idaho as well as the canadian province of british columbia and the yukon territory.
by the 1840s both governments wanted to resolve the border and end the joint ownership of the territory.
in the webster ashburton treaty of 1842 the united states and britain had already negotiated a u s canadian border at the 49th parallel from the great lakes west to the beginning of oregon.
continuing that border west would split the oregon territory 312 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 114 fort vancouver on the north shore of the columbia river in present day washington state was a beautiful site shown in this 1848 lithograph after an 1845 drawing by lieutenant henry j warre of native americans gathered in front of the fort.
pictures like this along with narcissa whitman s letters did much to popularize the oregon washington region.
between the two countries.
tylers ambassador in london proposed making the 49th parallel the boundary all the way to the pacific but giving the british the southern tip of vancouver island sliced by the 49th parallel and giving both countries the right to navigate the juan de fuca strait between vancouver and the mainland.
it seemed like a straightforward compromise.
polk however wanted more or pretended to.
in his 1844 campaign polk promised to win all of oregon up to the alaskan border or 5440 in terms of latitude.
but polk needed his army for the war that he expected to have with mexico and did not want to fight britain too.
the coalition that elected him was divided about oregon.
calhoun and the southern planters would have happily given all of oregon to britain.
they did not want a war or even tension to interrupt the cotton trade with britain that was making the south wealthy.
in addition from calhouns perspective any future states carved out of the oregon territory would most likely be free states tipping the balance in the senate against southern interests.
but missouris powerful senator thomas hart benton was growing fond of oregon because the trail from independence missouri to oregon was adding wealth to his state.
polk had promised 5440 and benton meant to hold him to it.
john quincy adams now a power in the house of representatives agreed with benton.
although he was opposed to annexing texas because of slavery adams was still an american expansionist he liked the region for all the reasons calhoun disliked it and he wanted oregon in the union.
the british government led by prime minister sir robert peel also wanted compromise that would support the hudsons bay company but guarantee an uninterrupted flow of american cotton to british mills and avoid war with the united states.
peel also faced other issues that were more pressing than oregon.
but others in london wanted more of oregon and insisted that the southern border of british oregon should be the columbia river which created the so called disputed triangle f land that both nations claimed.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 321 a hot july 4th of 1850 taylor suddenly died and vice president fillmore ascended to the presidency.
this time however unlike tyler s accession with the death of harrison there were no major policy shifts when fillmore took office.
11 2 quick review considering u s actions in texas and california was the mexican american war a land grab.
why or why not.
113 california gold rush the rush to find gold that brought thousands of new residents to california and produced millions of dollars in new wealth for the region and the united states.
west into the pacific describe the causes and outcomes of u s expansion in california and into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
early in his term of office president polk had told congress that he was interested in acquiring californias harbors from mexico because he said these ports would shelter american ships and allow the pacific ocean to provide the basis for an extensive and profitable commerce with china and other countries of the east he had no idea how quickly his dream would come true.
even before the negotiations with mexico were complete gold was discovered in california and the resulting gold rush made into thriving commercial centers not only the gold camps but also the cities around harbors that polk wanted.
these same pacific coast harbors quickly became home to american ships that had been dominating much of the pacific ocean for a decade before polk spoke.
in the 1840s american whaling ships led all other nations in the whale trade in the pacific and the u s navy led the way to american negotiations for a role in trade with hawaii and china.
after the acquisition of california the navy also established a trading relationship with japan.
after 1848 the profits of the pacific trade poured into the united states through the newly acquired pacific ports.
the acquisition of oregon and california not only expanded the united states to the pacific coast but also allowed the nation to become a dominant player all across the pacific ocean.
the gold rush to california another 1848 development was perhaps even more important to californias history than the shift in political authority from mexico to the united states.
on january 24 1848 while american and mexican negotiators were still meeting in the mexican town of guadalupe hidalgo james marshall a carpenter at the fort and mill owned by swiss native johann sutter on the american river in northern california was deepening the channel going into the mills water wheel when he noticed some odd material in the water.
he reported boys i believe i have found a gold mine his was the first discovery of gold that would quickly lead to the california gold rush.
sutter and marshall tried to keep the discovery a secret but word spread all too quickly.
by may 1848 everyone in san francisco seemed to know that gold had been discovered.
and while communications were still slow prospective miners from all over california indians long time mexican residents and american settlers as well as immigrants from oregon hawaii mexico and as far away as chile peru australia france and parts of china moved into the gold fields of the sierra nevada mountains.
the rush was on.
two thirds of the white men in oregon came south to california.
recently discharged soldiers from the mexican and american armies joined them there.
in the earliest days california indians who knew the land best made excellent gold prospectors.
newcomers expressed surprise that in the first year of the gold rush miwok indian women panned for gold alongside of miwok men and the newcomers from around the globe.
the diversity in the fields did not last.
in august 1848 an article in the new york herald included a brief mention that gold worth in value 30 was picked up in the bed of a stream of the sacramento.
president polk determined to show the value of the newly acquired territory 322 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 113 included a mention in l s annual message to congress.
ten million dollars in gold produced in california in 1848 and within 3 years the revenue had grown to s22o million.
so much gold changed the economic calculations of the united states and much of the world from china to south america to europe.
suddenly there was a great deal of gold in circulation everywhere.
thousands of people wanted to get rich quickly by coming to california to find the gold.
californias non indian population was around 7 000 in 1845 it had grown to almost 93 000 in the first u s census of 1850 while the first prospectors had come from the south mexico and south america and the east from pacific whaling ships hawaii and china by 1849 the largest numbers were coming from the eastern united states and europe.
getting to california from other parts of the united states or europe could mean a long slow and expensive trip by ocean around the southern tip of south america.
it could also involve a shorter sea voyage to nicaragua then an overland trek by pack mule across the isthmus and another voyage from there up to san francisco.
still for others it could mean traveling overland by walking and on ox drawn wagons across the continent.
sea travel around south america was certainly the most comfortable and perhaps safest but it cost a lot from 300 to 700 and it was slow taking 4 to 8 months.
the trip via nicaragua or panama was almost as expensive perhaps 600 and dangerous but it was certainly the fastest taking 5 to 8 weeks.
coming by land across the continent was by far the cheapest costing not more than 200 but it also took at least 3 months and had to be timed just right to avoid winter on the rocky mountains.
the majority opted for the cheapest way.
small numbers of people had been coming west for decades but in 1849 50 many thousands of prospective californians traveled along the platte and humboldt rivers and then the oregon and california trails into the gold fields see map 11 3.
the gold camps themselves were harsh places.
fortunes were made and lost not only in the fields but also at gambling tables and through theft and intimidation.
white americans some of them very recent americans resented the competition of miners from south america and elsewhere especially those who came from china or who were indians or californios.
within a short time most chinese and indians miners had been driven from the gold fields through violence and intimidation though some indians were retained to work for subsistence wages mining gold for others while the chinese found other kinds of work eventually building the western railroads and developing service industries for miners and others.
the incredible jump in californias immigrant population came at a terrible cost for the california indians.
their population already declining in the face of the missions declined much more rapidly after the beginnings of the gold rush because of disease and outright murder decreasing by almost 85 percent between 1848 and 1880 to 23 000 african slaves were rare both because slave owners knew it was all too easy for a slave to escape in california and because other miners hated all competition.
few women were able to succeed as miners indeed far fewer women than men even came to california in the gold rush.
mining camps were overwhelmingly male communities.
some women who did come to california were forced or tricked into prostitution to pay for their passage from europe china and latin america.
the most freewheeling era of the gold camps was very short lived.
by 1851 the chances of finding gold by simply looking in a stream bed as marshall and sutter had done in 1848 or even finding gold with a pan had pretty much ended except in the more southerly tuolumne and merced gold regions.
some miners began using a rocker or cradle that washed dirt out more quickly.
soon enough gold mining was transformed into large scale hydraulic mining which required large corporate investments and reduced most miners to hired labor.
even for hired laborers though mining paid much better than most east coast jobs the possibility of making r z nntimied and fortunes were still made in the gold a fortune evaporated.
gold mining continued ano ioi iu fields but the gold rush was over.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 325 a japanese artist captured a u s navy commanded by commodore mathew perry landing in tokyo and demanding that japan open itself to trade with the united states.
kanagawa treaty an 1854 agreement the first between the united states and japan it opened two japanese ports to american commerce protected shipwrecked american sailors and ended japan s 200 years of isolation.
the port of guangzhou but would never be treated as equals.
despite the restrictions american merchants wanted access to more trade with china and american missionaries wanted access to its people.
regardless both were mostly shut out.
losing patience with the chinese the british turned to violence.
in the so called opium war 1839 1842 the british forced china to open its ports to british products including opium from british india and cede hong kong island as a british colony.
following in the footsteps of the british u s ambassador caleb cushing negotiated the treaty of wang hsia in 1844 which gained the united states the same trade rights as the british.
while britain took the lead in china the united states forced the even more isolated empire of japan to open to the west.
the united states wanted japan as another coaling station beyond hawaii on the route to china and wanted to trade with japan for its own sake.
president fillmore sent commodore mathew perry to open up japan and force a weak and semi barbarous people to deal with the united states.
in july 1853 perry led four large warships with nearly 1 000 sailors into tokyo bay and began negotiations.
he returned in march 1854 with an even larger fleet.
perry did everything he could to impress the japanese providing japanese officials with champagne kentucky bourbon and a history of the war with mexico to let them know what happened to those who opposed united states might.
in return the japanese grudgingly agreed to the kanagawa treaty that opened two relatively iso lated ports to the united states.
only in 1858 did japan open more ports and establish formal diplomatic relations with other countries.
britain quickly became a larger economic and military force in japan than the united states.
nevertheless the united states had established a solid presence in japan and china by the late 1850s.
as a result of expansion in the 1840s the nations border was extended to the pacific and u s ships sailed everywhere on that ocean.
the pacific and every nation on its shores including china japan and russian siberia were in much closer contact with the united states than they had been a short time before.
after 1848 the united states was an emerging force in the world.
113 quick review was expansion to other nations hawaii china japan a logical extension of manifest destiny.
how were u s intentions across the pacific different than u s goals in north america.
326 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 conclusion from the late 1830s through the 1840s the united states became a continental power whose territory spanned from the atlantic to the pacific oceans.
a strong belief in the manifest destiny of the united states justified the louisiana purchase of 1803 though the term was not yet in use and supported hoped for territory acquisitions from oregon to texas to california.
manifest destiny reflected the larger belief that the united states was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy usually in its jacksonian form to the planet.
while americans discussed manifest destiny the nation experienced hard times in the 1830s.
the financial panic of 1837 brought on by a worldwide glut in trade created economic uncertainty in the cotton growing south and the industrial north.
it took several years for the nations economy to recover.
many americans supported versions of manifest destiny for varied political or economic reasons while others had grave reservations.
whether one supported or opposed slavery played directly into views about expansion which new territories one wanted and how new territories would be used.
military actions that leaders took in the name of manifest destiny led to territorial expansion that spanned the continent to the pacific coast.
during the presidency of james polk texas entered the union as a slave state and after a bloody war from 1846 to 1848 mexico ceded much of what became the american west to the united states including new mexico and aided by the local bear flag revolt california.
while many americans from politicians like john quincy adams to philosophers like henry david thoreau opposed the war with mexico many other americans celebrated the victory and the acquisition of so much new territory.
the united states also ended the joint ownership of the oregon territory with britain and both countries resolved borders that allowed each country to have full control of its share.
the gold rush accelerated the settlement of california with diverse people and it produced enormous amounts of gold but decimated the american indian population in the far west.
winning california from mexico dramatically changed the u s economy not only in terms of gold but also in terms of increased ventures throughout the pacific involving whaling and trade.
the united states now projected manifest destiny across an ocean where it had few rivals.
the united states became the world leader in the production of whale oil established a relationship with hawaii increased its trade with china and forced japan to open itself up to the west.
the intensification of american interest in asia in the 1840s and 1850s reflected the desire of american policy makers to successfully compete with europe for new markets and coincided with the realization of the long standing desire among many americans to create a continental nation that could become a world power.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 1850 1861 from union to disunion bleeding kansas and dredscott v sandford the economy the panic of 1857 and the lincoln douglas debates the election of 1860 and the secession of the south chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 339 j 12 1 12 2 123 van buren did win some 10 percent of the popular vote in 1848 nevertheless abolitionist rhetoric and political muscle were frightening an increasingly defensive slaveholding south.
slaveholders and their political and intellectual allies responded to both the increased profit and the increased criticism.
in the past most slaveholders including all of those from the south who attended the constitutional convention had defended slavery as a necessary evil somehow they argued slavery had become an economic and social necessity that was at best unfortunate.
however after 1830 a new generation of slaveholders began to describe slavery as a positive good an institution that christianized heathen africans while providing them with food shelter and an ordered life.
these new defenders of slavery also contrasted it with work in northern factories and noted that slaves unlike factory workers were not fired when work got slow or they grew old but rather were provided for throughout their lives.
southern apologists also became increasingly angry with northern critics of slavery.
one example of the new proslavery ideology was the changing views of roger b taney who served as chief justice of the united states from 1836 to 1864 as a young attorney in maryland in 1819 taney defended a methodist preacher jacob gruber who had warned it was inevitable that slaves would rise up and kill your children their oppressors when maryland charged gruber with breaking the peace and inciting rebellion taney asserted grubers legal right to free speech and said that slavery was a blot on our national character and every real lover of freedom confidently hopes that it will be wiped away in 1857 however almost 40 years after the gruber trial and 20 years after taneys appointment to lead the supreme court he wrote in reference to the dred scott decision see chapter 13 the politics of separation 369 routes.
more and more of the growing population of the upper midwest came from new york and new england the most antislavery regions of the country.
in the 1850s the new republican party reflected the interests of this fast growing swath of the nation that stretched from new england into all of the ohio river valley and beyond to indiana illinois and iowa.
most people in the region tended to be opposed to slavery even if few were serious abolitionists.
in addition the republican party also spoke for their economic interests.
john sherman brother of civil war general william tecumseh sherman began his political career as a whig but by 1854 he was elected to congress as a republican from an ohio district on the shores of lake erie.
sherman said that while the republican party was born with the immediate purpose and aim of stopping the spread of slavery into the territories it also supported an increase in the tariff to strengthen american industries a homestead bill to encourage settlement of the new territories by people who wanted to build small family farms and who had no intention or money to bring slaves with them land grant colleges that would serve agriculture and industry and a transcontinental railroad that would link california to the east coast.
it was a good summary of what would become the republicans economic program in the 1860s and 1870s and it played well across the region.
however neither that same economic program nor the republicans opposition to the spread of slavery was seen as a benefit in the south especially the deep south.
the pre civil war south was not an economic backwater.
indeed it was the most prosperous part of the nation in the 1850s but the prosperity could not be separated from cotton growing and slavery.
as much as southern cotton served as the raw material for new england mills far more of it was shipped across the atlantic to the larger mills in england.
as much as the south was building railroads often with slave labor its rivers and extended coastline meant that water transport served the south better than the north.
the southern planter elite saw far less reason than most northerners to support federal spending on canals as the price of midwestern wheat and goods produced in pennsylvania and ohio fell rapidly in 1857 panic hit the nation s financial center of new york s wall street.
newsboys sold extra editions of newspapers with.
news brought by telegraph from around the country and the papers were snapped up by fearful investors.
370 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 or a federal tariff that protected northern industries.
southern leaning presidents from polk in the 1840s to pierce in the 1850s vetoed bills for internal improvement that most northerners regardless of political party badly wanted.
the panic of 1857 exacerbated the economic split between the regions.
it was much more severe in the north than in the south.
overproduction of northern wheat helped precipitate the panic.
when the crimean war which had pitted britain and france against russia ended in 1856 european farmers resumed full scale wheat production and prices for american wheat fell sharply.
but the english mills continued to need southern cotton and the price of cotton held steady.
moreover in the iron and coal producing areas of the country pennsylvania and ohio demand for steel fell people lost their jobs banks failed and panic ensued.
not surprisingly the republican platform of 1860 supported a tariff both to provide revenue for the government and to protect northern industry.
the platform solidified support for the republicans especially in pennsylvania and new jersey.
it also showed how deeply these states were cut off from the interests of the south where the tariff raised the cost of manufactured goods but did nothing to keep the price of cotton high.
panic of 1857 a banking crisis that caused a credit crunch in the north it was less severe in the south where high cotton prices spurred a quick recovery.
s the lincoln douglas debates define the political parties on june 16 1858 abraham lincoln spoke to the republican state convention in springfield illinois that had just nominated him as their candidate against stephen a douglas for the u s senate.
reflecting on the fugitive slave act the kansas nebraska crisis and the dred scott decision lincoln quoted the bible well known to all of the convention delegates and told them a house divided against itself cannot stand he continued i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half ree.
i do not expect the union to be dissolved i do not expect the house to fall but i do expect it will cease to be divided.
it will become all one thing or all the other.
either the opponents of slavery will arrest the further spread of it and place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction or its advocates will push it forward till it should become alike lawful in all the states old as well as new north as well as south.
with all that had happened since 1850 lincoln could see no other option.
he begged his fellow republicans to be sure the outcome was what they wanted.
ihe result is not doubtful he concluded.
we shall not fail if we stand firm we shall not fail some of the delegates who had just nominated lincoln thought the speech was too radical and would hurt lincoln in the fall elections but by 1858 he was prepared to stand firm on his ideas.
later that summer on august 21 1858 democratic senator stephan a douglas met lincoln in ottawa illinois for the first of seven debates they held across illinois in that election season.
douglas and lincoln were campaigning to be elected by the illinois legislature to represent the state in the u s senate.
they were also seeking to define the philosophy of their respective political parties.
hundreds attended their debates and newspapers in every part of the country took their words to thousands of americans.
the debates were long and closely argued.
each sometimes spoke for 2 hours at a time.
ihe speeches and the responses were not sound bites but carefully reasoned arguments that forced each leader to refine his views and the audience to follow them closely.
at the ottawa debate douglas spoke first.
he painted lincoln and the republican party black republicans douglas called them as allies of the most radical abolitionists.
he attacked lincolns a house divided against itself speech.
why can it not exist divided into free and slave states douglas asked.
washington jefferson franklin madison hamilton jay and the great men of that day made this government divided into free states and slave states and left each state perfectly free to do as it pleased on the subject of slavery.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 383 chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 399 new york draft riot a mostly irish immigrant protest against conscription in new york city that escalated into class and racial warfare.
irish catholics were far from the only people in the north to dislike free blacks and have little interest in freeing slaves.
as word of the emancipation proclamation spread in 1862 antiblack riots broke out in several cities including cincinnati where a strike by irish dockworkers was defeated with the use of black strikebreakers.
in brooklyn a mob attacked a tobacco factory where blacks were working.
as opposition grew in the north to the war itself especially expanding the war goals to include emancipation voluntary enlistment in the army declined.
in july 1863 the government began to enforce a military draft and the antiblack anti abolitionist antiwar fervor broke into violence.
in new york city on july 13 mobs attacked the draft offices and then turned on black neighborhoods republican newspapers and government offices.
blacks were beaten lynched and shot.
before it was over 105 people most of them black were killed.
ihe new york draft riot was the worst riot in american history up to that time.
only the arrival of federal troops on july 15 fresh from the battle of gettysburg ended the violence.
warfare in the north and west although the civil war was fought primarily in the south battles took place in distant areas of the nation.
a victory at glorieta pass near santa fe kept new mexico in union hands.
in missouri bands loyal to each side fought battles throughout the war that spilled over into neighboring states and often were fueled by earlier disputes.
william clarke quantrill who had been among the missouri border ruffians in the 1850s led attacks on union troops and sympathizers in missouri and in 1863 quantrill led a band of 450 southern sympathizers in a raid on lawrence kansas.
in retaliation for events in bleeding kansas quantrill ordered kill every male and burn every house the band followed orders killing 183 men and boys and burning 185 buildings in lawrence eluding capture by union troops.
quantrill was eventually killed by union soldiers but many of his followers including jesse and frank james became famous outlaws and continued to terrorize parts of the west long after the war was over.
confederate agents also tried to arrange attacks on the union from canada and planned an uprising in chicago during the democratic convention of 1864 but nothing came of that effort.
those involved in the new york draft riot of july 1863 attacked union draft officials republican newspapers and supporters and most of all african americans.
400 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 confederate and union leaders both sought allies among the tribes in indian territory.
cherokee creeks and seminoles were all divided between some who thought the confederacy would offer better terms than the united states had done and others who sided with the united states.
even without confederate influence some northern tribes were angry at the u s government over the loss of supplies that had been diverted to the war effort and over lincolns withdrawal of troops that were protecting the tribes from expanding white settlements as promised in various treaties.
in minnesota in august 1862 santee sioux under little crow killed hundreds of white settlers and u s troops but were soon defeated.
little crow along with 37 other santee leaders were executed in the largest public hanging in u s history.
many from the tribe moved to canada.
in early 1863 the shoshoni under chief bear hunter angry at the growing presence of white settlers and migrants in the tribes region attacked white settlements in the utah and idaho territories.
union troops retaliated massacring most of the shoshoni warriors along with women and children in an attack on january 29 1863 as indian white relationships degenerated during the war union troops were diverted from the war with the confederacy to fight indians.
indians suffered no matter which side they took and most whites looked the other way.
quick review how did political opposition popular opposition especially where violent and economic upheaval threaten the war effort in the north and south.
from gettysburg to appomattox and beyond 14 4 analyze the strategies and costs of fighting a long and terrible war.
as both its proponents and opponents understood the emancipation proclamation widened the purpose of the civil war.
military tactics also changed in 1863 early in the war generals hoped for a short and limited war.
mcclellan was far from the only general north or south who tried to avoid large losses of fighting troops.
by the time the war entered its third year however military and civilian leaders on both sides had concluded that only a much more sustained offensive would end the war.
lincoln relieved several cautious generals mcclellan hooker and meade before he promoted grant to overall command.
davis on the other hand promoted lee to be the top military commander early in the war.
in grant and lee each president had selected a general who was willing to fight a large scale offensive war and absorb large troop losses to win.
gettysburg and the war in pennsylvania and virginia in spring of 1863 hooker while he was still in command marched union troops into virginia and the two armies fought for 7 days at chancellorsville.
when stonewall jackson led his troops around the end of the union lines hooker lost his nerve and ordered a retreat.
chancellorsville was a major confederate victory though it came at the high cost of 10 000 confederate dead and wounded and 14 000 union losses.
in the battle jackson was accidentally shot by his own troops and died a week later.
lincoln relieved hooker of command and appointed general george meade to replace hooker.
meanwhile lee convinced davis that the time had come to invade the north cut washington dc off from the rest of the country and end the war.
june 1863 was the high point of confederate confidence and confederate advances.
as lee led the souths largest army through rural pennsylvania many in the north not just the unfortunate inhabitants of the towns through which the army marched grew fearful.
if the confederate army could control the pennsylvania countryside chapter 15 reconstruction 441 the memphis riot was but one of many in which whites enraged by new black rights attacked homes schools and churches belonging to newly free blacks and any whites who supported them.
democratic sentries on the tombigbee river ensured that black voters could not cross the river to get to polling places.
governor ames fled for his life before his term ended while democratic party teams warned politically active republicans black and white to leave the state before they were killed.
reconstruction ended in mississippi with the 1875 elections.
efforts to defend reconstruction the antiblack anti republican violence with which the south was slowly redeemed from reconstruction met resistance at every step sometimes very significant resistance.
in march of 1870 just as the fifteenth amendment was ratified congress also passed the first enforcement act making the denial of the right to vote because of race through force fraud bribery or intimidation a federal crime.
up to that time protecting voting rights had been completely a state issue but in 1870 congress had significant reasons not to trust that all the states would protect voting rights especially for newly enfranchised african americans.
two further enforcement acts gave the federal government the right to intervene when elections were unfair.
in addition the ku klux kian act of april 1871 made conspiracies to deprive citizens of the right to vote a punishable federal offense.
in june 1870 congress also created the u s department of justice with a specific mandate to enforce reconstruction.
up until then the u s attorney general had been a kind of in house lawyer and legal advisor to the president and cabinet but with no agency to lead.
all of these acts ct v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 represented a major expansion of federal power.
because of the new legislation crimes against individuals could for the first time be prosecuted by the federal government especially if state governments did not step in and do their duty president grant used this legislation forcefully.
in october 1871 the president proclaimed nine counties of south carolina to be in a condition of lawlessness and sent federal troops to restore order and arrest several hundred kian leaders some of whom ended up serving terms in federal prison.
in addition perhaps 2 000 kian members left the state.
seven hundred leaders of the kian were also arrested in mississippi and several hundred more in north carolina.
by the end of 1872 the kian as an organization had been destroyed.
ihe kian would rise again but not for many decades later.
nevertheless despite its absence violence against blacks and their white republican allies continued in the 1870s.
in the north people were growing more and more willing to let the south settle its own affairs.
when the democrats nominated newspaper editor horace greeley for president in 1872 they adopted a platform attacking republican corruption and calling for civil service reform while also promising a general amnesty for former confederates and an end to federal intervention in the south.
grant was easily renominated by the republicans and won the election handily but democrats gained power in congress.
as it turned out greeley died before the electoral votes were counted which caused some confusion but no one doubted that grant had won the election.
in his inaugural address at the beginning of his second term in march 1873 grant told the nation the effects of the late civil strife have been to free the slave and make him a citizen.
yet he is not possessed of the civil rights which citizenship should carry with it.
this is wrong and should be corrected.
to this correction i stand committed so far as executive influence can avail grant did his best but it was not enough.
in 1875 grant sent fellow civil war general philip sheridan to louisiana to investigate the political violence.
sheridan documented the killing of 2 141 blacks and the wounding of 2 115 more since the war had ended.
all of these crimes remained unpunished.
another civil war veteran former slave henry adams organized a committee of 500 blacks to look into affairs and see the true condition of our race in northern louisiana around the red river area alone the committee documented 683 murders including the following notations sam maybury whipped to death december 1865 henry west badly whipped november 1874 george a colored man killed by white men 1873 nancy brooks badly whipped by a white man 1873 in most cases the list included the name of the victim and the unpunished killer.
the reality that sheridan and adams documented would not change for a very long time.
a changing national mood and the end of reconstruction a number of factors led to the growing national weariness with federal intervention in the south.
southern reconstruction governments were regularly accused of corruption and some office holders black and white certainly enriched themselves.
pinchback of louisiana the only black governor in the reconstruction era admitted that he made considerable profit for himself in his political career.
south carolinas white republican governor robert k scott speculated in state bonds and north carolinas governor william holden was aware of damnable rascality in truth the reconstruction governments were probably no more corrupt than those that came before or after but the charges tarnished reconstruction.
the grant administration also faced one corruption scandal after another.
during grants first year in office jay gould and james fisk the nations leading bankers tried to corner the nations gold supply and thus control the economy with possible support from administration insiders including julia grant the presidents wife.
one after another cabinet officers resigned and were replaced after they were charged with taking bribes or other forms of corruption.
in 1870 former ohio governor jacob cox resigned as secretary of the interior to protest the administrations failure to implement civil service reform.
in perhaps the biggest scandal a congressional investigation uncovered the workings of the so called whiskey ring a group including elected officials government employees and whiskey makers who defrauded the u s treasury of excise taxes on whiskey.
over 200 distillers and revenue agents were indicted and grants personal secretary orville e babcock resigned.
grant directed the investigations to continue saying let no guilty man escape if it can be avoided and he ordered the attorney general not to grant immunity to any suspects but he was seriously tarnished by the widespread corruption.
the sheer size of the federal interventions in the south also undermined public support.
in late 1874 white league militants ousted the republican governor william p kellogg in louisiana and took over the legislative hall.
since louisiana was still under military supervision grant ordered general sheridan to restore order.
with 5 000 u s army troops sheridan restored kellogg to the governors office and forcibly removed democrats from the legislative hall.
the spectacle of u s army soldiers marching into a legislative chamber and removing people who claimed to have been elected created a huge backlash.
newspapers that had supported the union cause now compared the white league to the founding fathers defending their freedom from the tyranny of the british.
debates in congress reflected the change in northern public opinion and the increasing swagger of southern leaders.
joseph r hawley a connecticut republican who called himself a radical abolitionist nevertheless argued that the social and educational and moral reconstruction of the south could never come from any legislative halls the democrats in congress praised local self government while insisting that black and white republicans in the south should stop depending upon external aid in that context it was difficult for the federal administration or the u s army officers in the south to get support.
the u s supreme court was not sympathetic to reconstruction.
in the slaughterhouse cases of 1873 the court severely restricted the reach of the fourteenth amendment.
a group of butchers in new orleans had challenged the right of the louisiana legislature to grant a monopoly to one meatpacking company because they said it violated their fourteenth amendment rights to due process of law and citizenship rights.
but the court ruled that the fourteenth amendment did not include such rights making it much harder to bring other suits about state infringement of citizens rights.
in march 1876 the courts decision in united states v cruikshank struck a further blow to reconstruction.
bill cruikshank was a white participant in the part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 attack on colfax louisiana in 1873 he was indicted on federal charges for violating the civil rights of blacks who were killed in the attack.
but 3 years later the supreme court ruled that the charges were unconstitutional.
chief justice morrison r waite wrote that protecting the rights of individual citizens was a state not a federal duty.
cruikshank took away one of the federal governments most important enforcement powers the right to bring federal charges against those who attacked the basic rights of african americans.
finally in 1883 the court ruled that the civil rights act of 1875 was unconstitutional because the fourteenth amendment gave congress only the right to outlaw state government actions not discrimination by individuals which the court left to the states to deal with.
the legal foundation of reconstruction seemed to be crumbling or perhaps the court was simply following public opinion.
associate justice samuel miller a grant appointee wrote to a friend describing what many americans were also feeling i am losing interest in these matters as the country prepared for the 1876 presidential elections the loss of interest in reconstruction was evident.
the republicans nominated ohio governor rutherford b hayes who was on good terms with all factions in the party and especially popular with some because of his crackdown on nascent labor unions in ohio.
the platform said surprisingly little about reconstruction.
the democrats nominated new york governor samuel tilden who had made a fortune as legal counsel for some of the countrys richest bankers and railroads and gained fame for fighting corruption in government.
promising to continue the fight against corruption and foster prosperity and never mentioning reconstruction tilden was the strongest candidate the democrats had nominated in some time.
the campaign was intense especially in the south where violence and confusion reigned.
in november tilden outpolled hayes winning the popular vote 4 286 808 to 4 034 142 but it was the electoral votes that counted.
in three states florida louisiana and south carolina republican election boards discarded enough votes to declare hayes the winner which meant that he would also win the electoral count.
not surprisingly the democrats challenged these decisions.
the months between the election and the inauguration were as tense as any since the jefferson adams contest of 1800 some democrats vowed tilden or war congress created an electoral commission of 10 congressional representatives five from each party plus five supreme court justices to determine the outcome since the constitution gave no guidance beyond saying that the votes shall be counted in the senate.
after intense negotiations the electoral commission ruled 8 to 7 for hayes.
but the constitution specified that a president could not be declared elected until the senate actually counted the votes cast by the presidential electors from the various states.
democrats refused to convene the senate to count that vote thus making it impossible to resolve the crisis.
finally on february 26 a group of southern democrats met with ohio republicans and negotiated a compromise.
hayes who promised to treat the south with kind consideration agreed that if he were made president he would use his power to end reconstruction most of all by withdrawing the federal troops that were in the south protecting republican governments.
the southern democrats liked the offer and agreed to let the senate meet and count the votes including following the electoral commissions recommendation the votes of the republican electors from florida.
on inauguration day march 4 1877 hayes became president and moved quickly to fulfill his promises.
152 152 15 3 jim crow segregation segregation laws that became widespread in the south during the 1890s named for a minstrel show character portrayed satirically by white actors in blackface.
southern republicans who had supported hayes were outraged.
a former slave from south carolina commented angrily to think that hayes could go back on us when we had to wade through blood to help place him where he is now little could now be done however.
hayes did not immediately remove federal troops from the south but he made it clear that the troops who remained would not intervene in the souths internal matters as grant had ordered.
the changes in federal policy had been coming for some time but after march 1877 there was little reason to expect any federal support for reconstruction anywhere.
after 1877 the direction was clear.
john c calhoun an arkansas planter and grandson of the south carolina senator of the same name told congress that left to ourselves the white south could settle all questions about the regions political arrangements.
and they did.
blacks carpetbaggers and scalawags were slowly excluded from offices though some stayed on into the 1890s.
many were forced to leave the south altogether if they wanted long lives.
in addition blacks were excluded from voting altogether education budgets were slashed and the regulation of share cropping shifted further in favor of plantation owners.
after 1877 white rule in the south was assured.
the birth of the segregated south disenfranchisement and segregation did not happen overnight.
african americans were still being elected to office in the 1880s and 1890s.
george h white of north carolina who was described as the last of the negro congressmen bade a final farewell to the house of representatives in 1901 saying this mr chairman this is perhaps the negroes temporary farewell to the american congress.
but let me say phoenix like he will rise up someday and come again the absence of blacks from congress lasted for 28 years until oscar de priest was elected from chicago.
only after another civil rights movement many decades later did african americans reach the number of representatives in congress that they had in the 1870s.
various forms of what came to be called jim crow segregation developed at a rapid pace.
jim crow was a derogatory character in a minstrel show designed to denigrate blacks but his name has been applied to the whole era of rigid racial segregation that was the rule in many parts of the united states from the 1870s to the 1960s.
schools public facilities transportation and most every other aspect of life were segregated.
in addition to losing the vote blacks were marginalized economically so that sharecropping became virtually the only option for most.
a vicious campaign of lynching controlled blacks through fear and intimidation.
perhaps the capstone of this segregation was the u s supreme courts 1896 plessy v ferguson decision that separate by equal facilities were quite acceptable under the united states constitution.
by the time that decision was issued the high hopes of reconstruction were a dim memory and most americans white and black were living in a very different world.
153 quick review considering the events and trends of the later years of reconstruction or redemption as it was called who were the winners and who were the losers.
who was most responsible for what happened.
partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 conclusion during the 12 years after the civil war americans grappled with what the future held for newly freed slaves and how best to return to the union those states that had been in rebellion during the civil war.
the so called radical republicans in congress sought ways to protect the educational political and economic rights of the freedmen as former slaves male and female were called.
andrew johnson who became president upon lincolns death in april 1865 seemed indifferent to african american rights and soon alienated congressional radicals by restoring power to former rebels intent on limiting the freedoms of former slaves.
congressional republicans had their own plans for consolidating the union victory however and eventually the house of representatives impeached johnson for obstructing its plans to reconstruct the south.
although he was acquitted of high crimes and misdemeanors by the senate which allowed him to stay in office johnsons political career was over.
but congress passed a number of laws including the 1866 civil rights act and the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments to the constitution designed to protect black rights as citizens and voters.
across the south african americans and whites committed to reconstruction were elected to local and national office in larger numbers and began to reshape their states.
in 1868 ulysses s grant the republican nominee was elected president.
grant was committed to the reconstruction of the south in ways that would protect black rights especially black voting rights.
after the war african americans pursued full citizenship rights education and economic independence.
terrorized by white supremacists and lacking money and credit most african americans never achieved either true equality or independence.
at the same time white veterans of the confederate army were organizing to deny those rights not only legally through the democratic party but also illegally through the ku klux kian and other similar organizations.
as time passed and as public support for federal intervention in the affairs of the south eroded the promise of reconstructions early days evaporated.
by 1877 a new president rutherford b hayes began to bring reconstruction to an end assuring white rule in the south and the disenfranchisement and jim crow segregation of african americans for generations to come.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 451 medicine lodge creek treaty an 1867 treaty between the comanches and the u s army in which the comanches agreed to settle on a reservation.
from the mid 1860s into the early 1870s great annual trading gatherings took place where comancheros often backed by investors from the eastern united states traded salt hard bread flour sugar tobacco blankets and knives as well as the ever in demand latest issue revolvers and rifles in exchange for cattle that the comanches had recently acquired in texas.
the comanches also continued to trade in people mexican and indian captives especially women who were in great demand as brides in new mexico.
while these trading gatherings integrated the comanches into u s markets the stolen cattle and the continued trade in humans were sources of serious tensions between the comanches and the governments of the united states and the state of texas.
to restore order to the southwest and open up new land for white settlement u s peace commissioners met with more than 5 000 comanches as well as kiowas naishans cheyennes and arapahoes at medicine lodge creek in texas in october 1867 the u s delegation was led by william tecumseh sherman head of the army of the west a post he had also held during the civil war.
as a show of strength the army team included 500 well armed soldiers in dress uniform.
a newspaper reporter also at the meeting wrote that the comanches arrived with all their war paraphernalia their horses striped with war paint the riders bedecked with war bonnets and their faces painted red they also knew a thing or two about a show of strength.
after elaborate opening ceremonies and the exchanges of gifts including 6 000 pounds of coffee 10 000 pounds of bread and 3 000 pounds of tobacco from the government the u s representatives made it clear they had come to medicine lodge creek to end the comanche status as a sovereign people.
the government would help them become farmers on a reservation but would not tolerate a continuation of the old hunting trading and stealing ways.
sherman concluded you can no more stop this change than you can stop the sun or the moon.
you must submit and do the best you can the comanche chiefs were outraged by the governments demands.
several including paruasemena the leader of the penateka comanches expressed their anger in eloquent responses but in the end the chiefs signed a treaty although it was one that left much open to interpretation.
the medicine lodge creek treaty provided for a comanche reservation but also gave them the right to hunt on open plains below the arkansas river in indian territory oklahoma.
the government representatives assumed that the comanches would become farmers on the reservation while venturing out on occasional hunting trips to track the buffalo.
the comanches thought that the reservation would make a perfectly good winter campground and they were more than happy to receive government rations but they had no intention of becoming settled farmers.
along with hunting buffalo the comanches expected to continue hunting for texas cattle and trading them to new mexico buyers.
the radically different interpretations of the medicine lodge creek treaty between the comanches and the u s government became clear the next spring when several thousand comanches having spent the winter on the reservation collected their government payments and began raiding cattle and horses in texas new mexico and indian territory.
according to one report 6 255 horses and 11 395 cattle were lost to indian raids in texas between 1866 and 1873 after several unsuccessful peace efforts the united states gave up on negotiations and ordered the army to attack and force the comanches onto a permanent reservation.
from 1871 to 1873 the army and the comanches fought.
while the army attacked american buffalo hunters decimated the buffalo herds as industries found new uses for their hides.
the buffalo had been at the heart of comanche life not only as food but also as a way to understand the universe and their destruction undermined the comanche way of life.
during the fighting from 1871 to 1873 a new comanche leader emerged.
quanah parker was the son of a comanche chief and ann cynthia parker a white texan who had been captured by the comanches.
he became the fiercest opponent of compromise with whites.
then in 1874 isa tai a young comanche spiritual leader or shaman became prominent sharing a message heard many times among different indian tribes that if they would get rid of white ways and end their dealings with white 2 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 american voices paruasemena ten bears speech at medicine lodge creek treaty meeting 1867 16 1 paruasemena was one of the indian leaders to visit lincoln at the white house in 1863 four years later the 75 year old leader spoke to the u s peace commission at medicine lodge creek.
the passion and pathos of the speech touched many.
my people have never first drawn a bow or fired a gun against the whites there has been trouble between us my young men have danced the war dance.
but it was not begun by us.
it was you who sent out the first soldier two years ago i came upon this road following the buffalo that my wives and children might have their cheeks plump and their bodies warm.
but the soldiers fired on us the blue dressed soldiers and the utes came out from the night and for campfires they lit our lodges.
instead of hunting game they killed my braves and the warriors of the tribe cut short their hair for the dead.
so it was in texas.
they made sorrow in our camps and we went out like the buffalo bulls when the cows are attacked.
when we found them we killed them and their scalps hang in our lodges.
the comanches are not weak and blind like the pups of a dog when seven sleeps old.
they are strong and farsighted like grown horses.
we took their road and we went on it.
the white women cried and our women laughed.
but there are things which you have said to me which i do not like they were not sweet like sugar but bitter like gourds.
you have said that you want to put us on a reservation to build us houses and make us medicine lodges.
i do not want them.
i was born under the prairie where the wind blew free and there was nothing to break the light of the sun.
i was born where there were no enclosures and everything drew a free breath.
i want to die there and not within walls.
i know every stream and wood between the rio grande and the arkansas.
i have hunted and lived over that country.
i live like my fathers before me and like them i lived happily.
when i was in washington the great father told me that all the comanche land was ours and that no one should hinder us in living upon it.
so why do you ask us to leave the rivers and the sun and the wind and live in houses.
do not ask us to give up the buffalo for the sheep.
the young men have heard talk of this and it has made them sad and angry.
do not speak of it more.
i love to carry out the talk i get from the great father.
when i get goods and presents i and my people feel glad since it shows that he holds us in his eye.
if the texans had kept out of my country there might have been peace.
but that which you now say we must live in is too small.
the texans have taken away the places where the grass grew the thickest and the timber was best.
had we kept that we might have done the things you ask.
but it is too late.
the whites have the country which we loved and we wish only to wander on the prairie ti we die.
source taylor nathaniel g et al 1910 papers relating to talks and councils held with the indians in dakota and montana in the years 1866 1869 washington government printing office.
original in the national archives records of the indian division office of the secretary of the interior record group 48.
thinking critically 1 documentary analysis how did paruasemena characterize the conflict between his people and the united states government.
2 contextualization what light does this document shed on the differences between white and indian cultural values in the 1800s.
people the buffalo would return and life would be good again.
in a great camp meeting in june 1874 several hundred comanche warriors led by isa tai and parker joined with kiowas cheyennes and arapahoes to eliminate the white presence from the great plains.
the comanche attacked the buffalo hunters.
the army counterattacked.
on september 28 1874 u s forces attacked parker s main encampment and though nearly all of the indians fled the army destroyed the camp taking the horses and burning tents blankets and food.
faced with starvation the comanches began to surrender in small groups coming to the army post at fort sill in indian territory over the course of the winter where they gave up their horses and rifles and moved to the reservations assigned to them.
isa tai was discredited among the comanches from then on.
the winter of 1874 75 was the low point of comanche life but it was not the end.
quannah parker was only 27 when he surrendered to federal authorities.
over the next 4 decades he became principal chief of the comanches and led them from warfare to farming and ranching.
parker was a tough negotiator with the federal bureau of indian affairs for expanded land allotments.
he had eight wives built a fine 10 room house and before he died he had his own telephone owned a car traveled by train and went hunting with president theodore roosevelt.
the life parker and his people lived as he grew older was radically different from the life he had lived as a youth but he helped create the foundation for tribal survival in a new era.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 453 bosque redondo a reservation in central new mexico where the majority of the navajos and mescalero apaches were confined during the civil war.
the navajos and the apaches the navajos or dine as they prefer to be called were as warlike as the comanches and dominated large swaths of new mexico colorado and kansas.
the union army ended their rule and that of the mescalero apaches too.
in august 1862 union brigadier general james h carleton arrived in new mexico in command of california volunteers but when he learned that confederates in the region had already been defeated he ordered his troops to attack the apaches and navajos instead.
in early 1863 the army invaded apache lands and soon confined some 400 apaches at a new reservation at bosque redondo in central new mexico.
carleton then appointed kit carson to lead the attack on the much larger navajo tribe of some 10 000 people.
carson told the navajos go to bosque redondo or we will pursue and destroy you.
we will not make peace with you on any other terms carson kept his word marching into canyon de chelly the sacred navajo heartland attacking navajo encampments as well as destroying orchards crops and livestock.
by the spring of 1864 some 6 000 navajos had surrendered rather than die of starvation.
u s troops pursued other resisters and eventually 8 000 navajos were forced on the long walk 300 miles south to a strange way of life at bosque redondo.
the bosque redondo reservation was a complete failure.
the mescalero apaches considered the navajos to be their inveterate enemies and the two tribes had no interest in cooperating.
the arid land of mid new mexico could not support thousands of families even if they did turn to farming as the government asked them to do.
in addition the comanches saw the confined reservation as an opportunity to attack old enemies.
after the civil war a congressional peace commission visited bosque redondo and realized that the government had created a disaster.
on june 1 1868 they signed a new treaty with the navajos that allowed them to return to a reservation in their own homelands.
a new mescalero apaches reservation in central new mexico was established by executive order in 1873 and expanded in 1883 navajo leaders negotiated several expansions of their reservation between 1868 and 1886 so it covered a large part of new mexico and arizona up to the four corners area with colorado and utah.
they also managed to avoid the division of the reservation into individual allotments that destroyed tribal ways for other tribes.
with the shared experience of suffering at bosque redondo andthe substantial new lands the navajo tribe had become the navajo nation.
they kept their promise to stop raiding and recreated much of their old ways living on lands they considered sacred and making a living by herding sheep goats and horses.
the tribe grew from 10 000 in 1864 to 30 000 in 1900 an unusual experience for american indians.
navajos under guard at bosque redondo ca.
454 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 the modocs the nez perce and the pacific coast tribes well before the civil war the rapid influx of white settlers who came to california with the gold rush was a catastrophe for the many small tribes that dotted the state.
the california tribes had already been weakened by decades of spanish and mexican efforts to turn them into workers on the missions and the large rancheros of the state.
the new american presence only made things worse.
federal commissioners negotiated treaties with 139 tribes to create small reservations mostly in northern california but congress did not ratify the treaties and white settlers ignored them.
in spite of the efforts of federal indian agents to create reasonable safeguards for the indians of california settlers and miners ignored restrictions on indian land if they thought they could find gold or plant a settlement.
california indians were starved and all too often simply murdered.
in 1845 before the united states took control of california there were some 150 000 indians in california down from probably 300 000 when the spanish missionaries first arrived just a decade after california became a state only 25 000 remained.
in the fall of 1872 kintpuash a leader of the modoc tribe in southern oregon and northern california led his people out of a reservation the modocs had shared with the klamaths and snakes since signing a treaty in 1864 kintpuash did not like reservation life and the modocs returned to their homelands on lost river in california.
the u s army followed and attacked them but the modocs knew the territory especially the great black lava fields that provided hiding to those who had grown up among them.
the modocs resisted killing soldiers settlers and government negotiators.
orders came from washington that the name of modoc should cease because they had violated their treaty and killed federal negotiators.
eventually the army won.
surviving modocs were relocated in indian territory far from their homeland.
the nez perce the tribe without whom lewis and clark would have perished had long lived in oregon and idaho but they were a deeply divided tribe.
one group known as the progressives signed a treaty in 1855 agreeing to live on a large reservation in idaho.
another group the so called nonprogressives refused.
they lived independently in an area encompassing the salmon river in idaho and the snake river in oregon.
for some time the nonprogressive nez perce were allowed to live in peace but as white settlement grew in the snake rivers fertile wallowa valley pressure came to force them and their leader chief joseph or hin mah too yah lat kekt onto the idaho reservation.
they resisted but by 1877 the nez perce knew they could no longer live unmolested in the wallowa valley.
they began a long retreat to preserve their independence a retreat that turned into a well chronicled but tragic journey.
initially the nez perce moved east across the bitterroot mountains into montana hoping to find sanctuary with the crow or sioux.
then they turned north hoping to cross into canada.
all along the way the u s army pursued them.
finally when they were less than 40 miles from canada the army caught up.
a few escaped across the border but the majority led by chief joseph surrendered.
the chief said i am tired of fighting.
our chiefs are killed it is cold and we have no blankets.
the little children are freezing to death my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will fight no more forever most of those who had made the long journey with chief joseph ended up on a reservation in indian territory although some eventually including chief joseph were allowed to return to the pacific northwest but never to their ancestral lands see map 16 1.
the lakota sioux from fort laramie to the little big horn and wounded knee the sioux by far the largest group of tribes in the northern great plains also fought fierce battles with the u s army.
teton and santee sioux had been embroiled with u s settlers and army troops through the 1860s but the largest battles of the 1870s were with the powerful lakota sioux.
in december 1866 the lakota attacked and killed u s troops.
rather than risk further fighting the government sought peace with the lakota as well as their 4w kj chief joseph of the nez perce who led the epic journey of his people.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 457 16 1 artist frederick remington depicted the 1890 ghost dance which represented a hope for a new age.
homestead act law passed by congress in 1862 providing 160 acres of land free to anyone who would live on the plot and farm it for 5 years.
apart from one another.
no reservations were established.
rather in exchange for gifts the army asked the tribes to avoid conflict with one another with military forts and with the transit routes for the mail and for settlers.
asking for anything more was beyond the limits of what the 270 soldiers at fort laramie could reasonably ask in a meeting attended by perhaps 10 000 american indians including the sioux arapaho cheyenne assinboins shoshones arikaras hidatsas mandans and crows.
after the civil war the pressure for space for white settlement greatly intensified.
at the same time u s army units that had been fighting the civil war were now available for service in the west.
among these units were segregated african american units that were sent to the west and came to be known as buffalo soldiers because their white commanders thought their hair was like that of the buffalo.
even though most military units were demobilized after the war there were more than sufficient numbers of soldiers white and black remaining in the army to provide a formidable fighting force in the west.
in 1862 a republican congress had passed and president lincoln had signed the homestead act fulfilling a major republican campaign promise to make more federal land available for white settlement.
the act provided 160 acres of federal land to a family that would settle and maintain the land for 5 years.
the act however did not specify where the land would come from.
much of the initial homestead settlements were in minnesota iowa nebraska and kansas all on lands that had been prime buffalo hunting locations for various tribes.
unlike before the civil war when most whites had moved across the great plains and kept going under the protection of u s army after the civil war whites were coming to the plains to stay and larger army forces were coming with them.
in addition to farming the discovery of mineral wealth in places like the black hills of the dakotas brought more whites and further racial conflict.
immediately after the war the same congress that was taking control of reconstruction also created its own indian peace policy and assigned the army to implement it.
the battles with the lakota sioux led those in congress to seek a peaceful way of proceeding so they created the indian peace commission to negotiate treaties with the plains tribes.
the congressional commission developed the idea of tribal reserves or reservations large tracts of land that would they hoped be set aside for the indians protecting the tribes from encroaching white civilization while ensuring their eventual assimilation into white culture.
it was same policy that had been used in negotiating with tribes that originally lived east of the mississippi but with one big difference.
the majority of eastern tribes had been forced onto reservations in the west specifically in oklahoma or indian territory.
there was no place further west to push the western 458 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 16 1 american voices charles w allen report from wounded knee 1890 charles w alien a white newspaper editor who had spent most of his life among the sioux and was friendly with them reported the event he saw while visiting his wife s family at the pine ridge reservation on december 29 1890 the first part of this report is taken from allen s autobiography published in 1938 the second part is from a newspaper article he wrote for the chadron democrat three days after the events took place.
presently all the indian men began coming in bunches of from two to a dozen or more stringing leisurely along then taking their seats in a circle on the grass before the commander and his staff then general forsyth addressed in a firm but conciliatory manner h e told them that for the time being they were prisoners and as such they were to give up their arms peaceably he then told them to go back to their lodges bring all their firearms and turn them over to him.
the indians departed for their camp in a reluctant obviously sulky mood after what seemed an unreasonable length of time the indians came strolling back pretty much as they had come to the first meeting except that they seemed purposely to adopt a more independent swagger in approaching the council field.
many of them were painted hideously and conspicuously grim of visage quite a number of their wives had accompanied the braves to this meeting robed in long blankets reaching almost to the ground and each took a position immediately behind her husband the women who stood close behind their men concealed under each blanket a repeating rifle and well filled cartridge belt chief big foot had been escorted from his tent and urged his followers to maintain peace and comply with the general s orders i also observed a hotchkiss gun that had been placed in commanding position on a small knoll at the north edge of the camp not far from the site on which the catholic church now commemorates the tragedy gen forsyth ordered a detail of dismounted troops under capt.
wallace to close in and surround them at a distance of about twenty paces during this procedure which was very interesting an indian ghost dance master arrayed in full paraphernalia began to make medicine holding his hands up to the sun and calling upon the messiah to visit his wrath upon the soldiers.
he would take up hands full of dirt and scatter it then hold up his hands as if momentarily expecting the earth to open and swallow up the troops.
it was evident that he was getting the indians worked up and he finally told them to be brave and that bullets would not hit them if the soldiers did shoot at them.
the commander was told of what he was saying and he ordered him to sit down which order he finally complied with after he had walked clear around the circle as though he owned the earth they had proceeded to disarm but some eight or ten of these when the brave who had been inciting them jumped up and said something and fired at the soldier who was standing guard over the arms that had been secured.
the first gun had no sooner been fired than it was followed by hundreds of others and the battle was on.
the fighting continued for about a half hour and then was continued in skirmish for another hour.
source charles w allen from fort laramie to wounded knee in the west that was edited with an introduction by richard e jensen originally published 1938 republished lincoln university of nebraska press 1997 pp.
192 202 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis as allen told the story who was responsible for the fighting at wounded knee.
2 historical interpretation in what ways did wounded knee mark the end of an era in american history.
tribes so the government tried to move them onto as limited an amount of land as possible.
at the same time of course confining the tribes on reservations would ensure that most of the land of the west could be opened for white development.
the plan was not a great success.
tribes like the sioux nez perce and comanches resented the confinement of reservation life and often wandered far beyond their assigned bounds.
when ulysses s grant became president in 1869 he initiated a new indian peace policy that became known as grants peace policy.
grants thinking was shaped by the terrible bloodshed he had seen in the civil war and by his identification with the emancipation of slaves.
he wanted to end the corruption that he saw in the indian bureau and he wanted to treat the indians with dignity.
his goal was peace.
at the same time grant wanted room for white settlement and was certainly not planning to keep whites out of the vast tracts of western land that the indians used for hunting.
in his first annual message to congress in december 1869 grant said there was no turning back the clock that the past cannot be undone and the question must be met as we now find it meeting the question he believed meant assimilating indians grant s peace policy a new effort by president grant to end the plains indian wars by creating a series of reservations on which tribes could maintain their traditional ways.
chapter 10.
after the region became part of the united states in 1848 the federal government initially left the mormons on their own and brigham young served as territorial governor as well as spiritual leader.
however in the late 1850s president buchanan forced young out of office and appointed a non mormon governor.
the issue for buchanan was the mormon commitment to plural marriage.
mormon men but not mormon women were encouraged to take more than one spouse.
the majority of mormon men had only one wife but a significant number had two and brigham young himself had 27 wives and 56 children.
as with more traditional families some extended mormon families succeeded quite well while others were torn.
when questioned the majority of mormon women including women whose husbands had other wives defended their arrangement.
plural marriage horrified most people in the rest of the united states however.
while presidents lincoln and johnson had been too preoccupied with war and reconstruction to worry much about the mormons presidents grant hayes garfield and arthur all promised to deal with the mormon question as early as 1862 congress passed the morrill anti bigamy act making it a federal crime to take multiple wives but utah was far away and mormon juries were not about to convict anyone accused of that crime.
in spite of all of the controversy and hostility generated by the issue of plural marriage the mormon community prospered.
by the 1860s there were enough people living in utah territory to qualify for statehood.
by 1870 the population stood at 87 000 unlike other parts of the west where white men far outnumbered white women utah had a balanced gender ratio.
women and men prospered in a community of strict morality and hard work including work for women outside of the household.
women ran their own industries cooperative stores as well as relief societies and charities.
the rest of the united states remained dissatisfied with utahs practices however and eventually the mormon leadership decided that statehood was more important than maintaining plural marriage.
in 1890 the mormon church announced the end of plural marriage and although there were those who continued to practice it the majority of members went along with the decision.
with that key issue resolved utah 16 1 io 163 chapter objective understand how the united states became an industrial giant at what cost and with what impact on its diverse peoples and cultures.
learning objectives technology changes the nation explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact.
corporations and monopolies analyze the role of the new giant corporations in american life.
lives of the middle class in the gilded age analyze daily life popular ideas and political direction for the middle class during the gilded age.
immigration explain the reasons immigrants came to the united states in such large numbers during the gilded age and what their experience was.
chanter 17 the gilded aqe building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order 17 1 17 j 173 17 4 significant dates 1859 edwin drake discovers oil in titusville pennsylvania 1870 standard oil company launched by john d rockefeller and henry m flagler 1871 thomas edison demonstrates universal stock printer treaty of washington settles u s canadian border and claims between united states and britain 1873 panic of 1873 economic panic and depression senate rejects united states acquisition of dominican republic 1875 dwight l moody launches religious revivals 1876 alexander graham bell patents the telephone thomas edison establishes research laboratory in menlo park new jersey president grant opens philadelphia centennial exhibition 1877 cornelius vanderbilt richest man in america dies in new york city 1878 edison demonstrates new phonograph 1879 edison s first successful incandescent lamp burns for 16 hours on november 17 1882 edison illuminating company lights southern manhattan chinese exclusion act 1886 1888 george westinghouse and nikola tesla discover alternating current to transmit electricity 1887 first electronic trolley cars built 1890 greatly increased immigration from eastern europe and asia begins 1892 ellis island immigration station opens in new york harbor 1893 panic of 1893 major u s depression 1896 edison demonstrates first moving pictures u s steel becomes the largest corporation in history 1902 victor talking machine company begins mass producing recording disks 1903 wright brothers make first flight at kitty hawk north carolina 1913 henry ford s moving assembly line begins operation at highland park michigan an appreciative audience that included the emperor of brazil.
it was a fitting opening to an era in which business manufacturing and technology would dominate the nations political economic and cultural life bringing prosperity and power that was previously unimagined.
it would also hring clashes between those who benefited and those who did not which frightened many and nearly tore the nation apart.
this chapter explores how the nation came to be that giant at what cost to its people and the world and with what results in the culture or rather the many different cultures of the country.
technology changes the nation 17 1 explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact.
alexander graham bell saw himself as a teacher more than an inventor.
while teaching deaf students at boston university bell sought new ways to help deaf people hear.
in july 1874 he discovered that if a person were to speak into a vibrating set of reeds it created a fluctuating current that could at the other end of an electronic wire be turned back into the same sound through another set of tuned reeds.
he patented his new invention in march 1876 and demonstrated it first by calling his assistant thomas watson from the next room.
later he showed it at the massachusetts institute of technology and then at the worlds fair.
while bell returned to teaching others organized the bell telephone company.
by 1880 there were 30 000 telephone subscribers.
by 1900 the number had grown to 1 3 million and by 1920 to 13 million.
in four decades bells experiment had become a necessity of modern life.
for most americans the telephone replaced the telegraph developed by samuel f b morse from earlier inventions in 1835 by the 1840s telegraphs were relaying messages and news in morse code consisting of dot and dash signals over miles of telegraph wires 215 000 miles of wires by 1900 but the telephone quickly made the telegraph outdated.
before bell gained fame for his telephone thomas edison was already on his way to being known as the greatest inventor of the era.
edison was born in milan ohio in 1847 the same year as bell.
at 16 with little formal schooling he became a telegraph transmitter.
several people in the telegraph industry were trying to design what they called a diplex a way to send two messages one in each direction on the same telegraph wire at the same time.
in 1873 edison produced both a diplex and a quadruplex that could send two messages simultaneously each way on a single wire greatly increasing the value of every telegraph line in the nation and securing edisons fame and fortune.
while he was toying with that invention edison had also invented the edison universal stock printer in 1871 a greatly improved version of the stock ticker tape machine.
in 1876 edison established an independent research laboratory at menlo park new jersey.
the many employees there were made to understand that they worked only at edisons direction and he got all of the credit.
eventually he had 1 000 patents to his name thus becoming the most productive american inventor of all time.
he tinkered with ways to record a human voice and music.
on april 18 1878 he demonstrated his new phonograph at the national academy of sciences in washington dc and later that night at a midnight show at the white house.
edisons most important invention was the electric light bulb.
in the 1870s large meeting halls were lit by arc lamps and gas lights were popular in many places.
the rest of the nation city as well as country depended on kerosene lamps or candles when the sun went down.
the electric light bulb changed things across the country.
given edisons fame he was able to assemble a consortium of financiers led by j pierpont morgan to support his research.
after toying with different options the edison labs created a bulb that lit a room for 16 hours on november 17 1879 almost immediately everyone wanted electric lights and edison wanted everyone to have power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 ki 80 part vi becoming an industrial world them.
he made london paris and new york the priority cities because he knew that what happened in those places would quickly be reported elsewhere.
within 2 years all three cities had buildings lit by electric lights.
on september 4 1882 edison pulled the switch that lit a number of buildings in southern manhattan including the house of morgan the new york stock exchange and the headquarters of the new york times and new york herald.
the inventions just kept coming.
george westinghouse and nikola tesla found that alternating current was a much more efficient way to transmit electricity than the direct current that edison used.
edison was initially skeptical but by the 1890s alternating current produced at generating plants from new york to california was powering much of the nation.
frank j sprague introduced the first electric streetcars in richmond virginia in 1888 and these cars which were cheaper and cleaner and safer than horse drawn or steam cars caught on quickly.
in 1892 the general edison electric company merged with a rival to create general electric the company that not only produced light bulbs but also all things electric.
by 1896 using film developed by george eastman of rochester new york edison moved from small scale to large screen moving pictures and in 1902 the victor talking machine company began mass producing recording disks and players.
the country was radically different because of edisons work and that of other prolific inventors who gave the country elevators invented by elisha g otis machine tools from pratt and whitney steam boilers from babcock and wilcox newspaper linotype compositors and typewriters.
a total of 440 000 patents issued between 1860 and 1890 transformed modern life.
in the 1890s a number of independent manufacturers began experimenting with gasoline powered vehicles putting a gasoline engine on bicycles or carriages which led to automobiles.
although by 1899 only 2 500 automobiles were produced per year many were predicting that the new vehicles would replace horse drawn carriages.
they were right.
by 1916 1 million automobiles were produced in the united states which created massive change as work with horses declined and a new set of jobs in the automobile industry began as more and more americans experienced the freedom that an automobile gave them.
the key to the vastly expanded production of automobiles was the vehicle itself which was relatively simple given other inventions that existed.
rather expanded production was possible only after inventing a way to produce large numbers of cars at low cost.
the genius who revolutionized the production of automobiles was henry ford.
ford a former machinist built his first automobile in 1896 after many others had done so but it was his invention of the assembly line that made possible the mass production of cars at reasonable costs.
ford took the idea of interchangeable parts first developed for guns by eli whitney and applied it to cars.
then he created a process whereby those parts could be assembled in a routinized fashion that greatly speeded production thus lowering cost even if it made the role of most workers extremely boring.
ford opened a plant for the production of the model t ford in highland park michigan in 1910 and added a moving assembly line in 1913 each worker was assigned one small task to be repeated over and over.
as ford described it every piece of work in the shop moves.
there is no lifting or trucking of anything other than materials worker after worker did his assigned task over and over again.
at the end of the process a fully assembled model t emerged from the assembly line.
ford paid his workers well.
they found the work mind numbing but valued the pay high enough that they too could afford their own model t he transformed an industry bringing the cost of an automobile to within the reach of many americans and spawning a whole set of new industries from highway construction to automobile repairs.
the success of the automobile dramatically expanded the nation s need for oil now refined into gasoline to power the rapidly growing numbers of vehicles see table 17 1.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social order work going on from early morning to late evening.
in spite or perhaps because of the harsh living and working conditions new york s jewish community grew strong.
russian jews had no intention of returning to russia where pogroms and poverty reigned.
they established synagogues foreign language newspapers provided news and some 300 hebrew schools maintained their language and culture.
italian immigrants also created their own neighborhoods.
in chicago taylor street became the heart of little italy.
in milwaukee the third ward on the east side was the heart of the italian community where some 20 italian grocery stores existed on brady street alone.
in boston the north end and east boston housed italian communities.
and in new york many italian immigrants like russian jewish immigrants moved to the lower east side of manhattan.
thinking historically the pull of nostalgia the push to continue in 1906 the jewish daily forward a yiddish language newspaper serving jewish immigrants began carrying an advice column in which the editor abraham cahan responded to letters.
one writer a recent immigrant from russia said oh my poor dear parents how saddened they were at my leaving.
the leave taking their seeing me on my way was like a silent funeral i came to america and became a painter.
my great love for hebrew for russian all my other knowledge was smeared with paint.
during the year that i have been here i have had some good periods but i am not happy because i have no interest in anything.
my homesickness and loneliness darken my life i want to run back and i beg you to be my counsel as to how to act.
the editor was blunt noting that almost all immigrants yearn deeply for dear ones and home at first but that the young man must not consider going home but try to take root here.
he should try to overcome all these emotions and strive to make something of himself so that in time he will be able to bring his parents here.
that same year hamilton holt editor of the new york independent published the life stories of undistinguished americans as told by themselves 27 accounts of the immigrant experience including several by those who considered a return to their homeland but who had decided against it.
an italian immigrant who shined shoes in new york city who wrote we had said that when we saved 1 000 each we would go back to italy and buy a farm but now that the time is coming we are so busy and making so much money that we think we will stay.
a swedish immigrant who prospered as a farmer in minnesota wrote father and mother kept writing to the children in america that now they had made their fortunes they should come home and live but they put it off am going over to sweden soon to keep christmas there but will come back again and maybe bring other people with us.
some swedes go to the old country every christmas.
a modern researcher erika lee found that her great great great grandfather moy dong kee had come to california in 1854 before the chinese exclusion act limited chinese mobility.
though he stayed in the united states for 52 years he was able to make at least three trips to visit his family who remained in china.
he finally retired to china in 1906 at the age of 72 some immigrants indeed traveled back and forth often.
others made their fortunes in america and then returned to their homelands.
perhaps a quarter or more of all italian immigrants eventually returned to italy an unusually high percentage among immigrant communities but a little money earned in america could translate into land ownership in italy.
in other immigrant communities especially among russian jews facing pogroms and conscription into the czarist army very few ever returned.
the pull of nostalgia and the usually stronger push to continue to make a life in their new adopted home was part of the life of almost every immigrant.
source isaac metzker a bintel brief sixty years of letters from the lower east side to the jewish daily forward new york doubleday 1971 pp.
117 118 cited in robert d marcus et al america firsthand volume two readings from reconstruction to the present boston bedford st.
martins 2004 pp.
121 122 thinking critically 1 crafting an argument what do the reasons immigrants gave for wanting to leave or wanting to stay tel you about their reasons for immigrating in the first place.
2 contextualization why might some immigrants have found it easier than others to return to their home country.
why was such a trip almost impossible for others.
81 04 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 since most italian immigrants came from the rural poverty of southern italy they had few marketable skills when they got to the united states.
like russian jews some became pushcart owners selling fruits and vegetables.
others opened restaurants.
more than a few became the laborers who built the cities where they lived new york chicago milwaukee and boston all have water and sewer lines dug by italian laborers.
gender roles were perhaps more rigidly defined in the italian immigrant communities than elsewhere.
italian families tried every way they could to encourage married women to stay at home and to depend on the men to earn a living for the family.
for the 900 000 french canadians who emigrated to the united states between 1840 and 1930 the move south meant escape from rural poverty and a chance for a new start especially in the mills of new england.
more than most immigrant groups those coming from quebec tended to bring their priests nearly all french canadians were catholic doctors lawyers and grocers with them all of whom were sure that life might be better or at least marginally more prosperous in rapidly industrializing new york and new england than in the isolated farms of quebec.
like the italians and the french canadians mexican immigrants often moved back and forth between the united states and home communities but in their case that move meant crossing only a river rather than an ocean.
nevertheless more and more immigrants from mexico eventually made permanent homes in the united states creating the barrios which were often extensions of mexican communities that had long stretched along the border from texas to california.
mexican american communities like those of european immigrants often reflected quite different home regions.
one immigrant remembered we came to know families from chihuahua sonora jalisco and durango.
some had come to the united states even before the revolution living in texas before migrating to california the barrio was also home in other ways.
immigrants from mexico could find familiar food including tamales frijoles tortillas and menudo.
they could see traditional clothing enjoy traditional holidays and festivals and feel much less like strangers in someone elses land.
for all catholic immigrants the catholic church was an essential link with their faith and their past.
at the end of the u s civil war there were 42 dioceses and 3 000 catholic churches in the united states.
by 1900 there were 70 dioceses and 10 000 churches many serving specific ethnic communities.
the italian parish the polish parish the mexican parish and the german parish might be in very close proximity but they served their own group often offering parochial schools and classes in a home language that was important to parents coping with children growing up in an english speaking society.
those who entered the united states from asia found different kinds of work in their own ethnic communities.
chinese immigrants such as lee chew found work when they could when i got to san francisco a man got me work as a house servant in an american family and my start was the same as that of almost all the chinese in this country.
the chinese laundryman does not learn his trade in china there are no laundries in china all chinese laundrymen here were taught in the first place by american women just as i was taught.
for the japanese in hawaii an independent country until 1898 housing and work were found on the sugar plantations which were new to them.
hawaiian companies encouraged whole families to immigrate believing that dependable married men made better workers though both women and men were given jobs in the fields.
japanese communities were able to establish themselves with their own traditions religious practices including buddhist temples japanese language schools for chil dren and festivals including the emperor s birthday when work ceased in spite of the frustration of the plantation owners.
in time japanese portuguese chinese and chapters in four states.
ihe wheel became a tough organization that excluded any but working farmers.
the organization used its size to negotiate price reductions with manufacturers of farm implements and got up to 50 percent reductions on the prices of wagons buggies reapers and mowers while organizing its own warehouses to hold crops until prices met expectations.
a number of similar organizations coordinated similar efforts but the largest by far was the farmers alliance which began as the texas alliance in lampasas county texas in the 1870s by ranchers who were dealing with issues of communal and private grazing lands.
after charles w macune was elected president of the texas organization in 1886 the alliance grew rapidly.
macune had trained as a pharmacist and a physician before he settled in milam county texas in 1879 where he practiced medicine while farming on the side.
but his rural medical practice gave him a sense of the problems the ranchers and the farmers faced particularly the isolation and the lack of economic clout.
518 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 under macune s leadership the farmers alliance became a business organization organizing the farmers including ranchers of texas and eventually the nation to use the best of corporate practices to fight with the organizations they saw oppressing them.
the alliance sought to get a better financial deal for farmers through the negotiating power of a large organization demanding lower prices for the things they bought and higher prices for the products they sold.
ihe texas farmers alliance grew from 38 000 members in 1886 to 225 000 members in 1889 almost half of all of the eligible farmers in texas.
in 1887 the alliance merged with the arkansas based agricultural wheel and continued to grow with local units stretching from north carolina to california and from texas to the dakotas.
in 1890 macune moved to a national headquarters in washington dc and the alliance had over 1 million members.
under macunes leadership the farmers alliance steered clear of direct political involvement.
the goal of the alliance was simple farmers would combine their power to equal the power of other businesses.
they were not opposed to monopolies they wanted to be one.
the washington office published the national economist mailed to farmers across the country while sponsoring lecturers organizers and corresponding secretaries to spread alliance ideas.
the organization sought to overcome rural isolation and lack of educational opportunities through lending libraries schools conferences and social occasions for farm families.
most of all the alliance sought to open a new era of prosperity for farmers through tough negotiations on their behalf.
macune believed that whites and blacks had different economic interests and insisted that the farmers alliance should include only white farmers.
when the agricultural wheel joined the alliance it dropped its black members.
in response to macunes segregationist policy african american farmers created their own colored farmers national alliance and cooperative union that had 1 2 million members by 1890 given the political and social disenfranchisement that black farmers faced they organized primarily through black churches.
in many communities the black baptist church and the colored farmers alliance had virtually the same membership.
lacking the resources to publish their own materials or hire lecturers or organizers the black organization never had the clout of the white alliance even though it had more members.
while the farmers alliance was racially segregated it welcomed women as members and leaders as did the colored farmers alliance.
fully a quarter of the members of the colored farmers alliance were women.
in contrast to the grange which had special positions for women the farmers alliance opened all positions to both women and men.
annie l diggs of kansas was one of the senior editors of the national reform press association the white alliances publishing house.
mary e lease of kansas was the most famous of the alliances many speakers while marion todd of illinois was considered to be the most effective theoretician for the movement.
bettie munn gay who had turned a highly mortgaged texas farm into a successful cotton growing operation became one of the leaders in the texas alliance.
women and men within the alliance debated womens suffrage and occasionally argued over the prohibition of alcohol.
but they were united in a commitment to improve the life of farm families economically as well as intellectually and culturally ending the terrible isolation that farm families experienced.
defining a national agenda while macune focused the farmers alliance on cooperative economic efforts and stayed out of electoral politics other leaders wanted more direct political involvement.
in california the president of the state farmers alliance marion cannon became convinced after long battles with the southern pacific railroad that only public ownership of the railroads would allow farmers to get a fair deal.
alliance lecturer marion todd published railways of europe and america in 1893 in which she argued for i8j io colored farmers national alliance and cooperative union an organization of southern black farmers formed in texas in 1886 in response to the southern farmers alliance which did not accept black people as members.
it helped launch the populist party.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 53 violence during a coal strike in ludlow colorado in 1914 in which at least 30 people including 11 children were killed.
rather than only company stores and doctors and enforcement of colorado mining laws.
mother jones told the miners dont be afraid boys.
fear is the greatest curse we have within a week 80 to 90 percent of the miners were on strike.
ihe strike lasted 14 months.
it was long and bloody.
the coal companies evicted the striking miners from their company owned housing and the union arranged tent camps.
violence erupted between the coal companys guards and strikers and by the end of the first month more than 20 people had been killed.
worse violence followed.
on april 20 1914 militia troops recruited by the coal company took up positions around the miners camp at ludlow colorado and the nervous inhabitants then took up their own positions.
no one knew who fired the first shot but one shot quickly led to several hours of murderous fighting.
tents burst into flame possibly from a bullet striking something explosive.
over 30 people were killed including several women and 11 children found under one of the tents where they had huddled for safety.
the ludlow massacre became a rallying cry for labor and the loss of life especially of children permanently tarnished and troubled the rockefeller family.
president woodrow wilson sent u s army troops to restore order and the united mine workers union declared that ending the strike was doing the best thing possible for the men on strike who have suffered so long in order that justice might be done further justice would take much longer.
183 quick review was the violence that accompanied many strikes inevitable.
why or why not.
conclusion the rapid industrialization of the united states after the civil war generated wealth and progress for some americans and serious new problems for others.
very quickly the disparities that emerged created new and violent tensions in the united states.
in the south the end of reconstruction set the region on a path that would continue to deny civil rights and economic opportunities to african americans for many decades to come.
combined with the countrys growing indifference to the original goals of reconstruction the new south successfully limited the advancement of african americans through legal exclusions.
even as the south was opening up to the world with the introduction of new railroad lines and the diversification of its economy power and prosperity came only to some.
those who were excluded fought back particularly african americans who challenged segregation violence and their economic exclusion.
farmers white and black also challenged their economic exclusion from the prosperity that gilded age america was generating.
through a number of organizations especially the farmers alliance and later the populist party farmers sought economic might equal to the giant corporations and political access at the highest levels.
industrial workers also organized to fight for their rights.
new unions the knights of labor the american federation of labor the united mine workers of america and the industrial worker of the world sought to protect workers rights.
the nation was wracked by strikes from the railroad strike of 1877 to the miners strike in pueblo colorado in 1914 as well as tragedies including the triangle shirtwaist fire of 1912 between the railway strike of 1877 and the colorado strike of 1914 american workers fought to better their lives and working conditions.
while some owners were sympathetic the nation was divided by a great gulf between those who owned the industries and those who worked in them.
grand visions of a different kind of society were born but not achieved.
more basic demands for higher pay safer conditions shorter work days were only partially met and it would be another 2 decades during the great depression and new deal era that industrial workers could get much of what they were asking for from 1877 onward.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 5 to be sure that every loyal voter got one even if that meant that the city had 20 inspectors for its four water pumps and central and riverside parks were kept immaculate by an impressively large number of park workers.
tammany and other political machines could also be counted on for more direct aid when it was needed a handout to tide a family over a rough spot a basket of food for the holidays someone to show up at court and indicate to the judge or district attorney when charges should be dropped.
tweeds corruption was attacked by the cartoonist thomas nast and eventually provoked a public backlash.
tweed was arrested convicted of theft and died in jail in 1878 some of his collaborators fled the country.
but tammany survived and the new leader john honest john kelly was the first of a long line of irish politicians to direct tammany.
kelly avoided the kind of theft that led to tweed s downfall.
but he did ensure that a tightly organized political machine maintained close links to immigrant communities and catholic parishes as well as local and district bosses.
kelly controlled the citys 40 000 jobs and made sure that loyal tammany supporters those who remembered to vote the tammany ticket on election day got those jobs.
one of tammanys district leaders george washington plunkitt was also a state senator.
in 1905 plunkitt described how new york politics worked.
he said that reformers failed to draw the distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft.
theres all the difference in the world between the two plunkitt would have nothing to do with dishonest graft blackmailin gamblers saloon keepers disorderly people etc but there was another way he said theres honest graft and im an example of how it works.
i might sum up the whole thing by sayin t seen my opportunities and i took em he explained well im tipped off say that theyre going to lay out a new park at a certain place 1 go to that place and i buy up all the land i can in the neighborhood aint it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a profit on my investment and foresight it was an arrangement that plunkitt saw no reason to hide.
reformers might not have liked it but that was how cities worked in plunkitts day.
new york was far from alone in the rise of machine politics that was often irish dominated.
most large cities had something similar.
politics in boston was played at the neighborhood level where a number of legendary figures patrick j kennedy in east boston john f honey fitz fitzgerald in the north end p j.
maguire and later james michael curley in roxbury and most powerful of all martin lomasney in the west end each ruled their neighborhood.
in 1905 fitzgerald won election as mayor.
he served two terms and was succeeded by his arch rival james m curley who dominated boston politics for the next half century.
fitzgeralds favorite daughter rose married patrick kennedys son joseph and their son john fitzgerald kennedy became the first irish catholic elected president.
while the political machines met real needs for their poor and working class constituents and along the way made a few of their leaders very wealthy the closed door deals the graft honest or dishonest and the political favoritism dismayed many.
the political machines greatly increased the cost of municipal government.
they also shut many out of office especially the children and grandchildren of the native born elite who thought it was their duty and destiny to rule.
a new generation of political reformers began challenging the political machines making municipal reform an important element in the progressive agenda.
the progressive challenge to city and state government progressive reformers believed that the countrys political and economic systems could be fixed if honest people of good will put their minds to it.
they had little interest in radical reforms like socialism and little sympathy for the old line politicians like bostons martin lomasney.
they were what they said they were reformers trying to reform current structures of government.
in their campaigns for efficient urban management progressive reformers sometimes came across as cold and heartless to residents who preferred the part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 542 american voices lincoln steffens boston 1915 1908 lincoln steffens one of the leading muckraking journalists was invited to support a reform effort in boston called boston 1915 by local businessmen in 1908 boston taught steffens some important lessons about not only the role of political machines but also the place of reformers like himself in the life of the urban poor.
my sponsor e a filene called together a group of earnest representative men some of them reformers not all i asked them who was the worst the most impossible man in boston.
martin lomasney they said all in quick agreement.
a politician he was and the next morning early i took my little dog mickey sweeney and went over in the bad wards where martin lomasney was the boss who do you want.
he demanded.
martin lomasney.
that s me he said.
who are you.
i told him.
sure he said.
i ve read your stuff.
what do you want.
the reformers sent me to you i asked them who was the worst man in town and they named you.
so i ve come to get the low down on things and will you give it to me.
you must want something martin grumbled at me yes i said.
police graft.
what do you do about the petty crooks.
he was cross or he pretended to be.
what do you mean by petty crooks.
oh you know the dips the burglars and thieves the regular professional crooks that we honest grafters call criminals.
and what do you mean by what i do about them.
well you go to the front for them don t you.
see the dis trict attorney or a judge or the cops you get them off don t you.
yes i do he said dropping his feet and facing me with three fingers thrust under my nose.
three times.
ah now don t you sometimes do it four times.
he was defying me.
seven times.
martin don t you even get em off seventy times seven times.
yes i do he burst.
i never quit some of em not the way you do.
of course i said.
you stick but tell me how do you justify it to yourself saving these hopeless crooks over and over and over again when you know they ll come back and do it over and over and over again.
i did not expect him to answer this question.
it was more of an exclamation on my part but he did answer it inarticulate people can sometimes express themselves.
i think said martin lomasney that there s got to be in every ward somebody that any bloke can come to no matter what he s done and get help.
help you understand none of your law and your justice but help.
that hit me hard and we got no further that day they provided help and counsel and a hiding place in emergencies for friendless men women and children who were in dire need who were in guilty need with the mob of justice after them.
and as i sat there and thought i saw that if we were to build up in boston an organization to replace the political machine and so win the town the loyalty that now went to the boss and his party we must provide for that service.
source lincoln steffens the autobiography of lincoln steffens new york the literary guild 1931 pp.
612 618 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what did lincoln steffens and the men who invited him to boston think about the way that martin lomasney ran his ward in boston.
what did lomasney think of the reformers.
2 historical interpretation how did lomasney justify his politics.
what do his justifications suggest about the challenges faced by the reformers who hoped to supplant him.
face to face dealings of old style political bosses.
moreover in their desire to cut costs some reformers attacked services that others thought essential.
progressive reform was also seen sometimes accurately as an effort by an older protestant and native born elite to reclaim power from more recent immigrant groups especially the irish who had built up their own political organizations.
nevertheless candidates committed to cleaning up urban corruption and providing more efficient urban services came to power in a number of cities.
progressive reform cut across the political parties.
republicans and democrats alike included both reformers and those who resisted reform.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 581 in the summer of 1914 as europe began to move toward war ellen wilson the presidents wife of 30 years whose warmth offset wilson s sometimes dour personality became desperately ill her kidneys were failing and through the summer the president read diplomatic cables while sitting by his wife s bedside.
she died at the white house at the beginning of august.
the president wrote i never understood before what a broken heart meant less than a year later wilson met a vivacious 42 year old widow named edith bolling galt and quickly fell in love.
although some in the cabinet worried about how the public would respond to a new marriage so quickly after the loss of his first wife the two were married in december 1915 the nation had a new first lady who would support wilson and have a significant role in policy as war and illness later sapped his energy.
while wilson was seeking to maintain neutrality and dealing with his personal life 1916 was also an election year.
after ellens death he had seriously considered not running but his new personal life and his desire to see the diplomatic crisis through led him to declare his candidacy for a second term.
the republican party was reunited and nominated supreme court justice charles evans hughes.
hughes had served two terms as governor of new york but he had also been on the supreme court since 1910 and thus sat out the roosevelt taft split.
roosevelt called him the bearded iceberg but campaigned strongly for the ticket as did taft.
it was a very close contest but in the end wilson carried california by 4 000 votes and with it the electoral college.
a month after the election wilson tried to broker a peace between europes warring powers.
he asked both sides for their demands.
germany indicated that it was willing to discuss peace but a new british government led by prime minister lloyd george said it had no interest in american mediation.
then in december lloyd george indicated willingness to talk while the germans backed off.
in the midst of this diplomacy the german government made two fateful mistakes.
on january 31 1917 it announced to the united states that it was resuming the full employment of all the weapons at its disposal at the same time german foreign minister arthur zimmermann sent a secret cable to the german embassy in mexico with an offer to the carranza government long estranged from wilson and the united states that if it would attack the united states germany would see to the restoration of the territory from texas to california that had been taken from mexico in 1848 the british government managed to intercept and decode the zimmermann telegram and release it to the public turning much of american public opinion against germany.
wilson was more concerned with unrestricted submarine warfare than any interference from carranza.
he broke diplomatic relations with germany.
he then asked congress for authority to arm merchant ships but la follette and other republican progressives blocked the bill in the senate.
wilson called them a little group of willful men and claimed the authority to arm the ships on executive authority.
at the same time other americans including former president roosevelt were pressing wilson to do more for britain.
as early as january 1915 roosevelt although out of office wrote to british foreign minister sir edward grey calling wilsons lack of greater support for the british very obstinate roosevelt thought wilson was stumbling in 1915 and was ready to march.
in the end when war came it brought roosevelt political and personal tragedy.
wilson would accept neither his advice to help britain nor his offer of service and in july 1918 roosevelts beloved son quentin was killed in combat in france.
from the german perspective an immediate attack on supplies going to britain and france was the only way to win the war.
if they could block food and munitions from getting to the allies then the germans believed they could win the war before the united states could organize itself to do much harm.
in march u boats sank three u s merchant ships with the loss of 15 american lives.
as bryan had warned wilsons hard line meant that germany had the initiative.
the president felt he had run out of options.
on april 2 1917 wilson appeared before a joint session of congress and asked for a declaration of war against germany.
part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 american voices woodrow wilson war message 1917 llfilson had spoken directly to congress many times before.
inf nevertheless when he decided that the united states needed to go to war on the side of britain and france the words took on a new level of importance.
everyone knew what he would ask but they waited to hear his reasons.
gentlemen of the congress on the 3d of february last i officially laid before you the extraordinary announcement of the imperial german government that on and after the 1st day of february it was its purpose to put aside all restraints of law or of humanity and use its submarines to sink every vessel that sought to approach either the ports of great britain and ireland or the western coasts of europe vessels of every kind whatever their flag their character their cargo their destination their errand have been ruthlessly sent to the bottom without warning and without thought of help or mercy for those on board the vessels of friendly neutrals along with those of belligerents with a profound sense of the solemn and even tragical character of the step i am taking and of the grave responsibilities which it involves but in unhesitating obedience to what i deem my constitutional duty i advise that the congress declare the recent course of the imperial german government to be in fact nothing less than war against the government and people of the united states that it formally accept the status of belligerent which has thus been thrust upon it what this will involve is clear.
it will involve the utmost practicable cooperation in counsel and action with the governments now at war with germany it will involve the organization and mobilization of all the material resources of the country to supply the materials of war it will involve the immediate full equipment of the navy in all respects but particularly in supplying it with the best means of dealing with the enemy s submarines.
it will involve the immediate addition to the armed forces of the united states already provided for by law in case of war at least 500 000 men who should in my opinion be chosen upon the principle of universal liability to service it will involve also of course the granting of adequate credits to the government sustained i hope so far as they can equitably be sustained by the present generation by well conceived taxation one of the things that has served to convince us that the prussian autocracy was not and could never be our friend is that from the very outset of the present war it has filled our unsuspecting communities and even our offices of government with spies and set criminal intrigues everywhere afoot against our national unity that it means to stir up enemies against us at our very doors the intercepted note to the german minister at mexico city is eloquent evidence the world must be made safe for democracy.
its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty.
we have no selfish ends to serve.
we desire no conquest no dominion.
we seek no indemnities for ourselves no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make.
we are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind.
source woodrow wilson war messages 65th cong 1 st sess.
senate doc.
5 serial no.
7264 washington d c 1917 2 april 1917 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis as wilson described it what led to his decision to ask congress to declare war on germany.
2 contextualization how did wilson justify american military intervention on moral ethical grounds.
what does the speech tell you about wilson s vision of america s place in the world.
the war at home support and opposition not everyone was convinced by wilsons eloquence.
in the senate wisconsins la follette and george norris of nebraska led the opposition to a declaration of war.
norris a republican long part of the progressive movement said we have loaned many hundreds of millions of dollars to the allies in this controversy.
and he saw the war as simply a way to defend those loans insisting we are going into war upon the command of gold he would have none of it.
when the vote came six senators three republican and three democrats opposed the war.
in the house 50 representatives voted no on the war resolution.
the most dramatic vote came from jeannette rankin of montana.
rankin was the only woman in the house elected at a time when women in most states still did not have the vote.
she was under intense pressure from some suffragists who planned to demand votes for patriotic women as a war measure to vote for the war but in the roll call rankin answered i want to stand by my country but i cannot vote for war.
i vote no in 1941 after a long absence rankin would chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the unique aspects of a decade in u s history that lasted from 1919 to 1929 the 1920s was known as the jazz age not only because of its most popular music but also because jazz music provided the background to an era in which many americans wanted to forget the past and have fun dancing drinking and riding in increasingly popular automobiles.
21 1 l e a r n i n ru the prelude the red summer of 1919 explain how events at the end of world war i shaped the decade that followed.
21 2 the 1920s the exuberance of prosperity analyze how prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped american culture.
21 3 the 1920s the conflicts about american ideals explain the elements of discrimination hardship and fundamentalism that also shaped american life in the 1920s.
21 4 harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
almost as soon as the era ended journalists and historians began talking about the jazz age or simply the 1920s as a way to describe a distinct era in american history.
the 11 years that was framed by the end of world war i in november 1918 and the stock market crash of october 1929 was unique in many ways.
as troops returned to the unites states from their service in europe during world war i and as national leaders debated the treaty of versailles at the start of this era many americans wanted to forget about the rest of the world and its troubles.
they expected the resulting peace to usher in a time of pleasure and plenty.
for many white middle class americans the twenties were indeed a time of great prosperity and a time to enjoy the freedom of the jazz age.
however for others including many white farmers in the midwest and south southern black sharecroppers and american indians living on isolated reservations the twenties were not prosperous at all.
for many recent immigrants and for residents of small towns and rural areas the 1920s were a decade when they felt especially marginalized when it was clear that sophisticated urban dwellers looked down on them and their cultural and religious values and their resentment took many forms.
understanding the differing experiences of those who lived through this decade is the focus of this chapter.
596 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the prelude the red summer of 1919 21 1 significant dates explain how events at the end of world war i shaped the decade that followed.
when the guns of world war i fell silent on november 11 1918 the world celebrated.
while the united states had been spared much of the wars cost many americans were not sure what to make of the postwar world.
some americans had talked of socialism even communism since the strikes of the 1870s but most did not follow their lead.
as a result of world war i communists had seized control of russia.
some americans celebrated the new russian government but many more feared it and wondered whether there might be links between americas homegrown radicals and russia.
for african americans who had fought in the war had risked their lives for democracy and had seen different cultures the idea of returning to a united states with rigid segregation generated new tensions and determination.
other african americans had moved north to take war time jobs and they had no intention of returning to the segregated south.
to the surprise of some within months of the armistice the country quickly became a very tense place.
with the coming of peace american workers wanted a part of the new postwar prosperity and tried to gain back the money they had lost from stagnant wages in an era of wartime inflation.
in january 1919 35 000 shipyard workers went on strike in seattle washington and a month later 60 000 workers in other industries joined them.
the week long seattle general strike when virtually no one in the city went to work stands as the largest citywide strike in u s history and it frightened many.
the seattle strike was the largest but hardly the only strike in 1919 textile workers in lawrence massachusetts the scene of the 1912 bread and roses strike see chapter 18 engaged in a short and successful strike to demand a 48 hour work week in january 1919 in september the police force of boston massachusetts who had not received a raise since 1913 went on strike.
without a police force in boston mobs looted stores and bars the police commissioner created a temporary voluntary force and massachusetts governor calvin coolidge gained national fame when he fired all of the striking police officers saying there is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody anywhere any time while people debated the right of public employees to strike steel workers went out on strike in september 1919 after the chairman of u s steel judge elbert gary refused to meet with union representatives.
a month later coal miners walked off the job just as the nations demand for coal for winter heat was beginning.
strikes were not the only signs of political chaos in 1919 in april bombs arrived in the mail of postmaster general albert burleson attorney general a mitchell palmer several members of the u s senate seattles antistrike mayor hanson and federal immigration authorities and judges.
not one of them was injured but no one ever discovered who sent the bombs.
on may day an international socialist holiday in honor of the haymarket events see chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time 21 2 harding s normalcy a word coined by warren g harding while he was the 1920 republican presidential candidate to convey what he thought the country wanted a new kind of norma i free from war international entanglements and reform efforts.
20 hardings normalcy was less a return to some previously normal era than a plea to give the reforming spirit of the previous decades a rest.
people were as tired of roosevelt era reforms as they were of wilson s internationalism.
many wanted to enjoy themselves take part in the growing national prosperity and keep the reformers and the government out of their lives.
there was nothing very normal about the era especially in terms of a national law that banned alcohol or in terms of the changing roles of women or the new technologies that changed the culture but it seemed to summarize what many americans wanted for themselves and their country.
prohibition the campaign for moral conformity just at the time when many sought normalcy the greatest reform experiment in the nations history the prohibition of alcohol took effect.
even though prohibition seemed like a reform more typical of the progressive era the way prohibition was implemented was typical of the 1920s.
indeed prohibition and resistance to it defined the 1920s for many.
americans had long been fond of alcohol.
but some americans had also long worried about the nations drinking habits.
in the 1830s the army ended the traditional whiskey ration for the troops.
by the 1850s school children learned to read from mcguffey s readers that included stories about the scene of desolation that liquor created.
some religious groups concluded that drinking and protestant christianity were incompatible.
the womens christian temperance union wctu became the primary voice of temperance reform in protestant america in the 1880s see chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontentec me 21 1 2t2 21j 214 great migration the mass movement of african americans from the rural south to the urban north spurred especially by new job opportunities that began during world war i and the 1920s.
woman to swim the english channel in 1926 or the decade s most celebrated hero charles a lindbergh who flew solo across the atlantic in his airplane the spirit of st louis in 1927 and was welcomed home with what was becoming a new york institution a ticker tape parade down fifth avenue.
in addition a new form of self defined sophisticated culture took hold.
when the new yorker appeared in 1925 its editor harold ross said that it was not edited for the old lady in dubuque but rather was a reflection in word and picture of metropolitan life part of the new yorkers success was the guidance it gave to members or aspiring members of new yorks smart set on how to navigate the city s nightlife which nightclubs speakeasies cafes and hotel lounges provided the best entertainment the grandest design and though it didnt overtly say so the best drinks.
the u s writers of the 1920s spoke to a generation and class disillusioned with the idealism of past decades as well as the business and money making that characterized so much of 1920s bourgeoisie culture.
many lived abroad and were dubbed the lost generation by gertrude stein who herself lived most of her life in paris.
among them were ernest hemingway and other writers as different as t s eliot and john dos passos.
sinclair lewis published main street in 1920 and babbitt in 1922 which both looked at the stifling conformity and hypocrisy of small town america.
f scott fitzgerald dropped out of princeton where he had spent most of his college career at parties and then described that culture he knew so well in this side of paradise in 1920 and the great gatsby in 1925 in their literature and their assumptions the social and artistic elite who lived between the end of the first world war in 1918 and the coming of the great depression in 1929 lived at a unique prosperous and discontented moment in american history and literature.
the harlem renaissance and marcus garvey in 1920 as in 1820 90 percent of african americans lived in the south.
however by 1920 some blacks had begun to move away from rural poverty and segregation in the rural south to new opportunities in southern cities and in the larger industrial cities of the north.
although the height of the great migration the great movement of african americans from rural south to urban north took place in the 1940s and 1950s see chapter 24 it had its beginnings during and immediately after world war i the result was both a population shift and a cultural flowering see map 21 1.
world war i created new opportunities for african americans.
as work expanded factories in the north needed more workers.
the illinois central railroad which ran straight from the heart of the cotton growing mississippi delta to job rich chicago enabled those who were moving.
the nations most widely read black newspaper the chicago defender announced the great northern drive in may 1917 the newspaper called on southern blacks to make the flight out of egypt commissioned songs like bound for the promised land and negotiated special group rates with the illinois central.
the paper told sharecroppers about jobs available in the stockyards and meat packing houses in chicago.
black music reflected the emotions of those who moved north.
the blues music born out of gospel ragtime and jazz began on back porches small town bars and dance halls and prison cells in the mississippi delta early in the 1900s.
at first blues musicians sang of hard lives in the south.
john hurt sang avalon mississippi my home town always on my mind and bill broonzy sang anywhere in mississippi is my native home but in the 1920s the blues moved north.
those who had sung about life in mississippi began to sing im going to detroit get myself a good job.
tired of stayin round here with the starvation mob some 50 000 african americans moved from the south to chicago during world war i and another 100 000 in the 10 years that followed.
chicagos black population grew from 44 000 in 1910 to 109 000 in 1920 to 234 000 in 1930 during and after world war ii many more blacks would follow.
in addition to chicago 608 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 w pacific ocean strong population growth i mooeraje population growth r i population lof africabkalnericc map 21 1 people moving in the 1920s.
many americans chose to or were forced to move during the 1920s.
cities and suburbs grew rapidly throughout the era african americans moved from the south to northern cities such as chicago detroit and new york.
in some areas the farmers depression meant giving up on cultivated land and starting over to farm another region or become a city worker.
african americans moved to new york detroit los angeles philadelphia syracuse new york oakland california milwaukee newark gary indiana and other cities that offered jobs and a modicum of freedom.
cotton planters did everything possible to stop the northern migration.
ihe chicago defender was branded as dangerously subversive.
plantation owners opposed anything more than rudimentary education for blacks so they would have few skills to take north.
in greenville mississippi the towns leading white citizen leroy percy opposed the blan because he feared that their brand of terror would lead to an exodus within a year of the black people who were essential to the economy.
african americans kept moving.
the novelist richard wright described the experience of many of the early migrants in his novel native son and his autobiography black boy.
wright was born to a sharecropper family in natchez mississippi.
he left the rural south for memphis and then in 1927 for chicago to experience he said the warmth of other suns it was not an easy move.
wright remembered i had fled a known terror and perhaps i could cope with this unknown terror ihe north to which the southern immigrants came was not always a welcoming place.
after world war i some whites sought to reclaim the industrial jobs they had held before the war at the same time that wartime demand for workers ebbed.
salaries were much higher in the north but so were rents.
living conditions in increasingly segregated and rapidly growing urban neighborhoods made for tightly packed homes.
race riots in chicago and st louis in 1919 made it very clear just how unwelcoming the north could be.
african americans had long lived in cities like new york providence and philadelphia.
free black communities emerged before the civil war in places like pittsburgh cleveland and cincinnati.
in 1910 only a tiny percentage of northern chapter 21 chapter 22 living in hard times and wisconsin senator robert la follettes bid for president in 1924 talked of a third party challenge in 1936 a 66 year old californian dr francis townsend proposed a federal pension of 200 per month to any person over 60 years old who would retire from work leaving a job open for someone younger.
the idea spread like wildfire.
a number of candidates were elected to congress in 1934 with townsends support.
in addition there were some 5 000 townsend clubs around the country and 25 million people signed townsend petitions to congress.
while townsends ideas were gaining political traction the muckraking author upton sinclair announced that he would seek the democratic nomination for governor of california in 1934 based on a pledge to end poverty in california epic.
like the townsend movement the epic campaign took off among voters who were impatient with the new deal.
sinclair won the nomination received widespread support though not from roosevelt who saw epic as an effort to confiscate private property and helped shape the national dialogue even though he lost the election.
more influential than townsend or sinclair the radio priest charles coughlin inspired some and frightened others in the early 1930s.
coughlin had been appointed pastor of a small catholic parish in the working class detroit suburb of royal oak in 1926 catholic auto workers formed the core of his congregation.
coughlin arranged for the local radio station to broadcast his sunday sermons and in 1930 their popularity led to a contract with the columbia broadcasting system to carry him nationally and led the anti catholic kian to burn a cross on his lawn.
as the depression worsened coughlins sermons became more political.
he relentlessly attacked hoover and the nations bankers and he described himself as the voice of the little people the average man who was suffering given the size of his radio audience roosevelt was delighted that coughlin supported his 1932 campaign.
after the election the two met at the white house but coughlin later turned on the new deal.
he accused fdr of having out hoovered hoover and talked of organizing his own political party.
his sermons took on an increasingly anti semitic and isolationist tone and some thought he was starting to sound like the new german chancellor adolph hitler.
in roosevelts mind however the greatest challenge came from louisianas charismatic senator huey p long.
long was a product of the pine woods region of louisiana where poverty the baptist church and political independence flourished.
longs forbearers had supported the union cause during the civil war and eugene v debs during the early 1900s.
in 1928 as al smith was going down to defeat long was elected governor of louisiana after a campaign attacking big corporations especially standard oil.
longs grass roots populism led him to attack the rich and promise opportunity for the poor.
every man a king but no one wears a crown was his campaign slogan.
he raised taxes on oil and gas production built new highways schools and hospitals provided free textbooks and grew very popular and very powerful.
some said that louisiana under long was a virtual dictatorship.
he was elected to the u s senate in 1930 in washington he showed disdain for democrats as well as republicans called the president frank much to fdrs displeasure and said that all he cared about was what the boys at the forks of the creek think of me ihere were a lot of boys and girls at the forks of a lot of creeks who thought a lot of long.
fdr considered him a dangerous demagogue.
in 1934 long launched what he called the share our wealth society.
long promised a one time grant of 5 000 per family and a guaranteed income of 2 500 twice the 1934 national average as well as educational subsidies for the young and pensions for the elderly specifically designed to attract townsend support all to be paid for by seizing the wealth of the few.
when people said his numbers did not add up that there was not enough wealth to seize even if people wanted to long responded that his followers needed to be prepared for the slurs and snickers of some high ups but he insisted let no one tell you that it is difficult to redistribute the wealth of this land.
it is simple 640 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 while the communists and socialists did not cause roosevelt to worry townsend coughlin and long did.
the president worried about a dictatorship emerging in the united states just as dictatorships had emerged as a result of the depression in italy and germany.
democratic chairman james farley commissioned a poll that showed that a third party ticket led by long could lead to roosevelts defeat in 1936 and perhaps even a long victory if not in 1936 then by 1940 there was plenty to worry about.
long plans to be a candidate of the hitler type for the presidency in 1936 roosevelt said.
the president reshaped his political agenda to take control of the national dialogue.
the continuing depression and the expanding new deal 1935 1939 during roosevelts first 100 days indeed his first 2 years the new deal consisted of a series of experiments some contradictory some well thought out but all designed to stem the worst of the depression and begin a new course to keep people from starving to put them back to work to get more money into circulation.
in 1935 there was a shift in focus some called it the second new deal it was not a radical change but it did involve greater attention to long term financial security for more americans.
before accepting the job as fdrs secretary of labor frances perkins had insisted that the president promise to back pensions for the aging and unemployment insurance.
in an early meeting roosevelt told perkins i will authorize you to try and if you succeed thats fine it was all the authorization she needed.
perkins had witnessed the tragic triangle shirtwaist fire in new york in 1911 and had led the investigation that followed and helped craft some of the health and safety legislation that emerged from it.
the growth and popularity of the townsend movement gave perkins more political clout than she might otherwise have had.
if a plan could be devised that was financially viable unlike the townsend plan then 1934 and 1935 was the time to get it passed.
roosevelt worried about amassing too much power in the federal government.
he insisted that the states play the lead role in unemployment insurance though he was willing to have a federal role.
but he was adamant all the power shouldnt be in the hands of the federal government.
look just think what would happen if all the power was concentrated here and huey long became president treasury secretary henry morgenthau was determined that any plan be fiscally viable.
but many in the administration thought townsend had a point the country did need to encourage older americans to retire and leave their jobs to younger people.
and perkins was determined to get a bill through congress.
frances perkins the secretary of labor and its prime architect stood behind him.
social security act legislation that established a system of federal old age pensions in effect to the present day.
on january 17 1935 fdr announced plans for a social security program that would protect some 26 million citizens with security against the hazards and vicissitudes of life the proposed bill included a federal tax on employees and employers to fund the retirement system a federal tax to help support a state administered unemployment insurance system and emergency grants to fund the immediate relief of the indigent elderly aid to dependent children and modest support for public health.
since the constitution clearly gave the government the right to tax there was no room for a constitutional challenge to the legislation.
congress passed the social security act 7 months later on august 14 1935 the proposed social security act included a federal tax on employees and employers to fund the retirement system.
in january 1940 the fifth anniversary of roosevelts speech about the program ida m fuller a 76 year old woman living in vermont received the first social security check.
as roosevelt prepared for the reelection battle of 1936 he also toughened his rhetoric.
in his 1933 inaugural address fdr had criticized the rulers of the exchange of mankinds goods for having failed through their own stubbornness and their own incompetence in 1936 however his speeches took on a harsher tone.
he spoke of his old enemies the bankers and profiteers and condemned their greed and autocracy he said of business leaders they are unanimous in their hate for me and i welcome their hatred american voices frances perkins the roots of social security reflecting on 1935 secretary of labor frances perkins took the lead in creating the social security retirement system still in operation today.
years later she looked back on the work she did.
t he real roots of the social security act were in the great depression of 1929 nothing else would have bumped the american people into a social security system except something so shocking so terrifying as that depression but everything was down.
nobody could get a job.
the grocer didn t employ the young boys to deliver goods any more.
he couldn t afford to.
the grocer himself finally went bankrupt and closed up.
he had given too much credit.
i mean the people who were out of work had credit at the grocery store at first and they could eat but they couldn t pay their bills and finally the grocer couldn t pay his bills and eventually somebody came and sold him out.
it went on like that all the time in the spring of 1932 franklin roosevelt had gone out to utah to the conference of governors he made a speech which was full of pleasant hyperbole of one sort or another flattery to various governors but at one point he began to discuss the great problems now facing this country and he spoke about unemployment.
then he said i am for unemployment insurance but not for the dole.
until we heard those words come over the wires i wasn t sure he was going to say he was for unemployment insurance.
i was afraid he was going to say he was against the dole and nothing else it created a great interest and a great enthusiasm among the voters which he was not slow to catch on to.
he had that kind of a mind you know he could feel the public pulse and he cared about the public pulse at any rate we worked all summer it was a terribly hot summer and everybody worked hard all the time and finally we actually did bring forth a report that recommended unemployment insurance and old age insurance but omitted health insurance just because the experts couldn t get through with health insurance in time to make a report on it this then was the genesis of the whole bill.
we did a great deal of educating by one kind of propaganda or other chiefly hearings.
senator wagner put it up a bill which he called a model bill and held public hearings in the senate which attracted a great deal of attention from the senators.
we had a number of senatorial committees which we asked to look into this or that.
we got advice.
all these actions were for the purpose not so much of advice as of propaganda that is of education of the public the result was a bill that finally was presented to congress and as you know was debated very briefly and finally we did get the basic bill passed.
source frances perkins the roots of social security speech delivered at social security administration headquarters baltimore maryland october 23 1962 downloaded from january 9 2013 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis as perkins described it what role did roosevelt play in the development and passage of social security.
what other groups and individuals were important in the process.
2 constructing an argument do you agree with perkins that without the great depression social security would never have been enacted.
why or why not.
642 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 roosevelt attacked business leaders every chance he got during 1935 and 1936 but he did not actually do very much to hurt them.
nevertheless his rhetoric stole the thunder from coughlin s and long s his legislation especially social security undermined townsends organization and his support for the wagner act created great loyalty among labor unions.
as a result roosevelt amassed great political capital going into the 1936 presidential election.
huey long was assassinated in september 1935 after his death his share our wealth clubs became the union party which nominated william lemke a congressman from north dakota for president.
the republicans nominated the liberal kansas governor alf landon.
in spite of polls including one by the literary digest that predicted a landon win roosevelt won a stunning electoral victory in november 1936 he carried 46 of the nations 48 states and a huge plurality of the popular vote.
as he began his second term in january 1937 the president seemed to turn the agenda back to fighting the ongoing depression.
in his inaugural address he said i see one third of a nation ill housed ill clad ill nourished it was a call to action but also an admission that in 4 years the new deal had not accomplished all that it hoped for.
in spite of his extraordinary election victory and the high hopes for more permanent reform it engendered roosevelt accomplished far less in his second term than in the first.
the sense of national crisis was not as great in 1937 and roosevelts own missteps got in the way.
one of fdrs greatest frustrations was the fact that a conservative u s supreme court kept undermining his efforts.
late in his first term the court declared the nra and then the aaa unconstitutional as well as state minimum wage laws.
court challenges to social security and the wagner act were working their way through the lower courts.
he was not sure what would come next.
in early february 1937 after his reelection roosevelt went to congress with a proposal that would allow him to appoint one additional supreme court justice for every member who was over the age of 70 which in 1937 would mean six new justices and similar numbers in the lower courts.
the constitution never mentions a number of justices for the court and the number had fluctuated between five and ten.
fdrs proposal was completely constitutional but politically very unwise.
fdr claimed that the goal was to speed judicial review and reduce the workload of the justices.
everyone knew that in fact there was only one goal to stop the court from overturning the new deal.
to many in congress not only conservatives the court packing bill was a step toward dictatorship.
for some southern senators it would open up the way to civil rights legislation which they always feared might someday emerge from the white house.
montana senator burton wheeler an old progressive who usually sided with the president led the assault claiming that the bill cut down those guarantees of liberty written by the blood of your forefathers the legislation was defeated by the friends of the new deal before its enemies got a chance to join in the debate.
ironically while congress defeated roosevelts plan to expand or pack the supreme court the justices perhaps reading the 1936 election returns shifted ground.
chief justice charles evans hughes and associate justice owen roberts who had both voted against the new deal changed their minds first on a minimum wage law and then on the all important wagner labor relations act which the court found to be constitutional.
the changes in the hughes and robert votes were dubbed the switch in time that saved nine after 1937 although no new justices were added the court stopped declaring new deal legislation unconstitutional.
nevertheless with the defeat of roosevelt s court plan the momentum behind the new deal slowly came to a stop.
divisions in congress engendered by the court plan never healed.
unemployment actually rose in 1937 and 1938 in the depression within a depression which most likely occurred due to roosevelts effort to balance the federal budget by cutting back on the federal spending that was keeping the economy moving.
congress did pass a bill to resurrect parts of the old aaa now that the court seemed more open to it.
a fair labor standards act that chapter review 22 1 the coming of the great depression explain the coming of the great depression and the initial response to it.
review questions 1 comparison compare and contrast the stock market crash of 1929 with other factors that led to the great depression in the united states and worldwide.
what similarities and differences do you note.
2 contextualization why did herbert hoover find it so difficult to craft an adequate response to the great depression.
the new deal explain the goals and results of the new deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse americans.
review questions 3 contextualization why was it so important that roosevelt stabilize the banking system as quickly as possible.
4 historical interpretation what factors contributed to the growth of organized labor in the 1930s.
22 2 5 comparison compare and contrast the arguments made by roosevelts critics on the left and the right.
why did roosevelt worry much more about his critics on the left than his critics on the right.
6 construct an argument in your opinion what were the most important accomplishments of the new deal.
what were its greatest failures.
the deep roots of war the united states europe and asia analyze the international impact of the depression german and japanese military expansion and the initial u s response.
review questions 7 historical interpretation what connection can you make between economic events and the rise of fascist parties to power in germany italy and japan.
8 contextualization why were so many americans committed to isolationism.
223 652 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 1939 1945 world war ii started out with disaster for the united states after japan attacked the u s navy base at pearl harbor sinking much of the pacific fleet.
it would be a long time before the tide turned.
chapter 23 living in a world at war iu american voices kathy ogrady what did you do in the war grandma f n 1995 kathy o grady interviewed her grandmother katherine o grady who remembered the war as a time when women wanted to work in war related industries.
the pay was much better than in other jobs and being of service to the nation mattered as did a new found sense of freedom.
many like o grady looked back on their prewar lives as a time when they were much more naive than they were later on.
in 1939 i lived in east providence rhode island i worked at gibson s a soda fountain at the bus stop on westminster street.
i was very busy.
servicemen from all over used to come in.
i made 15 for a 48 hour week.
i bought my own clothes paid my own expenses car fare whatever i wanted and i d go to the movies.
if you had a five dollar bill then you were very wealthy.
i met my husband while i was working at gibson s.
he had a construction job building an air base up in newfoundland.
when pearl harbor broke out he came back home and we got married.
all the fellows had gone into the service.
his brothers were all gone.
all the men were leaving.
my husband had a deferment because his job was considered important to the defense and we had a 9 month old son.
but he wanted to go so badly that he quit the job he was shipped out to okinawa.
he was a seabee and worked in the construction battalion which builds bases.
the seabees would go ahead of the marines to make the landing and do all that.
he went from one island to the other across the pacific after my husband went into the seabee s i quit my job at gibson s and went to work in a woolen mill lister s which before the war was just a normal routine job.
when the war started they needed wool very badly so this was considered a service job.
in other words it was important.
at the mill the government used to send out all the purple heart soldiers to talk to us and tell us that we couldn t take time off and pushed all this patriotism on us i think i got 27 a week so it did pay more.
the soldiers needed woolen blankets.
at the time all servicemen were issued their clothing their blanket their bedroll the whole bit.
the blankets that came home after war had traveled all over the world we were very proud of our work because it meant that we were doing our part after the war things changed because women found out they could go out and they could survive.
they could really do it on their own.
that s where i think women s lib really started.
source an oral history of rhode island women during world war ii downloaded from 30 2012 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis in what ways did the war change katherine o grady s life.
2 historical interpretation what clues does the document provide about the long term impact of the war on the place of women in american society.
marginalization in a democracy the march on washington and the war at home in 1940 african americans and latinos continued to be excluded from the new prosperity.
three out of four african americans still lived in the rural south the majority still sharecroppers.
most latinos lived in poverty in the urban or rural southwest.
even those who had moved from farms to small towns or cities saw themselves passed over as wartime production picked up.
in 1940 the brotherhood of sleeping car porters perhaps the most powerful black led organization in the united states asked the government to avoid discrimination in the expanding armed forces.
after a philip randolph long time president of the brotherhood of sleeping car porters and walter white the executive secretary of the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp met with president roosevelt later that year they believed they had a friend in the federal government especially given eleanor roosevelts commitment to civil rights.
the rapidly expanding war industries were less friendly.
when the president of north american aviation announced we will not employ negroes he spoke for many whites in management and on the shop floors of the companies.
then in late 1940 the war department announced its policy not to intermingle colored and white enlisted personnel in the same regimental organization randolph felt betrayed and he meant to do something about it.
664 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 randolph proposed a massive march on washington initially thinking that 10 000 blacks would come to washington dc to demand that the government protect their economic rights.
as word spread randolph raised the number to 50 000 and then to 100 000 he insisted that this event would be an all black march.
there are some things negroes must do alone he said.
the march was called for july 1 1941 as it became clear that the march might be a powerful and embarrassing event many people within the administration began to panic.
they challenged randolphs patriotism how could he do such a thing with war imminent.
what will they think in berlin.
randolph s response was oh perhaps no more than they already think of america s racial policy.
friends within the administration tried to persuade randolph to postpone the march but he persisted.
the only grounds on which the march could be called off he said would be a government order with teeth in it that would truly protect the economic rights of african americans in the new industries.
randolph won.
on june 25 1941 roosevelt signed executive order 8802 to provide for the full and equitable participation of all workers in defense industries without discrimination because of race creed color or national origin the order created the fair employment practices committee later commission to enforce the policy.
it was the order with teeth in it the march was called off.
some called executive order 8802 an economic emancipation proclamation.
executive order 8802 was enforced unevenly but sufficiently enough to make a real difference.
sybil lewis was a maid in oklahoma being paid 3 50 a week before the war.
she was hired at lockheed aircraft in los angeles at 48 per week.
she was paired with a white woman from arkansas and though they certainly had their differences lewis remembered that they learned to relate to each other in ways that we never experienced before not all encounters were as positive.
white workers went on strike at a western electric factory in baltimore maryland demanding segregated restrooms.
in a factory in mobile alabama shipyard workers rioted over the promotion of a black welder.
riots also took place in detroit and new york city in 1943 twenty five blacks and nine whites were killed in a june riot in detroit and six blacks were killed in another riot in new yorks harlem.
as news of these clashes spread army bases around the world also exploded as segregated white and black units clashed in england and in the united states.
latinos also faced exclusion and violence.
the most obvious symbol of mexican american resistance to white culture were gangs known as pachucos or zoot suiters for the exaggerated clothing a long suit coat with baggy pants that came in at the ankles that symbolized their defiance of social norms.
during wartime frugality when most people were channeling money and resources toward the war effort the zoot suits also seemed an unpatriotic extravagance.
in june 1943 white servicemen in various boot camps in the los angeles area took out much of their own frustration by attacking the nearby latino population especially the zoot suiters.
police for the most part looked the other way.
the zoot suit riots spread elsewhere until fdr intervened to stop the violence mostly because he had been courting mexico as a wartime ally.
in spite of riots and discrimination and they were very real world war ii also gave african americans latinos and american indians new opportunities.
because of the wartime labor shortages and federal enforcement efforts many who had previously been excluded got jobs in industries previously closed to them.
others became more politically active and more would do so once the war ended.
fair employment practices committee federal agency established in 1941 to curb racial discrimination in war production jobs and government employment.
zoot suit riots race riots in june 1943 primarily centered in los angeles in which american military personnel attacked latinos.
23 1 23 2 233 234 japanese internment in an era when many americans sacrificed much including their lives other americans especially japanese americans saw their most basic freedoms undermined by wartime hysteria.
the immigration legislation of 1924 had prohibited immigration from japan.
as a result the japanese population in the mainland united states comprised some chapter review 23 1 preparedness and isolation 1939 1941 explain support for and opposition to the growing u s support for britain and growing tensions with japan.
review questions 1 contextualization why did so many americans oppose u s involvement in the war in europe.
how did roosevelt justify his efforts to aid britain.
2 cause and effect what factors contributed to the japanese decision to go to war with the united states.
23 2 mass mobilization in a society at war analyze the war s impact on widely diverse groups of americans who fought supported the war effort at home or otherwise lived through the war years.
review questions 3 synthesis what steps did the united states take to create a mass army in the early years of the war.
4 comparison compare and contrast the roles of young men and young women in the war effort.
5 construct an argument in your opinion why were japanese americans and japanese immigrants interned while german and italian americans were not.
23 3 industrial strength industrial prosperity analyze u s industrial strength and productivity and its impact on the outcome of the war and on american society.
review questions 6 historical interpretation what factors contributed to the extraordinary u s military production during world war ii.
7 cause and effect how did increased industrial production affect the lives of ordinary americans during world war ii.
23 4 winning a world war north africa europe asia the pacific 1943 1945 explain the course of the war leading to victory in europe and then the pacific.
review questions 8 historical interpretation what tensions between the allies were revealed at the conferences in casablanca cairo and tehran.
9 comparison how did the fighting in europe during world war ii differ from that in world war i.
how would you explain the differences you note.
10 constructing an argument in your opinion was trumans decision to use atomic bombs against japan justified.
why or why not.
chapter 24 the world the war created 1945 1952 the united states in 1945 the cold war begins politics 1948 and 1952 chapter 24 the world the war created 6 significant dates 1944 bretton woods conference creates international monetary fund and world bank dumbarton oaks conference great migration of african americans to the north expands 1945 franklin d roosevelt dies and harry s truman becomes president nazi germany surrenders un charter approved and ratified truman meets with stalin at potsdam germany first successful test of atomic bomb united states drops atomic bomb on japan japan surrenders 1946 george kennan s long telegram winston churchill s iron curtain speech u s baby boom begins 1947 marshall plan proposed levittown new york housing opens 1948 united states recognizes new state of israel beginning of berlin airlift truman defeats dewey wallace and thurmond in presidential election un universal declaration of human rights 1949 berlin airlift ends senate ratifies u s membership in nato soviet union tests atomic bomb chiang kai shek leaves mainland china 1950 alger hiss convicted of lying under oath joseph mccarthy speech in wheeling west virginia north korea invades south korea u s landing at inchon korea chinese forces drive un force south of the 38th parallel 1952 eisenhower defeats stevenson for president might look like.
a navy petty officer and his wife walking hand in hand through the celebrations in seattle on august 14 told a reporter their plans raise babies and keep house many returning from the war followed these plans but they did so in a world much more complex than could be imagined on that idyllic august evening.
this chapter 24 the world the war created 24 1 united nations an international organization launched at the end of world war ii with leadership from the united states the soviet union great britain and china.
the united nations and the new economic order while americans were moving around the country the rest of the planet was also in transition.
even before world war ii ended a series of international gatherings reshaped the political and economic climate of the coming postwar world.
the international monetary fund and the world bank in 1944 leaders in the united states and britain were determined not to repeat the mistakes of the treaty of versailles.
among those mistakes they believed were the huge reparations imposed on the defeated germany and the failure of the victors to ensure robust economic activity after the war.
in early 1944 roosevelts secretary of the treasury henry m morgenthau invited great britain and the soviet union to join the united states in establishing a postwar economic system.
both agreed.
morgenthau then invited representatives of more than 40 wartime allies to meet at the mount washington hotel in bretton woods new hampshire in july 1944 the resulting bretton woods agreement created an international monetary fund imf for promoting international monetary cooperation the purpose of the imf was to maintain exchange rates between different currencies so people could buy and sell in different countries without fear that values would fluctuate wildly as happened in the 1930s to provide loans to a nation that was having problems balancing payments and to provide technical assistance to banks.
the u s dollar was made the base on which all other currencies were calculated and it remained so until 1971.
the bretton woods delegates also created the international bank for reconstruction development better known as the world bank to get the world on stable economic footing as quickly as possible after the devastation of the war.
the world bank was designed to support economic recovery in war torn europe and to reduce world poverty especially in latin america africa and parts of asia that did not have the economic foundation for recovery.
the first loans from the world bank were made to war torn france in 1947 and loans were soon extended around the world.
the united nations when franklin roosevelt and winston churchill agreed to an atlantic charter in august 1941 they called for the establishment of a wider and permanent system of general security see chapter 24 the world the war creati 24 1 24 2 243 iron curtain a phrase coined by former british prime minister winston churchill in 1946 when describing the post world war ii division of europe into two hostile segments.
truman doctrine president harry truman s statement in 1947 that the united states should assist other nations that were facing external pressure or internal revolution.
two weeks later winston churchill no longer in office but still a revered war hero gave a speech as trumans guest at westminster college in missouri in which he said from stettin in the baltic to trieste in the adriatic an iron curtain has descended across the continent.
from what i have seen of our russian friends and allies during the war i am convinced that there is nothing they admire so much as strength and there is nothing for which they have less respect than weakness especially military weakness.
the image of an iron curtain dividing europe became one of the central images of the cold war.
the call for military strength to counter soviet strength became the foundation of a massive arms race on both sides of the iron curtain.
not everyone in the united states agreed that a cold war with the soviet union was inevitable.
three senators issued a statement saying mr.
churchills proposal would cut the throat of the big three without which the war could not have been won and without which the peace cannot be saved former vice president henry wallace by then secretary of commerce insisted that it was important for the united states to allay any reasonable russian grounds for fear suspicion and distrust privately truman called these critics of churchills speech the american crackpots association as 1946 came to an end more americans were coming to the conclusion that stalin was an evil dictator and the soviet union could not be trusted.
truman decided that his administration needed to speak with a single voice and dropped wallace and secretary of state james byrnes from the cabinet replacing the latter with george marshall who was u s chief of staff during the war.
a year later truman also sponsored a reorganization of the nations military forces in which the previously separate cabinet level war and navy departments were merged into a single department of defense that was responsible for all military matters.
truman was quickly concluding that the end of world war ii did not mean the end of the need for u s military strength.
meanwhile in early 1947 greece was in the midst of a civil war between its government and communist forces and turkey was resisting soviet demands for greater control of access to the eastern mediterranean and the middle east.
great britain which had been providing support for both governments said it could no longer afford to do so.
truman marshall and marshalls deputy dean acheson agreed that the united states needed to step in to take britains place in supporting resistance to communism in the region.
if the containment policy meant anything it certainly meant stopping soviet moves into places like greece and turkey.
the truman doctrine made it clear that containing communism would be at the bedrock of u s foreign policy.
needing the support of a reluctant congress truman appeared in person and said i believe that it must be the policy of the united states to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures in june the administration announced plans for massive economic aid to western europe.
the winter of 1946 47 had been the worst in years.
by spring europe was running dangerously low on coal and food.
people were cold hungry and desperate.
secretary of state marshall used a harvard commencement speech to tell the world marshall plan the european recovery program 1949 which provided u s economic assistance to european nations in large part to keep them out of the soviet union s sphere of influence.
our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine but against hunger poverty desperation and chaos we know that in this trying period between a war that is over and a peace that is not yet secure the destitute and oppressed of the earth look chiefly to us for sustenance and support until they can again face life with self confidence and self reliance.
the speech was partly true.
the humanitarian goals a campaign against hunger poverty and desperation were real.
but the marshall plan as it came to be called was also directed against one country and its doctrine.
people in the united states and the soviet union knew that the goal was to stop soviet expansion in western europe.
698 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 congress funded 13 34 billion in u s aid for europe between 1948 and 1952 people were fed economies recovered and western capitalist democracies were established.
stalin saw the truman doctrine and the marshall plan as a direct assault.
some americans notably the now out of office henry wallace also thought it was a needless provocation.
the soviets quickly solidified the power of a pro soviet regime in hungary and arranged a pro soviet coup in czechoslovakia in february 1948 then in june 1948 the soviet union closed off american british and french access to berlin.
before world war ii ended the soviet union britain the united states and france had agreed that each of them would assume military authority not only in a different quadrant of germany but also within a different quadrant in the city of berlin even though berlin itself was deep inside the soviet quadrant.
the result was a divided germany and a divided berlin a precarious situation especially for the former capital city see map 24 2.
the soviets saw berlin as a useful pressure point in the cold war.
by closing off western access to the city they could challenge the truman doctrine and the marshall plan.
when they blocked all rail and highway access to berlin in the spring of 1948 truman decided to support the city with an airlift.
in the days and weeks that followed the berlin airlift sent hundreds of u s airplanes every day to templehoff airport in the western sector of berlin.
the city was well supplied and west berlin withstood the siege.
eventually in may 1949 the soviet union relented and reestablished access to berlin.
nevertheless by the beginning of 1949 the iron curtain that churchill had described was more firmly in place than ever and the cold war which had been developing since 1945 was a reality.
24 2 berlin airlift in 1948 and 1949 food and supplies delivered by air into berlin to keep the city attached to western europe.
1949 the soviet atom bomb and the fall of china just as the crisis in berlin was coming to an end the u s senate ratified american membership in the north atlantic treaty organization nato by an 82 to 13 vote in july 1949 fearing a soviet invasion of western europe 12 nations led by the united states and britain created the nato alliance in which each member agreed to treat an attack on any one from any source though only one source was feared as an attack on all.
there would be no repeat by any country of nazi germanys attacks on the nations of europe one after another.
the nato treaty was the first time in history that the united states agreed to such a peacetime partnership.
virtually nonstop flights brought vital supplies to the city of berlin and sustained it during its isolation from june 1948 until may 1949 chapter 24 the world the war 24 j that primary the momentum was hard to stop and eisenhower was nominated by the republicans in the summer of 1952 a bitter loss for taft and his supporters.
eisenhower asked california senator richard m nixon to be his running mate.
although the two were not close and never were nixon brought balance to the ticket.
ike almost dumped nixon at one point in the campaign because of charges that nixon had a private campaign fund donated by wealthy californians.
nixon gave what became known as his checkers television speech for its maudlin promise to keep the family dog named checkers even though the dog had been a gift.
the speech was a success and nixon stayed on the ticket.
for the rest of his career even after his own presidency nixon celebrated the day of the speech.
at the age of 38 nixon was considered young while ike at 62 was considered old.
nixon had made his name with his search for communists when he was a member of the house un american activities committee.
in addition he was from the west coast while ikes strongest support was in the east.
the democrats nominated illinois governor adlai stevenson.
like eisenhower stevenson was a strong cold warrior and a known internationalist who had been one of the founders of the united nations.
he had a reputation as an honest politician in a state where democrats were often corrupt.
he was more conservative than truman on most domestic issues especially race and he selected alabama senator john sparkman as his running mate in part to ensure that there would be no dixiecrat walkout in 1952 stevenson was also very popular with many liberals mostly because of his intelligence and wit.
one said that his speeches were simply gems of wisdom and wit and sense unfortunately for stevensons vote getting this skill mattered more to the partys intellectual leaders than to many in the working class black urban coalition that had been key to the election of roosevelt and truman.
the campaign was the first in which television played a major role.
the republicans made effective use of short tv spots that carried brief comments by ike along with his famous smile.
ike also promised a nation that was desperately tired of the war i shall go to korea though it was unclear what he would do there.
in november ike won 55 percent of the vote and carried the electoral college 442 to 89 winning even florida tennessee texas and virginia states that had voted democrat for decades.
the republicans won small majorities in congress.
eisenhower fulfilled his campaign promise and went to korea.
early in his term he was able to conclude the peace treaty that had eluded truman.
korea remained divided but the conflict ended.
ike intended to create what he called modern republicanism he was a determined internationalist who kept the united states active in the un and nato.
under ike there would be no return to 1920s style isolationism.
he was determined to balance the federal budget and not likely to launch major new programs but not roll back the major new deal initiatives either.
he once said should any political party attempt to abolish social security unemployment insurance and eliminate labor laws and farm programs you would not hear of that party again in our political history he dismissed the conservative wing of the republican party saying of the conservative california senator william knowland in his case there seems to be no final answer to the question how stupid can you get with eisenhower s election a new republican administration was prepared to maintain many of the new deals domestic policies and trumans cold war internationalism.
individuals changed but surprisingly little policy changed after the inauguration.
nevertheless as the great depression and world war ii receded and a new generation grew up with no memory of that difficult past and as many americans experienced unprecedented prosperity the culture began to change.
the 1950s were staid to some surprisingly novel to others and full of surprises for most.
243 quick review aside from their political parties how different were truman and eisenhower as candidates and as presidents.
712 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 conclusion the experience of world war ii had a profound effect on american culture in the decade that followed the war.
the federal government offered generous benefits to returning veterans allowing a whole generation of young men to attend college to buy homes and to live comfortable middle class lives.
men and women anxious to leave the war behind married quickly and had children a lot of children.
the population soared in what was called a baby boom.
in the postwar era the living patterns of americans changed drastically.
many middle class white americans left the cities for homes in newly created suburban communities.
at the same time the rate of migration of southern blacks to the urban centers of the north exploded.
many black migrants moved into city centers because they were excluded from suburban developments.
latinos from puerto rico and mexico moved to american cities notably new york and los angeles.
the economic gains achieved during the war continued throughout the postwar period made possible in part by the position of the united states as the only remaining economic superpower in the world.
consumers who had more money than ever purchased goods produced by american manufacturers achieved new levels of economic security and affluence buying automobiles televisions and electric appliances in the postwar economy.
the end of the world war ii also brought on new attempts at international cooperation.
in an effort to create political and economic stability and a lasting peace the united nations the international monetary fund and the world bank were ushered into being.
while enjoying the remarkable prosperity of the postwar era more and more americans became deeply concerned about the soviet union and the spread of communism.
the containment of communism became the bedrock of u s foreign policy in the truman administration.
by 1952 both the united states and the soviet union possessed hydrogen bombs and the possibility of mutually assured destruction set off a cold war between the two countries that would last 40 years.
in europe the cold war was institutionalized in the western led north atlantic treaty organization founded by the united states and great britain and the eastern warsaw pact led by the soviet union.
americas uneasy relationship with the soviet union resulted in a second red scare within the united states itself.
fueled by the fiery rhetoric of senator joseph mccarthy and others americans began to suspect communist infiltration everywhere and many personal and professional lives were ruined by accusations of treason espionage and communist party membership that often had little basis in reality.
in 1950 the american policy of containment was tested when north korea attacked south korea.
the united states with support from the united nations took up the defense of south korea even after a huge army from communist china attacked u s forces in the region.
after fierce fighting the outcome of the war was ambiguous.
the united states and china signed an armistice that left korea divided much as it had been since the end of world war ii.
with the election of a new president dwight eisenhower in november 1952 the nation that was tired of the war in korea settled into what many hoped would be a new era of peace and prosperity even as they continued to fear the soviet union and the mushroom cloud of atomic destruction.
chapter review 24 1 the united states in 1945 describe the new technology living patterns and political arrangements in the united states that resulted from world warll.
review questions 1 contextualization how did advances in science and technology change everyday life for americans in the 1950s.
2 cause and effect what explains the rapid growth of suburbs in the 1950s.
3 constructing an argument why did the rate of african american migration to the north explode after world war ii.
4 comparison compare and contrast the migration of african americans and latinos in the 1950s.
what similarities and differences do you note.
6 comparison compare and contrast the anticommunist hysteria relating to world war i with the hysteria that followed world war ii.
what similarities and differences do you note.
7 historical interpretation why was the korean war a turning point in the cold war.
politics 1948 and 1952 243 explain political developments that led to the elections of truman and then eisenhower as cold war era presidents.
review questions 8 cause and effect how did trumans policy initiatives during his first term impact the election of 1948.
9 historical interpretation why was eisenhowers election a turning point in american politics.
the cold war begins 24 2 analyze the coming of the cold war tensions with the soviet union and mccarthyism at home.
review questions 5 cause and effect why did relations between the united states and the soviet union deteriorate so rapidly after world war ii.
714 partvill fears joys and limits 1945 1980 25 complacency and c 1952 1965 only the arrival of federal troops assured the integration of little rock high school in 1957 chapter 19.
however the african american community never accepted segregation or second class citizenship and in the 1950s it seemed as if african american resistance to separate but equal burst forth in many different places at about the same time see map 25 3.
legal challenges to school segregation that had been building for decades achieved a major victory in 1954 soon thereafter long simmering opposition to segregation in public transportation led to a year long bus boycott in montgomery alabama.
meanwhile young african americans and some white supporters sat in at segregated lunch counters organized voter registration drives and found themselves considering significant alternatives to american culture.
brown v board of education a supreme court decision in 1954 declaring that separate but equal schools for children of different races violated the constitution.
the long road to brown v board of education on may 17 1954 the united states supreme court announced its unanimous decision in the legal challenge to the racial segregation of public schools a case known as brown v board of education.
chief justice earl warren wrote we conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of separate but equal has no place.
separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.
it had been a long road to the day of that finding.
the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp though founded in 1909 was often only whispered in black communities in the south throughout the 1930s 1940s and 1950s.
in the early 1950s anne moody then a high school student in centerville mississippi asked her homeroom teacher what naacp meant.
the teacher said you see the naacp is trying to do a lot for the negroes and get the right to vote for negroes in the south she also warned moody i shouldnt be telling you all of this it could cost me my job the teacher was gone the following year.
in the 1930s the naacp began to challenge state separate but equal laws bypassing state legislatures and governors with federal court cases arguing that the separate facilities were in fact far from equal.
two brilliant lawyers took charge of the naacp legal effort charles hamilton houston then dean of the howard university law school and his former student thurgood marshall.
when houston retired in 1938 marshall then just 30 years old became the naacp chief counsel a position he held for 23 years.
in 1961 marshall was appointed as a federal judge serving on the u s court of appeals and from 1967 to 1991 he served as the first appointed african american justice of the u s supreme court.
the houston marshall strategy at the naacp was to chip away at segregation.
in a 1938 case missouri ex rel.
gaines v canada registrar of the university et al the u s supreme court ruled that lloyd gaines could not be rejected by the university of missouri law school on the basis of his race unless the university could offer him an equally good legal education within the state of missouri.
to offer legal education to whites but not to blacks or to force blacks to leave the state for their education chief justice hughes said is a denial of the equality of legal right in alston v school board of the city of norfolk in 1940 the naacp won a ruling that said separate salary schedules for black and white teachers violated the fourteenth amendment.
in 1950 the court issued two rulings.
in sweatt v painter it said that separate law schools for blacks and whites were not equal and in mclaurin v oklahoma state regents it ruled that segregating graduate students violated their equal protection rights.
with each case segregation was becoming more expensive for states to maintain and the arena 732 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 in brown v ihe topeka board of education the u s supreme court ruled in 1954 that public school segregation was unconstitutional topeka kansas president eisenhower ordered troops to enforce the intergration of central high school in 1957 oklahoma routes of 1961 freedom rides core congress on racial equality route from washington d c to birmingham alabama sncc student nonviolent coordinating committee route from birmingham alabama to jackson mississippi map 25 3 civil rights events 1953 1963 most of the major events of the civil rights movement took place in the states of the south.
some are indicated in this map.
nebraska in 1962 james meredith integrated j the university of mississippi texas in 1955 the murder of i emmett till age 14 by i whites drew national attention in which it could be exercised smaller.
the time was coming for a direct challenge to plessy v ferguson the 1896 decision by which the supreme court had originally approved separate but equal arrangements.
while the naacp lawyers were winning cases students at the all black r r morton high school in farmville virginia called a strike to protest conditions at their school in 1951 although the white school in farmville had comfortable facilities some classes at r r.
morton were held in tar paper shacks students had to wear coats to keep warm and the teachers had to gather wood for the wood stoves.
the authorities had long promised new facilities but construction was continually postponed.
only after going on strike did the students appeal to the naacp.
the national organization sent word that they would consider taking the case but only if the challenge was for completely integrated schools.
the students agreed and called on the adults in their community to follow them.
thus was launched one of the five cases that would be consolidated as brown v board of education.
the five states whose policies were challenged in the naacp suit hired the 1924 democratic presidential nominee john w davis as their attorney to defend the separate but equal policies.
however the supreme court agreed with the naacps argument that separate education always violated the 14th amendments guarantee of the equal protection of the laws the unanimous 1954 decision said we come then to the question presented does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race even though the physical facilities and other tangible factors may be equal deprive the children of the minority group of the equal educational opportunities.
we believe that it does.
there were those who thought that with the brown decision the battle was over.
many years later kenneth clark whose testimony was central to the case recalled ruefully how naive i was i thought that within ten years or so america would be free of it i expected southern states to resist but i thought that their resistance would decrease and that we were on the road to some sort of functional democracy.
it would take much more.
chapter traces the many changes that some americans embraced others rejected but few ignored as the united states experienced the decade known to many simply as the sixties 748 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 26 1 new voices new authorities explain the growing social protest in books films and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
though it was formative for many the civil rights movement was only one of many challenges to american culture in the 1960s.
writers and artist had often been uncomfortable with the conformity of the 1950s and their uneasiness took on new forms as the new decade began.
small political movements burst onto a larger stage.
the result was a number of books films and songs that reflected and helped shape a rapidly changing culture while wide ranging protest movements often led by students changed not only college campuses but also the country.
books films music jane jacobs was a writer and activist in new yorks greenwich village when she wrote the death and life of great american cities in 1961 in the opening line of that book jacobs said this book is an attack on current city planning and rebuilding indeed it was an amazingly successful attack.
reflecting on the books impact one urban planner wrote when an entire field is headed in the wrong direction then it probably took someone from outside to point out the obvious after jacobs city planners in new york and most cities turned away from massive highway development sprawling suburbs and isolated urban high rise buildings to focus on smaller more neighborhood friendly options.
projects to bulldoze slums and build highways were replaced in the 1960s by the redevelopment of existing urban neighborhoods.
jacobs did not bring about this change single handedly but her book was a guidebook to a new generation of urban planners.
two books published in 1962 played a similar role in other movements.
rachel carsons silent spring is often called the bible of the conservation movement.
other people dating back to theodore roosevelt talked about conserving rather than taming nature but carson gave the preservation movement a new voice in the 1960s.
while most earlier conservation efforts focused on protecting land from development carson described in graphic detail what pesticides were doing to birds and animals.
michael harringtons the other america also published in 1962 is sometimes credited with launching the kennedy johnson era war on poverty.
harringtons was far from the only voice urging a new look at the urban and rural poverty that had gone unnoticed in the affluent 1950s but harringtons book sold over a million copies and the critic dwight mcdonald convinced president kennedy to read it.
in his own way harrington like carson and jacobs put a human face on an otherwise easily ignored domestic issue.
describing the way poverty was hidden in modern america cities harrington wrote the poor still inhabit the miserable housing in the central area the failures the unskilled the disabled the aged and the minorities are right there across the tracks where they have always been.
but hardly anyone else is they have no face they have no voice the war on poverty began to change that situation in 1964 and 1965 betty friedans the feminine mystique published in 1963 played an equally central role in the development of the new womens movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s see chapter langed 751 sitting at one of the tables placing him in a police car.
quickly some 3 000 students surrounded the car and for the next 32 hours while weinberg sat in the car speaker after speaker used the top of the car as a platform.
the long spontaneous rally launched the free speech movement at berkeley.
in december of that year at a much larger student rally on the berkeley campus mario savio a junior philosophy major who emerged as the prime voice of the student protest during the siege of the police car told his fellow students there s a time when the operation of the machine becomes so odious youve got to put your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels upon the levers upon all the apparatus and youve got to make it stop hundreds marched into the administration building to stop the universitys wheels.
they sat in for two days until arrested.
berkeley remained a center of student protest.
quick review how did student protest changes in popular music and the inauguration of john f kennedy symbolize the changes coming to the united states in the early 1960s.
26 2 camelot the white house and dallas the kennedy administration analyze the successes and failures of the kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the united states.
the student protests were but one aspect of the changes taking place in the early 1960s.
the january 1961 inauguration of john f kennedy referred to often as jfk brought the youngest president elected in the nations history to replace the oldest.
a new generation was taking charge of the country from college campuses to the white house.
kennedy partisans remembered his years in office as one brief shining moment to cite the lines of the then popular camelot a broadway play about medieval glory to which the kennedys glamour was often compared.
certainly john kennedy his young and attractive wife jacqueline bouvier kennedy and their extended family made for a dramatic comparison with the sometimes dowdy eisenhowers.
they were able to project an image of glamour youth vigor the presidents favorite word pronouncing it with his boston accent as vigah and wit.
the press loved to spar with kennedy and he with them.
during the kennedy years the white house was the scene of gala events concerts and dinner parties not seen in washington for some time.
the hopes and expectations for change that arrived with kennedy were unmistakable.
the new frontier civil rights advocates also had high hopes for the kennedy administration believing that the new president who had gone out of his way as a candidate to support martin luther king jr would do more to support the cause of civil rights than eisenhower.
the kennedy administration created a committee on equal employment opportunities headed by vice president johnson to look into discrimination in hiring.
they hired blacks in the federal government including some in high positions in the civil and foreign service.
jfk nominated african americans including thurgood marshall to federal judgeships.
during the presidential campaign in 1960 kennedy promised to introduce a new federal civil rights bill if elected.
but throughout 1961 and 1962 no such bill emerged from the white house.
he also had promised to end racial discrimination in federal housing with the stroke of a pen but when no order emerged civil rights organizers started sending thousands of pens to him.
kennedy was slow to move on civil rights for many reasons.
he could count votes in the congress and southern senators with high seniority made congressional action hard to imagine.
the kennedys were also good at gauging voter interest and in 1961 752 partvill fears joys and limits 1945 1980 jacqueline kennedy and her husband made the white house a center of grace and culture as in this reception honoring nobel prize winners including the poet robert frost and the novelist pearl buck.
and 1962 not that many white voters seemed interested in civil rights issues.
at the same time j edgar hoover hated martin luther king jr and was convinced that he was a sexual degenerate and a communist.
he had tapes to prove extramarital activity on kings part if nothing to show that he was a communist.
hoover also had tapes to prove president kennedys considerable extramarital activities which may well have made both kennedy brothers reluctant to challenge hoover who they allowed to tap kings telephones.
whatever the reasons the vaunted kennedy vigor was not brought to civil rights.
in other areas kennedys new frontier as he called his domestic policy was more successful.
working closely with house speaker sam rayburn the administration was able to win an increase in the federally mandated minimum wage.
at their urging congress also provided funds for job training and tougher regulations for testing new drugs before they went on the market.
jfk was the first president since herbert hoover to include no women in the cabinet but he appointed eleanor roosevelt to head the presidential commission on the status of women that recommended federal laws against sex discrimination.
kennedy issued executive orders ending sex discrimination in the federal civil service and signed a 1963 equal pay act that mandated equal pay for equal work.
in part because of his mentally ill sister kennedy cared deeply about mental health and at his urging congress passed the mental retardation facilities and community mental health act in 1963 that funded support for mental health programs.
in may 1961 kennedy who had been critical of the lack of interest in space exploration by the eisenhower administration advocated a significant increase in funding for the national aeronautics and space administration nasa and made a promise that within 10 years the united states would safely land a man on the moon.
although kennedy did not live to see the promise fulfilled in 1969 the nation celebrated that accomplishment.
ihe chair of his council of economic advisers walter heller convinced kennedy that a tax cut would stimulate the economy leading to greater prosperity for americans and improved standing of the kennedy administration with voters.
kennedy fought new frontier the name given to the domestic programs of the kennedy administration 1961 1963.
chaptei banged 753 engel v vitale u s supreme court decision that banned mandated prayers or devotional bible reading in american public schools.
hard for the tax cut and won.
nevertheless the domestic record was disappointing to the administration which would have liked to see faster congressional action on many of its proposals.
the new york times for november 12 1963 said rarely has there been such a pervasive attitude of discouragement around capitol hill this has been one of the least productive sessions of congress within the memory of most of its members religion education and the courts just as kennedy had his reasons for not wanting to deal with civil rights he also had very strong reasons for not wanting to deal with the issue of religion.
as the first catholic to be elected president he wanted to steer clear of anything that might imply his religion was influencing his work.
but as with civil rights issues of religion were bubbling.
on june 25 1962 the u s supreme court announced its decision in the case of engel v vitale.
by a 6 1 vote the court declared that schools in new york state could not open the school day with prayer.
the specific issue in engel v vitale was of relatively recent origin.
as the cold war led to a fear of godless communism the new york state board of regents which had responsibility for all public schools in the state of new york recommended but did not require opening the school day with prayer.
then in 1958 the board composed a short official prayer almighty god we acknowledge our dependence upon thee and we beg thy blessings upon us our parents our teachers and our country it was as inoffensive as a prayer could be and any students who objected could be excused when it was recited.
nevertheless the prayer caused problems.
nonbelievers did not want to say any prayer.
devout believers found such a bland prayer close to blasphemy.
when joseph and daniel roth asked to be excused from their long island classroom during the prayer because their father asked them to they were taunted.
their father lawrence roth challenged the prayer in court.
as the case was combined with others and moved through the courts it generated public attention and anger.
in the end justice hugo black spoke for the supreme court majority in saying we think that the constitutional prohibition against laws respecting an establishment of religion must at least mean that in this country it is no part of the business of government to compose official prayers a year later the court went further.
edward and sidney schempp challenged the policy of the abington township school board pennsylvania which opened the school day with a bible reading and the lords prayer.
in a 1963 decision abington school board v schempp the u s supreme court ruled that no matter who composed the prayers the school boards practices or any devotional reading of scriptures or recitation of prayers was unconstitutional.
the court went out of its way to insist that the academic study of religion including the study of the bible for its literary and historic qualities was not only constitutional but also to be encouraged.
however it was not the business of government the court said to lead devotional activities.
the supreme courts decisions provoked a fire storm.
many americans protestants and catholics claimed that the court was legislating god out of the public schools and that historic practices that had never bothered anyone were being undermined by an unusually activist warren court.
new york congressman frank j becker proposed an amendment to the constitution to allow voluntary prayer and bible reading.
the evangelist billy graham said the trend of taking god and moral teaching from the schools is a diabolical scheme alabama governor george wallace said i don t care what they say in washington we are going to keep right on praying and reading the bible in the public schools of alabama while catholics had once opposed devotional activities in public schools sure that they would be protestant now new york archbishop francis cardinal spellman said he was shocked and frightened by the courts decisions.
for large numbers of americans the decisions were the beginnings of a cultural war that would last for decades.
754 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 kennedy s foreign policy from the bay of pigs to the cuban missile crisis in a private conversation with his defeated rival richard nixon president kennedy asked nixon foreign affairs is the only important issue for a president to handle isnt it.
kennedy said he really didnt care about the minimum wage compared to something like cuba.
while americans receiving minimum wage might care a great deal about it kennedy s focus was indeed cuba germany vietnam china and perhaps most of all the soviet union.
in his inaugural address kennedy had promised to pay any price bear any burden meet any hardship support any friend oppose any foe to assure the survival and success of liberty.
he came to office a devout cold warrior and remained one.
the first test of kennedys cold war resolve came early.
the corrupt government of cuban dictator fulgencio batista had been overthrown at the beginning of 1959 in the middle of eisenhowers second term.
the new revolutionary government led by fidel castro was very popular in the united states during its first few months in office.
castro was welcomed in the united states and even appeared on the ed sullivan show.
organized crime which had enjoyed a haven for gambling and prostitution in cuba under batista was driven out by castro to the applause of most americans.
however the cuban american relationship quickly soured.
the new revolutionary government executed a number of batista supporters too many most americans thought.
as part of its land reform efforts the castro government seized the islands large commercial enterprises including vast holdings of american sugar and oil companies.
unhappy business interests legitimate and illegitimate began a public relations campaign against the new cuban government.
castros communist leanings also became clearer as cuba developed close ties with the soviet union.
before long soviet military advisers arrived in cuba.
by the time kennedy came to office in january 1961 many considered cuba to be a virtual satellite of the soviet union.
the eisenhower administration had developed plans to train a volunteer force to invade the island.
influential people including jfks father former ambassador joseph p kennedy urged kennedy to take action.
while some advisers had reservations allen dulles the head of the central intelligence agency cia was a strong advocate and secretary of defense mcnamara and the joint chiefs of staff approved the invasion.
on april 15 1961 less than 3 months after jfk took office american based planes made an initial bombing run against the island.
two days later a brigade of 1 400 u s volunteer troops landed at the bay of pigs on cubas south coast.
the plan was for the force to connect with other cuban anti castro forces that the cia was convinced were ready to rise up against the regime.
in fact no internal revolt sprang up.
cuban defenses were strong.
when the attackers called for further air support from the united states kennedy refused.
he had become convinced that the attack was doomed.
within hours 114 of the invaders were killed and 1 189 taken prisoner.
the bay of pigs fiasco was a huge embarrassment for kennedy.
he took personal responsibility for the failure.
he also fired allen dulles.
for the rest of his term kennedy would be more cautious and less willing to trust advisers in the cia.
kennedys first summit with soviet leader nikita khrushchev took place in june 1961 in vienna just 2 months after the bay of pigs crisis.
the meeting did not go well.
khrushchev gloated over the soviet union s success in getting the first man into space when yuri gagarin orbited the earth in april.
he also made threatening comments about berlin.
khrushchev seemed to believe that the new president was weak and could be brow beaten.
in fact his actions only strengthened kennedy s inclination to show he could be tough.
two months later khrushchev ordered the construction of what came to be known as the berlin wall to separate the soviet zone of the city from the western zone and the construction of similar barriers separating all of east germany from west germany.
german communists complained that their socialist system provided free education for people who then took their skills west to make more money.
after august 1961 no such easy movement nor were family visits or other travel possible.
26 1 26 2 263 bay of pigs a 1961 invasion of cuba by anti castro rebels backed by the kennedy administration that was quickly defeated much to kennedy s embarrassment.
berlin wall a substantive partition built by east germany on instructions from the soviet union that cut off all travel between east and west berlin from 1961 to 1989 ch fim lives changed 755 medium range ballistic missile base in cuba san cristobal cuban missile crisis a tense standoff between the united states and the soviet union in october 1962 at which each country stood on the brink of nuclear war over the placement of soviet missiles in cuba.
an american surveillance plane took pictures like this one of missile facilities in cuba that deeply worried the kennedy administration.
by fall berlin had become very tense.
some kennedy advisers suggested that the united states should use force to stop construction of the berlin wall.
others wondered whether access would be blocked as it was at the time of the berlin airlift.
by the end of october u s and russian tanks faced off in berlin.
some wondered whether world war iii was about to begin.
eventually the united states and the soviet union compromised.
kennedy acknowledged that he would rather have a wall than a war and that the soviets had a right to build the berlin wall.
khrushchev did not try to close off american or western access to berlin as stalin had done.
while the city remained a flash point in the cold war and the berlin wall stayed in place until november 1989 the berlin crisis of 1961 passed.
the third major foreign policy crisis of the kennedy administration and the most dangerous took place in october 1962 again the focus was cuba.
after the u s failure in the bay of pigs invasion cuban russian ties grew stronger and the soviets sent more military personnel to cuba.
in the summer of 1962 the soviets began building missile bases in cuba that could house medium range missiles pointed at the united states.
as u s reconnaissance flights showed proof of the missiles in cuba it became clear that a major crisis the cuban missile crisis was brewing.
in this crisis atmosphere kennedy convened an executive committee of the national security council.
for 13 tense days in october 1962 these advisers debated the next u s step.
moderates led by un ambassador adlai stevenson urged restraint.
why panic about a new missile site they asked when the united states had missiles in turkey and there were enough submarine based missiles to destroy the planet.
756 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 hard liners including former secretary of state dean acheson and national security adviser mcgeorge bundy urged an immediate u s attack on the missile site.
a third group led by robert kennedy opposed a surprise strike which rfk said would make his brother the tojo the japanese premiere who ordered the attack on pearl harbor of the 1960s.
the president agreed with his brothers position and overruled the hard liners but he was also determined to be tough.
on october 22 president kennedy informed khrushchev in both a diplomatic communication and a prime time television speech that the united states would enforce a complete quarantine against future military shipments to cuba and that the united states would meet any soviet retaliation anywhere in the world with a full retaliatory response.
the stakes could not be higher.
if a soviet ship ran the blockade it would be fired on by the united states.
if the soviets made a military move the united states was prepared to fire missiles.
many worried that the world was on the brink of nuclear war.
the next morning as the first soviet ships approached people held their breaths.
then the soviet freighters turned around.
secretary of state dean rusk said were eyeball to eyeball and the other fellow just blinked behind the scenes kennedy and khrushchev had come to an agreement.
the soviets agreed to remove the missiles in return for an end to the quarantine of the island and a promise that the united states would not invade.
the united states also agreed to remove its missiles from turkey but did not announce its decision.
an unthinkable war had been avoided.
both leaders quickly took steps to avoid a repeat of the crisis and new communication systems especially a hot line from the pentagon and white house to the kremlin were set up so there would be no delay in communication in any future crisis.
some military leaders and cuban exiles were furious at kennedy.
u s air force general curtis lemay who had commanded the bombing of tokyo in 1945 stunned the president when he told him its the greatest defeat in our history mr president we should invade today others wondered whether kennedy allowed his machismo to get the best of him when the missiles in cuba were no more of a threat than others already in place and hardly worth a world war.
while the crises in cuba berlin and then cuba again were the most significant of kennedys foreign policy the president also faced others.
in spite of the 1960 campaign rhetoric in which kennedy had accused eisenhower of allowing a missile gap to develop between the united states and the soviet union once in office kennedy acknowledged that no such gap existed.
nevertheless the kennedy administration increased military spending from 47 4 billion when it took office to 53 6 billion in its last budget.
the united states expanded the number of polaris submarines armed with missiles as well as the number of land based missiles in the united states.
each side had enough missiles to destroy the world multiple times.
the administration created a new flexible response policy as an alternative to eisenhowers mutually assured destruction they gave high priority to creating counterinsurgency forces named the green berets that could engage in small scale military operations in hot spots around the world.
in planning for cuba where the administration had a special interest they developed operation mongoose a secret cia program to destabilize the castro regime by contaminating cuban sugar causing explosions in cuban factories and developing at least 33 plans to assassinate castro all of which failed.
in addition to kennedys foreign policy efforts to contain communism the administration launched a new effort at peace in laos support for the u s agency for international development aid and efforts at economic reform in latin america and elsewhere.
kennedy also launched the peace corps through an executive order to recruit young idealistic americans to spend 2 years abroad as volunteers working on education and development projects.
in the spring of his first year in office the president joined by first lady jacqueline kennedy dazzled europe.
20 26 2 20 cl jves changed 757 lyndon johnson took the oath of office on board the presidential plane flanked by his wife lady bird and jacqueline kennedy still wearing a bloodstained suit.
by the end of his first term however kennedys foreign policy legacy was mixed.
chester bowles who served for a time as undersecretary of state in the kennedy administration said that the kennedy inner circle were full of belligerence and sort of looking for a chance to prove their muscle a nuclear armed world was a dangerous place to do such a thing.
nevertheless in november 1963 in spite of ongoing tensions in southeast asia berlin and cuba jfk was still immensely popular in many parts of the world and the world was at peace.
the president turned his attention to his 1964 reelection campaign.
dallas conspiracies and legacies the kennedy team wanted to ensure that texas home of the vice president stayed democratic in 1964 but the democratic party in texas was deeply divided.
there was also deep distrust of kennedy in texas by 1963 indeed even a deep visceral hatred among some texans.
in november 1963 kennedy dreaded the trip he needed to make to build his standing in the lone star state.
after the president and jackie kennedy arrived in dallas on november 22 1963 they rode into the city center in a caravan the president and first lady along with texas governor john connally and his wife in the first car vice president johnson in the next one.
a little after noon as they passed the texas school book depository several shots rang out.
one wounded connally.
two hit the president.
a back brace he wore for constant back pain held him erect and the second shot hit his head.
by the time the presidents car reached the nearest emergency room the president was dead.
a catholic priest offered the last rites.
vice president lyndon johnson had been right behind kennedys car and quickly understood what had happened.
neither johnson nor anyone else knew how many people were involved in the assassination or how widespread the danger might be so johnson insisted that the presidential party wait until kennedys coffin was brought to air force one still parked at the airport where it had arrived that morning.
in the afternoon johnson flanked by his wife lady bird and by jacqueline kennedy took the presidential oath of office.
then they flew to washington.
kennedys death provoked an outpouring of national grief.
suddenly the youthful vigor that the president had projected and the hopes that many americans had projected onto him seemed to dim.
lee harvey oswald was arrested for the murder.
his fingerprints were on the gun and he had easy access to the window where the shots were fired.
two days later another troubled man jack ruby shot oswald in the dallas police station.
many suspected a widespread conspiracy.
president johnson asked supreme court chief justice earl warren to lead a high level bipartisan commission to find out the truth.
the commissions report known as the warren report concluded that oswald acted alone.
not everyone was convinced no one could confirm for sure the whole story behind kennedys death.
whatever the truth a very different kind of person became president on november 22 one who would lead the administration and the country with a dramatically different style and set of priorities.
262 quick review what were the major accomplishments and frustrations of the kennedy administration.
758 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the coming of lyndon b johnson 26 3 analyze the successes and failures of the johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office the launching of the great society programs and the war in vietnam.
john f kennedy had been born to wealth and had attended harvard college.
as a child he had met franklin d roosevelt because his father was roosevelts ambassador to great britain.
he was elected to congress as a war hero after his small boat pt 109 had been sunk in the pacific during world war ii and he had served 8 years in the u s senate before becoming president.
kennedy was handsome and charismatic important factors in his election and continuing popularity.
lyndon johnson was born to poverty in the texas hill country northwest of san antonio and grew up in a small house in johnson city when there were no sidewalks or electricity.
his tough and slightly wild father served in the texas legislature trying hard to make ends meet and his strong willed mother yearned for a better life.
lbj as he was often called attended southwest texas state teachers college.
he arrived in washington as a congressional secretary a year before roosevelt was elected and managed to meet fdr whom he idolized and who in 1935 appointed the then 26 year old lbj as the director of the national youth administration for the state of texas.
johnson worked harder than any other nya state director got important services for texas and never forgot the value of government when he saw the new deal bring jobs electricity and hope to people living isolated lives in rural poverty.
johnson had a long and distinguished career in congress before becoming vice president.
he was first elected to the house of representatives in 1937 he campaigned tirelessly and worked equally tirelessly once in office building strong ties and coalitions.
lbj and his wife lady bird became a family for the sometimes lonely bachelor sam rayburn another texan who served as speaker of the house for all but 4 years between 1940 and 1961 lbj lost a primary race for a senate seat in 1941 but won the seat in 1948 once in the senate johnson built connections to the powerful committee chairs.
in 1953 at the age of 45 he was elected democratic leader in the senate.
in 1955 he suffered a severe heart attack recovered quickly and kept working kept building coalitions becoming known for the johnson treatment when he would grab a colleague by the coat lapels and hold his face an inch away while using anger humor and statistics to win a wavering vote.
he was highly respected for his ability to get things done in the senate even if he was often feared and seldom liked.
few said he was handsome or charismatic.
everyone said he was effective.
johnson hated his tenure as vice president.
many of kennedy s inner circle especially attorney general robert kennedy made sure he was kept out of the most significant decisions.
once he became president lbj desperately wanted to be loved as kennedy had been but most of all was determined to get things done in a way that kennedy had not been able to do.
on the domestic front he succeeded masterfully at moving his agenda along before slowly sinking into the morass of vietnam.
the war on poverty and the great society in his first speech as president 5 days after kennedy was shot lbj mourned with the nation but he also demonstrated a confident leadership that the country was looking for.
johnson told the congress that he was determined to continue the kennedy dream of education jobs care for the elderly and equal rights for all americans.
one could question whether given his focus on foreign policy those goals had actually been kennedys dream but they would certainly be johnsons.
thus the first president from a former confederate state insisted no memorial or oration or eulogy could more eloquently honor president kennedys memory than the earliest possible passage of the civil rights bill for which he fought so long congress was being put on notice that the former powerful democratic majority leader of the senate now president was determined to see his legislation passed.
263 20 263 c 20 20 american voices lyndon b johnson great society speech 1964 263 six months after he had taken the oath of office in dallas lyndon johnson gave the commencement address at the university of michigan.
he used the speech to outline a new program a johnson program to be known as the great society to improve the quality of life for all americans.
i have come today from the turmoil of your capital to the tranquility of your campus to speak about the future of your country your imagination your initiative and your indignation will determine whether we build a society where progress is the servant of our needs or a society where old values and new visions are buried under unbridled growth.
for in your time we have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society but upward to the great society.
the great society rests on abundance and liberty for all.
it demands an end to poverty and racial injustice to which we are totally committed in our time.
but that is just the beginning.
the great society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents so i want to talk to you today about three places where we begin to build the great society in our cities in our countryside and in our classrooms our society will never be great until our cities are great.
today the frontier of imagination and innovation is inside those cities and not beyond their borders.
new experiments are already going on.
it will be the task of your generation to make the american city a place where future generations will come not only to live but to live the good life a second place where we begin to build the great society is in our countryside.
we have always prided ourselves on being not only america the strong and america the free but america the beautiful.
today that beauty is in danger.
the water we drink the food we eat the very air that we breathe are threatened with pollution.
our parks are overcrowded our seashores overburdened.
green fields and dense forests are disappearing a third place to build the great society is in the classrooms of america.
there your children s lives will be shaped.
our society will not be great until every young mind is set free to scan the farthest reaches of thought and imagination.
we are still far from that goal these are three of the central issues of the great society so will you join in the battle to give every citizen the full equality which god enjoins and the law requires whatever his belief or race or the color of his skin.
will you join in the battle to give every citizen an escape from the crushing weight of poverty.
will you join in the battle to make it possible for all nations to live in enduring peace as neighbors and not as mortal enemies.
will you join in the battle to build the great society to prove that our material progress is only the foundation on which we will build a richer life of mind and spirit.
source lyndon b johnson speech to the graduating class university of michigan ann arbor may 22 1964 public papers of the presidents of the united states lyndon b johnson book i 1963 64 pp.
704 707 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what are some of the specific elements that johnson included in his definition of the great society.
2 historical interpretation knowing that johnson idolized franklin roosevelt what parallels do you see between the great society and the new deal.
later after he left office johnson explained his approach to the presidency.
if its really going to work the relationship between the president and the congress has got to be almost incestuous.
hes got to know them even better than they know themselves.
and then on the basis of this knowledge hes got to build a system that stretches from the moment a bill is introduced to the moment it is officially enrolled as the law of the land and that was exactly what johnson did.
he made sure he knew who would support each bill knew what the specific desires were of those who might be brought to support a measure and knew how to cajole those who did not want to support it.
he rewarded supporters with phone calls personal notes white house invitations and special services in their states and districts and he never hesitated to punish opponents.
he came to office with a democratic majority in both houses of congress and a nation mourning a fallen president.
he used that circumstance plus his incredible legislative skill to move significant legislation through an often reluctant congress.
760 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 johnson s first agenda was the stalled civil rights bill.
everyone expected the bill that kennedy had submitted to be watered down.
johnson normally the great compromiser would not allow any tampering with the bill.
he was determined to keep every section intact.
he broke with his senate mentor richard russell of georgia who led the opposition to the bill and instead made an alliance with the republican senate minority leader everett dirksen of illinois.
with dirksens help republicans and democrats overcame a russell led filibuster.
the most sweeping civil rights bill since reconstruction was passed and signed by johnson on july 2 1964 it included not only provisions for equal access and equal opportunity but also specifically forbade discrimination in employment based on race color religion and national origin as well as outlawed discrimination based on sex a clause that later feminists would use most effectively.
the law established a new equal employment opportunity commission to ensure enforcement.
as johnson pushed hard for the civil rights act of 1964 he also tackled a broader agenda.
in his first state of the union speech in january 1964 johnson said this administration today here and now declares unconditional war on poverty in america then in may he used the commencement speech at the university of michigan to describe what he called the great society which would be how he described all of his domestic programs.
kennedy had already started efforts to attack poverty in the united states but johnson the new dealer from texas had seen what federally financed rural electrification did to change the lives of poor people and was passionate see map 26 1.
he idolized franklin roosevelt and wanted to imitate him.
he also knew that if he wanted to remain in office he would have to face a skeptical electorate in only 11 months and he wanted to present a solid track record.
the first legislation of the war on poverty was passed by congress in august 1964 it included provision for many of the programs later associated with the great society including volunteers in service to america vista a domestic peace corps that recruited young people to work for a year serving in high poverty urban and rural settings a neighborhood youth corps to provide jobs for poor youth modeled on the civilian conservation corps of the new deal era work study loans and grants to support college students small business loans community action programs directed at building up grass roots organizing ventures head start to provide poor children with the same sort of readiness for kindergarten that their more well off counterparts got at home neighborhood legal services that provided government funded lawyers for the poor and to coordinate all of these ventures an office of economic opportunity.
this impressive agenda was only a first step for johnson but to do more he needed to be elected in his own right.
johnson wanted to not only win election in 1964 but also win with such a mandate that nothing could stand in the way of his programs.
before he could do that however johnson had to face a divided democratic party a republican opponent and his own inner demons.
johnsons insecurities ran deep.
he knew that the kennedy family despised him.
he knew that he did not have their urbane sophistication and that a century after the civil war much of the country still distrusted southerners.
he also knew powerfully so that he had become president the office he had wanted all his life only through a terrible tragedy.
despite his concerns however americans saw lbj as the sitting president who had taken command of the situation when jfk was killed and johnson had no serious resistance to the 1964 nomination.
notwithstanding johnson was under great pressure to name attorney general robert kennedy as his running mate.
there was a logic to the move bobby as he was always known was keeper of the kennedy legacy and his nomination would unite the party.
still as johnson later wrote with bobby on the ticket id never know if i could be elected on my own in addition johnson deeply disliked bobby kennedy.
he was convinced that bobby had tried to derail his own vice presidential nomination in 1960 eventually lbj informed bobby that he 26 1 20 26 3 the great society the name lyndon johnson gave to his far reaching domestic program which included federal aid to education medicare and medicaid health insurance immigration reform and a voting rights act.
ch map 26 1 americans in poverty.
this map shows the percentage and distribution of americans living below the poverty line at the end of the 1960s.
would not be his running mate and instead supported him in a successful run for the u s senate from new york.
johnson selected liberal minnesota senator hubert humphrey to be his vice president.
humphrey though more liberal than kennedy or johnson was also deeply loyal to johnson perhaps even to a fault.
the most serious challenge to johnsons easy nomination came from the mississippi freedom democratic party mfdp in which grass roots civil rights activists sought the convention seats of the regular mississippi delegation that had been elected in white only caucuses see chapter 19.
pressure for change came from new york representative emanuel celler who had tried and failed to get an exception to the old and restrictive national origin quotas so that jews could flee nazi germany and who was now determined to change the law see chapter 27 rights ind limits 791 woodstock music and art fair a countercultural music festival that attracted an audience of over 400 000 in 1969 in 1974 the u s supreme court in lau v nichols ruled that school districts must make accommodations for students who came to school not speaking english.
these accommodations could include english immersion programs or full bilingual programs.
they could not as san francisco had been doing simply tell a non english speaker like kenny lau to make the best of it and learn english on his own.
a year later in november 1975 congress passed and president ford signed the education for all handicapped children act requiring the least restrictive possible accommodation for students with special needs.
the 1970s were also a time in which the nature of american racial diversity began to change.
in 1965 when lyndon johnson signed a new immigration law only five percent of immigrants to the united states were from asia.
in the 1970s that number climbed to 50 percent.
small japanese and chinese communities grew dramatically while immigrants began to arrive from india pakistan and korea.
especially in california the growing asian population changed state and local politics.
immigration from latin america also increased significantly not only from mexico but also from many countries of central and south american as well as the racially diverse islands of the caribbean.
with this growing racial diversity interracial marriages became more common.
a child with one asian parent and one parent from central america was not adequately described with traditional ethnic labels.
out of the closet stonewall and gay lesbian rights the new york times for june 29 1969 carried an article that reported a shift in the citys gay community that would eventually spread to the nation.
of particular note it said hundreds of young men went on a rampage in greenwich village shortly after 3 a m yesterday after a force of plainclothes men raided a bar that the police said was well known for its homosexual clientele.
something shifted when a group of gay men whom the police assumed would submit quietly to arrest as they had in the past refused to do so.
many who had long kept their identities hidden stood up.
many would never return to a closeted life.
in the 1970s gay liberation became a political movement.
while the american psychological association apa had traditionally defined homosexuality as a form of mental illness pressure from outside and from within its own ranks led to a 1973 change when its board voted to remove homosexuality from its list of psychiatric disorders.
we will be removing one of the justifications for the denial of civil rights to individuals whose only crime is that their sexual orientation is to members of the same sex an apa leader said.
in november 1974 elaine nobel was elected to the massachusetts state legislature as the first openly lesbian or gay state representative in the united states.
the following january minnesota state senator allan spear announced that he too was gay and inspired by nobel would no longer keep his sexual orientation a secret.
then in 1977 harvey milk a gay man was elected to the san francisco board of supervisors symbolizing the radical change that was taking place.
a counterculture and its critics sex drugs and rock n roll the summer after richard nixons inauguration more than 400 000 young americans gathered on august 15 17 1969 on a farm in bethel new york for the woodstock music and art fair.
many more would have attended if massive traffic jams and rain induced mud had not made travel to woodstock exceedingly difficult.
those who attended woodstock heard janis joplin jimi hendrix and jefferson airplane as well as folk performers including joan baez.
many smoked marijuana swam in the nude and generally enjoyed a weekend free from the constraints of traditional society.
if any event stands as a symbol of the counterculture of the late 1960s woodstock was that event.
it was also a symbol that stood closer to the end of the countercultures life than the beginning.
792 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 several factors helped create the countercultures hippies of the 1960s.
one was the creation of hallucinogenic drugs.
the creation of a diethylamide of lysergic acid lsd by albert hoffman no relation to abbie hoffman who was seeking a way to treat schizophrenia set a new generation on a drug assisted search for vision quests and heightened ecstasy in body and soul.
lsd was popularized by timothy leary and ken kesey as the key to the ultimate revelation or a way to blow your mind music was also essential to the counterculture.
rock n roll had gone through extraordinary changes in the 1960s.
two british rock groups the beatles and the rolling stones became huge hits in the united states in the early 1960s with music that mocked mainstream music including songs like a hard days night bob dylan moved from folk music to rock.
his like a rolling stone moved to number one on the charts.
in sergeant pepper s lonely hearts club band and their first movie yellow submarine the beatles embraced the psychedelic world.
finally anger at a war that seemed always to be escalating led some notably abbie hoffman and jerry rubin to conclude that the best protest was street theater and humor that mocked those who they thought were leading the country to ruin.
if the counterculture had a physical home it was in san franciscos haight ashbury district from 1966 to 1969 in haight ashbury the counterculture ruled its own small domain.
street theater could be seen on every corner.
a group called the diggers gave out free food.
relationships were casual and informal.
drugs were easily available.
the summer of 1967 was declared the summer of love and young people from every corner of the united states streamed into the haight to make love not war but drugs led to too many emergency room visits and violence.
rock heroes janice joplin and jimi hendrix both died of drug overdoses in 1970 and jim morrison died in 1971 each 27 years old.
venereal disease spread rapidly.
the free food disappeared and the street actors went elsewhere.
utopia it seemed could not last long.
the woodstock festival of 1969 was a 3 day celebration of new freedoms that were already passing for many.
quick review how might an historian account for the many political and cultural movements that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s.
the culture wars of the 1970s 27 j analyze the reaction to the liberal and radical politics of the 1960s and 1970s and the growth of new militant conservative movements.
in the 1970s the united states was a deeply divided nation.
among activist women there were major conflicts between feminist and with antifeminist groups.
conservative protestants catholics and jews found new common ground often in opposition to liberals in their own traditions.
the nations deep racial divides shifted as various groups representing specific ethnicities whites blacks latinos asians and american indians moved in different directions.
phyllis schlafly and the defeat of the equal rights amendment perhaps no one symbolized the new political situation what some have called the culture wars of the 1970s as much as phyllis schlafly.
schlafly was born phyllis stewart in a middle class family in st louis missouri in august 1924 3 years after betty friedan another child of the midwest.
however their paths diverged dramatically.
schlafly deeply influenced by her roman catholic background and the commitment to individual responsibility she was taught as a child became a republican party activist.
throughout the 1940s and 1950s schlafly was a conservative activist within the republican party.
she organized grassroots efforts for barry goldwater and wrote a choice not an echo an attack on liberals within the republican party.
chapter 29 a new world ordj 29 1 operation desert storm code name for the successful offensive against iraq by the united states and its allies in the 1991 persian gulf war.
north american free trade agreement nafta agreement reached in 1993 by canada mexico and the united states to substantially reduce barriers to trade.
bush announced this will not stand the united states negotiated with hussein but quickly began military planning if negotiations failed.
bush gained the support of syria egypt and saudi arabia in insisting that iraq must leave kuwait.
in november the un security council authorized the use of force if negotiations did not succeed.
while there was significant opposition in the united states to any intervention congress authorized the use of force though in the senate the vote was a close 52 47 on january 17 1991 the u s led operation desert storm began.
an air war showered missiles and bombs on the iraqi forces in kuwait and destroyed communications and electrical systems in iraq.
on february 24 u s marines from bases in saudi arabia landed in kuwait and in 100 hours of battle drove the iraqi forces out of the country.
kuwait was reestablished as an independent country and a close u s ally.
fearing unnecessary carnage and not wanting a u s occupation of iraq proper bush then halted all military operations.
the war was over.
it seemed an easy military victory but it was not without costs.
within iraq rebellions broke out against husseins rule.
while bush hoped they would succeed he was not willing to intervene or to try to topple hussein fearing that the united states would be caught in a long term land war in iraq.
he did however take action to protect the kurdish minority in a new autonomous region within northern iraq announcing a no fly zone in which the united states would shoot down any iraqi planes over that area but opposition forces in the rest of the country expecting u s aid that never came were slaughtered by husseins troops.
a u s boycott of iraq led to widespread suffering within the country.
finally the staging of u s troops in saudi arabia site of the holiest places in the muslim world stirred anger among devout muslims who hated the idea of non muslims in that region.
among those who were angry was osama bin laden a saudi who founded al qaeda a terrorist organization to retaliate against both saudi arabia and the united states.
meanwhile closer to home bush decided in december 1989 that panamas dictator manuel noriega had to be removed.
noriega had received cia support to oppose communists in the region but he had also become rich through drug trafficking and had become a brutal dictator.
when his party lost a presidential election in may 1989 noriega annulled the election.
knowing that the carter era treaty meant that the panama canal was going to be returned to panama bush took no chances.
on december 20 a u s assault team landed in panama and took control of the country.
they restored the democratically elected president of panama guillermo endara and eventually arrested noriega as a drug dealer and imprisoned him in florida.
the bush team also made other international efforts that had mixed results.
the administration negotiated a north american free trade agreement nafta that would eliminate tariffs between the united states and canada and mexico but senate confirmation of the treaty was slow in coming.
into somalia a nation in northeast africa threatened by famine and chaos the united states sent 28 000 peacekeeping troops but could not effect large scale changes.
to the surprise of many of its own citizens yugoslavia which had been relatively stable since the end of world war ii disintegrated into ethnic hostility between its eastern orthodox serbian roman catholic croatian and bosnian muslim communities.
in response to the new crisis in yugoslavia the united states supported a un peacekeeping mission which was ineffective and an arms embargo.
even with the cold war over the world remained a confusing and dangerous place.
education legislation and the supreme court in his inaugural address george bush angered the outgoing ronald reagan by saying that it was time to make kinder the face of the nation and gentler the face of the world.
he also continued the reagan assault on big government insisting 842 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present that the new kindness must come from a thousand points of light emerging from local nongovernmental groups around the country rather than from federal government programs.
bush called himself an education president where reagan sought to abolish the department of education and reduce the federal governments role in education bush convened the nation s governors at an education summit in charlottesville virginia in the fall of 1989 to address the challenges in american public schools.
the plan that emerged from bushs partnership with the governors who were led by arkansas governor bill clinton was called america 2000 it sought to improve the nation s schools by setting new national standards for all students.
bush also focused efforts on two other pieces of legislation that would have far reaching results.
he supported the clean air act that toughened air quality standards and pollution controls.
it would effect huge changes in industry and begin to shift more attention to environmental issues.
he also led the fight for the americans with disabilities act ada that passed congress in 1990 the ada outlawed discrimination in employment public services and public accommodations for people with disabilities.
it not only transformed the face of american buildings that now had to provide wheelchair ramps elevators and appropriate lavatories for those with physical disabilities but also put in motion pervasive changes in hiring practices and services that would benefit all those with disabilities including those who were deaf and blind.
bushs first appointment to the supreme court david souter drew little controversy.
souter turned out to be a more liberal judge than many expected probably including bush especially when he voted to affirm the courts roe v wade decision in 1992 when thurgood marshall retired bush stirred considerable controversy by nominating clarence thomas.
thomas like marshall was an african american but while marshall had been known as mr.
civil rights and was probably the most liberal member of the court in many years thomas was known as an unusually conservative republican.
in his confirmation hearings thomas was accused of sexual harassment by anita hill a black law professor and former member of thomass staff.
hill offered explicit testimony as to what thomas had said and done which was highly embarrassing to thomas and his supporters.
hill was attacked in turn by conservatives and thomas called the assault a high tech lynching for uppity blacks but when he was confirmed by the narrowest of senate votes 52 to 48 many women concluded that the male senators did not take sexual harassment seriously.
while thomas took his seat on the court more women ran for and won elective office the following year than in any previous time increasing their numbers in the senate the house and state legislatures.
race from rodney king to o j.
simpson in march 1991 rodney king an african american failed to stop for police on the foothill freeway near san fernando california.
los angeles police department lapd officers gave chase for 8 miles and finally arrested king.
when king resisted arrest four police officers beat him as he lay on the ground.
a nearby resident used a home video camera to record the arrest and beating and the video was quickly distributed around the nation.
people were outraged.
although king had resisted arrest the officers had clearly continued to beat him long after he was subdued.
the four officers on the video were arrested.
their attorneys argued that they could not get a fair trial in los angeles and the trial was moved to mostly rural simi county california.
the result of the move was that the officers faced an all white jury unlikely in los angeles county.
in april 1992 the jury found three of the officers clean air act passed by congress in 1990 as amendments to an earlier act required substantial restrictions on air pollution.
americans with disabilities act ada legislation that significantly improved options for people with disabilities.
the supreme court s 1973 roe v wade decision stating that the right to privacy guaranteed in the constitution protects a woman s right to choose an abortion remained controversial and impacted american politics for decades to come most of all in terms of the appointment every new supreme court justice.
not guilty and deadlocked on the fourth.
the acquittal released pent up anger in the black community in los angeles.
riots lasting 4 days resulted in 53 deaths 2 300 injuries and 1 billion in property damage.
black and latino rioters targeted whites and asians in their neighborhoods perhaps especially korean storeowners.
a video from the riot showed a white truck driver being pulled out of his cab and beaten.
only the intervention of other blacks who got the driver to a hospital saved his life.
for many the arrest of king the trial and the riot that followed illustrated just how deeply lines were still drawn between races in the united states in the 1990s.
while the events around king got the headlines scholars and activists debated the state of race relations.
some observed that despite what happened much had changed since the 1950s when blacks were legally barred from white schools white bus seats and all white polling places in many places.
orlando patterson a harvard sociologist wrote relations between ordinary afro americans and euro americans are in fact the best they have ever been although still far from ideal other scholars were less sure noting that events like the beating of rodney king and data about the educational experience of many black and latino students confirmed that much had not changed.
andrew hacker wrote that a huge racial chasm remains and there are few signs that the coming century will see it closed in 1994 another crisis illustrated the depth of the racial divide in the united states.
simpson a celebrated african american hall of fame former football star was arrested in june after his divorced wife nicole brown who was white and her white friend ron goldman were found stabbed to death just outside her condominium in an exclusive neighborhood of los angeles.
when the police issued a warrant for simpsons arrest he and a friend fled in simpsons white bronco down the artesia freeway while perhaps 100 000 americans watched on tv.
simpson eventually surrendered and his trial continued for most of the next year.
the evidence against simpson seemed strong but black and white americans saw it differently.
in one poll 63 percent of whites thought he would get a fair trial while 69 percent of blacks thought he would not.
the trial was a media circus.
simpsons lead attorney johnnie cochran a tough african american trial lawyer proved that the investigation of simpson by the los angeles police was filled with racist assumptions although he did not prove simpsons innocence.
when in october 1995 a jury acquitted simpson of the murder charge a majority of blacks agreed with the verdict and celebrations broke out in black communities while most whites were stunned.
regardless of whoever killed brown and goldman the simpson trial showed that americans of different races were deeply divided in how they viewed the criminal justice system in the 1990s.
economic troubles and the election of 1992 bushs greatest political failure was his inability to manage the u s economy.
after 1990 the economy went into a serious recession.
during 1991 and 1992 at t fired 100 000 workers gm fired 74 000 and two major airlines pan am and eastern went bankrupt throwing more out of work.
people blamed the president.
with his preoccupation with foreign policy bush seemed out of touch a perception that did not help his political standing.
bushs economic problems became an even worse political liability when he decided in the face of the rapidly increasing government debt that he needed to raise taxes in spite of his promise not to do so.
when the top tax bracket was increased from 28 to 31 5 percent the new york post headline said read my lips i lied conservative republicans never forgave bush.
with the republican party in not quite open revolt and the nations economy in trouble democrats smelled victory in the 1992 election.
arkansas governor bill clinton soon emerged as a democratic front runner.
when clinton lost the new hampshire primary he called himself the comeback kid and campaigned harder than ever.
clinton demonstrated a combination of strengths and of weaknesses.
844 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 29 1 president bush future president clinton and independent candidate ross perot debated in the lively 1992 presidential campaign.
he was brilliant.
even though he grew up in poverty he excelled in school and won scholarships to georgetown university was awarded a rhodes scholarship to oxford and then went on to yale law school.
at yale he also met and married fellow student hillary rodham.
he was as charismatic on the campaign trail as john f kennedy had been.
as one of the founders of the democratic leadership council he was a moderate who distanced himself from his partys more liberal members.
clinton also had his weaknesses.
the explanations he gave for his rumored womanizing draft dodging and one time marijuana smoking were never convincing and he earned the name slick willie but he was a tough campaigner who would not quit.
he won the democratic nomination asked tennessee senator al gore a fellow baby boomer to be his running mate and in spite of a personally chaotic style kept his campaign focused.
a sign in the clinton campaign headquarters reading its the economy stupid said it all.
an independent candidate also entered the race eccentric billionaire h ross perot.
perot described the deficit as being like a crazy aunt we keep down in the basement.
all the neighbors know shes there but nobody wants to talk about her he said that bushs nafta treaty would produce a giant sucking sound of american jobs leaving the country.
although given virtually no chance of winning perot was the most popular third party candidate in many years.
bush was challenged for the republican nomination by conservative commentator pat buchanan known as the pit bull of the right bush easily defeated buchanan for the nomination but the attack weakened the president.
the conservative dominance of the 1992 republican convention especially the vocal role of religious conservatives like buchanan alienated many more moderate voters.
throughout the fall campaign the president seemed disengaged.
it was not a close contest.
clinton won almost 45 million votes to bushs 39 million.
surprisingly perot won almost 20 million votes hurting bush more than clinton.
democrats retained control of the senate 57 to 43 and the house 258 to 176.
29j quick review how did george h w.
bush s foreign policy concerns evolve over the course of his presidency.
chapter e how did changes in the 1990s connect the united states to the rest of the world to an extent unimagined at the beginning or in the middle of the 1900s.

chapter 2 chapter 3 the english colonies in north america what were the similarities and differences among the colonies in north america.
3 1 introduction in the mid 1700s a german schoolteacher named gottlieb mittelberger boarded a ship bound for the colony of pennsylvania in far off north america.
mittelberger had borrowed the cost of his passage by signing on as an indentured servant.
he would have to settle his debt by working for several years for the master who bought his services.
the voyage across the atlantic was horrible.
most passengers suffered from illness and hunger.
the people are packed densely mittelberger wrote like herrings so to say in the large sea vessels.
one person receives a place of scarcely 2 feet width and 6 feet length there is on board these ships terrible misery stench fumes horror vomiting many kinds of seasickness fever dysentery headache heat constipation boils scurvy cancer mouth rot and the like all of which come from old and sharply salted food and meat also from very bad and foul water when the nightmarish voyage ended mittelberger had to stay on board until his service was bought.
most indentured servants had to work for their masters for three to six years but commitments varied according to the servants age and strength.
as mittelberger noted young people from 10 to 15 years must serve till they are 21 years old why were people willing to go through such hardships to come to the colonies.
many colonists came to north america for the chance to own land and start a new life.
others were seeking freedom to practice their religion.
there were also some who did not have a choice.
a number of convicts people in jail were forced to go to north america to work off their debts as indentured servants.
millions of africans were kidnapped from their homelands and brought to the colonies as slaves.
in this chapter summary in this chapter 4 colonial society had a strong religious flavor.
here colonial citizens gather around a church on sunday.
4 6 religion religion was an important part of colonial life.
most colonists tried to lead good lives based on their faith.
children grew up reading the bible from cover to cover several times over.
puritan church services in new england the sound of a drum or horn called puritans to worship on sunday morning.
captains of the watch made sure everyone was a sabbath keeper sometimes houses were searched to ensure that everyone was at church.
church services were held in the town meetinghouse.
this was the most important building in the community and was used for all public meetings.
inside were rows of wooden benches called pews and a pulpit a platform where the preacher stood.
a seating committee carefully assigned seats with the best ones going to older wealthy people.
services could last as long as five hours.
at midday villagers would go to noon houses near the church to warm themselves by a fire eat and socialize.
then they returned to church for the long afternoon sermon.
the great awakening beginning in the 1730s a religious movement known as the great awakening swept through the colonies.
this movement was spurred by a feeling that people had lost their religious faith.
the forms of religion were kept up a puritan observed but there was little of the power of god in it.
to revive peoples religious spirit preachers traveled from town to town holding outdoor revival meetings.
there they delivered fiery sermons to huge crowds.
their words touched the hearts and souls of many colonists.
benjamin franklin wrote about the change he observed in philadelphia it seemed as if all the world were growing religious so that one could not walk through the town in an evening without hearing psalms bible songs sung in different families of every street the great awakening had a powerful effect on the colonies.
it helped spread the idea that all people are equal in the eyes of god.
ordinary people could understand gods will if they had an open heart and a desire to know gods truth.
by encouraging ideas of liberty equality and self reliance the great awakening helped pave the way for the american revolution.
great awakening a revival of religious feeling and belief in the american colonies that began in the 1730s life in the colonies 71 4 7 education i children gather with their teacher in a colonial school.
these children were among a minority of children who received formal education.
most children did not go to school beyond the elementary level.
except in new england most children in the colonies received little formal education.
neither the middle nor the southern colonies had public schools.
in the southern colonies most families were spread out along rivers.
a few neighbors might get together to hire a teacher for their children.
wealthy planters often hired tutors to educate younger children at home.
older children were sent to schools in distant cities or even england to complete their education.
in the middle colonies religious differences among quakers catholics jews baptists and other religious groups slowed the growth of public education.
each religious group or family had to decide for itself how to educate its children.
some groups built church schools.
others were content to have parents teach their children at home.
only in new england were towns required to provide public schools.
the puritans support for education was inspired by their religious faith.
they wanted their children to be able to read the bible.
to encourage education massachusetts passed a law in 1647 that required every town with 50 families or more to hire an instructor to teach their children to read and write.
towns with more than 100 families were required to build a school.
similar laws were passed in other new england colonies.
wiv adivcu lu contribute whatever they could to the village school.
contributions might be money vegetables firewood or anything else the school needed.
often land was set aside as school meadows or school fields this land was then rented out to raise money for teachers salaries.
schools were one room buildings with a chimney and fireplace ii the center.
there were no boards to write on or maps.
pencils and pa per were scarce.
students shouted out spelling words and wrote sum in ink on pieces of bark.
there was usually one book the new engl primer which was used to teach the alphabet syllables and prayers.
i 72 chapter 5 about 90 000 pounds of tea were dumped into the sea that night.
nothing else on the ships was touched.
news of the boston tea party excited patriots throughout the colonies.
this is the most magnificent moment of all wrote john adams in his journal the next day.
this destruction of the tea is so bold so daring so firm it must have important consequences he was right.
5 7 the intolerable acts lord north was stunned by news of the boston tea party.
as he saw it he had tried to help the colonists by sending them cheap tea.
and what did they do.
they threw it in the sea.
this time they had gone too far.
king george agreed.
to him the issue was no longer about taxes.
it was about great britains control over the colonies.
we must master them totally he declared or leave them to themselves the king wasnt about to leave the colonies to themselves however.
great britains anger led parliament to pass a new series of laws in 1774 these laws were so harsh that many colonists called them intolerable or unacceptable.
throughout the colonies they became known as the intolerable acts.
parliament punishes massachusetts the intolerable acts were designed to punish massachusetts for the boston tea party.
the first law closed boston harbor to all shipping until the ruined tea was paid for.
the second law placed the government of massachusetts firmly under british control.
colonists in massachusetts could not even hold a town meeting without the colonial governors permission.
the third law said that british soldiers who were accused of murder would be tried in england not in the colonies.
finally more troops were sent to boston to enforce the new laws.
a few british leaders worried that the intolerable acts might push the colonies into rebellion.
but george iii was sure they would force the colonists to give in to british authority.
the first of the intolerable acts punished massachusetts for the boston tea party.
it closed boston harbor to all shipping until the destroyed tea was paid for.
as a result sailors and dockworkers lost their jobs and stores closed for lack of goods to sell.
the colonies begin to unite in fact the intolerable acts did not force the colonists to give in.
boston patriots declared they would abandon their city to flames before paying a penny for the lost tea.
merchants in other cities showed their support by closing their shops.
many colonies sent food and money to boston so that its citizens would not starve.
toward independence 97 in virginia lawmakers drafted a resolution in support of massachusetts.
the virginians said that everyone s rights were at stake.
an attack made on one of our sister colonies they declared is an attack made on all british america.
the virginians also called for a congress or meeting of delegates from all the colonies.
the purpose of the congress would be to find a peaceful solution to the conflicts with great britain.
not all americans agreed with this plan.
in every colony there were loyalists who thought that bostonians had gone too far and should pay for the tea.
if they were forced to choose they would side with the king against sam adams and his sons of liberty.
in their view it was the misguided patriots who were causing all the trouble.
delegates from the colonies met in philadelphia atthe first continental congress in 1774 patrick henry of virginia urged the colonists to unite as americans not as citizens of separate colonies.
the granger collection newyork the first continental congress in september 1774 some 50 leaders from 12 colonies met in philadelphia.
the meeting brought together delegates from most of the british colonies on the north american continent so it was called the first continental congress.
the delegates were used to thinking of themselves as citizens of their own colonies.
patrick henry a leader from virginia urged them to come together as one people.
i am not a virginian he declared but an american but only strong patriots like sam and john adams were ready to think of themselves this way.
many delegates were strong loyalists who still thought of themselves as british.
still others like george washington were somewhere in between.
only one thing united the delegates their love of liberty and hatred of tyranny.
in spite of their differences the delegates agreed to send a respectful message to king george.
the message urged the king to consider their complaints and to recognize their rights.
the delegates also called for a new boycott of british goods until parliament repealed the intolerable acts.
finally they agreed to meet again the following may if the boycott didnt work.
the colonies form militias in towns and cities throughout the colonies patriots appointed committees to enforce the boycott.
in case the boycott didnt work they also organized local militias.
in new england the volunteers called themselves minutemen because they could be ready to fight in 60 seconds.
across the colonies militias marched and drilled.
in new hampshire unknown persons stole 100 barrels of gunpowder and 16 cannons from a british fort.
similar thefts occurred in other colonies.
rather than forcing the colonies to give in the intolerable acts had brought the two sides to the brink of war.
chapter 5 5 8 lexington and concord king george had made many mistakes in his decisions about the colonies.
the first continental congress listed all these mistakes in its message to the king.
now he made another one.
rather than consider the colonists complaints king george refused even to answer their message.
the new england governments are in a state of rebellion he said.
blows must decide whether they are to be subject to this country or independent in boston general gage the kings commander of british troops in america got ready to deliver those blows.
this hand colored engraving by connecticut engraver amos doolittle shows the british firing upon the minutemen who are gathered at lexington this was the first battle in the war for independence from great britain.
the first blow at lexington in april 1775 a spy told general gage that the colonists were hiding a large supply of gunpowder and weapons in the nearby village of concord.
general gage decided to strike at once.
the general ordered 700 of his best troops to march to concord and seize the weapons.
to keep the colonists from moving the weapons the attack had to be a surprise.
so gage had his troops march the 20 miles to concord at night.
the colonists had their own spies.
when gages troops slipped out of boston on april 18 1775 patriots were watching their every move.
soon paul revere and others were galloping through the countryside warning colonists that the british soldiers were coming.
the news reached lexington a town on the road to concord in the early hours of april 19 led by captain john parker a small band of minutemen gathered nervously in the chilly night air.
toward independence 99 at the north bridge in concord the minutemen fired upon british troops who had occupied the town.
surprised by the fury of the colonial attack the british fled in panic.
the amos doolittle engraving above shows the bridge at the time of the battle.
the photograph shows the bridge today.
at dawn the british troops reached the town green.
stand your ground ordered parker.
dont fire unless fired upon but if they mean to have a war let it begin here as the minuteman faced the british troops a shot rang out from where no one knew for certain.
without orders the soldiers rushed forward shooting wildly.
a few minutemen managed to return fire.
when the firing stopped eight colonists lay dead or dying.
another ten were limping to safety with painful wounds.
the british troops gave three cheers for victory and marched on to concord.
the second blow at concord by breakfast time the british were in concord searching for gunpowder and weapons.
but the colonists had hidden them.
in frustration the soldiers piled up a few wooden tools tents and gun carriages and set them on fire.
on a ridge outside the city militiamen from the surrounding countryside watched the smoke rise.
will you let them burn the town down shouted one man.
captain isaac davis replied i havent a man thats afraid to go davis marched his volunteers down the hill.
as they approached concords north bridge the british troops opened fire.
davis fell dead a bullet through his heart.
the british expected the americans to break and run.
to their surprise the minutemen stood their ground and fired back.
two minutes later it was the redcoats who were running away in panic.
the retreat back to boston was a nightmare for the british.
more than 4 000 armed and angry minutemen lined their route shooting at every redcoat they saw.
by the end of the day 74 british soldiers were dead and another 200 were wounded or missing.
the colonists counted their own losses as 49 dead and 41 wounded.
a british officer chapter you read about tensions between the colonies and great britain in the mid 1700s.
before 1763 during the french and indian war 1754 1763 great britain and france fought for territory and power.
when the war ended france gave up canada to great britain.
great britain now had a much larger american empire to control.
early british actions in the colonies the war left great britain with huge debts.
to raise money parliament passed the stamp act in 1765 colonists protested the stamp act because it was passed without colonial representation.
colonists also protested the quartering act which required them to house british troops at the colonies expense.
the townshend acts and the boston massacre the townshend acts imposed more taxes on the colonies which divided many colonists into opposing camps.
loyalists urged obedience to great britain but patriots resisted taxation without representation through protests boycotts and riots.
tensions in boston erupted into violence in 1770 when british troops fired into a crowd of colonists in what become known as the boston massacre.
the boston tea party and the intolerable acts when patriots protested a new tax on tea by throwing tea into boston harbor in 1773 great britain responded by passing the intolerable acts to force the colonies to give in to british authority.
patriots responded by forming the first continental congress and organizing colonial militias.
lexington and concord fighting between patriots and british troops at lexington and concord in 1775 showed that colonists would not only fight for their rights but were willing to die for them.
this stone marks the line where minutemen faced british troops at the battle of lexington.
the stone is inscribed with the words of john parker captain of the lexington minutemen.
toward independence 101 reading further poet henry wadsworth longfellow i love the story of paul revere whether he rode or not so said president warren g harding in 1923 like most americans at that time harding probably learned about revere as a schoolboy when he read a poem by henry wadsworth longfellow.
later when a skeptic claimed the story of revere s ride never happened harding sprang to the poet s defense.
but was revere the hero longfellow made him out to be.
in 1860 the young nation whose fight for freedom began at lexington and concord was in danger of falling apart.
war clouds gathered as americans debated the issues of slavery and states rights.
the south which had grown prosperous with slave labor vigorously defended its way of life.
the north which had grown even more prosperous without slave labor condemned slavery as morally wrong.
americans had never been so divided or so close to civil war.
henry wadsworth longfellow was then the nations most popular poet.
he was also a northerner who opposed slavery.
as he watched the nation move toward war longfellow began thinking about a new poem.
he wanted it to be a call to arms for all who loved liberty in such a time of peril.
one day in april 1860 longfellow took a walk with a friend in boston.
his companion told him a story that took place on another april day some 85 years earlier.
it was the tale of a midnight ride made by a silversmith named paul revere to alert the countryside to coming danger.
longfellow was inspired.
like paul revere s ride the poem he planned would be a cry of alarm to awaken a sleeping nation.
longfellow set to work at once.
his finished work titled paul revere s ride was published in 1861 over the next century generations of schoolchildren would read and memorize its stirring lines.
as you read the excerpt that follows can you see why the poem captured americans imaginations.
paul revere s ride tells the story of revere s mission to warn the minutemen.
this minuteman statue stands atthe site of the battle in concord massachusetts.
an excerpt from listen my children and you shall hear of the midnight ride of paul revere on the eighteenth of april in seventy five hardly a man is now alive who remembers that famous day and year.
he said to his friend if the british march by land or sea from the town to night hang a lantern aloft in the belfry arch of the north church tower as a signal light one if by land and two if by sea and i on the opposite shore will be ready to ride and spread the alarm through every middlesex village and farm for the country folk to be up and to arm then he said good night and with muffled oar silently rowed to the charlestown shore and lo.
as he looks on the belfrys height a glimmer and then a gleam of light.
he springs to the saddle the bridle he turns but lingers and gazes till full on his sight a second lamp in the belfry burns.
a hurry of hoofs in a village street a shape in the moonlight a bulk in the dark and beneath from the pebbles in passing a spark struck out by a steed flying fearless and fleet that was all.
and yet through the gloom and the light the fate of a nation was riding that night and the spark struck out by that steed in his flight kindled the land into flame with its heat it was one by the village clock when he galloped into lexington.
he saw the gilded weathercock swim in the moonlight as he passed and the meeting house windows blank and bare gaze at him with a spectral glare as if they already stood aghast at the bloody work they would look upon.
this sheet music for a song inspired by longfellow s poem was written in the early 1900s.
it was two by the village clock when he came to the bridge in concord town.
he heard the bleating of the flock and one was safe and asleep in his bed who at the bridge would be first to fall who that day would be lying dead pierced by a british musket ball.
you know the rest.
in the books you have read how the british regulars fired and fled how the farmers gave them ball for ball from behind each fence and farm yard wall chasing the red coats down the lane so through the night rode paul revere and so through the night went his cry of alarm to every middlesex village and farm a cry of defiance and not of fear a voice in the darkness a knock at the door and a word that shall echo forevermore.
for borne on the night wind of the past through all our history to the last in the hour of darkness and peril and need the people will waken and listen to hear the hurrying hoof beats of that steed and the midnight message of paul revere.
toward independence 103 over the years american artists were drawn to the legend of paul revere.
most works like this 19th century painting show revere as a lone rider.
longfellow creates a legend the lone hero longfellow had set out to create a dramatic tale that would make patriotic hearts beat faster.
in the process he transformed paul revere from a local folk hero into a national legend.
even today millions of americans know the opening lines of longfellows poem.
listen my children and you shall hear of the midnight ride of paul revere when we think of the events that launched the american revolution we can picture them clearly.
revere asks a friend to send a signal from bostons old north church when the british troops quartered there begin to move out.
one if by land and two if by sea and i on the opposite shore will be the signal comes and revere gallops into the night waking the countryside with the news that the british are coming.
so through the night rode paul revere and so through the night went his cry of alarm to every middlesex village and farm a cry of defiance and not of fear a voice in the darkness a knock at the door and a word that shall echo forevermore.
alerted by our lone hero the colonists homes and liberties.
rise up to defend their you know the rest.
in the books you have read how the british regulars fired and fled how the farmers gave them ball for ball from behind each fence and farm yard wall.
the rest as they say is history.
104 chapter 6 this poster shows the delegates leaving independence hall in philadelphia to announce the signing of the declaration of independence.
independence day on july 4 the delegates approved a final version of the declaration of independence.
when they signed the document they pledged to support independence with our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor this was a serious pledge.
every signer understood that he was committing an act of treason against great britain.
if the new nation failed to win its freedom each of them could very well end up swinging from a hangman s rope.
knowing this benjamin franklin told the delegates we must all hang together or assuredly we shall all hang separately chapter 7 7 3 british strengths and weaknesses in contrast to the american colonies great britain entered the war from a position of strength.
yet despite both their real and their perceived advantages the british forces encountered many problems.
british strengths with a professional army of about 42 000 troops at the beginning of the war british forces greatly outnumbered the continental army.
in addition george iii hired 30 000 mercenaries from germany.
these hired soldiers were known as hessians heh shenz because they came from a part of germany called hesse cassel.
the british were also able to recruit many loyalists african americans and american indians to fight on their side.
british and hessian troops were well trained in european military tactics.
they excelled in large battles fought by a mass of troops on open ground.
they also had far more experience firing artillery than americans had.
the british forces were well supplied as well.
unlike the pitifully equipped continental army they seldom lacked for food uniforms weapons or ammunition.
british weaknesses even so the war presented great britain with huge problems.
one was the distance between great britain and america.
sending troops and supplies across the atlantic was slow and costly.
news of battles arrived in england long after they had occurred making it difficult for british leaders to plan a course of action.
a second problem was that king george and his ministers were never able to convince the british people that defeating the rebels was vital to the future of great britain.
the longer the war dragged on the less happy the british taxpayers became about paying its heavy costs.
a third problem was poor leadership.
lord george germain the man chosen to direct the british troops had no real sense of how to defeat the rebels.
how could he.
he had never set foot in north america.
nor did it occur to him to go see for himself what his army was up against.
if he had germain might have realized that this was not a war that could be won by conquering a city or two.
to end the revolution germains forces would have to crush the patriots will to fight state by state.
instead germain kept changing plans and generals hoping that some combination of the two would bring him an easy victory.
british soldiers were trained professionals.
they were well equipped with plenty of ammunition good muskets adequate food and uniforms.
the american revolution 121 1a great britain almost wins the war after the british abandoned boston in the spring of 1776 germain came up with his first plan for winning the war.
british forces in america led by general william howe were ordered to capture new york city.
from that base british troops would then move north to destroy the rebellion at its heart massachusetts.
to block the british invasion washington hurried with his army from boston to new york.
it was there that he heard the good news by signing the declaration of independence congress had finally declared the colonies to be free and independent states.
washington had the declaration of independence read aloud to his troops.
the time had come he said to show our enemies and the whole world that free men contending for their own land are superior to any mercenaries on earth ihe declaration made it clear that the troops had the support of all the colonies who agreed that independence was a prize worth fighting for.
african americans faced a difficult decision during the revolution.
which country was more likely to give them freedom atthe end of the war america or great britain.
many blacks chose to fight with the americans.
with their help the continental army defeated the british atthe battle of cowpens in south carolina pictured below.
african americans and the war for african americans however the declaration of independence raised both hopes and questions.
did jeffersons words all men are created equal apply to them.
would independence bring an end to slavery.
should they join the revolution.
even before independence was declared a number of african americans had joined the patriot cause.
black militiamen both free and slave fought at lexington concord and bunker hill.
early in the war however blacks were banned from the continental army.
washington did not want the army to become a haven for runaway slaves.
in contrast the british promised freedom to all slaves who took up arms for the king.
as a result thousands of runaways became loyalists and fought for great britain.
a shortage of volunteers soon forced washington to change his mind.
by 1779 about 15 percent of the soldiers in the continental army were african americans.
large numbers of black sailors also served in the continental navy.
as black americans joined the war effort some whites began to question their own beliefs.
how could they accept slavery if they truly believed that all people are created equal with the same rights to life liberty and happiness.
by the wars end vermont connecticut massachusetts new hampshire rhode island and pennsylvania had all taken steps to end slavery.
122 chapter 8 achieved his first major goal without a struggle.
the convention had agreed to form a new government.
but winning support for the plans details would prove much more difficult.
the toughest issues involved the national legislature.
the delegates all agreed that congress was a key part of government.
but they disagreed on how the people and the states should be represented in congress.
convention leaders like madison knew that this dispute could derail the convention.
so they focused on what they thought would be a simpler issue the executive branch.
but this turned out to be a tough issue too.
should there be one executive or three.
how long should the executive serve.
should the executive be elected or appointed.
for a week the debate circled around and around these questions.
delegates would vote on a question discuss it some more and vote again.
crafting a final document frustrated by this seemingly endless debate on june 9 the delegates decided to tackle the thorny problem of representation in the legislature.
the month long debate was so fierce that at times it looked like the convention would fall apart.
but the delegates always pulled back from the brink.
finally on july 16 they approved the great compromise which set different forms of representation for the two houses of congress.
depressed madison realized that he had lost his battle for a legislature based solely on representing the people rather than the states.
but with the greatest battle behind them the framers could work toward a final plan for the new government.
by late august the delegates formed the committee on postponed matters to take up the few issues that remained to be resolved.
a few days later the committee reported back with its findings.
more debate followed.
but by early september a committee on style consisting of madison and four others was formed to prepare a final draft to present to the full convention.
ever mindful of the importance of this plan for the nation the delegates made a few more changes.
finally gouverneur morris of new jersey handwrote the final document 4 300 words in all.
on the question to agree to the constitution as amended madison recorded in his notes all the states ay yes and so at last on september 17 1787 most of the delegates signed the constitution.
it was ready to go to the states for ratification.
the exhausted delegates had finally completed their monumental task.
the constitution was not everything james madison had hoped for.
in his view it left too much power in the hands of the states.
but he had done what he could and was prepared to live with the outcome.
now he would turn to the fight for ratification and the task of creating a new government.
visitors to the national constitution center in philadelphia can make a choice the framers once made to sign or not to sign a copy of the constitution.
in signers half bronze statues of the framers stand together.
visitors are encouraged to consider the choices that each man made in 1787 creating the constitution 163 chapter summary in this chapter 10 mbbli before a trial the prosecutor must tell the accused person not only the charge but also the time and place of the supposed crime.
this information is essential to the accused persons preparation of his or her defense.
a defendant also has the right to hear and question all witnesses who testify at the trial.
in addition the defendant can ask the court to order reluctant unwilling witnesses to testify against their wishes.
lastly a defendant has the right to an attorney to assist in his or her defense.
the supreme court has called this the most important of all the rights of accused persons.
without legal help an innocent person may all too easily be convicted of a crime.
in the past only people with money to hire lawyers enjoyed this important right.
today people accused of crimes are provided with a lawyer if they cannot afford to pay for one.
seventh amendment civil trial rights not all trials involve criminal actions.
some trials decide civil cases or disputes between people or businesses.
civil cases typically involve money property or family matters such as divorce.
the seventh amendment says that in all but the most minor cases people involved in a civil case have a right to a jury trial.
the seventh amendment also says that no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined this means that after a jury decides the facts of a case no judge can overrule the jurys decision.
a lawyer s job is to convince the jury to decide in his or her client s favor during a trial.
the right to a jury trial is one of a number of citizen protections found in the sixth amendment.
eighth amendment bail and punishments the eighth amendment protects an accused persons rights both before and after trial.
before a trial it forbids a judge from demanding excessive bail.
bail is money or property given to the court to hold until an accused person shows up at trial.
if a defendant cannot pay bail he or she stays in jail until trial.
the eighth amendment prevents judges from using unreasonably high bail to keep someone in jail before his or her day in court.
after a trial if the person is found guilty the eighth amendment forbids excessive fines and cruel and unusual punishments.
it does not say what such punishments are.
in 1791 physical punishments like whipping and branding were common.
today they are considered cruel.
as supreme court justice thurgood marshall has written a penalty that was permissible at one time in our nation s history is not necessarily permissible today the bill of rights 191 calvin and hobbes ok calmtn let s check oier w mato homework.
sass 00 heed to spend more time on t.
hame a seat.
more time i alreadt spent ten whole mshulesl on it ten minutes shot.
down toe drain.
too he written here 8 7.
now tod know toats not right by bill watterson tew cant add i things and i i can do come out s that ts with zss than a free too started with j counter ite eot mt rights.
this cartoon illustrates how passionate the supreme court has interpreted this amendment to mean that americans are about their rights even punishments must be proportionate to the crime.
judges cannot those that don t exist.
for example impose long prison terms on people convicted of minor crimes.
the court has also held that this amendment prohibits inhumane prison conditions such as depriving prisoners of food.
today americans continue to debate whether the death penalty should be banned under the eighth amendment.
opponents of the death penalty have argued that executing anyone is a cruel and unusual punishment no matter how horrible the crime.
the supreme court has disagreed.
in the 1976 case of gregg v georgia the courts decision stated that the punishment of death for the crime of murder does not under all circumstances violate the eighth amendment.
10 6 other rights and powers the last two amendments were included to help keep a proper balance of rights and power among the federal government the people and the states.
ninth amendment rights retained by the people one argument raised against putting a bill of rights in the constitution was that no such list could be complete.
if some rights were listed and others were not did this mean that people had only the listed rights.
the ninth amendment provides the answer.
it says that even though certain rights are listed in the constitution other rights and liberties not listed there are also retained kept by the people the rights protected under the constitution are not the only rights people have.
an example of this is the right to privacy.
tenth amendment powers reserved to the states the tenth amendment was included to protect the states from excessive ederal power.
it says that powers not given to the national government by the constitution are reserved to the states or to the people j 92 chapter 11 116 the presidency of john adams when the framers of the constitution created the electoral college they imagined that the electors would simply choose the two best leaders for president and vice president.
that was how the nations first two presidential elections worked.
by the third election in 1796 however it was clear that political parties had become part of the election process.
the republicans supported thomas jefferson for president that year.
his support came mainly from farmers in the south and west.
the federalists supported john adams who appealed to lawyers merchants ship owners and businesspeople in the north.
when the electoral votes were counted john adams was elected president by just three votes.
jefferson came in second making him vice president.
the nations new top two leaders were political leaders from opposing parties.
sedition the crime of encouraging rebellion against the government the alien and sedition acts at first president adams tried to work closely with jefferson.
party violence adams found made such efforts useless meanwhile federalists in congress passed four controversial laws known as the alien and sedition acts.
they argued that these laws were needed as protection against foreigners who might threaten the nation.
in fact the real purpose of the alien and sedition acts was to make life difficult for the federalists rivals the republicans.
three of the laws the alien acts were aimed at aliens or noncitizens.
the first law lengthened the time it took for an immigrant to become a citizen with the right to vote from 5 to 14 years.
since most immigrants voted republican jefferson saw this law as an attack on his party.
the other two alien acts allowed the president to either jail or deport aliens who were suspected of activities that threatened the government.
although these laws were never enforced they did frighten a number of french spies and troublemakers who then left the country.
the fourth law known as the sedition act made sedition encouraging rebellion against the government a crime.
its definition of sedition included printing uttering or publishing any false scandalous and malicious hateful writing against the government congress or the president.
alexander hamilton approved of this law believing that it would punish only those who published lies intended to destroy the government.
instead the sedition act was used to punish republican newspaper editors who insulted president adams in print.
one for example called him old querulous whiny bald blind crippled toothless adams twenty five people were arrested under the new law.
ten of them were convicted of printing seditious opinions.
john adams a federalist was elected the second president of the united states by only 3 votes in the electoral college.
thomas jefferson a democratic republican who had 68 votes to adams s 71 became vice president.
political developments in the early republic 215 nullify to refuse to recognize a federal law.
this action by a state is called nullification.
states rights theory the theory that rights not specifically given to the federal government by the constitution remain with the states the virginia and kentucky resolutions republicans viewed the sedition act as an attack on the rights of free speech and free press.
since the federal government was enforcing the act republicans looked to the states to protect these freedoms.
thomas jefferson and james madison drew up a set of resolutions or statements opposing the alien and sedition acts and sent them to state legislatures for approval.
they argued that congress had gone beyond the constitution in passing these acts.
states therefore had a duty to nullify the laws that is to declare them to be without legal force.
only two states virginia and kentucky adopted the resolutions.
the arguments put forward in the virginia and kentucky resolutions were based on the states rights theory of the constitution.
this theory holds that rights not specifically given to the federal government remain with the states.
of these one of the most important is the right to judge whether the federal government is using its powers properly.
when no other states approved the virginia and kentucky resolutions the protest died.
the states rights theory however was not forgotten.
it would be raised and tested again in the years ahead.
the imew national capital in 1800 the federal government moved to the city of washington in the district of columbia.
most of the governments buildings were still under construction.
president adamss wife abigail described the new presidents house as a castle in which not one room or chamber is finished she used the large east room for hanging laundry as it was not fit for anything else.
in this political cartoon a devil and a lion symbolizing great britain encourage a federalist editor represented by a hedgehog to cross out important phrases from america s great documents.
liberty weeps at benjamin franklin s tomb.
chapter 12 foreign affairs in the young nation to what extent should the united states have become involved in world affairs in the early 1800s.
12 1 introduction did you know that you are carrying a history lesson in your pocket or purse.
you will find it on any 1 bill.
look at a dollar and see for yourself.
on one side you will see two circles showing the great seal of the united states.
for thousands of years governments have used seals like this one to mark their approval of important documents.
our nations founders thought that a national seal was so important that they began work on it the same day they declared independence july 4 1776 in 1782 congress approved the design we see on our currency today.
the great seal symbolizes the nations principles.
for example the unfinished pyramid on one side of the seal signifies strength and endurance.
the bald eagle on the other side is a symbol of the united states.
in one claw the eagle holds an olive branch a symbol of peace.
in the other the eagle holds arrows to symbolize war.
the olive branch and arrows of war show that the united states will pursue peace but will also protect itself.
notice that the eagle faces peace.
now turn the dollar bill over.
you will see a portrait of george washington.
americans still honor washington as the nations first president.
but few remember that washington defined u s foreign policy in the early years of the nations history.
during his presidency washington established policies that would guide the united states in its future dealings with other nations.
the united states could be actively involved in world affairs risking war.
or it could avoid involvement in other nations conflicts in the hope of staying at peace.
which choice would you have made for the new nation.
in this chapter 12 north american land claims 1796 in 1796 the united states was surrounded by colonies that belonged to the european countries of great britain france and spain.
what problems do you thinkthis fact might have caused forthe newly independent united states.
foreign affairs in the young nation 227 12 3 president adams s dilemma protecting u s ships isolationism sounded good in theory.
but it is often hard to stay out of other countries conflicts.
no one knew this better than john adams the nations second president.
adams tried to follow george washingtons policy of neutrality.
with france however staying neutral proved to be difficult.
the jay treaty french leaders hoped that great britains refusal to leave the ohio valley would lead to war between great britain and the united states.
those hopes were dashed when washington sent john jay chief justice of the supreme court to london to settle things with the british.
in the treaty signed in 1794 known as the jay treaty the british finally agreed to pull their troops from the ohio valley.
france still at war with great britain viewed the jay treaty as a violation of its own treaty with the united states made back in 1778 in july 1796 the french navy began attacking u s merchant ships bound for great britain.
over the next year french warships seized 316 american ships.
in this cartoon american envoys meet with a french diplomat depicted as a multiheaded monster holding a dagger.
the cartoonist shared the negative view of french diplomacy held by most americans in the 1790s.
the granger collection newyork the xyz affair president adams sent three envoys or representatives to france to ask the french to end the attacks.
french foreign minister talleyrand refused to speak to the americans.
instead they were met by secret agents later identified only as x y and z the agents said that no peace talks would be held unless talleyrand received a large sum of money as a tribute.
a tribute is money given to someone in exchange for that persons protection.
shocked by the request the american envoys refused.
the xyz affair as it became known outraged americans when the story reached home.
at president adamss request congress voted to recruit an army of 10 000 men.
it also voted to build 12 new ships for the nations tiny navy.
the slogan millions for defense but not one cent for tribute was heard everywhere as americans prepared for war.
meanwhile congress authorized u s warships and privately owned ships called privateers to launch a half war on the seas.
during this undeclared war american ships captured more than 80 armed french vessels.
as war fever mounted president adams never a well loved leader found himself unexpectedly popular.
his federalist party gained support in all parts of the country.
the question facing adams was whether the popular thing waging an undeclared war on france was also the best thing for the country.
chapter 12 the making of a warrior tecumseh was born in the ohio territory around 1768 ohio was a beautiful land of rivers and forests rich in wildlife.
it was a sacred place to the shawnee.
they called it the center of the world tecumseh grew up in troubled times however.
white settlers were crossing the appalachians and taking indian lands.
during the american revolution most indians fought on the british side hoping to halt western settlement.
after the war however westward expansion continued.
and so did the conflict between indians and white americans.
indians called the americans long knives because of the army swords some of them carried.
tecumseh lost his father in fighting with the long knives.
he and his family also had to move many times as the americans raided and burned their villages.
these experiences led tecumseh to become a warrior.
as a boy he saw shawnee war parties prepare for battle.
he watched them paint their faces and put on their war feathers.
as a young man he learned the arts of warfare.
by his early twenties he had become a brave and skillful warrior.
at first the indians enjoyed great success in their battles with the long knives.
but in 1794 they suffered a crushing defeat at the battle of fallen timbers.
the following year they were forced to sign the treaty of greenville.
under this treaty they gave up most of the ohio territory to white settlement.
in exchange they received money and the promise of lands in western ohio and indiana.
tecumseh refused to sign the treaty.
he knew that the government had failed to honor previous treaties.
he also believed that ohio was the land of his people.
many older indian leaders had grown tired of fighting.
they did not believe they could defeat the long knives.
but tecumseh would not give up.
historians believe thatthese war clubs belonged to tecumseh.
foreign affairs in the young nation 239 tecumseh s brother was known as the prophet.
he helped tecumseh launch a movementfor indian unity.
his indian name was lalawethika.
he later changed itto tenskwatawa meaning open door.
the quest for indian unity after the treaty of greenville tecumseh and his followers moved west into the indiana territory.
but the white settlers continued to move closer.
they cleared the land and killed the wild game.
soon there would be nothing left to sustain the indian way of life.
by the early 1800s tecumseh knew that he had to do something to save his people.
the only solution he believed was to form a single indian nation.
this was not a new idea.
indians had formed tribal confederacies in the past.
but tecumsehs plan was much bigger.
he imagined a grand confederation of indian peoples stretching from the great lakes to the gulf of mexico.
this confederation would unite dozens of tribes around the common goal of defending their land.
to these various tribes he declared brothers we all belong to one family it was an enormous challenge perhaps too big even for an inspired leader like tecumseh.
but he got crucial help from his younger brother lalawethika.
in 1805 lalawethika fell into a fire and nearly died.
but in his suffering he had a mystical vision that told him how his people could be saved.
they had to embrace indian customs and reject the ways of the white world.
if they did this the white people would be driven from their land.
this message had a powerful effect on other indians who began calling lalawethika the prophet tecumseh realized that he could combine the prophets message with his own call for indian unity to forge a powerful movement.
together the two brothers founded a new indian village called prophetstown.
indians began flocking there to join the movement.
these events made governor harrison very nervous.
but he continued with his plans to settle indiana.
in 1809 he gathered a number of indian leaders together and persuaded them to sign the treaty of fort wayne.
they agreed to sell 3 million acres of land to the government for just pennies an acre.
tecumseh was furious.
in his view the indians had no right to sell the land.
he went to meet harrison at vincennes the famous meeting of 1810 and told him that the treaty was invalid.
but harrison refused to listen.
tecumseh went away more convinced than ever that only indian unity and war could save his people.
tecumseh s defeat war came sooner than tecumseh wanted.
in the fall of 1811 while tecumseh was away trying to win new allies governor harrison made his move.
he marched his militia to prophetstown and told the indians to leave.
tecumseh had warned the prophet not to get drawn into war while he was gone.
but the prophet ignored this order.
he believed his spiritual power would protect the indians from harm.
l0 chapter 12 just before dawn on november 7 the indians crept into the militia camp.
they were a much smaller force several hundred warriors against a thousand soldiers but they hoped to take the camp by surprise.
with a flurry of war cries they fell on the unsuspecting soldiers.
the battle of tippecanoe had begun.
at first it seemed their strategy might work.
in the darkness and confusion of battle the indians quickly gained the upper hand.
but as the day dawned and the fighting wore on it was clear that they were outnumbered and outgunned.
finally they were forced to retreat.
harrison and his troops entered prophetstown and burned it to the ground.
the governor returned home in victory.
this defeat struck hard at tecumsehs plans.
but the fighting had just begun.
tecumseh continued to build his confederacy.
when the war of 1812 began he and his indian allies joined with british forces in canada to fight the u s army.
once again tecumseh showed his bravery and brilliance.
the british commanders were awed by his military genius.
in 1813 however tecumseh and the british were defeated by a much larger u s force at the battle of the thames.
the british quickly fled the battlefield but tecumseh refused to retreat.
our lives are in the hands of the great spirit he said.
we are determined to defend our lands and if it is his will we shall leave our bones upon them he was killed in the battle.
in the end tecumseh failed to realize his vision of a great american indian nation.
indians continued to lose their lands and their lives to u s expansion.
but he set an example in his dedication to his ideals and his commitment to his people.
for a brief time his star burned bright.
today tecumseh is regarded as an american hero.
tecumseh was killed on october 5 1813 atthe battle of the thames.
the battle was a decisive victory forthe americans in the war of 1812 the granger collection newyork chapter 15 15 4 texas there was a reason many americans felt that texas was so valuable.
much of this region was well suited for growing cotton the souths most valuable cash crop.
many southerners hoped that one day texas would become part of the united states.
americans come to texas the story of texas begins with moses austin a banker and business owner who dreamed of starting a u s colony in spanish texas.
in 1821 spanish officials granted austin a huge piece of land.
after moses austin died that same year his son stephen took over his fathers dream.
stephen f austin arrived in texas just as mexico declared its independence from spain.
now texas was a part of mexico.
mexican officials agreed to let austin start his colony under certain conditions.
austin had to choose only moral and hardworking settlers.
the settlers had to promise to become mexican citizens and to join the catholic church.
austin agreed to mexicos terms.
by 1827 he had attracted 297 families soon known as the old three hundred to texas.
stephen f austin made his father s dream a reality when he founded a colony in texas in 1822 here we see austin talking with a group of anglo american settlers about the rules that mexico required them to live by.
rising tensions the success of austins colony started a rush of settlers to texas.
by 1830 there were about 25 000 americans in texas compared to 4 000 tejanos tay ha nos or texans of mexican descent.
soon tensions between the two groups began to rise.
the americans had several complaints.
they were used to governing themselves and they resented taking orders from mexican officials.
they were unhappy that all official documents had to be in spanish a language most of them were unwilling to learn.
in addition many were slaveholders who were upset when mexico outlawed slavery in 1829 the tejanos had their own complaints.
they were unhappy that many american settlers had come to texas without mexicos permission.
worse most of these new immigrants showed little respect for mexican culture and had no intention of becoming citizens.
the mexican government responded by closing texas to further u s immigration.
the government sent troops to texas to enforce the immigration laws.
the texans rebel americans in texas resented these actions.
a group led by a lawyer named william travis began calling for revolution.
another group led by stephen f austin asked the mexican government to reopen texas to immigration and to make it a separate mexican state.
that way texans could run their own affairs.
manifest destiny and the growing nation 283 in 1833 austin traveled to mexico and presented the texans demands to the new head of the mexican government general antonio lopez de santa anna.
the general was a power hungry dictator who once boasted if i were god i would wish to be more rather than bargain with austin santa anna tossed him in jail for promoting rebellion.
soon after austin was released in 1835 texans rose up in revolt.
determined to crush the rebels santa anna marched north with some 6 000 troops.
fewer than 200 texans fought 4 000 mexican troops atthe alamo.
when the battle was over they were all dead including james bowie and davy crockett.
the alamo in late february 1836 a large part of santa annas army reached san antonio texas.
about 180 texan volunteers including eight tejanos defended the town.
the texans had taken over an old mission known as the alamo.
among them was davy crockett the famous frontiersman and former congressman from tennessee.
sharing command with william travis was james bowie a well known texas freedom fighter the alamos defenders watched as general santa anna raised a black flag that meant expect no mercy the general demanded that the texans surrender.
travis answered with a cannon shot.
slowly santa annas troops began surrounding the alamo.
the texans were vastly outnumbered but only one man fled.
meanwhile travis sent messengers to other towns in texas pleading for reinforcements and vowing not to abandon the alamo.
victory or death.
he proclaimed.
but reinforcements never came.
r 15 for 12 days the mexicans pounded the alamo with cannonballs.
then at the first light of dawn on march 6 santa anna gave the order to storm the fort.
desperately the texans tried to fight off the attackers with rifle fire.
for 90 minutes the battle raged.
then it was all over.
by days end every one of the alamos defenders was dead.
by santa annas order those who had survived the battle were executed on the spot.
santa anna described the fight for the alamo as but a small affair but his decision to kill every man at the alamo filled texans with rage.
texas wins its independence sam houston the commander of the texas revolutionary army understood texans rage.
but as santa anna pushed on houstons only hope was to retreat eastward.
by luring santa anna deeper into texas he hoped to make it harder for the general to supply his army and keep it battle ready.
houstons strategy wasnt popular but it worked brilliantly.
in april santa anna caught up with houston near the san jacinto san ha sin to river.
expecting the texans to attack at dawn the general kept his troops awake all night.
when no attack came the weary mexicans relaxed.
santa anna went to his tent to take a nap.
late that afternoon houstons troops staged a surprise attack.
yelling remember the alamo the texans overran the mexican camp.
santa anna fled but he was captured the next day.
in exchange for his freedom he ordered all his remaining troops out of texas.
the texas war for independence had been won but mexico did not fully accept the loss of its territory.
texas war for independence the 1836 rebellion of texans against mexican rule that resulted in texas becoming an independent nation annex to add a territory to a country.
such an addition is called an annexation.
manifest destiny the belief that it was americas right and duty to spread the nation across the north american continent ro annex texas or not.
now an inde endent country texas became known as he lone star republic because of the single tar on its flag.
but most texans were americans who wanted texas to become part of the jnited states.
despite their wishes texas remained in lependent for ten years.
people in the united fates were divided over whether to annex exas.
southerners were eager to add another lave state.
northerners who opposed slavery wanted to keep texas out.
others feared that nnexation would lead to war with mexico.
the 1844 presidential campaign was influenced by the question of diether to expand u s territory.
one of the candidates henry clay rarned annexation and war with mexico are identical his opponent james k polk however was a strong believer in manifest des iny.
he was eager to acquire texas.
after polk was elected congress oted to annex texas.
in 1845 texas was admitted as the 28th state.
collection of the star of the republic museum washington.
sam houston was elected the first president of the independent country of texas in 1836 in 1845 texas was admitted to the united states.
this is the only known official lone star flag of the republic of texas.
manifest destiny and the growing nation 285 15 5 oregon country far to the northwest of texas lay oregon country.
this enormous tree covered wilderness stretched from the rocky mountains to the pacific ocean.
to the north oregon was bounded by alaska which belonged to russia.
to the south it was bordered by spanish califor nia and new mexico.
in 1819 oregon was claimed by four nations russia spain great britain and the united states.
spain was the first to drop out of the scramble.
as part of the treaty to purchase florida spain gave up its claim to oregon.
a few years later russia also dropped out.
by 1825 russia agreed to limit its claim to the territory that lay north of the 5440 parallel of latitude.
today that line marks the southern border of alaska.
that left great britain and the united states.
for the time being the two nations agreed to a peaceful joint occupation of oregon.
in the 1800s wagon trains transported thousands of families from established eastern settlements to the rugged west.
this wagon train is winding its way across nebraska toward oregon country.
discovering oregon the united states claim to oregon was based on the lewis and clark expedition.
between 1804 and 1806 meriwether lewis and william clark had led a small band of explorers to the oregon coast.
lewis thought that many more americans would follow the path blazed by the expedition.
in the course of 10 or 12 years he predicted in 1806 a tour across the continent by this rout route will be undertaken with as little concern as a voyage across the atlantic that was wishful thinking.
the route that lewis and clark had followed was far too rugged for ordinary travelers.
there had to be a better way.
in 1824 a young fur trapper named jedediah smith found that better way.
smith discovered a passage through the rocky mountains called south pass.
unlike the high steep passes used by lewis and clark south pass was low and flat enough for wagons to use in crossing the rockies.
now the way was open for settlers to seek their fortunes in oregon.
oregon fever the first american settlers to travel through south pass to oregon were missionaries.
these missionaries made few converts among oregons indians.
but their glowing reports of oregons fertile soil and towering forests soon attracted more settlers.
these early settlers wrote letters home describing oregon as a pioneers paradise the weather was always sunny they claimed.
disease was unknown.
trees grew as thick as hairs on a dogs back.
and farms were free for the taking.
one man even joked that pigs are running about under the great acorn trees round and fat and already cooked with knives and forks sticking in them so you can cut off a slice whenever you are hungry reports like these inspired other settlers who were looking for a fresh start.
in 1843 about 1 000 pioneers packed their belongings into covered wagons and headed for oregon.
a year later nearly twice as many people made the long journey across the plains and mountains.
the oregon fever has broke out reported one observer and is now raging settlers who braved the 2 000 mile trekfrom independence missouri to oregon country were rewarded with fertile land in the willamette valley.
all of oregon or half.
along with texas oregon fever also played a role in the 1844 presidential campaign.
polk won the election with such stirring slogans as all of oregon or none and fifty four forty or fight polk promised he would not rest until the united states had annexed all of oregon country.
but polk didnt want oregon enough to risk starting a war with great britain.
instead he agreed to a compromise treaty that divided oregon roughly in half at the 49th parallel.
that line now marks the western border between the united states and canada.
the senate debate over the oregon treaty was fierce.
senators from the south and the east strongly favored the treaty.
they saw no reason to go to war over worse than useless territory on the coast of the pacific senators from the west opposed the treaty.
they wanted to hold out for all of oregon.
on june 18 1846 the senate ratified the compromise treaty by a vote of 41 to 14 polk got neither fifty four forty nor a fight.
what he got was a diplomatic settlement that both the united states and great britain could accept without spilling a drop of blood.
manifest destiny and the growing nation 287 volunteers from exeter new hampshire line up as they leave new england to fight in the war against mexico.
15 6 the mexican american war you might think that texas and oregon were quite enough new territory for any president.
but not for polk.
this humorless hardworking president had one great goal.
he wanted to expand the united states as far as he could.
polks gaze fell next on the huge areas known as california and new mexico.
he was determined to have them both by purchase if possible by force if necessary.
these areas were first colonized by spain but became mexican territories when mexico won its independence in 1821 both were thinly settled and the mexican government had long neglected them.
that was reason enough for polk to hope they might be for sale.
he sent a representative to mexico to try to buy the territories.
but mexican officials refused even to see polks representative.
mexican american war the war with mexico from 1846 to 1847 that resulted in mexico ceding to the united states a huge region from texas to california war breaks out in texas when congress voted to annex texas relations between the united states and mexico turned sour.
to mexico the annexation of texas was an act of war.
to make matters worse texas and mexico could not agree on a border.
texas claimed the rio grande as its border on the south and the west.
mexico wanted the border to be the nueces new ay sis river about 150 miles northeast of the rio grande.
on april 25 1846 mexican soldiers fired on u s troops who were patrolling along the rio grande.
sixteen americans were killed or wounded.
this was just the excuse for war that polk had been waiting for.
mexico he charged has invaded our territory and shed american blood upon american soil two days after polks speech congress declared war on mexico.
the mexican american war had begun.
the fall of new mexico and california a few months later general stephen kearny led the army of the west out of kansas.
his orders were to occupy new mexico and then continue west to california.
mexican opposition melted away in front of kearnys army.
the americans took control of new mexico without firing a shot.
genl kearny a pleased polk wrote in his diary has thus far performed his duty well meanwhile a group of americans led by the explorer john c fremont launched a rebellion against mexican rule in california.
the americans arrested and jailed general mariano guadalupe vallejo vuh yay oh the mexican commander of northern california.
then they raised a crude flag showing a grizzly bear sketched in blackberry juice.
california they declared was now the bear flag republic.
when kearny reached california he joined forces with the rebels.
within weeks all of california was under u s control.
chapter summary in this chapter 18 meanwhile in massachusetts mann became the states supervisor of education.
in towns and villages he spoke out on the need for public schools.
our means of education he stated are the grand machinery by which the raw material of human nature can be worked up into inventors and discoverers into skilled artisans and scientific farmers citizens in massachusetts responded to manns message.
they voted to pay taxes to build better schools to provide teachers with higher salaries and to establish special training schools for teachers.
an unfinished reform by 1850 many states in the north and west used manns ideas.
soon most white children especially boys attended free public schools.
but states still did not offer public education to everyone.
most high schools and colleges did not admit girls.
states as far north as illinois passed laws to keep african americans out of public schools.
when towns did allow blacks to attend school most made them go to separate schools that received less money.
in the south few girls and no african americans could attend public schools.
education for girls and women did make some progress.
in 1837 oberlin college in ohio became the first college to admit women as well as men.
when states opened the first public universities in the 1860s most accepted female students.
african americans however had few options.
when prudence crandall admitted a black student to her girls school in connecticut in 1833 white parents took their children out of the school.
crandall responded by opening a school for african american girls.
angry white people threw stones at the school and had crandall jailed.
in 1834 she was forced to close her school.
horace mann realized that much more needed to be done to increase educational opportunities for women and african americans.
in 1853 he became the first president of a new college for men and women antioch college in ohio.
there he urged his students to become involved in improving society.
be ashamed to die he fold them until you have won some victory for humanity the granger collection newyork an era of reform 34 abolitionist a person who supported abolition or the ending of slavery 18 5 the movement to end slavery in 1835 a poster appeared on walls throughout washington d c the poster showed two drawings.
one drawing labeled the land of the free showed the founding fathers reading the declaration of independence.
the other labeled the home of the oppressed showed slaves trudging past the u s capitol building the home of congress.
the poster posed a challenging question how could america the land of the free still allow slavery.
by the 1830s growing numbers of people were asking this question.
these people were called abolitionists.
the struggle begins some americans had opposed slavery even before the american revolution began.
quakers stopped owning slaves in 1776 by 1792 every state as far south as virginia had antislavery societies.
congress passed a law that ended the atlantic slave trade in 1808 once it became illegal to import slaves northern shipping communities had no more interest in slavery.
northern textile mills however wanted the cheap cotton that slave labor in the south provided.
although slavery ended in the north by the early 1800s many northerners still accepted slavery.
abolitionists wanted to end slavery but they did not always agree about how to do it.
some abolitionists tried to inspire slaves to rise up in revolt.
others wanted to find a peaceful way to end slavery immediately.
still others wanted to give slaveholders time to develop farming methods that didnt rely on slave labor.
from its earliest days both blacks and whites worked in the abolition movement sometimes together sometimes separately.
black activists often kept their distance from their white counterparts.
one african american journalist remarked as long as we let them think and act for us they will outwardly treat us as men while in their hearts they still hold us as slaves in 1831 a deeply religious white man william lloyd garrison started a fiery abolitionist newspaper the liberator.
344 chapter 19 new england farms.
if they stayed on the farms most of them could count on marrying having children and working on the farm their whole lives.
and farming in new england challenged even the hardiest workers.
the population was growing making land scarce.
the soil was rocky and the growing season was short.
more and more people were looking elsewhere for work to crafts to the west or to the cities.
answering the call of the factory recruiter promised something new different and profitable.
one young woman sally rice left her family in vermont eventually to work in a factory in connecticut.
in a letter written in 1839 she explained her reasons for leaving home.
i can never be happy there in among so many mountains i am aljmost 19 years old.
i must of course have something of my own before many years have passed over my head.
and where is that something coming from if i go home and earn nothing you may think me unkind but how can you blame me for wanting to stay here.
i have but one life to live and i want to enjoy myself as well as i can while i live.
many other women shared sally rices feelings and like her they went to work in the factories.
while most of the women who first staffed the factories came from farms some girls came for other reasons.
harriet hansons mother moved to lowell from boston with her four small children after her husband died.
harriet started working at the mills when she was ten years old.
after lucy larcoms mother was widowed she moved the family to lowell from a nearby town.
lucy started working in a factory when she was 11 at the very least life in the mills offered girls and women survival.
at the most it promised a chance to have something of their own in cluding adventure before they settled down and married.
this lowell mil girl was photographed at her loom in 1850 on 10 000 looms like this one mill workers produced more than 500 miles of cloth every week.
8 1 h monthly magazine the lowell offering published the writings of the factory girls.
the writers told of their lives and the working conditions in lowell.
a mill girl s life in the 1830s it would not have been considered proper for a young woman to move to a city alone without an adult chaperone.
the mill owners had to find a way to make the move to factory life feel safe for their workers and to reassure the workers parents.
they also wanted to make sure the workers were well disciplined so that they would be efficient.
for those reasons the manufacturing companies built boarding houses.
the young women lived there under the protective watch of an older woman.
they ate their meals at the boarding house slept there and often became friends with other boarders.
one lowell mill worker wrote to her father in new hampshire that i have a very good boarding place the girls are all kind and obliging.
the girls that i room with are all from vermont and good girls too the mill girls had opportunities in lowell that they would never have had on the farm.
they could attend lectures and plays and join literary discussion groups and libraries.
and their wages allowed them to shop.
one woman whose sister worked in lowell described how the women who went to the factories came home changed they went in their plain country made clothes and after working several months would come home for a visit or perhaps to be married in their tasteful city dresses and with more money in their pockets than they had ever owned before young women in lowell even started their own magazine the lowell offering.
from 1840 to 1845 the girls wrote essays stories and poems.
some of their writing told about how much they liked their lives in lowell.
other pieces told stories about women coming to work in the mills so they could help their families out of financial problems.
but when historians looked at other sources like bank accounts they discovered that most of the mill girls were not helping their families at all.
instead they were saving money to use later for school clothes or a dowry money they would bring to a marriage.
chapter summary in this chapter 21 21 5 the compromise of 1850 on january 21 1850 henry clay now a senator from kentucky trudged through a washington snowstorm to pay an unexpected cation senator daniel webster of massachusetts.
clay the creator of the missouri compromise had come up with a plan to end the deadlock over california.
but to get his plan through congress he needed websters support.
something for everyone clays new compromise had something to please just about everyone.
it began by admitting california to the union as a free state.
that would please the north.
meanwhile it allowed the new mexico and utah territories to decide whether to allow slavery which would please the south.
in addition clays plan ended the slave trade in washington d c although slaveholders in washington would be able to keep their slaves human beings would no longer be bought and sold in the nations capital.
clay and webster agreed that this compromise would win support from abolitionists without threatening the rights of slaveholders.
finally clays plan called for passage of a strong fugitive slave law.
slaveholders had long wanted such a law which would make it easier to find and reclaim runaway slaves.
compromise of 1850 the agreements made in order to admit california into the union as a free state.
these agreements included allowing the new mexico and utah territories to decide whether to allow slavery outlawing the slave trade in washington d c and creating a stronger fugitive slave law.
the compromise is accepted hoping that clays compromise would end the crisis webster agreed to help it get passed in congress.
but despite websters support congress debated the compromise of 1850 for nine frustrating months.
as tempers frayed southerners the compromise of 1850 admitted california as a free state and allowed the southwestern territories to be set up without restriction on slavery.
talked of simply leaving the union peacefully.
webster dismissed such talk as foolish.
peaceable secession he exclaimed.
your eyes and mine are never destined to see that miracle i see it as plainly as i see the sun in heaven i see that secession must produce such a war as i will not describe a war over slavery was something few americans wanted to face.
in september 1850 congress finally adopted clays plan.
most americans were happy to see the crisis end.
some southerners however remained wary of the compromise.
the compromise of 1850 ibis.
oregon territory yww.
mexico q free state slave state 1 free territory slave territory territory open to slavery a dividing nation 21 6 the compromise of 1850 fails henry clay and daniel webster hoped the compromise of 1850 would quiet the slavery controversy for years to come.
in fact it satisfied almost no one and the debate grew louder each year.
colored people or boston one all ton are hereby respectfully cautioned and advised to avoid conversing with the watchmen and police officers of boston for since the recent order of the mayor a aldermen they are empowered to act as kidnappers slave catchers and they have already been actually employed in iqdnapping catching anh keeping race.
them in every possible manner as so many a on the track or the most unfortunate of your keep a sharp look out for kidnappers and have io eyeon april 34 i8m.
the fugitive slave act people in the north and the south were unhappy with the fugitive slave act though for different reasons.
northerners did not want to enforce the act.
southerners felt the act did not do enough to ensure the return of their escaped property.
under the fugitive slave act a person arrested as a runaway slave had almost no legal rights.
many runaways fled all the way to canada rather than risk being caught and sent back to their owners.
others decided to stand and fight.
reverend jarmain loguen a former slave living in new york said boldly i dont respect this law i dont fear it i wont obey it i will not live as a slave and if force is employed to re enslave me i shall make preparations to meet the crisis as becomes a man the fugitive slave act also said that any person who helped a slave escape or even refused to aid slave catchers could be jailed.
this provision complained new england poet ralph waldo emerson made slave catchers of us all opposition to the act was widespread in the north.
when slave catchers came to boston they were hounded by crowds of angry citizens shouting slave hunters there go the slave hunters after a few days of this treatment most slave catchers decided to leave.
northerners refusal to support the act infuriated slaveholders.
it also made enforcement of the act almost impossible.
of the tens of thousands of fugitives living in the north during the 1850s only 299 were captured and returned to their owners during this time.
the fugitive slave act was passed as part of the compromise of 1850 this 1851 poster warned free african americans in boston to watch outfor slave catchers looking for escaped slaves.
even people who helped escaped slaves could be jailed.
uncle tom s cabin nothing brought the horrors of slavery home to northerners more than uncle toms cabin a novel by harriet beecher stowe.
the novel grew out of a vision stowe had while sitting in church on a wintry sunday morning in 1851 the vision began with a saintly slave known as uncle tom and his cruel master.
in a furious rage the master simon legree had the old slave whipped to death.
just before uncle toms soul slipped out of his body he opened his eyes and whispered to legree ye poor miserable critter.
there aint no more ye can do.
i forgive ye with all my soul 408 chapter 24 tensions in the west how did settlers change the west and affect american indians.
24 1 introduction in the spring of 1889 two white women arrived at the nez perce lands in lapwai idaho.
one of them jane gay had nursed soldiers during the civil war.
the other alice fletcher had been a leader in the growing movement for women s rights.
now a new cause had brought these women west.
they wanted to improve the lives of american indians.
gay and fletcher were just two of the thousands of americans who moved west after the civil war.
as you have read during this period politicians in the east were arguing over reconstruction.
meanwhile railroad builders miners ranchers and farmers continued to move westward.
in this chapter 24 the pacific railway act kicked off the greatest period of railroad construction in the nations history.
by 1900 the railroads had laid 170 000 miles of track much of it in the west.
rail barons like the central pacifics leland stanford and charles crocker made vast fortunes.
railroads opened the west to a flood of new settlers.
the newcomers included farmers and ranchers prospectors and preachers and more than a few crooks.
but most were ordinary people who dreamed of a new start.
for them the west was a place where a lot of hard work and a little luck could make their dreams come true.
24 4 railroad builders the plan for building a transcontinental railroad looked simple enough on paper.
the union pacific would start in nebraska and build tracks westward across the great plains and the rocky mountains.
meanwhile the central pacific would start in california and lay tracks eastward across the mountains of the sierra nevada and then across the great basin.
the two lines would meet somewhere in between the starting points.
the company that laid the most track would get more land more loans and more profits.
laying track was hard work.
first the surveyors studied the land and chose the route for the tracks.
they were followed by the graders who prepared the land.
armed with picks and shovels the graders cut through hills and filled up valleys to make the route as level as possible.
next came the tracklayers.
they put down wooden ties and hauled in heavy iron rails.
one rail weighed 700 pounds and there were 400 rails in each mile of track.
last came the spikers.
the spikers nailed the rails to the ties with spikes ten spikes per rail three hammer blows for every spike.
this group of workers photographed in 1866 paused to look atthe camera as they hauled heavy railsto lay trackfor the union pacific railroad.
american indians depended on the buffalo for food shelter and clothing.
as the railroad moved west hunters shot buffalo out the windows of trains.
by 1900 there were fewer than 50 buffalo left in the united states.
the union pacific builds west the union pacific railroad got off to a slow start.
then in 1866 a former civil war general named grenville dodge took charge of construction.
dodge had built railroads before the war and as a military officer he knew how to lead men.
now he commanded a force of 10 000 workers.
most of them were irish immigrants who were fleeing the slums of eastern cities.
they were joined by other immigrants ex soldiers mexicans and freed slaves.
all were young men who needed jobs.
most of all they hoped to start new lives in the open spaces of the west.
by 1867 dodges crews were laying as much as seven miles of track a day across the plains.
the workers lived in tent cities that followed the tracks west.
these portable towns were rough and often dangerous places.
a reporter wrote not a day passes but a dead body is found somewhere in the vicinity with pockets rifled of their contents for the plains indians the railroad was an invasion of their homeland.
they watched as millions of buffalo were slaughtered to feed railroad workers destroying their main source of food.
some indian warriors attacked the work crews and derailed supply trains by prying up sections of track.
grenville dodge demanded military help and soon he had 5 000 troops guarding his crews as they inched their way west.
474 chapter 25 rival steel companies.
he then combined them all to form the giant carnegie steel company.
by 1900 carnegie steel produced a quarter of the nations steel.
electric power in 1876 thomas edison opened an invention factory in new jersey.
with a team of workers he set out to create a minor invention every ten days and a major one every six months or so edison succeeded brilliantly.
more than any other inventor he helped turn electricity into an everyday source of light and power.
his workshop turned out the first practical electric lightbulb the phonograph record player the motion picture projector and many other inventions.
in 1882 edison built the first electrical power station and distribution system in new york city.
his team invented everything the system required including generators regulators meters switches light sockets fuse boxes and underground electric cables.
when he finally turned the generator on electricity began to flow to homes stores and factories.
the age of electricity had begun.
by 1900 some 25 million lightbulbs were glowing across the country.
many factories were replacing waterwheels and steam engines with electric motors.
streetcars powered by electricity carried workers and shoppers along city streets.
new electric powered devices such as washing machines and vacuum cleaners were making housework easier.
1 of the new york historical society negative 2946 thomas edison s invention of the light bulb transformed the nation and gave birth to the age of electricity.
in this picture of new york in the late 1880s electric lines formed a crisscross canopy over the street.
at night these buildings glowed with electric light.
the rise of industry mass production the use of interchangeable parts and assembly lines to make large quantities of identical goods the telephone the telephone was invented by a scottish immigrant alexander graham bell.
in 1876 as he was getting ready to test his talking machine bell spilled acid on himself.
watson come here i want to see you he commanded his assistant.
thomas wat son who was in another room heard every word over bells telephone.
bells invention worked so well that by 1915 americans were communicating with one another over 9 million telephones.
all these telephones made american industry more efficient and competitive by allowing producers sellers and customers to communicate quickly and easily.
new production methods new methods of organizing work were also making businesses more efficient.
factory owners adopted eli whitneys idea of assembling a wide variety of products from interchangeable parts.
they also used the assembly line.
in a shoe factory for example one worker operated a heel cutting machine.
another operated a sole cutting machine.
another made shoelaces.
still other workers assembled labeled and packaged the shoes.
henry ford was one person who foresaw the great potential in the assembly line.
ford created a moving assembly line to mass produce automobiles.
in ford plants workers stood in place all day while a conveyor brought the work to them.
after each worker did one or two tasks the belt moved the product to the next workers station.
these techniques of mass production enabled workers to produce more goods per day at a lower cost.
as prices dropped more americans could afford to buy manufactured products.
more customers meant more factories.
by 1900 almost four times as many americans worked in factories as had a generation earlier.
the triangle factory mass production in new york the triangle shirtwaist factory was just one of many new businesses that took advantage of improved technology to mass produce a quality product at a good price.
the triangle factory specialized in a style of womens blouse known as a shirtwaist.
a shirtwaist had puffy sleeves a neat collar front buttons and a snug waist.
women liked shirtwaists so much that by 1909 new york city had more than 500 factories that made only this style of blouses.
sam bernstein the production manager at the triangle shirtwaist factory loved watching his workers use the newest tools and production methods.
each person at the cutting tables had a special steel knife.
this knife could slice through many layers of fabric at a time.
this meant that a worker could cut dozens of sleeves fronts and backs at one time.
on another floor of the building bernstein could hear the whirring of 240 sewing machines.
the machines were neatly laid out in 16 tightly packed rows.
flexible belts connected each machine to a rotating axle running down each row just above the floor.
this axle which was spun by an electric motor delivered power to the machines.
the machines clattered loudly as 494 chapter 26 mexicans in america many american employers welcomed the mexicans.
expanding railroads and large scale farms and ranches in the southwest depended on laborers who were willing to work hard for little pay after congress banned chinese immigration in 1882 these employers looked to mexico for new workers.
where i came from said one mexican construction worker i used to work ten hours for 1 25 then i came here and they paid 1 25 for eight hours it was good some mexican immigrants found jobs with railroads mines factories and canneries.
but most found work in agriculture.
mexican farmworkers moved from region to region harvesting crops as they ripened.
they picked oranges in southern california almonds in central california and then apples in oregon.
they harvested cotton in texas and arizona and then moved on to sugar beets in colorado.
farmwork paid very little.
one texas farmer paid pan cho and his whole family 60 cents a day he worked from some mexicans such as those in this photograph found jobs in mines.
most however were employed as agricultural workers.
sun to sun children worked in the fields with their parents to help support their families.
few of them had a chance to attend school.
farmworkers often lived in camps that they built near the fields.
shelters were made of almost every conceivable thing burlap canvas palm branches said one visitor.
some farms and ranches provided housing for their workers.
either way these temporary homes usually lacked running water and basic sanitation.
after harvest season farmworkers sometimes moved to nearby towns.
barrios or mexican neighborhoods sprang up on the edges of cities near such farming areas as los angeles california and san antonio texas.
food stands and grocery stores in the barrio offered familiar tastes and smells.
residents helped each other take care of the sick and find jobs.
on mexican religious holidays catholic churches held special ceremonies.
on those days the barrio was filled with singing dancing and fireworks.
many mexican immigrants originally planned to return to mexico once the revolution was over.
whites who believed that mexicans were taking their jobs encouraged such returns.
one wrote i wish the mexicans could be put back in their country.
mexicans who remained in the united states often faced strong prejudice.
compared to whites they earned very low wages and they had little say in their working conditions.
in schools white children were sometimes taught to boss their mexican classmates as they were expected to do when they grew up.
despite these problems many mexican immigrants chose to stay.
like isidro osorio a farm and railroad worker they hoped for a better future in their new homeland.
i have worked very hard to earn my 4 00 a day reported osorio.
that is why i want to give a little schooling to my children so that they won t stay like i am.
the great wave of immigration btun i rra ti trades unlotts.
bsmjt tt o.
1 d ftsiss f cnihesf j b b arbarians tb tta i country must st stop y b to ballot bullet jsy n f ivtctoasj segkm john chinaman ss am iwavm heathen 26 7 closing the door on immigration in 1920 a mob stormed through the italian neighborhood of west frankfort a small town in illinois.
the crowd was frustrated by a mining strike and angered by bank robberies that italian criminals were rumored to have committed.
for three days mobs beat up italian immigrants and burned their homes.
this attack reflected a surge of nativism or anti immigrant feeling it that peaked in the united states around this time.
the tide turns against immigrants the united states has always been a nation of immigrants yet time and again nativism has sparked actions and policies directed against newer arrivals.
sometimes nativism is rooted in economic competition.
sometimes it stems from ethnic religious and other differences.
in the 1830s for example protestant nativists charged that catholic immigrants were enemies of democracy.
they feared that catholics had more loyalty to the pope in rome who was the head of their church than to the u s government.
the surge in immigration that began in the 1880s fueled another rise in nativism.
some native born americans blamed immigrants for everything from slums and crime to hard times.
fearing competition for jobs many labor leaders discriminated against nonwhites.
in 1909 for example the president of the united mine workers wrote of asians that as a race their standard of living is extremely low and their assimilation by americans impossible restricting immigration politicians responded to the growing prejudice against immigrants.
as you have read in 1882 congress passed the chinese exclusion act banning further immigration by chinese laborers.
in 1907 japanese immigrants were forbidden entry to the united states.
in 1917 congress required immigrants to prove they could read and write in at least one langauge before they were allowed into the united states.
to further limit immigration congress established a quota system in 1921 and refined it in 1924 under this system by 1927 only 150 000 immigrants were allowed to enter the united states each year.
people from east asia were completed excluded.
in addition quotas limited immigration from any one country to 2 percent of the number of people from that country who lived in the united states in 1890 most eastern and southern europeans had arrived after that year.
as a result most of the quota spaces were reserved for immigrants from england ireland and germany.
this 1871 cartoon shows columbia a symbol of the united states protecting a chinese immigrantfacing discrimination.
in 1882 a federal law banned immigration from china.
nativism an attitude of resentment and superiority toward foreign born people quota a limit based on numbers or proportions such as the proportion of a countrys population allowed to immigrate to the united states 522 chapter 28 annexing hawaii commerce drove u s expansionists to develop an interest in hawaii a group of islands located in the pacific ocean.
americans had first come to these islands in the 1820s as missionaries.
their goal was to convert the native hawaiians to christianity.
the hawaiians whose ancestors had come from the south pacific had lived on these islands for more than a thousand years.
they were ruled by their own kings and queens.
in 1835 a boston merchant established a large sugar plantation in hawaii.
before long american owned sugar and pineapple plantations dotted the islands.
the planters brought laborers to hawaii from china and japan to work in their vast fields.
under pressure from the planters the hawaiians agreed in 1887 to let the united states establish a naval base at pearl harbor on the island of oahu oh ah hoo.
the planters also persuaded congress to allow hawaiian sugar to be imported into the united states without paying any tariff import tax.
u s sugar growers objected that the law now favored hawaiian sugar over domestically grown sugar.
they convinced congress to give a bonus to growers in the united states.
hawaiian planters wanted that bonus too.
so they asked the united states to annex hawaii.
meanwhile native hawaiians increasingly resented being pushed around by americans.
when queen liliuokalani lee lee uh woh kuh lah nee took the throne in 1891 people rallied around her call of hawaii for hawaiians americans in hawaii feared that they would lose their land.
with help from u s marines in 1893 sugar planters forced queen liliuokalani to give up her throne.
now in control the planters established a new government for the islands.
despite the planters wishes president grover cleveland refused to support the annexation of hawaii.
cleveland who opposed imperialism said that hawaii should be ruled by hawaiians.
but in 1898 under president mckinley the united states did annex hawaii.
u s interest in japan and china in the mid to late 1800s the united states turned its attention to japan and china.
the u s government signed a trade treaty with japan in 1858 several european countries had made efforts to control trade with china.
the united states wanted to maintain its own access to chinese markets.
in 1899 and 1900 the u s government issued what became known as the open door policy.
it called on foreign nations to allow free trade in china.
28 3 a splendid little war closer to the united states americans established huge sugar plantations on the caribbean island of cuba only 90 miles from florida.
like nearby puerto rico cuba was still a spanish colony.
by the 1890s u s expansionists wanted to annex both of these islands.
to support their ambitions they argued that it was time for the united states to enforce the monroe doctrine.
no european country they said should control territory in the western hemisphere.
queen liliuokalani the last reigning monarch of hawaii insisted that native hawaiians should control the islands.
american planters organized a revolt that dethroned her.
the united states becomes a world power i i 1 ra1ne explosion i t sigsbee and consul general lee are in doubt jhe world has sen.
i special tug with subrrmie divers to havana to find out lee asssjor t an immecsate court of jnquiry capt.
sigsbee s suspicions jum.
lift suppressed despatch to thf state department says the accident was hade posstble by an dl e c pendtetonljuji mixed from havana says he overtieard talk there ot a plot lo blow up the zahakerthe oyffsiwe expert and olher expats report lo the world that ihe wreck was f accidental washington qfdctsh ready a vigrxous action if spanish responsmty can be show divers to be sent down to make careful exa when an explosion sunkthe battleship uss maine and killed 260 men americans accused spain of causing the tragedy and demanded war.
in 1976 admiral h g rickover acting forthe u s navy presented evidence thatthe explosion was probably caused by spontaneous combustion in one of the coal containers.
cubans struggle for independence the cubans themselves had staged an unsuccessful revolt against spain in 1868 in 1895 under the leadership of jose marti ho zay mar tee cubans again tried to win their independence.
to crush this movement the spanish herded men women and children into reconcentration camps forced to live with inadequate food and medical care tens of thousands of people died.
u s newspapers jumped at the chance to report stories of cuban suffering.
competing fiercely for customers some newspapers resorted to yellow journalism offering sensational and shocking reports.
some of these stories were based on rumors and untruths.
one said that a spanish general was feeding prisoners to sharks as sympathy for cubans grew more and more americans were willing to go to war for cuba.
to help americans in cuba in case of trouble president mckinley sent the new battleship uss maine to the islands capital city havana in january 1868 the spanish american war trouble soon erupted in havana.
about three weeks after the maine arrived an explosion destroyed the battleship killing 260 u s sailors.
no one knew whether the explosion was caused by an accident a mine or a bomb.
but many americans were quick to blame spain.
young men rushed to join the army raising the battle cry remem her the maine.
senators shouted free cuba hoping to avoid war mckinley offered to work out a solution between the spanish and cubans.
but the spanish did not respond.
under pressure from newspapers and members of congress calling him a coward mckinley asked congress to declare war.
congress quickly agreed and in april 1898 voted to go to war with spain.
at the same time congress approved a resolution stating that the united states intended to leave the government and control of the island cuba to its people i i the spanish american war in the caribbean 1898 when spain refused to grant cuba independence the united states declared war on spain.
in july 1898 u s forces sank or captured the entire spanish fleet after the battle of san juan hill.
the united states then defeated spanish troops in puerto rico.
556 chapter 28 an enemy read the journal s headline.
other inflammatory stories followed.
hearst even published a card game called war with spain two months later hearst got his wish.
congress declared war on spain.
on the journal s front page hearst gloated how do you like the journals war hearst at the front contrary to his claims hearst did not cause the spanish american war.
although the journal and other yellow papers built public support for the war they did not make it happen.
they were just one factor in a set of circumstances that led to war.
hearst was brilliant at self promotion however and he knew that war was good for newspaper sales.
in fact circulation figures continued to rise.
as the war began both the journal and the world were selling more than a million copies a day.
hearst made sure his paper was at the center of the action.
he sent dozens of correspondents to cuba to report on the war.
he even offered to organize and equip a regiment to fight in cuba.
when president mckinley declined his offer hearst proposed sending his own yacht to cuba as a military vessel.
the navy accepted this offer though it rejected hearsts request to command the ship.
denied the chance to fight in cuba hearst went as a reporter.
he fitted out a ship with food and medical supplies and sailed to cuba with some of his staff.
there he filed several stories from the front lines.
he took his reporting duties seriously though he sometimes got in the way of the fighting.
at one point soldiers warned him off the battlefield.
meanwhile the journal and the world continued their own battle for readership.
they sometimes stole each others stories rewriting them and claiming them as their own.
they also accused each other of publishing false stories.
at times they paid more attention to their own squabbles than to the war itself.
both papers spent a lot of money on the war however.
in fact they spent far more than they made back in sales.
by the wars end they were deeply in debt.
to cut their losses pulitzer and hearst agreed to cease their newspaper war.
they toned down their papers thus ending the golden age of yellow journalism.
the two men continued to leave their mark on the news business.
pulitzer funded the country s first journalism school at columbia university.
he also lent his name to the pulitzer prizes journalisms top awards.
hearst went on to build a giant media empire which included radio and film companies.
he continued to shape the news for years to come.
students from columbia university s school of journalism founded by joseph pulitzer celebrate their graduation.
today s journalists work in a wide range of media from television and the internetto newspapers like joseph pulitzer s.
the united states becomes a world power 573j chapter 29 29 3 innovations change daily life the first model ts rolling off fords moving assembly line in 1914 were relatively simple machines.
the car had a top speed of 45 miles per hour.
its only safety features were headlamps and brakes.
even so an affordable car was an innovation or new idea that would change how americans lived.
other innovations would soon follow.
airplanes dramatically decreased travel time though passengers may not always feel that way as they move through airport security checkpoints.
terrorist threats in the 21st century have caused airports to tighten security.
faster easier ways to travel the model t ended americas horse and buggy era.
cars were faster and easier to manage than horse drawn buggies.
people with cars could travel longer distances to work or shop.
this allowed families to move out of crowded cities into suburbs.
cars also changed how people used their leisure time.
families piled into cars to see the country on sunday drives or to take vacation trips to new places.
the growing popularity of cars gave rise to new industries.
gas stations repair shops and tourist stops sprang up along newly paved roads.
by the mid 1920s one out of eight american workers had a job related to the automobile industry.
by 2008 that number had dropped only slightly to about one in ten.
another innovation the airplane cut travel times between distant cities.
the worlds first scheduled airline service opened in florida in 1914 the st petersburg tampa airboat line flew passengers between those two cities in 22 minutes.
the same journey took 12 hours by train.
the airboat line flew only 1 205 passengers that first year.
soon though more people were traveling by air than rail.
in 2008 airlines carried 650 million passengers from one u s city to another.
linking past to present 5 mass media forms of communication that reach large audiences new mass media other innovations gave rise to new mass media or means of communicating with large audiences.
one form of mass media was the motion picture.
in 1914 most americans had never seen a full length movie.
but during the 1920s going to the movies became a national pastime.
it still is.
in 2009 americans bought 1 47 billion movie tickets.
the next new mass media was radio.
the nations first commercial radio stations began broadcasting in 1920 families were soon organizing their lives so that they could hear their favorite radio programs.
by 1945 nearly every american home had a radio set.
but by then another new media had appeared television.
in 1946 the first regularly scheduled television programs began broadcasting.
the new media offered viewers a window on the world.
it also entertained them.
by 2010 the average american was watching more than four and a half hours of television a day.
altogether americans spend 250 billion hours a year watching tv.
an assembly line operated by robots puts pickup trucks together at a u s auto plant.
automated factories have helped change the way americans work.
lower labor costs overseas are another factor contributing to the shift from manufacturing to service jobs.
29 4 america s changing economy when the first gas powered cars appeared in the late 1800s the united states was still a nation of farms.
by the time model ts began rolling off fords assembly line the industrial revolution had shifted the economy from agriculture to manufacturing.
more economic changes lay ahead.
from a manufacturing to a service economy the next major change was a shift from a manufacturing to a service economy.
after growing for decades the number of factory jobs began to shrink after 1960 about 30 percent of the workforce had factory jobs that year.
by 2009 only 9 percent of workers were employed in factories.
several factors contributed to this shift.
one was automation.
automation involves replacing workers with machines.
in automobile plants for example robots took over jobs once done by people.
a second factor was the growth of worldwide trade part of a trend known as globalization.
this trend began in 1947 with the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt.
over the next half century gatt removed trade barriers between nations.
as cross border trade became easier many u s companies moved factories to countries with lower labor costs.
this left fewer manufacturing jobs in the united states.
many workers who lost factory jobs found work in the service sector the part of the economy that provides services rather than goods.
service workers include teachers doctors mechanics and salespeople.
by 2010 about 36 percent of the workforce held jobs in the service sector.
globalization an increase in the flow of people money ideas and trade goods across national boundaries service sector the part of the economy that provides services instead of producing goods knowledge worker a person whose main job is working with ideas information and technology the rise of knowledge workers the growing service sector also includes knowledge workers.
knowledge workers create and work with ideas and information.
examples include writers scientists and engineers.
in 1914 knowledge workers were a small part of the workforce.
today about a third of all workers are knowledge workers.
the rise of knowledge workers was assisted by the invention of the computer.
in 1981 the first personal computers pcs appeared in offices.
pcs put vast amounts of information at a workers fingertips.
pcs became even more useful in the 1990s when they were linked together via the internet and world wide web.
when the web was opened up to the public in 1991 few u s households had internet access.
by 2007 close to two thirds did.
with this shift the u s economy had entered an information age americans born after 1991 have never known a world without the internet.
they consider devices such as computerized phones with web access and hundreds of thousands of applications a part of everyday life.
linking past to present united states here u s ambassador to the united nations susan rice speaks atthe un.
the united nations was formed in 1945 immediately after world war ii as an international organization dedicated to promoting world peace and security.
today nearly every country is a member of the un.
communism an economic or political system in which the government owns all property and controls economic activity 29 5 the united states enters the world stage in 1914 war broke out in europe.
the united states entered the war in early 1917 eight million people would die before the guns finally fell silent in 1918 two world wars world war i marked americas entry onto the world stage as a major power.
when the war ended americans hoped it would be the war to end all wars these hopes vanished when a second global conflict broke out in 1939 the united states stayed out of this war for two years.
then on december 7 1941 japanese warplanes attacked a u s naval base in pearl harbor hawaii.
the growing conflict soon engulfed most of europe and asia.
world war ii finally ended when the united states dropped atomic bombs on two japanese cities.
after witnessing the destruction caused by this terrifying new weapon japan surrendered.
at the wars end the united states took the lead in founding a new world organization the united nations.
the primary purpose of the un is to maintain international peace by 2010 the un had grown from its 51 founding members in 1945 to 192 member nations.
cold war conflicts two nations emerged from world war ii as superpowers the united states and the soviet union.
by 1947 these two superpowers were locked in a grim struggle for power.
americans saw this struggle as a fight for freedom and democracy.
the soviet union saw it as a fight to expand communism.
communism is an economic or political system in which the government owns all property and controls the economy.
because this struggle was waged without warfare it is called the cold war.
the cold war lasted 44 years.
during this time the united states sent troops to two asian nations to stop the spread of communism.
the korean war 1950 1953 left the korean peninsula divided into two countries a communist north korea and a noncommunist south orea.
e vietnam war 1954 1975 ended with communists taking control of vietnam.
in 1991 the soviet union collapsed breaking apart to form 15 new nations this event ended the cold war and left the united states as the world s sole remaining superpower.
582 chapter 29 an ongoing debate now decades into the green revolution people around the world must wrestle with the same question that haunted norman borlaug and rachel carson.
how can we feed a growing population and at the same time take care of a fragile earth.
the people who grow food think about this question.
some of them work for agribusiness companies.
these companies are large scale farming outfits.
they use pesticides and chemical fertilizers to increase production.
agribusiness leaders say that using less land to produce more will protect forests that would otherwise be cut down to make farmland.
they also say their crops are necessary to feed the worlds growing population.
other food growers think about the question differently and support organic farming.
organic farmers use only natural materials to grow crops no pesticides and no chemical fertilizers.
organic farmers say that high yield crops are not sustainable.
they pollute the land and the water and they threaten world water supplies.
growing high yield crops they say may make it impossible for future generations to continue farming the land.
organic farmers say their techniques can provide enough food for the people on earth today and those who will be here in the future.
but it is not just food growers who need to think about the problems of farming techniques.
everyone who eats and that means all of us needs to think about it too.
we address the question of balancing environmental well being and feeding the world by deciding what kind of food to buy.
more and more americans are choosing locally grown organic products.
still most americans buy food grown with across the united states farmers mar kets make farm fresh food available in cities.
here first lady michelle obama and a white house chef shop at a new farmers market in washington d c high yield techniques.
those of us who live in the united states have the luxury of thinking about how to balance our concern with the environment and our concern with humankind.
in other parts of the world where hunger is a daily problem it is a question of life and death.
people need solutions and they need them now.
hunger is not going away.
neither is the need for a healthy earth.
the problem of how to feed people and care for the planet is a problem today and will be one in the future.
what is the answer.
that remains to be seen.
as you get older you will join in the debates or you may have already.
perhaps one day you will be part of the solution.
linking past to present 58 unit 9 timeline challenge a modern nation emerges 1867 u s purchase of alaska many americans originally thought of this acquisition as a folly but the nation soon discovered a wealth of resources in alaska.
1890 congress creates yosemite national park the preservation of yosemite in california is one of the first major victories in a national conservation movement to protect the american wilderness for future generations.
1898 spanish american war the united states enters a four month long war with spain.
after a u s victory cuba declares independence from spain and puerto rico and the philippines come under u s rule.
a revolt against the united states in the philippines lasts three more years.
the philippines become independent in 1946.
1870s the grange promotes the farmers cause this self help organization for farmers becomes a major force in politics and reform during the 1870s.
i i i 1898 u s annexation of hawaii after years of debate the united states makes hawaii a territory with the support of president mckinley.
queen liliuokalani is the last hawaiian monarch to rule the islands.
1901 andrew carnegie becomes philanthropist andrew carnegie sells his steel company for 250 million and retires to a life of philanthropy.
he and other industrialists like john d rockefeller use their fortunes to build universities hospitals libraries and concert halls to benefit the american people.
1909 child labor draws to a close by year s end 43 of the nation s 46 states outlaw child labor.
1911 u s government breaks up standard oil president roosevelt has john d rockefeller and his company investigated for unfair practices.
the company s monopoly of the oil industry ends and many other companies monopolies over other industries are investigated.
1920 nineteenth amendment ratified ratification of the nineteenth amendment grants women the right to vote.
1895 1900 1905 1910 1915 1920 1903 united states takes over canal zone panama cedes a 10 mile wide canal zone to the united states.
during the next two decades the united states oversees the construction of the panama canal which opens in 1921.
1909 founding of the naacp w e b du bois and other civil rights activists found the national association for the advancement of colored people to ensure equal rights and opportunity for all african americans.
1917 united states enters world war i u s forces side with and ultimately bring victory for the allied powers.
three years later the u s senate tries to avoid involvement in future wars by rejecting the treaty of versailles pushing the nation once again toward isolationism.
modern nation emerge 590.

chapter terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its connection to exploration and the colonial era.
1 nomadic 2 reformation 3 christopher columbus 4 columbian exchange 5 indentured servant 6 puritan 7 navigation acts 8 triangular trade 9 enlightenment 10 french and indian war main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter skill activity using academic and social studies vocabulary defining the skill within this textbook there are two main types of words.
the first academic words includes words that are important in all classes not just in social studies.
these are words that your teacher may use during classroom instruction such as interpret or distribute.
a second type social studies words include words and phrases you will see as you read social studies materials.
words like civilization century and democracy are considered social studies words and are used primarily to describe social studies content.
understanding the skill strategy identify and use social studies terms to identify the social studies terms locate boldface terms and other key terms that explain the historical content.
this excerpt is about life in the early american colonies.
read the strategies to learn how to identify and use social studies terms in a historical context.
life in the early american colonies slavery existed in all the colonies but it became a vital source of labor in the south during the 1600s enslaved africans were brought to north america through a network of transatlantic trade also known as the triangular trade.
through this trading network goods and enslaved africans were exchanged between three points england its colonies and africa.
by contrast the new england and middle colonies did not rely on slave labor or the production of a single commodity also called a single staple crop such as tobacco or rice.
most people were farmers but they grew a wide variety of crops the new england colonies traded actively with the islands of the west indies.
in addition to foods they ex ported all kinds of other items ranging from barrels to horses.
in return they imported sugar and molasses.
all this trade resulted in the growth of small towns and larger port cities.
identify academic and social studies words.
look for terms that are in boldface print or are defined in the margin.
sometimes specialized academic or social studies words are highlighted.
ask questions to understand what each term means.
reread text to understand the meaning of each term.
look for words that indicate a definition or key term is approaching.
often terms such as called and known as indicate that a definition is coming up.
in this case single staple crop is a definition of single commodity.
read the surrounding text to further clarify meaning.
why was the transatlantic trade called the triangular trade.
think about what you know about the time frame or ideas being discussed.
use your prior knowledge to put the idea into context.
what do you already know about slavery in the colonies in the 1600s and 1700s.
consider the topic at hand.
what words help convey the topic.
this alerts you to their relevance to the topic and helps you better understand the historical concept being discussed.
what is a trading network.
43 ski strategy make a diagram making a diagram can help you to understand the vocabulary terms that you will encounter throughout the text.
sometimes your own background knowledge or the use of context clues may not be enough to determine what a word means.
in that case ask a teacher or classmate to help you develop your background knowledge so that you can understand the definition of the word.
you may also look the word up in a dictionary to find the actual definition.
applying the skill turn to page 28 in your book and read the section titled mercantilism and the navigation acts.
choose one of the unfamiliar vocabulary terms that you encounter in this section and use a diagram to help you understand it.
1 identify academic and social studies words.
what social studies terms can you find in the text and in the margin.
you may recognize a term from seeing it in the section opener.
what is mercantilism.
2 ask questions to understand what each term means.
what does mercantalism mean.
what terms and grammatical marks help you know what it means.
why did colonies play a critical role in mercantilism.
3 read the surrounding text to help further clarify meaning.
which sentence helps you better understand what the theory of mercantilism entails.
how does reading this help your understanding of the term.
4 think about what you know about the time frame or ideas being discussed.
use your prior knowledge to help put the term or idea into context.
what do you already know about how and when the colonies in north america were established.
5 consider the topic at hand.
what words help convey the concept of economic growth and expansion.
how does knowing the topic of economics help your understanding of this section.
43 sk2 history the maya developed one of the most advanced civilizations in the americas but their story is shrouded in mystery.
around a d 250 the maya began to build great cities in southern mexico and central america.
they developed a writing system practiced astronomy and built magnificent palaces and pyramids with little more than stone tools.
around a d 900 however the maya abandoned their cities leaving their monuments to be reclaimed by the jungle and for a time forgotten.
explore some of the incredible monuments and cultural achievements of the ancient maya online.
you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources and more at watch the video to learn how the actions of one spanish missionary nearly destroyed the written record of the maya world.
thus let it he done.
let the emptiness he filled.
let the water recede and make a void let the earth appear and become solid let it he done.
they said and instantly it was made.
finding the city of palenque watch the video to learn about the great maya city of palenque and the european discovery of the site in the eighteenth century.
vst essential question mynotebook what were the causes and major events of the american revolution and how did the new american republic develop.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks a 1c 21b 23a 23c 26e 26f 29c section 1 colonial resistance and rebellion main idea conflicts between great britain and the american colonies escalated until the colonists finally declared their independence.
section 2 the war for independence main idea key american victories reversed british advances during the american revolutionary war.
section 3 confederation and the constitution main idea american leaders created the constitution as a blueprint of government for the united states.
section 4 launching the new nation main idea with george washington as its first president the united states began creating a working government for its new nation.
the sons of liberty pull down a statue of george iii on the bowling green new york july 9 1776 usa world 1760 george 111 becomes king of great britain.
17651 british parliament passes the stamp act.
1765 1773 colonists stage the boston tea party.
1774 parliament passes the intolerable acts.
first continental congress convenes.
1774 reign of louis xvi begins in france.
1775 second continental congress convenes.
1776 colonies declare independence.
1775 1776 adam smiths the wealth of nations is published.
44 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic h tea act british action britain gives the east india company special concessions in the colonial tea business and shuts out colonial tea merchants.
colonial reaction colonists in boston rebel dumping 18 000 pounds of east india company tea into boston harbor intolerable acts british action king george iii tightens control over massachusetts by closing boston harbor and quartering troops.
lexington and concord colonial reaction colonial leaders form the first continental congress and draw up a declaration of colonial rights.
british action general gage orders troops to march to concord massachusetts and seize colonial weapons.
colonial reaction minutemen intercept the british and engage in battle first at lexington and then at concord.
a this bottle contains tea that skillbuilder interpreting charts in what ways did colonial reaction to british rule intensify between 1765 and 1775.
was over 170 000 pounds.
north persuaded parliament to repeal the townshend acts except for the tax on tea.
tensions rose again in 1772 when a group of rhode island colonists attacked a british customs schooner that patrolled the coast for smugglers.
the colonists boarded the vessel which had accidentally run aground near providence and burned it to the waterline.
in response king george named a special commission to seek out the suspects and bring them to england for trial.
the plan to haul americans to england for trial ignited widespread alarm.
the assemblies of massachusetts and virginia set up committees of correspondence to communicate with other colonies about this and other threats to american liber ties.
by 1774 such committees formed a buzzing communication network linking leaders in nearly all the colonies.
colonists threw into boston harbor during the boston tea party.
the boston tea party in 1773 lord north devised the tea act in order to save the nearly bankrupt british east india company.
the act granted the company the right to sell tea to the colonies free of the taxes that colonial tea sellers had to pay.
this action would have cut colonial merchants out of the tea trade by enabling the east india company to sell its tea directly to consumers for less.
north hoped the american colonists would simply buy the cheaper tea instead they protested dramatically.
on the moonlit evening of december 16 1773 a large group of boston rebels disguised themselves as native americans and proceeded to take action against three british tea ships anchored in the harbor.
in this incident later known as the boston tea party the indians dumped 18 000 pounds of the east india company s tea into the waters of boston harbor.
main idea analyzing motives what do you think king george set out to achieve when he disciplined massachusetts.
the intolerable acts an infuriated king george iii pressed parliament to act.
in 1774 parliament responded by passing a series of measures that colonists called the intolerable acts.
one law shut down boston harbor.
another the quartering act authorized british commanders to house soldiers in vacant private homes and other buildings.
in addition to these measures general thomas gage commander in chief of british forces in north america was appointed the new governor of massachusetts.
to keep the peace he placed boston under martial law or rule imposed by military forces.
in response to britain s actions the committees of correspondence assembled the first continental congress.
in september 1774 56 delegates met in philadelphia and drew up a declaration of colonial rights.
they defended the colonies right to run their own affairs and stated that if the british used force against the colonies the colonies should fight back.
review unit 49 the battle of lexington as depicted in a mid nineteenth century painting.
the road to revolution after the first continental congress met colonists in many eastern new england towns stepped up military preparations.
minutemen civilian soldiers who pledged to be ready to fight against the british on a minute s notice quietly stockpiled firearms and gunpowder.
general thomas gage soon learned about these activities.
in the spring of 1775 he ordered troops to march from boston to nearby concord massachusetts and to seize illegal weapons.
fighting at lexington and concord colonists in boston were watching and on the night of april 18 1775 paul revere william dawes and samuel prescott rode out to spread word that 700 british troops were headed for concord.
the darkened countryside rang with church bells and gunshots prearranged signals sent from town to town that the british were coming.
the king s troops known as redcoats because of their uniforms reached lexington massachusetts five miles short of concord on the cold windy dawn of april 19 as they neared the town they saw 70 minutemen drawn up in lines on the village green.
the british commander ordered the minutemen to lay down their arms and leave and the colonists began to move out without laying down their muskets.
then someone fired and the british soldiers sent a volley of shots into the departing militia.
eight minutemen were killed and ten more were wounded but only one british soldier was injured.
the battle of lexington the first battle of the revolutionary war lasted only 15 minutes.
the british marched on to concord where they found an empty arsenal.
after a brief skirmish with minutemen the british soldiers lined up to march back to boston but the march quickly became a slaughter.
between 3 000 and 4 000 minutemen had assembled by now and they fired on the marching troops from behind stone walls and trees.
british soldiers fell by the dozen.
bloodied and humiliated the remaining british soldiers made their way back to boston that night.
colonists had become enemies of britain and now held boston and its encampment of british troops under siege.
main idea evaluating 4 do you think the british underestimated the colonists in 1770 1775.
50 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic main idea forming generalizations how did the thinking of loyalists differ from that of patriots.
history video saratoga force surrender 7 weaknesses large distance separating britain from battlefields troops unfamiliar with terrain weak military leaders sympathy of certain british politicans for the american cause united states strengths familiarity of home ground leadership of george washington and other officers inspiring cause independence great britain strengths strong well trained army and navy strong central government with available funds support of colonial loyalists and native americans 65w the war begins as they took on the mighty british empire the colonists suffered initial losses in the middle states which served as the revolutionary war s early battleground.
in time however the colonists would battle their way back.
loyalists and patriots as the war began americans found themselves on different sides of the conflict.
loyalists those who opposed independence and remained loyal to the british king included judges and governors as well as people of more modest means.
many loyalists thought that the british were going to win and wanted to avoid punishment as rebels.
still others thought that the crown would protect their rights more effectively than the new colonial governments would.
patriots the supporters of independence drew their numbers from people who saw political and economic opportunity in an independent america.
many americans remained neutral the conflict presented dilemmas for other groups as well.
many african americans fought on the side of the patriots but others joined the loyalists because the british promised freedom to slaves who would fight for the crown.
most native americans supported the british because they viewed colonial settlers as a greater threat to their lands.
early victories and defeats as part of a plan to stop the rebellion by isolating new england the british quickly attempted to seize new york city.
the british sailed into new york harbor in the summer of 1776 with a force of about 32 000 soldiers.
they included thousands of german mercenaries or hired soldiers known as hessians because many of them came from the german region of hesse.
weaknesses most soldiers untrained and undisciplined shortage of food and ammunition inferior navy no central government to enforce wartime policies revolutionary war 1775 1778 75 w 70w geography skillbuilder location from which city did general burgoyne march his troops to saratoga.
place what characteristic did many of the battle sites have in common.
why do you think this was so.
although the continental army attempted to defend new york in late august the untrained and poorly equipped colonial troops soon retreated.
by late fall the british had pushed washington s army across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
desperate for an early victory washington risked everything on one bold stroke set for christmas night 1776 in the face of a fierce storm he led 2 400 men in small rowboats across the ice choked delaware river.
they then marched to their objective trenton new jersey and defeated a garrison of hessians in a surprise attack.
the british soon regrouped however and in september of 1777 they captured the american capital at philadelphia.
saratoga and valley forge in the meantime one british general was marching straight into the jaws of disaster.
in a complex scheme general john burgoyne planned to lead an army down a route of lakes from canada to albany where he would meet british troops as they arrived from new york city.
the two regiments would then join forces to isolate new england from the rest of the colonies.
as burgoyne traveled through forested wilderness militiamen and soldiers from the continental army gathered from all over new york and new england.
while he was fighting off the colonial troops burgoyne didn t realize that his fellow british officers were preoccupied with holding philadelphia and weren t coming to meet him.
american troops finally surrounded burgoyne at saratoga where he surrendered on october 17 1777 the surrender at saratoga turned out to be one of the most important events of the war.
although the french had secretly aided the patriots since early 1776 the saratoga victory bolstered france s belief that the americans could win the war.
as a result the french signed an alliance with the americans in february 1778 and openly joined them in their fight.
while this hopeful turn of events took place in paris washington and his continental army desperately low on food and supplies fought to stay alive at winter camp in valley forge pennsylvania.
more than 2 000 soldiers died yet the survivors didn t desert.
their endurance and suffering filled washington s letters to the congress and his friends.
main idea developing historical perspective why were these early victories so important to the continental army.
bgeorge washington 1732 1799 during the revolutionary war commander in chief george washington became a national hero.
an imposing man washington stood six feet two inches tall.
he was broad shouldered calm and dignified and he was an expert horseman.
but it was washingtons character that won hearts and ultimately the war.
washington persistently roused dispirited men into a fighting force.
at princeton he galloped on his white horse into the line of fire shouting and encouraging his men.
at valley forge he bore the same cold and privation as every suffering soldier.
time and again washingtons tactics saved his smaller weaker force to fight another day.
by the end of the war the entire nation idolized general washington and adoring soldiers crowded near him just to touch his boots when he rode by.
a personal voice george washington it may be said that no history.
can furnish an instance of an armys suffering uncommon hardships as ours have done.
to see the men without clothes to cover their nakedness without blankets to lie upon without shoes.
and submitting without a murmur is a proof of patience and obedience which in my opinion can scarcely be paralleled quoted in ordeal at valley forge life during the revolution one huge problem that the continental congress faced was paying the troops.
when the congress ran out of hard currency silver and gold it printed paper money called continentals like the revolutionary soldiers.
as congress printed more and more money its value plunged causing rising prices or inflation.
the congress also struggled against great odds to equip the beleaguered army.
60 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic main idea contrasting what was the difference between the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787.
f main idea making inferences why do you think news of shayss rebellion made states eager to participate in the philadelphia convention.
after the revolution many americans favored a republic a government in which citizens rule through their elected representatives.
however many also feared that a democracy government directly by the people placed power in the hands of the uneducated masses.
these fears and concerns deeply affected the planning of the new government.
the articles of confederation the second continental congress set up a new plan of government in a set of laws called the articles of confederation.
the plan established a form of government called a confederation or alliance among the thirteen states.
the articles set up a congress in which each state would have one vote regardless of population.
powers were divided between the states and the national government.
the national government had the power to declare war make peace and sign treaties.
it could borrow money set standards for coins and for weights and measures and establish a postal service.
after approval by all thirteen states the articles of confederation went into effect in march 1781 one of the first issues the confederation faced had to do with the the northwest territory lands west of the appalachians where many people settled after the revolutionary war.
to help govern these lands congress passed the land ordinance of 1785 which established a plan for surveying the land.
see geography spotlight on page 72.
in the northwest ordinance of 1787 congress provided a procedure for dividing the land into no fewer than three and no more than five states.
the ordinance also set requirements for the admission of new states which however overlooked native american land claims j weaknesses of the articles of confederation congress could not enact and collect taxes.
each state had only one vote in congress regardless of population.
nine out of thirteen states needed to agree to pass important laws.
articles could be amended only if all states approved.
there was no executive branch to enforce laws of congress.
there was no national court system to settle legal disputes.
there were thirteen separate states that lacked national unity.
the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787 became the confederation s most significant achievements.
overshadowing such successes however were the confederation s many problems.
the most serious problem was that each state functioned independently by pursuing its own interests rather than considering those of the nation as a whole.
the government had no means of raising money or enforcing its laws.
moreover there was no national court system to settle legal disputes.
the articles of confederation created a weak central government and little unity among the states.
shayss rebellion the need for a stronger central government became obvious in 1786 when many farmers in western massachusetts rose up in protest over increased state taxes.
the farmers discontent boiled over into mob action in january of 1787 when daniel shays a fellow farmer led an army of 1 200 farmers toward the arsenal at springfield massachusetts.
state officials hurriedly called out the militia to head off the army of farmers killing four of the rebels and scattering the rest.
shays s rebellion as the farmers protest came to be called caused panic and dismay throughout the nation.
it was clearly time to talk about a stronger national government.
because the states had placed such severe limits on the government to prevent abuse of power the government was unable to solve many of the nation s problems.
news of the rebellion spread throughout the states.
the revolt persuaded twelve states to send delegates to a convention called by congress in philadelphia in may of 1787 kl history video shays s rebellion dsbbbq review unit 67 i tv player james madison 1751 1836 the oldest of 12 children james madison grew up in virginia.
he was a sickly child who suffered all his life from physical ailments.
because of a weak speaking voice he decided not to become a minister and thus entered politics.
madisons virginia plan resulted from extensive research that he had done on political systems before the convention.
he asked edmund randolph a fellow delegate from virginia to present the plan because his own voice was too weak to be heard throughout the assembly.
besides providing brilliant political leadership madison kept a record of the debates that took place at the convention.
because of his plan and his leadership madison is known as the father of the constitution.
creating a new government most of the delegates at the constitutional convention recognized the need to strengthen the central government.
within the first five days of the meeting they gave up the idea of fixing the articles of confederation and decided to form an entirely new government that would replace the one created by the articles.
conflict and compromise one major issue that the delegates faced was giving fair representation to both large and small states.
james madison proposed the virginia plan which called for a bicameral or two house legislature with membership based on each state s population.
delegates from the small states vigorously objected to the virginia plan because it gave more power to states with large populations.
small states supported william paterson s new jersey plan which proposed a single house congress in which each state had an equal vote.
the debate became deadlocked and dragged on through the hot and humid summer days.
eventually roger sherman suggested the great compromise which offered a two house congress to satisfy both small and big states.
each state would have equal representation in the senate or upper house.
the size of the population of each state would determine its representation in the house of representatives or lower house.
voters of each state would choose members of the house.
the state legislatures would choose members of the senate.
the great compromise settled one major issue but led to conflict over another.
southern delegates whose states had large numbers of slaves wanted slaves included in the population count that determined the number of representatives in the house.
northern delegates whose states had few slaves disagreed.
not counting the slaves would give the northern states more representatives than the southern states in the house of representatives.
the delegates eventually agreed to the three fifths compromise which called for three fifths of a state s slaves to be counted as part of the population.
division of powers after the delegates reached agreement on the difficult questions of slavery and representation they dealt with other issues somewhat more easily.
they divided power between the states and the national government and they separated the national government s power into three branches.
thus they created an entirely new government.
the new system of government that the delegates were building was a form of federalism in which power is divided between a national government and several state governments.
the powers granted to the national government by the constitution are known as delegated powers or enumerated powers.
these include such powers as the control of foreign affairs and regulation of trade between the states.
powers not specifically granted to the national government but kept by the states are called reserved powers.
these include powers such as providing for and supervising education.
some powers such as the right to tax and establish courts were shared by both the national and the state governments.
main idea analyzing issues jgj in what ways did the great compromise resolve certain problems even as it created new ones.
68 chapter 4 the union in peril the south and slavery singling out senator andrew p butler of south carolina for his proslavery beliefs.
soon after butler s nephew congressman preston s brooks walked into the senate chamber and struck sumner on the head repeatedly with a cane until the cane broke.
sumner suffered brain damage and did not return to his senate seat for more than three years.
the widening gulf between the north and the south had far reaching implications for party politics as well.
as the two regions grew further apart the old national parties ruptured and new political parties emerged including a party for antislavery northerners.
a this 1856 cartoon with its ironic caption gives the northern view of preston brookss beating of charles sumner.
new political parties emerge main idea analyzing effects what impact did the slavery issue have on the democratic and whig parties.
by the end of 1856 the nation s political landscape had a very different appearance than it had exhibited in 1848 the whig party had split over the issue of slavery and had lost support in both the north and the south.
the democratic party which had survived numerous crises in its history was still alive though scarred.
a new republican party had formed and was moving within striking distance of the presidency.
jy slavery divides whigs in 1852 the whig vote in the south fell dramatically which helped produce a victory for the democratic candidate franklin pierce.
in 1854 the kansas nebraska act completed the demise of the whigs.
unable to agree on a national platform the southern faction splintered as its members looked for a proslavery pro union party to join.
at the same time whigs in the north sought a political alternative of their own.
one alternative that appeared was the american party which soon became known as the know nothing party because members were instructed to answer questions about their activities by saying i know nothing.
the know nothings supported nativism the favoring of native born people over immigrants.
however like the whigs the know nothings split over the issue of slavery in the territories.
southern know nothings looked for another alternative to the democrats.
meanwhile northern know nothings began to edge toward the republican party.
review unit 161 1 free soil free speech free labor and free men free soilers campaign slogan 1848 two antislavery parties had also emerged during the 1840s.
the liberty party was formed for the purpose of pursuing the cause o a o 1 tion by passing new laws but received only a small percentage of vo es in the 1848 presidential election.
in that same election the free soil arty which opposed the extension of slavery into the territories received ten percent of the popular vote in the presidential election.
from this strong showing it was clear that many northerners opposed the extension of slavery in the territories.
the free soilers voice northern opposition to slavery in the territories was not necessarily based on positive feelings toward african americans.
it was not unusual for northerners to be free soilers without being abolitionists.
unlike abolitionists a number of northern free soilers supported racist laws prohibiting settlement by blacks in their communities and denying them the right to vote.
what free soilers primarily objected to was slaverys competition with free white workers or a wage based labor force upon which the north depended.
they feared that such competition would drive down wages.
free soilers detected a dangerous pattern in such events as the passage of the fugitive slave act and the repeal of the missouri compromise.
they were convinced that a conspiracy existed on the part of the diabolical slave power to spread slavery throughout the united states.
the new republican party in 1854 opponents of slavery in the territories formed a new political party the republican party.
the republicans were united in opposing the kansas nebraska act and in keeping slavery out of the territories.
apart from these issues however the republican party embraced a wide range of opinions.
as the party grew it took in free soilers antislavery whigs and democrats and nativists mostly from the north.
the conservative faction hoped to resurrect the missouri compromise.
at the opposite extreme were some radical abolitionists.
during the election of 1856 the republicans chose as their candidate john c fremont.
the democrats nominated james buchanan of pennsylvania.
if fremont had won the south might have seceded then and there.
however buchanan won and the threat of secession was temporarily averted.
main idea contrasting how did free soilers differ from abolitionists.
dred scotts conflicts lead to secession lawsuit set off even more political conflicts only intensified after the election of president buchanan.
the controversy over first slavery related controversy arose on march 6 1857 just two days after slavery y he took office the dred scott decision a major supreme court decision was brought about by dred scott a slave whose owner took him from the slave state of missouri to free territory in illinois and wisconsin and back to missouri.
scott appealed to the supreme court for his freedom on the grounds that living in a free state illinois and a free territory wisconsin had made him a free man.
me case was in court for years.
finally on march 6 185 the supreme court ruled against dred scott.
accordingto tl ruling scott lacked any legal standing to sue in federal cou because he was not and never could be a citizen.
moreovc the court ruled that being in free territory did not make a slm free.
the fifth amendment protected property includir s aves.
for territories to exclude slavery would be to denrh slaveholders of their property.
f background the dred scott case was only the second one in american history in which the supreme court reversed a federal legislative act.
chapter 4 the union in peril northern and southern resources 1861 source times atlas of world history 1989 military strength naval ship iron production 15 to 1 firearms production 32 to 1 skillbuilder interpreting graphs 1 which side north or south had the advantage in terms of industrial production.
2 what do the overall data suggest about the eventual outcome of the war.
industrial workers source battles and leaders of the civil war 1884 1888 reprinted ed 1956 most confederate soldiers fought to protect the south from northern aggression.
most union troops saw the war as a struggle to preserve the union.
main idea making inferences why were northern factories and railroads so advantageous to the unions war effort.
upper south.
in april and may virginia arkansas north carolina and tennessee seceded bringing the number of confederate states to eleven.
the western counties of virginia opposed slavery so they seceded from virginia and were admitted into the union as west virginia in 1863 the four remaining slave states maryland delaware kentucky and missouri remained in the union.
strengths and strategies the union and the confederacy were unevenly matched.
the union enjoyed enormous advantages in resources over the south more people more factories greater food production and a more extensive railroad system.
the confederacy s advantages included king cotton first rate generals and highly motivated soldiers.
both sides adopted military strategies suited to their objectives and resources.
the union which had to conquer the south to win devised a three part plan the navy would blockade southern ports so they could neither export cotton nor import much needed manufactured goods.
union riverboats and armies would move down the mississippi river and split the confederacy in two.
union armies would capture the confederate capital at richmond virginia.
the confederacy s strategy was mostly defensive although southern leaders encouraged their generals to attack the north if the opportunity arose.
bull run the first bloodshed on the battlefield occurred about three months after fort sumter fell near the little creek of bull run just 25 miles from washington d c the battle was a seesaw affair.
in the morning the union army gained the upper hand but the confederates held firm inspired by general thomas j jackson.
there stands jackson like a stone wall another general shouted coining the nickname stonewall jackson.
in the afternoon confederate reinforcements helped win the first southern victory.
fortunately for the union the confederates were too exhausted to follow up their victory with an attack on washington.
still confederate morale soared.
many confederate soldiers confident that the war was over left the army and went home.
union armies in the west lincoln responded to the defeat at bull run by stepping up enlistments.
he also appointed general george mcclellan to lead the union forces encamped near washington.
while mcclellan drilled his troops the union forces in the west began the fight for control of the mississippi river.
review unit 169 in february 1862 a union army invaded western tennessee.
see the battles of the west map below.
at its head was general ulysses s grant a brave and decisive military commander.
in just eleven days grant s forces captured two confederate forts fort henry on the tennessee river and fort donelson on the cumberland river.
two months later grant narrowly escaped disaster near shiloh a small church in tennessee close to the mississippi border.
after grant failed to have his troops dig trenches or set out adequate guards and patrols thousands of confederate soldiers carried out a surprise attack.
grant averted disaster by reorganizing his troops and driving the confederate forces away the next day.
however shiloh demonstrated what a bloody slaughter the war was becoming.
nearly one fourth of the 100 000 men who fought there were killed wounded or captured.
as grant pushed toward the mississippi river david g farragut commanding a union fleet of about 40 ships seized new orleans the confederacy s largest city and busiest port.
see the fall of new orleans map below.
by june farragut had taken control of much of the lower mississippi.
between grant and farragut the union had nearly achieved its goal of cutting the confederacy in two.
only port hudson louisiana and vicksburg mississippi still stood in the way.
the war for the capitals in the spring of 1862 while mcclellan was leading his army toward richmond he met a confederate army commanded by general joseph e johnston.
see the battles of the east map on page 171.
after a series of battles johnston was wounded and command of the army passed on to robert e lee.
lee was very different from mcclellan modest rather than vain and willing to go beyond military textbooks in his tactics.
determined to save the confederate capital lee drove mcclellan away from richmond.
main idea making inferences why was control of the mississippi river so important to the union.
400 kilometers civil war 1861 1862 area controlled by union area won by union 1861 1862 area controlled by confederacy union troop movements confederate troop movements union victory confederate victory fort capital 400 miles geography skillbuilder 1 region in which region of the country did northern forces have the most success.
2 place in which states did confederate troops attempt invasions of the north.
vocabulary casualties those who are injured killed captured or missing in action now it was lee s turn to move against washington.
in september his troops crossed the potomac into the union state of maryland.
at this point mcclellan had an incredible stroke of luck.
a union corporal found a copy of lee s orders wrapped around some cigars.
the plan revealed that lee s and stonewall jackson s armies were separated for the moment.
mcclellan ordered his men to pursue lee and the two sides fought on september 17 near a creek called the antietam an te tem.
the clash proved to be the bloodiest single day battle in american history with casualties totaling more than 26 000 the next day instead of pursuing the battered confederate army into virginia and possibly ending the war mcclellan did nothing.
as a result lincoln removed him from command.
historical spotlight main idea drawing conclusions why did both the union and confederacy care about british neutrality.
the politics of war after secession occurred many southerners believed that dependence on southern cotton would force great britain to formally recognize the confederacy as an independent nation.
unfortunately for the south britain had accumulated a huge cotton inventory just before the outbreak of war.
instead of importing southern cotton the british now needed northern wheat and corn.
britain decided that neutrality was the best policy.
boys in war both the union and confederate armies had soldiers who were under 18 years of age.
examination of some confederate recruiting lists for 1861 1862 reveals that approximately 5 percent were 17 or younger with some as young as 13 the percentage of boys in the union army was lower perhaps 1 5 percent.
these figures however do not count the great number of boys who ran away to follow each army without officially enlisting.
review unit 171 key players abraham lincoln 1809 1865 people question why lincoln believed so passionately in the union.
a possible answer lies in his life story.
he was born into poverty the son of illiterate parents.
lincoln once said that in his boyhood there was absolutely nothing to excite ambition for educa tion yet he hungered for knowledge.
apart from a years worth of school lincoln educated himself and after working as rail splitter flatboatman storekeeper and surveyor he taught himself to be a lawyer.
this led to careers in politics and law and eventually to the white house.
perhaps because of this upward mobility lincoln fought passionately to preserve the democracy he described as the last best hope of earth jefferson davis 1808 1889 davis who was named after thomas jefferson was born in kentucky but grew up in mississippi.
after graduating from west point he served in the military then settled down as a planter before going into politics.
he served terms in the u s senate.
his election as president of the confederacy dismayed him.
as his wife varina wrote i thought his genius was military but as a party manager he would not succeed.
he did not know the arts of the politician.
varina was right.
davis fought frequently with other confederate leaders and was blamed for the refusal of many southern states to put the confederacys welfare above their own.
history video emancipation proclamation 7 proclaiming emancipation as jefferson davis s confederacy struggled in vain to gain foreign recognition abolitionist feeling grew in the north.
although lincoln disliked slavery he did not believe that the federal government had the power to abolish it where it already existed.
as the war progressed however lincoln did find a way to use his constitutional war powers to end slavery.
the confederacy used the labor of slaves to build fortifications and grow food.
lincoln s powers as commander in chief allowed him to order his troops to seize enemy resources.
therefore he decided that just as he could order the union army to take confederate supplies he could also authorize the army to emancipate slaves.
emancipation was not just a moral issue it became a weapon of war.
on january 1 1863 lincoln issued his emancipation proclamation.
the following portion captured national attention.
from the emancipation proclamation abraham lincoln i do order and declare that all persons held as slaves within these said designated states and parts of states are and henceforward shall be free and that the executive government of the united states including the military and naval authorities thereof will recognize and maintain the freedom of said persons.
and i hereby enjoin upon the people so declared to be free to abstain from all violence unless in necessary self defense and i recommend to them that in all cases when allowed they labor faithfully for reasonable wages.
and i further declare and make known that such persons of suitable condition will be received into the armed service of the united states to garrison forts positions stations and other places and to man vessels of all sorts in said service.
and upon this sincerely believed to be an act of justice warranted by the constitution upon military necessity i invoke the considerate judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of almighty god from the emancipation proclamation january 1 1863 172 chapter 4 the union in peril main idea analyzing effects why was the battle of gettysburg a disaster for the south.
main idea forming generalizations what ideas about the united states did lincoln express in the gettysburg address.
by the second day of battle the confederates had driven the union troops from gettysburg and had taken control of the town.
however the north still held positions on cemetery ridge the high ground south of gettysburg.
on july 2 lee ordered general james longstreet to attack cemetery ridge.
at about 4 00 p m longstreet s troops advanced from seminary ridge where they were positioned in a peach orchard and wheat field that stood between them and most of the union army on cemetery ridge.
the confederates repeatedly attacked the union lines.
although the union troops were forced to concede some territory their lines withheld the withering confederate onslaught.
on july 3 lee ordered an artillery barrage on the center of the union lines on cemetery ridge.
for two hours the two armies fired at one another in a vicious exchange that could be heard in pittsburgh.
believing they had silenced the union guns the confederates then charged the lines.
confederate forces marched across the farmland between their position and the union high ground.
suddenly northern artillery renewed its barrage and the infantry fired on the rebels as well.
devastated the confederates staggered back to their lines.
after the battle lee gave up any hopes of invading the north and led his army back to virginia.
the three day battle produced staggering losses 23 000 union men and 28 000 confederates were killed or wounded.
total casualties were more than 30 percent.
despite the devastation northerners were enthusiastic about breaking the charm of robert lee s invincibility.
the gettysburg address in november 1863 a ceremony was held to dedicate a cemetery in gettysburg.
there president lincoln spoke for a little more than two minutes.
according to some contemporary historians lincoln s gettysburg address remade america.
before lincoln s speech people said the united states are afterward they said the united states is in other words the speech helped the country to realize that it was not just a collection of individual states it was one unified nation.
the gettysburg address abraham lincoln four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
now we are engaged in a great civil war testing whether that nation or any nation so conceived and so dedicated can long endure.
we are met on a great battle field of that war.
we have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live.
it is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this.
but in a larger sense we can not dedicate we can not consecrate we can not hallow this ground.
the brave men living and dead who struggled here have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or detract.
the world will little note nor long remember what we say here but it can never forget what they did here.
it is for us the living rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced.
it is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation under god shall have a new birth of freedom and that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth the gettysburg address november 19 1863 t 1 history video gettysburg address insn review unit 177 history through photojournalism j mathew bradys photographs the civil war marked the first time in united states history that photography a resource since 1839 played a major role in a military conflict.
hundreds of photographers traveled with the troops working both privately and for the military.
the most famous civil war photographer was mathew brady who employed about 20 photographers to meet the public demand for pictures from the battlefront.
this was the beginning of american news photography or photojournalism.
many of bradys photographs are a mix of realism and artificiality.
due to the primitive level of photographic technology subjects had to be carefully posed and remain still during the long exposure times.
in this 1864 photograph brady posed a kneeling soldier offering a canteen of water beside a wounded soldier with his arm in a sling.
images like this showing the wounded or the dead brought home the harsh reality of war to the civilian population.
encampment of the army of the potomac may 1862.
few photographs of the civil war are as convincing in their naturalism as this view over a union encampment.
simply by positioning the camera behind the soldiers the photographer draws the viewer into the composition.
although we cannot see the soldiers faces we are compelled to see through their eyes.
skillbuilder interpreting visual sources 1 what elements in the smaller photograph seem posed or contrived.
what elements are more realistic.
2 how do these photographs compare with more heroic imagery of traditional history painting.
178 chapter 4 the union in peril main idea developing historical perspective h do you think that the union would take revenge on the southern states after the war is over.
after some political maneuvering the thirteenth amendment was ratified at the end of 1865 the u s constitution now stated neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the united states.
lincoln is assassinated whatever further plans lincoln had to reunify the nation after the war he never got to imple ment them.
on april 14 1865 five days after lee surrendered to grant at appomattox lincoln and his wife went to ford s theatre in washington to see a british comedy our american cousin.
during its third act a man crept up behind lincoln and shot the presi dent in the back of his head.
lincoln who never regained consciousness died on april 15 it was the first time a president of the united states had been assassinated.
after the shooting the assassin john wilkes booth a 26 year old actor and southern sympathizer then leaped down from the presidential box to the stage and escaped.
twelve days later union cavalry trapped him in a virginia tobacco shed and shot him dead.
the funeral train that carried lincoln s body from washington to his hometown of springfield illinois took 14 days for its journey.
approximately 7 million americans or almost one third of the entire union population turned out to mourn publicly their martyred leader.
the civil war had ended.
slavery and secession were no more.
now the country faced two new problems how to restore the southern states to the union and how to integrate approximately 4 million newly freed african americans into national life.
lincolns body lies in state in 1865 assessment 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
gettysburg gettysburg address vicksburg william tecumseh sherman appomattox court house thirteenth amendment john wilkes booth main idea using your notes copy the multiple effects chart below on your paper and fill it in with consequences of the civil war.
which consequence of the civil war do you think has had the most impact on modern life.
critical thinking analyzing issues grant and sherman used the strategy of total war.
do you think the end justifies the means.
that is did defeating the confederacy justify harming civilians.
think about their reasons for targeting the civilian population shermans remark about georgia quoted on page 181 shermans march through georgia 4 summarizing how did lincoln abolish slavery in all states.
drawing conclusions why did the unions victory strengthen the power of the national government.
review unit 183 i reconstruction its effects main idea r ml ss why it matters now terms names in after the civil war the nation embarked on a period known as reconstruction during which attempts were made to readmit the south to the union.
the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments passed as part of reconstruction gave civil rights to americans of all races.
freedmens bureau reconstruction radical republicans andrew johnson fourteenth amendment fifteenth amendment scalawag carpetbagger hiram revels sharecropping ku klux kian kkk taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on problems facing the south after the civil war and solutions that were offered for those problems.
robert g fitzgerald was born a free african american in delaware in 1840 during the civil war he served in both the u s army and the u s navy.
in 1866 he taught former slaves in a small virginia town.
a year after his arrival in virginia fitzgerald looked back on what he had accomplished.
a personal voice robert g fitzgerald i came to virginia one year ago on the 22nd of this month.
erected a school organized and named the freedmans chapel school.
now june 29th have about 60 who have been for several months engaged in the study of arithmetic writing etc.
this morning sent in my report accompanied with compositions from about 12 of my advanced writers instructed from the alphabet up to their present condition their progress has been surprisingly rapid.
quoted in proud shoes fitzgerald was working for the freedmen s bureau which had been established by congress to provide food clothing hospitals legal protection and education for former slaves and poor whites in the south in 1865.
robert fitzgerald the politics of reconstruction the need to help former slaves was just one of many issues the nation confronted after the war.
in addition the government led by andrew johnson lincoln s vice president and eventual successor had to determine how to bring the confederate states back into the union.
reconstruction the period during which the united states began to rebuild after the civil war lasted from 1865 to 1877 the term also refers to the process the federal government used to readmit chapter 4 section 1 page 163 and read the passage headed lincoln douglas debates.
pay special attention to the descriptions of lincoln s and douglas s views on slavery.
make a venn diagram that shows the ideas on which the two men differed and on which they agreed.
1 compare identify similarities.
on what ideas did lincoln and douglas agree.
2 contrast identify differences.
on what ideas did they differ.
3 analyze the information.
what do these similarities and differences tell you about what the important issues were during this election.
191 sk2 history multimedia connections 7 w sawcety recked the front door wdon ok toofdn the tired t kuo zopko ofr the ww ok korseb ck i fw a korrude tiykt.
twtffrdty forwodod that tho kad aobuolly w oti lad.
what they kroodd do with uo woo ol feoorfrd ytetifok to wj yotmv kund tnise pierce age 15 click through inter activities a citizen soldier watch the video to meet john burns the man who would come to be called the citizen hero of gettysburg.
ol a family s story watch the video to discover the story of courage and commitment exhibited by one gettysburg family.
jf j the national cemetery watch the video to learn about the soldiers national cemetery and the speech president lincoln gave there.
the gettysburg civilians 191 mc2 major characteristics of u s history historians tend to consider past events within a series of historical eras that they have identified.
different historians may define these eras differently but in general this approach helps them to place events within the larger context of the time in which they occurred.
doing so can enable historians to understand the ideas and beliefs of the past in the way the participants might have.
for each era historians can apply a broad set of characteristics to help understand the connections between time events places and people.
throughout this textbook you will find opportunities to apply the characteristics identified below to eras and events to make those connections and to help you grasp the larger patterns of history.
o w tin women have now m will.
civil rights and government the government of the united states is based on several founding principles such as human equality limited government and democratic representation.
the u s constitution was intended to ensure that individual rights are protected from government interference.
notions such as separation of powers and checks and balances protect citizens by keeping any one branch from abusing its power.
as the nation has developed political and civil rights have been expanded to encompass more people and to ensure that all americans can count on fair treatment and equal protection from the government.
economic development as a result of fertile land and abundant natural resources a free enterprise economic system and government regulation protecting both private property and the public good the united states has long been a land of economic success and opportunity.
the promise of social mobility and economic opportunity through hard work has inspired americans from all walks of life to struggle to improve their prospects just as it has drawn immigrants from around the world to the united states.
involvement in global affairs no matter its level of involvement in the affairs of other nations the united states has been influenced by those nations and has influenced them in return.
early american foreign policy reflected the country s colonial roots as the nation tried to remain isolated from the concerns and affairs of europe.
by the 1900s however the united states emerged as a world superpower with allies and responsibilities around the world driving its greater involvement in global affairs.
major characteristics of u s history movement americans have come from numerous places around the world to form a nation united by the common bond of standing for certain self evident truths equality and the right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
people from many nations representing an extraordinary range of racial ethnic and religious groups have come to the united states and become american citizens shaping american society and culture in the process.
people have also migrated within the country s borders often in search of new opportunities and a better way of life.
b i 8 8 discovery and innovation a spirit of discovery and a drive for innovation in science and technology has had a tremendous effect on the economy and culture of the united states.
throughout our nation s history americans have developed transformative new inventions and technologies that have vastly improved quality of life and standards of living not only here but across the globe.
such developments continue to shape american society in new and sometimes unexpected ways.
i cultural expression cultural expression often reflects the characteristics and issues of the period in which it occurs.
our diverse nation has given rise to a diverse culture which draws on the heritage and traditions of many different groups.
the blending and remixing of cultural expression among racial ethnic and religious groups can be the source of tremendous creativity but can also lead to conflict.
major eras in u s history 1877 to the present westward expansion industrialization and urbanization progressive era and american expansionism overview in the late 1800s americans moved west in increasing numbers.
the government promoted the settlement of the west by offering free or cheap land to those willing to establish productive farms and by supporting railroad development.
settlers were also drawn west by economic opportunities such as ranching and mining.
native americans resisted but westward expansion settlement continued threatening their traditional way of life.
major characteristics movement as thousands of settlers streamed westward native americans were displaced from their native territory.
economic development the growth of railroads made travel west easier and faster.
discovery and innovation new technologies helped settlers to confront the hardships of life and work on the plains.
overview innovations in business and industry occurred at a rapid pace in the late 1800s.
business leaders made huge sums of money but ordinary workers continued to live and work in dangerous conditions.
immigrants moved to the nation s growing cities in search of new opportunities.
the cities often controlled by corrupt political machines offered challenges as well as opportunity.
major characteristics economic development the growth of the oil and steel industries and the completion of the transcontinental railroad fueled the nation s economy.
discovery and innovation new inventions such as the skyscraper the telephone and electricity changed how americans lived and worked.
movement many immigrants encouraged by optimism about a better life in american traveled to the united states.
4 major eras in u s history overview the progressive movement arose to redress the negative impact of industrialization progressives achieved many wide reaching reforms that affected american political social and economic life.
at the same time global competition for empire led the nation into war against spain and into military conflicts in mexico.
the united states emerged as a new world power.
major characteristics civil rights and government movements for social and political change prompted by industrialization and urbanization led to expansion of suffrage to women and other progressive reforms that gave americans more of a voice in government.
involvement in global affairs the united states grew more involved in foreign affairs claiming new territories after the spanish american war.
economic development claiming alaska hawaii and new territories in the pacific made the united states a growing economic power.
1914 1919 1920 1929 1929 1941 world war i the roaring twenties the great depression overview when rivalries among european nations led to the outbreak of war in 1914 the united states remained neutral.
hostile german acts soon convinced president wilson and congress that war was inevitable.
after the united states joined the allies in 1917 the u s government quickly mobilized the economy and built public support for the war effort.
however some efforts to minimize dissent infringed on individual rights.
major characteristics involvement in global affairs despite americans best efforts to stay neutral in the face of war in europe germany s hostile actions brought an end to any hope for peace.
civil rights and government the espionage act and the sedition act limited antiwar speech which some saw as a violation of their first amendment rights.
overview the years following world war i brought unease over the apparent spread of radical influences in the united states.
the american people sought leaders who promised a return to peaceful times.
they also eagerly contributed to a booming consumer driven economy.
the 1920s were also a time of widespread cultural change as women took on new roles urbanization increased and music art and literature reflected characteristics and issues of the period.
major characteristics economic development government policies increased production efficiencies and the increasing availability of consumer goods fueled a period of prosperity.
cultural expression the artists musicians and writers of the lost generation and the harlem renaissance created works that reflected postwar feelings and expectations.
overview following an era of apparent prosperity the great depression began in 1929 soon millions of americans were suffering and the political landscape of the united states stood on the brink of great change.
following his election in 1932 president roosevelt pushed forward a series of programs called the new deal.
intended to solve the nation s economic troubles the new deal had mixed results.
major characteristics economic development the prosperity of the 1920s came to an abrupt end as the stock market crashed and unemployment skyrocketed.
civil rights and government the new deal met with some success as well as some criticism but it unquestionably changed the relationship between the people and their government.
movement millions of residents left the great plains in search of economic opportunity in the wake of the dust bowl.
review unit 195 major eras in u s history 1877 to the present 1939 1945 1945 1959 1954 1975 1954 1975 world war ii postwar america civil rights and social change the vietnam war w it h 1968 1992 a conservative resurgence 1992 present entering the 21st century overview unsettled conditions after world war i led to the rise of ruthless dictators.
their aggression led europe into another great war in 1939 the united states was eventually drawn into world war ii after being attacked by japan.
americans at home worked hard to support the war and millions went off to fight overseas.
hard fighting by the allies brought victory first in europe and then in the pacific.
major characteristics involvement in global affairs following a period of isolationism the united states joined the other allied nations to defeat the axis powers.
civil rights and government the united states fought against regimes that opposed democracy and minorities began to expect increased civil rights in return for their wartime contributions.
movement world war ii triggered one of the greatest internal migrations in american history as millions moved in search of wartime employment.
major eras in u s history overview after world war ii the united states took its place as a world leader and an adversary of the soviet union in the cold war.
the conflict and tensions during this time period worried many americans.
however they also experienced a period of economic prosperity as consumers were once again able to purchase goods and services to fulfill wants and needs that had accumulated during the war.
major characteristics economic development in the wake of a conversion back to a peacetime economy median family income home ownership and savings all increased steadily during the 1950s.
involvement in global affairs tensions between the united states and its former ally the soviet union led to a prolonged cold war.
discovery and innovation this period witnessed the development of new consumer goods as well as new military technologies.
overview during this period many groups fought for expanded civil and political rights.
the african american civil rights movement won key victories in gaining racial equality.
inspired by their gains women mexican americans and native americans also pushed for greater equality.
presidents kennedy and johnson supported these efforts passing key civil rights and voting rights legislation in the 1960s.
president johnson also implemented his great society plan in an effort to reduce poverty.
major characteristics civil rights and government citizens called for social and political reforms racial equality for african americans and other minorities and gender equality for women.
cultural expression during this period a counterculture developed to challenge the tradi tional american ideals and lifestyle overview concern about the spread of communism during the cold war led the united states to become increasingly involved in vietnam.
president johnson sent the first u s fighting troops to the region in 1965 and the war escalated as u s troop strength increased in the years that followed.
as the war dragged on however more and more americans began to question u s involvement reflecting deep divisions within american society.
president nixon eventually ended u s involvement in vietnam but the war had lasting effects.
major characteristics involvement in global affairs the desire to contain communism and prevent it from spreading caused the united states to become involved in the vietnam war.
civil rights and government television images of the war caused many americans to ques tion u s involvement and those pposed formed a protest move ment to express their views to the overnment.
overview frustration with the counterculture and the social change of the 1960s led to a conservative backlash in the 1970s and 1980s.
despite president nixon s notable successes in foreign relations the watergate scandal ultimately led to his resignation.
still four of the five presidents who followed him also supported conservative policies and values.
many americans embraced the message of smaller government that presidents reagan and bush advocated during the 1980s.
major characteristics civil rights and government the watergate scandal caused some people to question their faith in government and later administrations worked to reduce the size of government.
involvement in global affairs president nixon improved relations with china and the soviet union president carter worked toward middle east peace and president reagan oversaw the end of the cold war.
overview in the wake of the cold war americans faced the 21st century with hope determination and a readiness to confront challenges at home and abroad.
the economy has experienced periods of growth and recession.
the period brought new enemies as the united states became the target of international terrorists on september 11 2001 while confronting these and other challenges society has changed as a result of a more diverse population and new advances in technology.
major characteristics economic development economic gains disappeared as the global economy began to slow down around the turn of the 21st century.
involvement in global affairs the united states worked with other nations to confront the threat of global terrorism.
discovery and innovation innovations such as the internet have affected nearly all areas of american life.
review unit 197 i ll.
unit chapter 5 farmers and the populist movement main idea why it matters now i terms names farmers united to address their economic problems giving rise to the populist movement.
many of the populist reform issues such as income tax and legally protected rights of workers are now taken for granted.
oliver hudson kelley grange farmers alliances populism bimetallism gold standard william mckinlej william jennings bryan one american s story taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes about the populist party.
as a young adult in the early 1870s mary elizabeth lease left home to teach school on the kansas plains.
after marrying farmer charles lease she joined the growing farmers alliance movement and began speaking on issues of concern to farmers.
lease joked that her tongue was loose at both ends and hung on a swivel but her golden voice and deep blue eyes hypnotized her listeners.
a personal voice mary elizabeth lease what you farmers need to do is to raise less corn and more hell.
we want the accursed foreclosure system wiped out.
we will stand by our homes and stay by our firesides by force if necessary and we will not pay our debts to the loan shark companies until the government pays its debts to us.
quoted in the populist uprising farmers had endured great hardships in helping to transform the plains from the great american desert into the breadbasket of the nation yet every year they reaped less and less of the bounty they had sowed with their sweat.
farmers unite to address common problems in the late 1800s many farmers were trapped in a vicious economic cycle.
prices for crops were falling and farmers often mortgaged their farms so that they could buy more land and produce more crops.
good farming land was becoming scarce though and banks were foreclosing on the mortgages of increasing numbers of farmers who couldn t make payments on their loans.
moreover the railroads were taking advantage of farmers by charging excessive prices for shipping and storage.
mary elizabeth lease the daughter of irish immigrants was a leader of the populist party.
changes on the western frontier 219 analyzing political cartoons j the plight of the farmers farmers were particularly hard hit in the decades leading to the financial panic of 1893 they regarded big business interests as insurmountable enemies who were bringing them to their knees and leaving them with debts at every turn.
this cartoon is a warning of the dangers confronting not only the farmers but the entire nation.
skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1 how does this cartoon depict the plight of the farmers.
2 who does the cartoonist suggest is responsible for the farmers plight.
economic distress the troubles of the farmers were part of a larger economic problem affecting the entire nation.
during the civil war the united states had issued almost 500 million in paper money called greenbacks.
greenbacks could not be exchanged for silver or gold money.
they were worth less than hard money of the same face value.
hard money included both coins and paper money printed in yellow ink that could be exchanged for gold.
after the war the government began to take the greenbacks out of circulation.
retiring the greenbacks caused some discontent.
it increased the value of the money that stayed in circulation.
it meant that farmers who had borrowed money had to pay back their loans in dollars that were worth more than the dollars they had borrowed.
at the same time they were receiving less money for their crops.
between 1867 and 1887 for example the price of a bushel of wheat fell from 2 00 to 68 cents.
in effect farmers lost money at every turn.
throughout the 1870s the farmers and other debtors pushed the government to issue more money into circulation.
those tactics failed although the bland allison act of 1878 required the government to buy and coin at least 2 million to 4 million worth of silver each month.
it wasn t enough to support the increase in the money supply that the farmers wanted.
problems with the railroads meanwhile farmers paid outrageously high prices to transport grain.
lack of competition among the railroads meant that it might cost more to ship grain from the dakotas to minneapolis by rail than from chicago to england by boat.
also railroads made secret agreements with middlemen grain brokers and merchants that allowed the railroads to control grain storage prices and to influence the market price of crops.
many farmers mortgaged their farms for credit with which to buy seed and supplies.
suppliers charged high rates of interest sometimes charging more for items bought on credit than they did for cash purchases.
farmers got caught in a cycle of credit that meant longer hours and more debt every year.
it was time for reform.
the farmers alliances to push effectively for reforms however farmers needed to organize.
in 1867 oliver hudson kelley started the patrons of main idea analyzing issues why did farmers think that an increased money supply would help solve their economic problems.
main idea analyzing causes what were some of the causes of farmers economic problems.
120 chapter 5 i texas types the cowboy william lawrence larry chittenden left his home in new jersey in 1883 and made his way to texas.
once there he partnered with his uncle to establish a ranch near anson in jones county.
he eventually became known as the poet ranchman of texas after the 1893 publication of ranch verses a collection of his poems about ranch life in texas.
he wears a big hat and big spurs and all that and leggins of fancy fringed leather he takes pride in his boots and the pistol he shoots and he s happy in all kinds of weather.
he is fond of his horse t is a bronco of course for oh he can ride like the devil he is old for his years and he always appears to be foremost at round up or revel.
william lawrence chittenden texas types the cowboy 1893 vaquero modeled 1980 cast 1990 luis jimenez.
national museum of american art art resource new york.
w 1 a chief satanta chief satantas speech at the medicine lodge creek council known as the orator of the plains chief satanta represented the kiowa people in the 1867 medicine lodge creek negotiations with the u s government.
the speech from which this excerpt is taken was delivered by satanta in spanish but was translated into english and widely published in leading newspapers of the day.
all the land south of the arkansas belongs to the kiowas and comanches and i dont want to give away any of it.
i love the land and the buffalo and will not part with it.
i want you to understand well what i say.
write it on paper.
let the great father u s president see it and let me hear what he has to say.
i want you to understand also that the kiowas and comanches dont want to fight and have not been fighting since we made the treaty.
i hear a great deal of good talk from the gentlemen whom the great father sends us but they never do what they say.
i dont want any of the medicine lodges schools and churches within the country.
i want the children raised as i was.
when i make peace it is a long and lasting one there is no end to it.
a long time ago this land belonged to our fathers but when i go up to the river i see camps of soldiers on its banks.
these soldiers cut down my timber they kill my buffalo and when i see that my heart feels like bursting i feel sorry.
i have spoken.
chief satanta speech at the medicine lodge creek council 1867 comparing and contrasting compare and contrast the views these selections give of the american frontier in the second half of the 19th century.
use details from the selections to help explain your answer.
2 x internet activity from the gauchos of the argentine pampas to the workers on australian sheep stations many nations have had their own versions of the cowboys of the american west.
use the links for american literature to research one such nation.
prepare a bulletin board display that shows the similarities and differences between western cowboys and their counterparts in that country.
changes on the western frontier 225 chapter 6 main idea analyzing effects how did electricity change american life.
wherever they wanted not just near sources of power such as rivers.
this enabled industry to grow as never before.
huge operations such as the armour and swift meatpacking plants and the efficient processes that they used became the models for new consumer industries.
jey inventions change lifestyles edison s light bulb was only one of several revolutionary inventions.
christopher sholes invented the typewriter in 1867 and changed the world of work.
next to the light bulb however perhaps the most dramatic invention was the telephone unveiled by alexander graham bell and thomas watson in 1876 it opened the way for a worldwide communications network.
the typewriter and the telephone particularly affected office work and created new jobs for women.
although women made up less than 5 percent of all office workers in 1870 by 1910 they accounted for nearly 40 percent of the clerical work force.
new inventions also had a tremendous impact on factory work as well as on jobs that traditionally had been done at home.
for example women had previously sewn clothing by hand for their families.
with industrialization clothing could be mass produced in factories creating a need for garment workers many of whom were women.
industrialization freed some factory workers from backbreaking labor and helped improve workers standard of living.
by 1890 the average workweek had been reduced by about ten hours.
however many laborers felt that the mechanization of so many tasks reduced human workers worth.
as consumers though workers regained some of their lost power in the marketplace.
the country s expanding urban population provided a vast potential market for the new inventions and products of the late 1800s.
the typewriter shown here dates from around 1890.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
edwin l drake thomas alva edison alexander graham bell bessemer process christopher sholes main idea using your notes in a chart like the one below list resources ideas and markets that affected the industrial boom of the 19th century.
in the second column note how each item contributed to industrialization.
resources ideas markets impact critical thinking making inferences do you think that consumers gained power as industry expanded in the late 19th century.
why or why not.
4 hypothesizing if the u s had been poor in natural resources how would industrialization have been affected.
analyzing effects how did scientific discoveries and technological innovations affect the economic development of the united states.
think about the discoveries and inventions of the period the impact of inventions on peoples daily lives the effect of inventions on the workplace a new industrial age 233 citizenship spotlight qualities of effective leadership leadership matters.
in many instances a team or organization is only as good as its leader.
by influencing people to work toward common goals effective leaders are able to accomplish important tasks and effect change in the world.
there is no list of characteristics that a good leader must possess.
in fact good leadership can depend on the situation different leaders might behave in different ways depending on their position their goals their personalities and those of their followers.
however there are some qualities that can help an individual be an effective leader.
a desire to lead perhaps the most important quality is the desire to lead.
in order to lead effectively an individual must be committed to his or her cause and feel confident enough to advance that cause.
billy graham shown at left is a good example of an individual with a desire to lead.
he believes his purpose in life is to help people find a personal relationship with god.
since beginning his ministry in 1950 graham has worked tirelessly to accomplish that mission and share his faith with others.
he has written 31 books and conducted events in 185 countries.
he has even served as a spiritual adviser to presidents including dwight d eisenhower and richard nixon.
part of what enabled graham to reach so many people with his message was that he was committed to his cause.
judgment and decisiveness another important characteristic is the ability to act decisively and with good judgment.
in the face of complex issues with many factors a strong leader needs to determine an appropriate course of action to pursue.
by demonstrating these leadership qualities sonia sotomayor earned a place as a u s supreme court justice.
she is the only current member of the court with experience as a trial judge.
in that position she was required to hand down decisions on a variety of complex legal and constitutional issues and she earned a reputation as an able judge as a result of her thoughtful opinions.
she continues to employ her skills of judgment and decisiveness from the supreme court bench.
i i i i1 f i ll i 1 4 chapter and do library or internet research to discover how he or she embodied those characteristics.
then make a poster describing your leaders personal qualities and how they helped him or her to lead and inspire others.
include your own assessment of which qualities might have been most important in the success of your selected leader.
add an image of the leader to the poster and display it in your classroom.
a new industrial age 251 end of chapter 7 main idea analyzing effects how did conditions in cities affect peoples health.
often did not do the jobs properly.
by 1900 many cities had developed sewer lines and created sanitation departments.
however the task of providing hygienic living conditions was an ongoing challenge for urban leaders.
crime as the populations of cities increased pickpockets and thieves flourished.
although new york city organized the first full time salaried police force in 1844 it and most other city law enforcement units were too small to have much impact on crime.
fire the limited water supply in many cities contributed to another menace the spread of fires.
major fires occurred in almost every large american city during the 1870s and 1880s.
in addition to lacking water with which to combat blazes most cities were packed with wooden dwellings which were like kindling waiting to be ignited.
the use of candles and kerosene heaters also posed a fire hazard.
in san francisco deadly fires often broke out during earthquakes.
jack london described the fires that raged after the san francisco earthquake of 1906 a personal voice jack london on wednesday morning at a quarter past five came the earthquake.
a minute later the flames were leaping upward.
in a dozen different quarters south of market street in the working class ghetto and in the factories fires started.
there was no opposing the flames.
and the great water mains had burst.
all the shrewd contrivances and safeguards of man had been thrown out of gear by thirty seconds twitching of the earth crust the story of an eye witness at first most city firefighters were volunteers and not always available when they were needed.
cincinnati ohio tackled this problem when it established the nation s first paid fire department in 1853 by 1900 most cities had full time professional fire departments.
the introduction of a practical automatic fire sprinkler in 1874 and the replacement of wood as a building material with brick stone or concrete also made cities safer.
fire enemy of the city the great chicago fire october 8 10 1871 the fire burned for over 24 hours.
an estimated 300 people died.
100 000 were left m homeless.
more than 3 square miles of the city center was destroyed.
property loss was estimated at 200 million.
17 500 buildings were destroyed.
the san francisco earthquake april 18 1906 the quake lasted 28 seconds fires burned for 4 days.
an estimated 1 000 people died.
over 200 000 wer left homeless.
fire swept through 5 square miles of the city.
property loss was estimated at 500 million.
28 000 buildings were destroyed.
immigrants and urbanization 265 i reformers mobilize.
as problems in cities mounted concerned americans worked to find solutions.
social welfare reformers targeted their efforts at relieving urban poverty.
the settlement house in the late 1800s with poverty a desperate problem some american reformers turned to great britain for inspiration.
in 1884 london reformers had founded toynbee hall the first of the settlement houses.
these were community centers in slum neighborhoods that provided assistance to local residents especially immigrants.
in addition to providing aid settlement houses taught immigrants many useful skills.
they provided social activities such as clubs and sports.
they also sent visiting nurses into the homes of the sick.
most settlement house workers were middle class college educated women who lived among the people they served.
the movement gave women new opportunities to lead organize and improve life for others.
settlement houses soon began appearing in u s cities.
one of the first was hull house in chicago founded by jane addams and ellen gates starr in 1889 addams became one of the most influential members of the settlement house movement.
hull house was located in the middle of an urban neighborhood peopled by italian irish german greek bohemian and russian and polish jewish immigrants.
through english classes and job training programs offered at hull house addams worked to provide economic opportunities for the ethnic and religious minorities who inhabited the neighborhood.
settlement houses also sought political solutions by lobbying state and local government to resolve social and economic problems.
by 1910 about 400 settlement houses were operating in cities across the country.
the settlement houses helped cultivate social responsibility toward the urban poor.
many workers in the movement held strong religious views.
they believed in the social gospel the idea that religious faith should be expressed through good works.
they believed that churches had a moral duty to help solve society s problems and preached salvation through service to the poor.
their views contrasted with social darwinists who saw existence as a competitive struggle and argued that people were poor because of their own deficiencies.
they criticized the social gospel movement because they did not believe their reforms could help.
2 1 assessment social gospel 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance urbanization tenement settlement house americanization movement mass transit jane addams main idea using your notes re create the spider map below.
list problems on the vertical lines.
fill in details about attempts to solve each problem solutions to urban problems j which solution do you think was most effective.
266 chapter 7 critical thinking 3 summarizing explain how settlement house workers expanded economic opportunities for ethnic and religious minorities.
analyzing issues why would urban problems inspire followers of the social gospel to work toward reform.
analyzing effects what effects did the migration from rural areas to the cities in the late 19th century have on urban society.
think about why people moved to cities the problems caused by rapid urban growth the differences in the experiences of whites and blacks teks 3a main idea politics in the gilded age local and national political corruption in the 19th century led to calls for reform.
why it matters now political reforms paved the way for a more honest and efficient government in the 20th century and beyond.
terms names x ihkiimu nutc5 use the graphic organizer online to take notes about political corruption in the gilded age.
one americans story political machine james a garfield graft chester a arthur boss tweed pendleton civil patronage service act civil service grover cleveland.
r rutherford b.
benjamin 1 i t hayes harrison mark twain described the excesses of the late 19th century in a satirical novel the gilded age a collaboration with the writer charles dudley warner.
the title of the book has since come to represent the period from the 1870s to the 1890s.
twain mocks the greed and self indulgence of his characters including philip sterling.
a personal voice mark twain and charles dudley warner there are many young men like him philip sterling in american society of his age opportunities education and abilities who have really been educated for nothing and have let themselves drift in the hope that they will find somehow and by some sudden turn of good luck the golden road to fortune.
he saw people all around him poor yesterday rich to day who had come into sudden opulence by some means which they could not have classified among any of the regular occupations of life 99 the gilded age twain s characters find that getting rich quick is more difficult than they had thought it would be.
investments turn out to be worthless politicians bribes eat up their savings.
the glittering exterior of the age turns out to hide a corrupt political core and a growing gap between the few rich and the many poor.
a luxurious apartment building rises behind a new york city shantytown in 1889 the emergence of political machines the late 19th century cities experienced rapid growth under inefficient government.
in a climate influenced by dog eat dog social darwinism cities were receptive to a new power structure the political machine and a new politician the city boss.
immigrants and urbanization 267 the political machine an organized group that controlled the activities of a political party in a city the political machine also offered services to voters and businesses in exchange for political or financial support n t e eca es after the civil war political machines gained control of local government in baltimore new york san francisco and other major cities.
the machine was organized like a pyramid.
at the pyramid s base were local precinct workers and captains who tried to gain voters support on a city block or in a neighborhood and who reported to a ward boss.
at election time the ward boss worked to secure the vote in all the precincts in the ward or electoral district.
ward bosses helped the poor and gained their votes by doing favors or providing services.
as martin lomasney elected ward boss of boston s west end in 1885 explained there s got to be in every ward somebody that any bloke can come to.
and get help.
help you understand none of your law and your justice but help.
at the top of the pyramid was the city boss who controlled the activities of the political party throughout the city.
precinct captains ward bosses and the city boss worked together to elect their candidates and guarantee the success of the machine.
main idea summarizing in what way did the structure of the political machine resemble a pyramid.
the role of the political boss whether or not the boss officially served as mayor he controlled access to municipal jobs and business licenses and influenced the courts and other municipal agencies.
bosses like roscoe conkling in new york used their power to build parks sewer systems and waterworks and gave money to schools hospitals and orphanages.
bosses could also provide government support for new businesses a service for which they were often paid extremely well.
it was not only money that motivated city bosses.
by solving urban problems bosses could reinforce voters loyalty win additional political support and extend their influence.
immigrants and the machine many precinct captains and political bosses were first generation or second generation immigrants.
few were educated beyond grammar school.
they entered politics early and worked their way up from the bottom.
they could speak to immigrants in their own language and understood the challenges that newcomers faced.
more important the bosses were able to provide solutions.
the machines helped immigrants with naturalization attaining full citizenship hous ing and jobs the newcomers most pressing needs.
in return the immigrants provided what the political bosses needed votes.
big jim pendergast an irish american saloonkeeper worked his way up from precinct captain to democratic city boss in kansas city by aiding italian african american and irish voters in his ward.
by 1900 he controlled missouri state politics as well.
a personal voice james pendergast ive been called a boss.
all there is to it is having friends doing things for neo soinx at d y people 7 l st y0u u ke hem v 1 ce e l anybody in my life.
wherever you see a man bulldozing anybody he dont last long quoted in the pendergast machine a corrupt 19th century boss robs the city treasury by easily cutting government red tape or bureaucracy.
main idea analyzing motives why did immigrants support political machines.
68 chapter to answer the following questions.
science and urban life pages 276 281 1 how did new technology promote urban growth around the turn of the century.
2 in what ways did methods of communication improve in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
expanding public education pages 282 285 3 how did late 19th century public schools change.
4 why did some immigrants oppose sending their children to public schools.
segregation and discrimination pages 286 289 5 analyze the effects of the p essy v ferguson supreme court decision.
6 how did mexicans help make the southwest prosperous in the late 19th century.
dawn of mass culture pages 292 297 7 what leisure activities flourished at the turn of the 20th century.
8 what innovations in retail methods changed the way americans shopped during this time period.
critical thinking using your notes create a table similar to the one shown listing at least six important trends at the turn of the century along with a major impact of each.
trend impact 1.
6 drawing conclusions how had changes in technology affected urban life by the turn of the 20th century.
interpreting graphs look at the graph of expanding education lncreasing literacy on page 283 which year reported the greatest gain in the literacy rate.
what do you think were the implications on society of a more literate population.
300 chapter 9 vocabulary temperance refraining from alcohol consumption main idea analyzing motives 4 why did the prohibition movement appeal to so many women.
women and children.
intellectuals questioned the dominant role of large corporations in american society.
political reformers struggled to make government more responsive to the people.
together these reform efforts formed the progressive movement which aimed to restore economic opportunities and correct injustices in american life.
even though reformers never completely agreed on the problems or the solutions each of their progressive efforts shared at least one of the following goals protecting social welfare promoting moral improvement creating economic reform fostering efficiency protecting social welfare many social welfare reformers worked to soften some of the harsh conditions of industrialization.
the social gospel and settlement house movements of the late 1800s which aimed to help the poor through community centers churches and social services continued during the progressive era and inspired even more reform activities.
the young men s christian association ymca for example opened libraries sponsored classes and built swimming pools and handball courts.
the salvation army fed poor people in soup kitchens cared for children in nurseries and sent slum brigades to instruct poor immigrants in middle class values of hard work and temperance.
in addition many women were inspired by the settlement houses to take action.
florence kelley became an advocate for improving the lives of women and children.
she was appointed chief inspector of factories for illinois after she had helped to win passage of the illinois factory act in 1893 the act which prohibited child labor and limited women s working hours soon became a model for other states.
promoting moral improvement other reformers felt that morality not the workplace held the key to improving the lives of poor people.
these reformers wanted immigrants and poor city dwellers to uplift themselves by improving their personal behavior.
prohibition the banning of alcoholic beverages was one such program.
prohibitionist groups feared that alcohol was undermining american morals.
founded in cleveland in 1874 the woman s christian temperance union wctu spearheaded the crusade for prohibition.
members advanced their cause by entering saloons singing praying and urging saloonkeepers to stop selling alcohol.
as momentum grew the union was transformed by frances willard from a small midwestern religious group in 1879 to a national organization.
boasting 245 000 members by 1911 the wctu became the largest women s group in the nation s history.
wctu members followed willard s do everything slogan and began opening kindergartens for immigrants visiting inmates in prisons and asylums and working for florence kelley 1859 1932 the daughter of an antislavery republican congressman from pennsylvania florence kelley became a social reformer whose sympathies lay with the powerless especially working women and children.
during a long career kelley pushed the government to solve americas social problems.
in 1899 kelley became general secretary of the national consumers league where she lobbied to improve factory conditions.
why kelley pointedly asked while campaigning for a federal child labor law are seals bears reindeer fish wild game in the national parks buffalo and migratory birds all found suitable for federal protection but not children in the 1890s carry nation worked for prohibition by walking into saloons scolding the customers and using her hatchet to destroy bottles of liquor.
307 historical spotlight anti saloon league quietly founded by progressive women in 1895 the anti saloon league called itself the church in action against the saloon whereas early temperance efforts had asked individuals to change their ways the anti saloon league worked to pass laws to force people to change and to punish those who drank.
the anti saloon league endorsed politicians who opposed demon rum no matter which party they belonged to or where they stood on other issues.
it also organized statewide referendums to ban alcohol.
between 1900 and 1917 voters in nearly half of the states mostly in the south and the west prohibited the sale production and use of alcohol.
individual towns city wards and rural areas also voted themselves dry suffrage.
the wctu reform activities like those of the settlement house movement provided women with expanded public roles which they used to justify giving women voting rights.
sometimes efforts at prohibition led to trouble with immigrant groups.
such was the case with the anti saloon league founded in 1895 as members sought to close saloons to cure society s problems tension arose between them and many immigrants whose customs often included the consumption of alcohol.
additionally saloons filled a number of roles within the immigrant community such as cashing paychecks and serving meals.
creating economic reform as moral reformers sought to change individual behavior a severe economic panic in 1893 prompted some americans to question the capitalist economic system.
as a result some americans especially workers embraced socialism.
labor leader eugene v debs who helped organize the american socialist party in 1901 commented on the uneven balance among big business government and ordinary people under the free market system of capitalism.
a personal voice eugene v debs competition was natural enough at one time but do you think you are competing today.
many of you think you are competing.
against whom.
against oil magnate john d rockefeller.
about as i would if i had a wheelbarrow and competed with the santa fe railroad from here to kansas city.
debs his life writings and speeches though most progressives distanced themselves from socialism they saw the truth of many of debs s criticisms.
big business often received favorable treatment from government officials and politicians and could use its economic power to limit competition.
journalists who wrote about the corrupt side of business and public life in mass circulation magazines during the early 20th century became known as muckrakers milk rak r.
the term refers to john bunyan s pilgrim s progress in which a character is so busy using a rake to clean up the muck of this world that he does not raise his eyes to heaven.
in her history of the standard oil company a monthly serial in mcclure s magazine the writer ida m tarbell described the company s cutthroat methods of eliminating competition.
mr rockefeller has systematically played with loaded dice tarbell charged and it is doubtful if there has been a time since 1872 when he has run a race with a competitor and started fair.
fostering efficiency many progressive leaders put their faith in experts and scientific principles to make society and the workplace more efficient.
in defending an oregon law that limited women factory and laundry workers to a ten hour day lawyer louis d brandeis paid little attention to legal argument.
instead he focused on data produced by social scientists documenting the high costs of long working hours for both the individual and society.
this type of argument the brandeis brief would become a model for later reform litigation within industry frederick winslow taylor began using time and motion studies to improve efficiency by breaking manufacturing tasks into simpler parts taylorism became a management fad as industry reformers applied these scientific management studies to see just how quickly each task could be performed 8 chapter and explore the issues below use the annotation tools in your ebook to record your thoughts.
explore the issues when should the u s intervene in the affairs of another country.
in what ways do dramatic headlines influence american opinion.
19171 puerto ricans become u s citizens.
i917i the united states enters world war i.
1920 i 1917 mexico revises and adopts its constitution.
america claims an empire 341 j40 chapter 10 vocabulary guerrilla a member of a military force that harasses the enemy main idea analyzing motives h why did jos6 martf encourage cuban rebels to destroy sugar mills and plantations.
but american interest in cuba continued.
when the cubans rebelled against spain between 1868 and 1878 american sympathies went out to the cuban people.
the cuban revolt against spain was not successful but in 1886 the cuban people did force spain to abolish slavery.
after the emancipation of cuba s slaves american capitalists began investing millions of dollars in large sugar cane plantations on the island.
the second war for independence anti spanish sentiment in cuba soon erupted into a second war for independence.
jose marti a cuban poet and journalist in exile in new york launched a revolution in 1895 marti organized cuban resistance against spain using an active guerrilla campaign and deliberately destroying property especially american owned sugar mills and plantations.
marti counted on provoking u s intervention to help the rebels achieve cuba libre a free cuba.
public opinion in the united states was split.
many business people wanted the government to support spain in order to protect their investments.
other americans however were enthusiastic about the rebel cause.
the cry cuba libre.
was after all similar in sentiment to patrick henry s give me liberty or give me death.
war fever escalates in 1896 spain responded to the cuban revolt by sending general valeriano weyler to cuba to restore order.
weyler tried to crush the rebellion by herding the entire rural population of central and western cuba into barbed wire concentration camps.
here civilians could not give aid to rebels.
an estimated 300 000 cubans filled these camps where thousands died from hunger and disease.
headline wars weyler s actions fueled a war over newspaper circulation that had developed between the american newspaper tycoons william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer.
to lure readers hearst s new york journal and pulitzer s new york world printed exaggerated accounts by reporters such as james creelman of butcher weyler s brutality.
stories of poisoned wells and of children being thrown to the sharks deepened american sympathy for the rebels.
this sensational style of writing which exaggerates the news to lure and enrage readers became known as yellow journalism.
hearst and pulitzer fanned war fever.
when hearst sent the gifted artist frederic remington to cuba to draw sketches of reporters stories remington informed the publisher that a war between the united states and spain seemed very unlikely.
hearst reportedly replied you furnish the pictures and i ll furnish the war.
the de lome letter american sympathy for cuba libre.
grew with each day s headlines when president william mckinley took office in 1897 demands for american intervention in cuba were on the rise.
preferring to avoid war with spain mckinley tried diplomatic means to resolve the crisis.
at first his efforts appeared to succeed.
spain recalled general weyler modified the policy regarding concentration camps and offered cuba limited self government.
jose marti 1853 1895 the cuban political activist jos6 martf dedicated his life to achieving independence for cuba.
expelled from cuba at the age of 16 because of his revolutionary activities marti earned a masters degree and a law degree.
he eventually settled in the united states.
wary of the u s role in the cuban struggle against the spanish martf warned i know the monster because i have lived in its lair his fears of u s imperialism turned out to have been well founded.
u s troops occupied cuba on and off from 1906 until 1922 martf died fighting for cuban independence in 1895 he is revered today in cuba as a hero and martyr.
america claims an empire 347 in february 1898 however the new york journal published a private letter written by enrique dupuy de lome the spanish minister to the united states.
a cuban rebel had stolen the letter from a havana post office and leaked it to the newspaper which was thirsty for scandal.
the de lome letter criticized president mckinley calling him weak and a bidder for the admiration of the crowd.
the embarrassed spanish government apologized and the minister resigned.
still americans were angry over the insult to their president.
maine explodes only a few days after the publication of the de lome letter american resentment toward spain turned to outrage.
early in 1898 president mckinley had ordered the u s s.
maine to cuba to bring home american citizens in danger from the fighting and to protect american property.
on february 15 1898 the ship blew up in the harbor of havana.
more than 260 men were killed.
at the time no one really knew why the ship exploded however american newspapers claimed that the spanish had blown up the ship.
the journal s headline read the warship maine was split in two by an enemy s secret infernal machine.
hearst s paper offered a reward of 50 000 for the capture of the spaniards who supposedly had committed the outrage.
main idea summarizing what events increased the tension between the united states and spain.
war with spain erupts now there was no holding back the forces that wanted war.
remember the maine.
became the rallying cry for u s intervention in cuba.
it made no difference that the spanish government agreed on april 9 to almost everything the united states demanded including a six month cease fire.
when the l s s.
maine exploded in the harbor of havana newspapers like the new vnru journal were quick to place the blame on spain.
k 348 chapter 10 mexicans grew angrier over the u s invasion of their land.
in june 1916 u s troops clashed with carranza s army resulting in deaths on both sides.
carranza demanded the withdrawal of u s troops but wilson refused.
war seemed imminent.
however in the end both sides backed down.
the united states facing war in europe needed peace on its southern border.
in february 1917 wilson ordered pershing to return home.
later that year mexico adopted a constitution that gave the government control of the nation s oil and mineral resources and placed strict regulations on foreign investors.
although carranza had called for the constitution of 1917 he failed to carry out its measures.
instead he ruled oppressively until 1920 when a moderate named alvaro obregon came to power.
obregon s presidency marked the end of civil war and the beginning of reform.
u s intervention in mexican affairs provided a clear model of american imperialist attitudes in the early years of the 20th century.
americans believed in the superiority of free enterprise democracy and the american government attempted to extend the reach of this economic and political system even through armed intervention.
the united states pursued and achieved several foreign policy goals in the early 20th century.
first it expanded its access to foreign markets in order to ensure the continued growth of the domestic economy.
second the united states built a modern navy to protect its interests abroad.
third the united states exercised its international police power to ensure dominance in latin america.
pancho villa directs a column of his troops through northern mexico in 1914.
1 terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its significance.
panama canal dollar diplomacy emlliano zapata roosevelt corollary francisco pancho villa john j pershing summarizing using your notes in a two column chart list ways teddy roosevelt and woodrow wilson used american power around the world during their presidencies.
using american power roosevelt wilson choose one example and discuss its impact with your classmates.
critical thinking comparing and contrasting what do you think were the similarities and differences between roosevelts big stick policy and wilsons missionary diplomacy.
use evidence from the text to support your response.
think about the goal of each of these foreign policies how the policies defined the role of u s intervention in international affairs how the policies were applied evaluating decisions in your opinion should the united states have become involved in the affairs of colombia nicaragua and mexico during the early 1900s.
support your answer with details.
think about the effect of the roosevelt corollary the results of dollar diplomacy the implication of wilsons missionary diplomacy america claims an empire 365 geography spotlight the panama canal funnel for trade by the late 19th century the u s position in global trade was firmly established.
a glance at a world map during that time revealed the trade advantages of cutting through the world s great landmasses at two strategic points.
the first cut through the isthmus of suez in egypt was completed in 1869 and was a spectacular success.
a second cut this one through panama in central america would be especially advantageous to the united states.
such a cut or canal would substantially reduce the sailing time between the nation s atlantic and pacific ports.
it took the united states ten years from 1904 to 1914 to build the panama canal.
by 1999 more than 700 000 vessels flying the flags of about 70 nations had passed through its locks.
on december 31 1999 panama assumed full control of the canal.
intercoastal trade the first boat through the canal heralded the arrival of increased trade between the atlantic and pacific ports of the united states.
san francisco r j r f v.
newp orleans san francisco 1 13 000 mi.
x panama canal numbers tell the story a ship sailing from new york to san francisco by going around south america travels 13 000 miles the canal shortens the journey to 5 200 miles.
panama is a narrow stretch of land or isthmus that connects north and south america.
in building the canal engineers took advantage of natural waterways.
moving ships through the mountains of the continental divide required the use of massive locks.
locks allow a section of the canal to be closed off so that the water level can be raised or lowered.
chapter 13 1925 the scopes trial takes place in tennessee.
1927 charles lindbergh makes the first nonstop solo transatlantic flight.
1928 president alvaro obregon of mexico is assassinated.
1930 the roaring life of the 1920s 433 teks 5a 6a 6b 13a americans experienced cultural conflicts as customs and values changed in the 1920s.
the way in which different groups react to change continues to cause conflict today.
prohibition speakeasy bootlegger fundamentalism clarence darrow scopes trial oiie irten ciin svory.
i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on government efforts to address social concerns in the 1920s.
as the 1920s dawned social reformers who hoped to ban alcohol and the evils associated with it rejoiced.
the eighteenth amendment to the constitution banning the manufacture sale and transportation of alcohol took effect in january of 1920 billy sunday an evangelist who preached against the evils of drinking predicted a new age of virtue and religion.
a personal voice billy sunday 66 the reign of tears is over.
the slums will soon be only a memory.
we will turn our prisons into factories and our jails into storehouses and corncribs.
men will walk upright now women will smile and the children will laugh.
hell will be forever for rent quoted in how dry we were prohibition revisited sunday s dream was not to be realized in the 1920s as the law proved unenforceable.
the failure of prohibition was a sign of cultural conflicts most evident in the nation s cities.
lured by jobs and by the challenge and freedom that the city represented millions of people rode excitedly out of america s rural past and into its urban future.
a 1920s evangelist billy sunday rural and urban differences america changed dramatically in the years before 1920 as was revealed in the 1920 census.
according to figures that year 51 2 percent of americans lived in communities with populations of 2 500 to more than 1 million.
between 1922 and 1929 migration to the cities accelerated with nearly 2 million people leaving farms and towns each year.
cities were the place to be not to get away from said one historian.
the agricultural world that millions of americans left behind was largely unchanged from the 19th century that world was one of small towns and farms bound together by conservative moral values and close social relationships.
yet small town attitudes began to lose their hold on the american mind as the city rose to prominence.
14 chapter 13 i the new urban scene at the beginning of the 1920s new york with a population of 5 6 million people topped the list of big cities.
next came chicago with nearly 3 million and philadelphia with nearly 2 million.
another 65 cities claimed populations of 100 000 or more and they grew more crowded by the day.
life in these booming cities was far different from the slow paced intimate life in america s small towns.
chicago for instance was an industrial powerhouse home to native born whites and african americans immigrant poles irish russians italians swedes arabs french and chinese.
each day an estimated 300 000 workers 150 000 cars and buses and 20 000 trolleys filled the pulsing downtown.
at night people crowded into ornate movie theaters and vaudeville houses offering live variety shows.
for small town migrants adapting to the urban environment demanded changes in thinking as well as in everyday living.
the city was a world of competition and change.
city dwellers read and argued about current scientific and social ideas.
they judged one another by accomplishment more often than by background.
city dwellers also tolerated drinking gambling and casual dating worldly behaviors considered shocking and sinful in small towns.
for all its color and challenge though the city could be impersonal and frightening.
streets were filled with strangers not friends and neighbors.
life was fast paced not leisurely.
the city demanded endurance as a foreign visitor to chicago observed.
main idea contrasting how did small town life and city life differ.
how ya gonna keep em down on the farm after they ve seen paree popular song of the 1920s i i a personal voice walter l george 66 it is not for nothing that the predominating color of chicago is orange.
it is as if the city in its taxicabs in its shop fronts in the wrappings of its parcels chose the color of flame that goes with the smoky black of its factories.
it is not for nothing that it has repelled the geometric street arrangement of new york and substituted.
great ways with names that a stranger must learn if he can.
he is in a crowded city and if he has business there he tells himself if i weaken i shant last long hail columbia.
history through art song of the towers this mural by aaron douglas is part of a series he painted inside the 135th street branch of the new york public library to symbolize different aspects of african american life during the 1920s.
in this panel song of the towers he depicts figures before a city backdrop.
as seen here much of douglass style was influenced by jazz music and geometric shapes.
skillbuilder analyzing visual sources 1 what is the focal point of this panel.
2 what parts of this painting might be symbolic of african americans move north.
3 how does douglas represent new freedoms in this mural.
support your answer with examples.
difficult vn cisk s to prohibit alcohol or not.
the question of whether to outlaw alcohol divided americans.
many believed the government should make alcohol illegal to protect the public while others believed it was a personal decision and not morally wrong.
1 examine the pros and cons of each position.
which do you agree with.
what other factors if any do you think would influence your position.
2 if you had been a legislator asked to vote for the eighteenth amendment what would you have said.
3 what happens when the government legislates moral values.
give contemporary examples to support your answer.
16 chapter 13 in the city lonely migrants from the country often ached for home.
throughout the 1920s americans found themselves caught between rural and urban cultures a tug that pitted what seemed to be a safe small town world of close ties hard work and strict morals against a big city world of anonymous crowds moneymakers and pleasure seekers.
the prohibition experiment one vigorous clash between small town and big city americans began in earnest in january 1920 when the eighteenth amendment went into effect.
this amendment launched the era known as prohibition during which the manufacture sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages were legally prohibited.
reformers had long considered liquor a prime cause of corruption.
they thought that too much drinking led to crime wife and child abuse accidents on the job and other serious social problems.
support for prohibition came largely from the rural south and west areas with large populations of native born protestants.
the church affiliated anti saloon league had led the drive to pass the prohibition amendment.
the woman s christian temperance union which considered drinking a sin had helped push the measure through.
at first saloons closed their doors and arrests for drunkenness declined.
but in the aftermath of world war i many americans were tired of making sacrifices they wanted to enjoy life.
most immigrant groups did not consider drinking a sin but a natural part of socializing and they resented government meddling.
eventually prohibition s fate was sealed by the government which failed to budget enough money to enforce the law.
the volstead act established a prohibition bureau in the treasury department in 1919 but the agency was underfunded.
the job of enforcement involved patrolling 18 700 miles of coastline as well as inland borders tracking down illegal stills equipment for distilling liquor monitoring highways for truckloads of illegal alcohol and overseeing all the industries that legally used alcohol to be sure none was siphoned off for illegal purposes.
the task fell to approximately 1 500 poorly paid federal agents and local police clearly an impossible job.
speakeasies and bootleggers to obtain liquor illegally drinkers went underground to hidden saloons and nightclubs known as speakeasies so called because when inside one spoke quietly or easily to avoid detection.
speakeasies could be found everywhere in penthouses cellars office buildings rooming houses tenements hardware stores and tearooms.
to be admitted to a speakeasy one had to present a card or use a password.
inside one would find a mix of fashionable middle class and upper middle class men and women.
before long people grew bolder in getting around the law they learned to distill alcohol and built their own stills.
since alcohol was allowed for medicinal and religious purposes prescriptions a young woman demonstrates one of the means used to conceal alcohol hiding it in containers strapped to ones legs.
niaing it main idea developing historical perspective why do you think the eighteenth amendment failed to eliminate alcohol consumption.
main idea analyzing effects how did criminals take advantage of prohibition.
for alcohol and sales of sacramental wine intended for church services skyrocketed.
people also bought liquor from bootleggers named for a smuggler s practice of carrying liquor in the legs of boots who smuggled it in from canada cuba and the west indies.
the business of evading the law and making a mock of it has ceased to wear any aspects of crime and has become a sort of national sport wrote the journalist h l mencken.
organized crime prohibition not only generated disrespect for the law it also contributed to organized crime in nearly every major city.
chicago became notorious as the home of a1 capone a gangster whose bootlegging empire netted over 60 million a year.
capone took control of the chicago liquor business by killing off his competition.
during the 1920s headlines reported 522 bloody gang killings and made the image of flashy a1 capone part of the folklore of the period.
in 1940 the writer herbert asbury recalled the capone era in chicago.
a personal voice herbert asbury the famous seven ton armored car with the pudgy gangster lolling on silken cushions in its darkened recesses a big cigar in his fat face and a 50 000 diamond ring blazing from his left hand was one of the sights of the city the average tourist felt that his trip to chicago was a failure unless it included a view of capone out for a spin.
the mere whisper here comes al was sufficient to stop traffic and to set thousands of curious citizens craning their necks along the curbing.
gem of the prairie by the mid 1920s only 19 percent of americans supported prohibition.
the rest who wanted the amendment changed or repealed believed that prohibition caused worse effects than the initial problem.
rural protestant americans however defended a law that they felt strengthened moral values.
the eighteenth amendment remained in force until 1933 when it was repealed by the twenty first amendment.
historical spotlight al capone by age 26 al capone headed a criminal empire in chicago which he controlled through the use of bribes and violence.
from 1925 to 1931 capone bootlegged whiskey from canada operated illegal breweries in chicago and ran a network of 10 000 speakeasies.
in 1927 the big fellow as he liked to be called was worth an estimated 100 million.
the end came quickly for capone though.
in 1931 the gangster chief was arrested for tax evasion and went to jail.
that was the only crime of which the authorities were ever able to convict him.
capone was later released from jail but he died several years later at age 48 prohibition 1920 1933 causes various religious groups thought drinking alcohol was sinful.
reformers believed that the government should protect the publics health.
reformers believed that alcohol led to crime wife and child abuse and accidents on the job.
during world war i native born americans developed a hostility to german american brewers and toward other immigrant groups that used alcohol.
effects consumption of alcohol declined.
disrespect for the law developed.
an increase in lawlessness such as smuggling and bootlegging was evident.
criminals found a new source of income.
organized crime grew.
the roaring life of the 1920s 437 science and religion clash the evangelist aimee semple mcpherson in 1922 evolution creationism and education there is still great controversy today over the teaching of evolution in the public schools.
some people believe evolution should be taught as the only theory of the origin of life.
some believe the theories of creationism or intelligent design should also be taught.
others want to focus on the debate surrounding evolution.
the issue of what should be taught about the origin of life and who should decide this issue continues to stir up debate.
some have suggested that science and religion are not necessarily incompatible.
they believe that a theory of the origin of life can accommodate both the scientific theory of evolution and religious beliefs.
another bitter controversy highlighted the growing rift between traditional and modern ideas during the 1920s.
this battle raged between fundamentalist religious groups and secular thinkers over the validity of certain scientific discoveries.
american fundamentalism the protestant christian movement grounded in a literal or nonsym bolic interpretation of the bible was known as fun damentalism.
fundamentalists were skeptical of some scientific discoveries and theories they argued that all important knowledge could be found in the bible.
they believed that the bible was inspired by god and that therefore its stories in all their details were true.
their beliefs led fundamentalists to reject the theory of evolution advanced by charles darwin in the 19th century a theory stating that plant and animal species had developed and changed over millions of years.
the claim they found most unbelievable was that humans had evolved from apes.
they pointed instead to the bible s account of creation in which god made the world and all its life forms including humans in six days.
fundamentalism expressed itself in several ways.
in the south and west preachers led religious revivals based on the authority of the scriptures.
one of the most powerful revivalists was billy sunday a baseball player turned preacher who staged emotional meetings across the south.
in los angeles aimee semple mcpherson used hollywood showmanship to preach the word to homesick midwestern migrants and devoted followers of her radio broadcasts.
in the 1920s fundamentalism gained followers who began to call for laws prohibiting the teaching of evolution.
the scopes trial in march 1925 tennessee passed the nation s first law that made it a crime to teach evolution.
immediately the american civil liberties union aclu promised to defend any teacher who would challenge the law.
john t scopes a young biology teacher in dayton tennessee accepted the challenge.
in his biology class scopes read this passage from civic biology we have now learned that animal forms may be arranged so as to begin with the simple one celled forms and culminate with a group which includes man himself.
scopes was promptly arrested and his trial was set for july.
the aclu hired clarence darrow the most famous trial lawyer of the day to defend scopes.
william jennings bryan three time democratic candidate for president and a devout fundamentalist served as a special prosecutor.
there was no real question of guilt or innocence scopes was honest about his action.
the scopes trial was a fight over evolution and the role of science and religion in public schools and in american society.
the trial opened on july 10 1925 and almost overnight became a national sensation.
darrow called bryan as an expert on the bible the contest that everyone had been waiting for.
to handle the throngs of bryan supporters judge raulston moved the court outside to a platform built maple trees.
there before a crowd of several main idea summarizing summarize the beliefs of fundamentalism.
vocabulary culminate to come to completion end under 18 chapter 13 main idea analyzing causes why did some writers reject american culture and values.
vocabulary expatriate a person who has taken up residence in a foreign country 1 many writers also met important issues head on.
in the age of innocence edith wharton dramatized the clash between traditional and modern values that had undermined high society 50 years earlier.
willa cather celebrated the simple dignified lives of people such as the immigrant farmers of nebraska in my antonia while edna st vincent millay wrote poems celebrating youth and a life of independence and freedom from traditional constraints.
some writers such as fitzgerald ernest hemingway and john dos passos were so soured by american culture that they chose to settle in europe mainly in paris.
socializing in the city s cafes they formed a group that the writer gertrude stein called the lost generation.
they joined other american writers already in europe such as the poets ezra pound and t s eliot whose poem the waste land presented an agonized view of a society that seemed stripped of humanity.
several writers saw action in world war i and their early books denounced war.
dos passos s novel three soldiers attacked war as a machine designed to crush human freedom.
later he turned to social and political themes using modern techniques to capture the mood of city life and the losses that came with success.
ernest hemingway wounded in world war i became the best known expatriate author.
in his novels the sun also rises and a farewell to arms he criticized the glorification of war.
he also introduced a tough simplified style of writing that set a new literary standard using sentences a time reporter compared to round stones polished by rain and wind.
during this rich literary era vital developments were also taking place in african american society.
black americans of the 1920s began to voice pride in their heritage and black artists and writers revealed the richness of african american culture.
assessment terms names for each of the following names charles a lindbergh georgia okeeffe george gershwin sinclair lewis main idea using your notes create a time line of key events relating to 1920s popular culture.
use the dates below as a guide.
1920 1926 1928 1923 1927 in a sentence or two explain which of these events interests you the most and why.
f scott fitzgerald 1900 1940 f scott fitzgerald married vivacious zelda sayre in 1920 after his novel this side of paradise became an instant hit.
he said of this time in his life riding in a taxi one afternoon between very tall buildings under a mauve and rosy sky i began to bawl because i had everything i wanted and knew i would never be so happy again flush with money the couple plunged into a wild social whirl and outspent their incomes.
the years following were difficult.
zelda suffered from repeated mental breakdowns and scotts battle with alcoholism took its toll.
write a sentence explaining his or her significance.
f scott fitzgerald ernest hemingway edna st vincent millay critical thinking 3 synthesizing in what ways do you think the mass media and mass culture helped americans create a sense of national community in the 1920s.
support your answer with details from the text.
think about the content and readership of newspapers and magazines attendance at sports events and movie theaters the scope of radio broadcasts 4 evaluating do you think the popular heroes of the 1920s were heroes in a real sense.
what impact did they have on american society and culture.
5 summarizing in two or three sentences summarize the effects of education and mass media on society in the 1920s.
the roaring life of the 1920s 451 teks6b 25b the harlem renaissance main idea african american ideas politics art literature and music flourished in harlem and elsewhere in the united states.
why it matters now the harlem renaissance provided a foundation of african american intellectualism to which african american writers artists and musicians contribute today.
terms names zora neale hurston claude mckay james weldon johnson marcus garvey harlem renaissance langston hughes paul robeson louis armstrong duke ellington bessie smith one american s story a zora neale hurston ibbsbb taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the achievements of the harlem renaissance.
when the spirited zora neale hurston was a girl in eatonville florida in the early 1900s she loved to read adventure stories and myths.
the powerful tales struck a chord with the young talented hurston and made her yearn for a wider world.
a personal voice zora neale hurston my soul was with the gods and my body in the village.
people just would not act like gods.
raking back yards and carrying out chamber pots were not the tasks of thor.
i wanted to be away from drabness and to stretch my limbs in some mighty struggle quoted in the african american encyclopedia after spending time with a traveling theater company and attending howard university hurston ended up in new york where she struggled to the top of african american literary society by hard work flamboyance and above all grit.
i have seen that the world is to the strong regardless of a little pigmentation more or less hurston wrote later.
i do not weep at being negro i am too busy sharpening my oyster knife.
hurston was on the move like millions of others.
and like them she went after the pearl in the oyster the good life in america.
african american voices in the 1920s during the 1920s african americans set new goals for themselves as they moved north to the nation s cities.
their migration was an expression of their changing attitude toward themselves an attitude perhaps best captured in a phrase first used around this time black is beautiful.
the move north between 1910 and 1920 in a movement known as the great migration hundreds of thousands of african americans had uprooted chapter 13 main idea analyzing effects a how did the influx of african americans change northern cities.
vocabulary oratory the art of public speaking themselves from their homes in the south and moved north to the big cities in search of jobs.
by the end of the decade 5 2 million of the nation s 12 million african americans over 40 percent lived in cities.
zora neale hurston docu merited the departure of some of these african americans.
a personal voice zora neale hurston some said goodbye cheerfully.
others fearfully with terrors of unknown dangers in their mouths.
others in their eagerness for distance said nothing.
the daybreak found them gone.
the wind said north quoted in sorrow s kitchen the life and folklore of zora neale hurston however northern cities in general had not welcomed the massive influx of african americans.
tensions had escalated in the years prior to 1920 culminating in the summer of 1919 in approximately 25 urban race riots.
41 african american goals founded in 1909 the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp urged african americans to protest racial violence.
w e b du bois a founding member of the naacp led a parade of 10 000 african american men in new york to protest such violence.
du bois also used the naacp s magazine the crisis as a platform for leading a struggle for civil rights.
under the leadership of james weldon johnson poet lawyer and naacp executive secretary the organization fought for legislation to protect african american rights.
it made antilynching laws one of its main priorities.
in 1919 three antilynching bills were introduced in congress although none was passed.
the naacp continued its campaign through antilynching organizations that had been established in 1892 by ida b wells.
gradually the number of lynchings dropped.
the naacp represented the new more militant voice of african americans.
marcus garvey and the unia although many african americans found their voice in the naacp they still faced daily threats and discrimination.
marcus garvey an immigrant from jamaica believed that african americans should build a separate society.
his different more radical message of black pride aroused the hopes of many.
in 1914 garvey founded the universal negro improvement association unia.
in 1918 he moved the unia to new york city and opened offices in urban ghettos in order to recruit followers.
by the mid 1920s garvey claimed he had a million followers.
he appealed to african americans with a combination of spellbinding oratory mass meetings parades and a message of pride.
a personal voice marcus garvey in view of the fact that the black man of africa has contributed as much to the world as the white man of europe and the brown man and yellow man of asia we of the universal negro improvement association demand that the white yellow and brown races give to the black man his place in the civilization of the world.
we ask for nothing more than the rights of 400 million negroes.
speech at liberty hall new york city 1922 playr james weldon johnson 1871 1938 james weldon johnson worked as a school principal newspaper editor and lawyer in florida.
in 1900 he wrote the lyrics for lift every voice and sing the song that became known as the black national anthem.
the first stanza begins as follows lift every voice and sing till earth and heaven ring ring with the harmonies of liberty let our rejoicing rise high as the listening skies let it resound loud as the rolling sea in the 1920s johnson straddled the worlds of politics and art.
he served as executive secretary of the naacp spearheading the fight against lynching.
in addition he wrote well known works such as gods trombones a series of sermon like poems and black manhattan a look at black cultural life in new york during the roaring twenties.
the roaring life of the 1920s 453 marcus garvey designed this uniform of purple and gold complete with feathered hat for his role as provisional president of africa garvey also lured followers with practical plans especially his program to promote african american businesses.
further garvey encouraged his followers to return to africa help native people there throw off white colonial oppressors and build a mighty nation.
his idea struck a chord in many african americans as well as in blacks in the caribbean and africa.
despite the appeal of garvey s movement support for it declined in the mid 1920s when he was convicted of mail fraud and jailed.
although the movement dwindled garvey left behind a powerful legacy of newly awakened black pride economic independence and reverence for africa.
je the harlem renaissance flowers in new york many african americans who migrated north moved to harlem a neighborhood on the upper west side of new york s manhattan main idea summarizing jpwhat approach to race relations did marcus garvey promote.
in the 1920s harlem became the world s largest black urban community with residents from the south the west indies cuba puerto rico and haiti.
james weldon johnson described harlem as the capital of black america.
a personal voice james weldon johnson 44 harlem is not merely a negro colony or community it is a city within a city the greatest negro city in the world.
it is not a slum or a fringe it is located in the heart of manhattan and occupies one of the most beautiful.
sections of the city.
it has its own churches social and civic centers shops theaters and other places of amusement.
and it contains more negroes to the square mile than any other spot on earth.
harlem the culture capital like many other urban neighborhoods harlem suffered from overcrowding unemployment and poverty.
rut its problems in the 1920s were eclipsed by a flowering of creativity called the harlem renaissance a literary and artistic movement celebrating african american culture.
african american writers above all the harlem renaissance was a literary movement led by well educated middle class african americans who expressed a new pride in the african american experience.
they celebrated their heritage and wrote with defiance and poignancy about the trials of being black in a white world.
w e b du bois and james weldon johnson helped these young talents along as did the harvard educated former rhodes scholar alain locke.
in 1925 locke published the new negro a landmark collection of literary works by many promising young african american writers.
claude mckay a novelist poet and jamaican immigrant was a major figure whose militant verses urged african americans to resist prejudice and discrimination.
his poems also expressed the pain of life in the black ghettos and the strain of being black in a world dominated by whites.
another gifted writer of the time was jean toomer.
his experimental book cane a mix of poems and sketches about blacks in the north and the south was among the first full length literary publications of the harlem renaissance.
missouri born langston hughes was the movement s best known poet.
many of hughes s 1920s poems described the difficult lives of working class african americans.
like mckay hughes wrote of black defiance but he also wrote of hope.
some of his poems moved to the tempo of jazz and the blues.
chapter 14 main idea identifying problems what industrial weakness signaled a declining economy in the 1920s.
industries in trouble the superficial prosperity of the late 1920s shrouded weaknesses that would signal the onset of the great depression.
key basic industries such as railroads textiles and steel had barely made a profit.
railroads lost business to new forms of transportation trucks buses and private automobiles for instance.
mining and lumbering which had expanded during wartime were no longer in high demand.
coal mining was especially hard hit in part due to stiff competition from new forms of energy including hydroelectric power fuel oil and natural gas.
by the early 1930s these sources supplied more than half the energy that had once come from coal.
even the boom industries of the 1920s automobiles construction and consumer goods weakened.
one important economic indicator that declined during this time was housing starts the number of new dwellings being built.
when housing starts fall so do jobs in many related industries such as furniture manufacturing and lumbering.
farmers need a lift perhaps agriculture suffered the most.
during world war i prices rose and international demand for crops such as wheat and corn soared.
farmers had planted more and taken out loans for land and equipment.
however demand fell after the war and crop prices declined by 40 percent or more.
farmers boosted production in the hopes of selling more crops but this only depressed prices further.
between 1919 and 1921 annual farm income declined from 10 billion to just over 4 billion.
farmers who had gone into debt had difficulty in paying off their loans.
many lost their farms when banks foreclosed and seized the property as payment for the debt.
as farmers began to default on their loans many rural banks began to fail.
auctions were held to recoup some of the banks losses.
congress tried to help out farmers with a piece of legislation called the mcnary haugen bill.
this called for federal price supports for key products such as wheat corn cotton and tobacco.
the government would buy surplus crops at guaranteed prices and sell them on the world market.
president coolidge vetoed the bill twice.
he commented farmers have never made money.
i don t believe we can do much about it.
consumers have less money to spend as farmers incomes fell they bought fewer goods and services but the problem was larger.
by the late 1920s i v onom f background uneven income distribution 1929 the 1920s were an era that favored big business.
life was good for the rich.
they made up just 0 1 percent of the population and had yearly incomes of more than 100 000.
conversely much of the population had to scrape to get by.
many earned so little that everyone in the family including children had to work.
nearly 80 percent of all families had no savings.
1 999 and under 65 2 000 4 999 29 source historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 10 000 and over 1 9 999 5 000 5 americans were buying less mainly because of rising prices stagnant wages unbalanced distribution of income and overbuying on credit in the preceding years.
production had also expanded much faster than wages resulting in an ever widening gap between the rich and the poor.
living on credit although many americans appeared to be prosperous during the 1920s in fact they were living beyond their means.
they often bought goods on credit an arrangement in which consumers agreed to buy now and pay later for purchases.
this was often in the form of an installment plan usually in monthly payments that included interest charges.
by making credit easily available businesses encouraged americans to pile up a large consumer debt.
many people then had trouble paying off their growing debts.
faced with debt consumers cut back on spending.
uneven distribution of income during the 1920s the rich got richer and the poor got poorer.
between 1920 and 1929 the income of the wealthiest 1 percent of the population rose by 75 percent compared with a 9 percent increase for americans as a whole.
more than 70 percent of the nation s families earned less than 2 500 per year then considered the minimum amount needed for a decent standard of living.
even families earning twice that much could not afford many of the household products that manufacturers produced.
economists estimate that the average man or woman bought a new outfit of clothes only once a year.
scarcely half the homes in many cities had electric lights or a furnace for heat.
only one city home in ten had an electric refrigerator.
this unequal distribution of income meant that most americans could not participate fully in the economic advances of the 1920s.
many people did not have the money to purchase the flood of goods that factories produced.
the prosperity of the era rested on a fragile foundation.
jeu main idea forming generalizations what did the experience of farmers and consumers at this time suggest about the health of the economy.
hoover takes the nation we in america are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before.
herbert hoover although economic disaster was around the corner the election of 1928 took place in a mood of apparent national prosperity.
this election pitted republican candidate herbert hoover against democrat alfred e smith.
the election of 1928 hoover the secretary of commerce under harding and coolidge was a mining engineer from iowa who had never run for public office.
smith was a career politician who had served four terms as governor of new york.
he was personable and enjoyed being in the limelight unlike the quiet and reserved hoover.
still hoover had one major advantage he could point to years of prosperity under republican administrations since 1920 many americans believed him when he declared we in america are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before.
it was an overwhelming victory for hoover.
the message was clear most americans were happy with republican leadership.
dreams of riches in the stock market by 1929 some economists had warned of weaknesses in the economy but most americans chapter 15 analyzing political cartoons changing course with hopes of lessening opposition to his programs roosevelt proposed a court reform bill that would essentially have allowed him to pack the court with judges supportive of the new deal.
this cartoon shows roosevelt as a sea captain ordering a shocked congress to change course.
skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1 what compass did roosevelt want to change.
2 how does the cartoonist portray fdrs attitude regarding his power as president.
main idea contrasting how did liberal and conservative critics differ in their opposition to the new deal.
liberal critics argued that the new deal did not go far enough to help the poor and to reform the nation s economic system.
conservative critics argued that roosevelt spent too much on direct relief and used new deal policies to control business and socialize the economy.
many critics believed the new deal interfered with the workings of a free market economy jy the supreme court reacts by the mid 1930s conservative opposition to the new deal had received a boost from two supreme court decisions.
in 1935 the court struck down the nira as unconstitutional.
it declared that the law gave legislative powers to the executive branch and that the enforcement of industry codes within states went beyond the federal government s constitutional powers to regulate interstate commerce.
the next year the supreme court struck down the aaa on the grounds that agriculture is a local matter and should be regulated by the states rather than by the federal government.
fearing that further court decisions might dismantle the new deal president roosevelt proposed in february 1937 that congress enact a court reform bill to reorganize the federal judiciary and allow him to appoint six new supreme court justices.
most observers saw this bill as a clumsy effort to pack the supreme court with friendly justices and a dangerous attempt to upset the constitutional balance of power.
some of the supreme court s rulings had been based on the belief that the executive branch had usurped too much legislative power.
the court reform bill would further shift the relationship between the branches by allowing the executive to use legislation to interfere with judicial independence.
as it turned out the president got his way without reorganizing the judiciary.
in 1937 an elderly justice retired and roosevelt appointed the liberal hugo s black shifting the balance of the court.
rulings of the court began to favor the new deal.
over the next four years because of further resignations roosevelt was able to appoint seven new justices.
three fiery critics in 1934 some of the strongest conser vative opponents of the new deal banded together to form an organization called the american liberty league.
the american liberty league opposed new deal measures that it believed violated respect for the rights of individuals and property.
three of the toughest critics the president faced however were three men who expressed views that appealed to poor americans charles coughlin dr francis townsend and huey long.
father charles coughlin speaks to a radio audience in 1935 every sunday father charles coughlin a roman catholic priest from a suburb of detroit broadcast radio sermons that combined economic political and religious ideas.
initially a supporter of the new deal coughlin soon turned against roosevelt.
he favored a guaranteed annual income and the nationalization of banks.
at the height of his popularity father coughlin claimed a radio audience of as many as 40 45 million people but his increasingly anti semitic anti jewish views eventually cost him support.
another critic of new deal policies was dr francis townsend a physician and health officer in long beach california.
he believed that roosevelt wasn t doing enough to help the poor and elderly so he devised a pension plan that would provide monthly benefits to the aged.
the plan found strong backing among the elderly thus undermining their support for roosevelt.
perhaps the most serious challenge to the new deal came from senator huey long of louisiana.
like coughlin long was an early supporter of the new deal but he too turned against roosevelt.
eager to win the presidency for himself long proposed a nationwide social program called share our wealth.
under the banner every man a king he promised something for everyone.
a personal voice huey long 4 4 we owe debts in america today public and private amounting to 252 billion.
that means that every child is born with a 2 000 debt tied around his neck.
we propose that children shall be born in a land of opportunity guaranteed a home food clothes and the other things that make for living including the right to education 99 record 74 congress session 1 long s program was so popular that by 1935 he boasted of having perhaps as many as 27 000 share our wealth clubs and 7 5 million members.
that same year however at the height of his popularity long was assassinated by a lone gunman.
as the initial impetus of the new deal began to wane president roosevelt started to look ahead.
he knew that much more needed to be done to help the people and to solve the nation s economic problems.
vocabulary nationalization conversion from private to governmental ownership huey long 1 terms names for each of the terms and names below write a sentence explaining its significance.
franklin delano roosevelt federal securities act civilian conservation deficit spending huey long new deal glass steagall act federal securities act agricultural adjustment act aaa corps ccc national industrial recovery act nira main idea using your notes in a two column chart list problems that president roosevelt confronted and how he tried to solve them.
problems solutions critical thinking 3 evaluating what constitutional issues were raised by federal policy changes during the great depression.
how did they affect the relationships among the legislative executive and judicial branches.
think about the policies and legislation of the new deal supreme court decisions roosevelts attempt to increase the number of supreme court justices write a paragraph telling which solution had the greatest impact and why.
comparing how did roosevelts new deal policies to resolve the economic effects of the great depression compare to the approaches of his opponents.
summarizing describe the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money as a monetary policy of the united states.
the second new deal takes hold main idea the second new deal included new programs to extend federal aid and stimulate the nations economy.
why it matters now second new deal programs continue to assist homebuyers farmers workers and the elderly in the 2000s.
terms names taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on groups helped by the second new deal.
oneftmer ican sstory dorothea lange was a photographer who documented american life during the great depression and the era of the new deal.
lange spent considerable time getting to know her subjects destitute migrant workers before she and her assistant set up their cameras.
a personal voice dorothea lange so often its just sticking around and remaining there not swooping in and swooping out in a cloud of dust.
we found our way in not too far away from the people we were working with.
the people who are garrulous and wear their heart on their sleeve and tell you everything thats one kind of person.
but the fellow whos hiding behind a tree and hoping you dont see him is the fellow that youd better find out why.
quoted in restless spirit the life and work of dorothea lange lange also believed that her distinct limp the result of a childhood case of polio worked to her advantage.
seeing that lange too had suffered people were kind to her and more at ease.
much of lange s work was funded by federal agencies such as the farm security administration which was established to alleviate rural poverty.
her photographs of migrant workers helped draw attention to the desperate conditions in rural america and helped to underscore the need for direct relief.
eleanor roosevelt national youth works progress administration administration wagner act wpa social security act dorothea lange taking photographs on the texas plains in 1934 the second hundred days by 1935 the roosevelt administration was seeking ways to build on the programs established during the hundred days.
although the economy had improved during fdr s first two years in office the gains were not as great as he had expected unemployment remained high despite government work programs and production still lagged behind the levels of the 1920s.
the new deal 495 eleanor roosevelt visits a children s hospital in 1937 nevertheless the new deal enjoyed widespread popularity and president roosevelt launched a second burst of activity often called the second new deal or the second hundred days.
during this phase the pres ident called on congress to provide more extensive relief for both farmers and workers.
the president was prodded in this direction by his wife eleanor roosevelt a social reformer who combined her deep humanitarian impulses with great political skills.
eleanor roosevelt traveled the country observing social conditions and reminding the president about the suffering of the nation s people.
she also urged him to appoint women to government positions.
reelecting fdr the second new deal was under way by the time of the 1936 presidential election.
the republicans nominated alfred landon the governor of kansas while the democrats of course nominated president roosevelt for a second term.
the election resulted in an overwhelming victory for the democrats who won the presidency and large majorities in both houses.
the election marked the first time that most african americans had voted democratic rather than republican and the first time that labor unions gave united support to a presidential candidate.
the 1936 election was a vote of confidence in fdr and the new deal.
main idea summarizing why did roosevelt launch the second hundred days.
helping farmers in the mid 1930s two of every five farms in the united states were mortgaged and thousands of small farmers lost their farms.
the novelist john steinbeck described the experience of one tenant farmer and his family.
a 20 cbdury fox picture a personal voice john steinbeck across the dooryard the tractor cut and the hard foot beaten ground was seeded field and the tractor cut through again the uncut space was ten feet wide.
and back he came.
the iron guard bit into the house corner crumbled the wall and wrenched the little house from its foundation so that it fell sideways crushed like a bug.
the tractor cut a straight line on and the air and the ground vibrated with its thunder.
the tenant man stared after it his rifle in his hand.
his wife was beside him and the quiet children behind.
and all of them stared after the tractor.
the grapes of wrath a poster promotes the movie adaption of john steinbeck s novel the grapes of wrath.
focusing on farms when the supreme court struck down the aaa early in 1936 congress passed another law to replace it the soil conservation and domestic allotment act.
this act paid farmers for cutting production of soil depleting crops and rewarded farmers for practicing good soil conservation methods.
two years later in 1938 congress approved a second agricultural adjustment act that brought back many features of the first aaa.
the second aaa 3 p1ocej sing lax to pay for farm subsidies a provision of the first aaa that the supreme court had declared unconstitutional.
do you think president roosevelt adequately addressed the needs of the economy.
do you think his new deal policies extended far enough to restore public confidence.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write answers to these questions supporting your opinions with examples.
multimedia activity vcehtury organize into small groups.
use the internet and other sources to research how photographer dorothea lange used her camera to tell stories of life during the great depression.
then create a web site that describes langes life and analyzes how her work depicts the great depression.
include some of langes images and make sure to credit them properly.
be j writesmart several agencies that were established during the new deal such as the federal deposit insurance corporation fdic the securities and exchange commission sec and the social security ministration ssa still exist today.
write an essay describing how these and other new deal agencies continue to affect the lives of u s citizens.
use ywritesmart in your ebook to write your essay.
the new deal 523 end of chapter skill activity categorizing defining the skill categorizing means organizing information into similar groups so that it is easier to understand and compare.
historians categorize information to help them identify and understand historical patterns.
understanding the skill strategy decide what information needs to be categorized the following passage describes the new deal goals and programs.
as you read look for facts and details that are closely related.
then choose appropriate categories to organize the information.
major new deal programs 0to put the country on more secure footing during the great depression president roosevelt pushed a series of programs known collectively as the new deal to help people and businesses.
0the programs were each designed to meet one of three goals relief for those suffering the effects of the great depression recovery of the depressed economy and reforms that would help prevent economic crises in the future.
in 1933 the 0civilian conservation corps ccc was started to provide jobs on conservation projects to young men whose families needed relief.
that same year the 0tennessee valley authority tva began to promote development projects aimed to help the tennessee river valley recover.
the following year the qfederal housing administration fha recovery project started to provide loans for renovating or building homes.
another reform program started in 1934 was the 0 securities and exchange commission created to provide increased government regulation of trade on the stock exchange.
by 1935 the government had added more relief programs.
one was the 0 works progress administration wpa which provided jobs on public works projects for those needing income.
also providing financial relief was the q social security act which established pensions for retirees unemployment benefits and aid for certain groups of low income or disabled people.
that same year the 0 national labor relations act of 1935 established the national labor relations board nlrb to reform labor laws.
o decide what kind of information needs to be categorized.
decide what the passage is about and how the information can be sorted into categories.
look at titles labels topic sentences and key details for clues to define categories.
in this passage for example find the details that describe the various new deal programs.
decide what the categories will be.
note commonalities or differences in the information.
for example which new deal programs had similar goals.
look for clue words such as like other as well and another.
once you have chosen the categories sort information into them.
reread the passage and decide which items belong in each of the categories that you have identified.
in this example you would sort each different new deal program into one of three categories relief recovery or reform.
strategy make a chart you can use a chart to categorize information.
the chart below categorizes the new deal programs discussed in the passage based on which of roosevelt s goals the program met relief recovery or reform.
major new peal programs relief programs reform programs recovery programs civilian conservation corps ccc 1933 works progress administration wpa 1935 social security act 1935 securities and exchange commission sec 1934 national labor relations act 1935 tennessee valley authority tva 1933 federal housing administration fha 1934 applying the skill read chapter 17 i 1943 rommels forces surrender in north africa.
1944 gl bill of rights is passed y i.
pwmdent g cvch is elected fourth term.
i 1945j u s marines take iwo jima.
1945 harry s truman becomes president when roosevelt dies.
1944 on june 6 the allies launch a massive invasion of europe.
i 1945j nazi retreat begins after the battle of the bulge 119451 japan surrenders after atomic bombing of hiroshima and nagasaki.
the united states in world war ii 56 w mobilizing for defense main idea following the attack on pearl harbor the united states mobilized for war.
why itt matters now military industries in the united states today are a major part of the american economy.
terans names george marshall womens auxiliary army corps waac a philip randolph manhattan project office of price administration opa war production board wpb rationing fi taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes about how the united states prepared for war.
american s story as soldiers went off to fight in europe and the pacific many american families were separated by the war effort.
this letter from marine 1st lt leonard isacks expresses the emotions that many soldiers felt when thinking of their loved ones back home.
a personal voice leonard isacks my dear little boys i am writing to you today just a week before christmas eve in the hope that you will get this little note at christmas time.
all of this coming week will be holidays and i can just imagine the fun you will be having i wont be able to give you a christmas present personally this year but i do want you to know that i think of you all the time i know that you would like to give me a xmas present too so i will tell you what you can do and this will be your xmas present to me.
everyday ask mummie if there are any errands that you can do for her and when there are errands to run say sure mummie and give her a big smile from letter from marine 1st lt leonard isacks as the united states began to mobilize for war the isacks like most americans had few illusions as to what lay ahead.
it would be a time filled with hard work hope sacrifice and sorrow.
leonard isackss children at home.
americans join the war effort the japanese had attacked pearl harbor with the expectation that once americans had experienced japan s power they would tremble with fear and shrink from further conflict.
but if americans were trembling it was with rage not fear.
american patriotism drove citizens to incredible acts of bravery and sacrifice on the battlefields of europe and the pacific as well as at home.
uniting under the battle cry remember pearl harbor.
they set out to prove japan wrong.
562 chapter the allies fought world war ii on multiple fronts with engagements in both the european and pacific theaters.
how do you think fighting the war on multiple fronts affected the war effort.
consider personnel and supply needs and what challenges the allies faced.
make an inference about the effects of fighting the war on multiple fronts and then do additional research to confirm or challenge your conclusions.
create a website detailing how fighting the war on multiple fronts affected the allies.
include primary sources and images to support your inference.
end of chapter 18 vocabulary demilitarize to ban military forces in an area or region settling for stalemate as the macarthur controversy died down the soviet union unexpectedly suggested a cease fire on june 23 1951 truce talks began in july 1951 the opposing sides reached agreement on two points the location of the cease fire line at the existing battle line and the establishment of a demilitarized zone between the opposing sides.
negotiators spent another year wrangling over the exchange of prisoners.
finally in july 1953 the two sides signed an armistice ending the war.
at best the agreement was a stalemate.
on the one hand the north korean invaders had been pushed back and communism had been contained without the use of atomic weapons.
on the other hand korea was still two nations rather than one.
on the home front the war had affected the lives of ordinary americans in many ways.
it had cost 54 000 american lives and 67 billion in expenditures.
the high cost of this unsuccessful war was one of many factors leading americans to reject the democratic party in 1952 and to elect a republican administration under world war ii hero dwight d eisenhower.
in addition the korean war increased fear of communist aggression and prompted a hunt for americans who might be blamed for the communist gains.
sow 0 thefy the two koreas korea is still split into north korea and south korea even after several decades.
south korea is booming economically while north korea still communist struggles with severe shortages of food and energy.
periodically discussions about reuniting the two countries resume.
in 2000 south korean president kim dae jung won the nobel peace prize for his efforts to improve ties with north korea.
the two nations met in north korea for the first time since the nations were established in 1948 although economic and political differences continue to keep the two countries apart there is hope that one day korea will become a united nation.
4 south korean president kim dae jung waves to cheering north koreans on june 13 2000.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
chiang kai shek taiwan korean war mao zedong 38th parallel main idea using your notes on a time line such as the one shown below list the major events of the korean war.
choose two events and explain how one event led to the other.
critical thinking 3 hypothesizing what might have happened if macarthur had convinced truman to expand the fighting into china.
how might todays world be different.
analyzing events do you think the korean war was worth fighting.
explain outcomes of u s involvement to justify your answer.
think about the loss of american lives the fear of communism that enveloped the country at the time the stalemate that ended the war evaluating decisions at the end of chinas civil war the united states refused to accept the communist peoples republic of china as chinas true government.
what were the advantages of such a policy.
what were the disadvantages.
do you agree with this decision.
why or why not.
explaining events what is the relationship of the korean war to the u s containment policy.
cold war conflicts 615 teks8b the cold war at home main idea why it matters now terms names during the late 1940s and early 1950s domestic events intensified cold war tensions.
americans today remain vigilant to ensure that accusations of disloyalty are supported by evidence.
huac hollywood ten blacklist alger hiss ethei and julius rosenberg joseph mccarthy mccarthylsm p dneamerican s storyj.
taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how anti communist fear gripped the united states.
tony kahn made the neighbors uncomfortable because they thought his father gordon kahn was a communist.
in 1947 gordon kahn was a successful screenwriter.
however when a congressional committee began to investigate communists in hollywood kahn was blacklisted named as unfit to hire.
in 1951 gordon kahn was asked to testify before the committee.
to save himself he simply had to name others as communists but he refused.
rather than face the congressional committee he fled to mexico.
tony kahn remembers how the cold war hurt him and his family.
a personal voice tony kahn the first time i was called a communist i was four years old.
ill never forget the look in our neighbors eyes when i walked by.
i thought it was hate.
i was too young to realize it was fear.
from the cold war comes home tony kahn the members of the kahn family were among thousands of victims of the anti communist hysteria that gripped this country in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
by the end of the period no one was immune from accusations.
fear of communist influence the postwar years were a tense time in the united states.
many americans worried about the nation s security.
the soviet domination of eastern europe and the communist takeover of china shocked the american public fueling a fear that communism would spread around the world.
in addition at the height of world war ii about 80 000 americans claimed membership in the communist party.
for several years concern had been growing about possible communist influence in american government.
thus the domestic events of the period intensified cold war tensions already worrying many americans.
616 chapter 18 j pi.
main idea analyzing effects what were the results of the suez war.
the suez war in 1955 the same year in which the geneva summit took place great britain and the united states agreed to help egypt finance construction of a dam at aswan on the nile river.
however gamal abdel nasser egypt s head of government tried to play the soviets and the americans against each other by improving relations with each one in order to get more aid.
in 1956 after learning that nasser was making deals with the soviets dulles withdrew his offer of a loan.
angered nasser responded by nationalizing the suez canal the egyptian waterway that was owned by france and great britain.
the french and the british were outraged.
egyptian control of the canal also affected israel.
nasser refused to let ships bound for israel pass through the canal even though the canal was supposed to be open to all nations.
great britain france and israel responded by sending troops.
the three countries seized the mediterranean end of the canal.
the un quickly stepped in to stop the fighting.
it persuaded great britain france and israel to withdraw.
however it allowed egypt to keep control of the canal.
c the eisenhower doctrine the soviet union s prestige in the middle east rose because of its support for egypt.
to counterbalance this development president eisenhower issued a warning in january 1957 this warning known as the eisenhower doctrine said that the united states would defend the middle east against an attack by any communist country.
in march congress officially approved the doctrine.
israel on may 14 1948 the united nations created the nation of israel by partitioning the palestine mandate into two states one jewish and one arab.
thousands of jews had immigrated to the palestine mandate from europe before and during world war ii.
modern israel became like the promised land of biblical times.
the creation of israel was one of the few issues upon which the united states and the soviet union agreed as the world reacted uniformly to the horror that had befallen the jews in the holocaust.
the hungarian uprising even as fighting was raging in the middle east a revolt began in hungary.
dominated by the soviet union since the end of world war ii the hungarian people rose in revolt in 1956 they called for a democratic government.
crowds surround a imre nagy the most popular and liberal hungarian communist leader capture russian tank formed a new government.
he promised free elections denounced the during the anti communist warsaw pact and demanded that all soviet troops leave hungary.
the soviet response was swift and brutal.
in november 1956 soviet tanks rolled into hungary and killed approximately 30 000 hungarians.
armed with only pistols and bottles thousands of hungarian freedom fighters threw up barricades in the streets and fought the invaders to no avail.
the soviets overthrew the nagy government and replaced it with pro soviet leaders.
nagy himself was executed.
some 200 000 hungarians fled to the west.
although the truman doctrine had promised to support free peoples who resisted communism the united states did nothing to help hungary break free of soviet control.
many revolution in hungary.
cold war conflicts 625 i hungarians were bitterly disappointed.
the american policy of containment did not extend to driving the soviet union out of its satellites.
no help came to hungary from the united nations either.
although the un passed one resolution after another condemning the soviet union the soviet veto in the security council stopped the un from taking any action.
the cold war takes to the skies u s budget 1950 2010 after stalin s death in had no well defined way another.
for the first leaders shared power.
percentage spent on defense 1950 32 source historical tables budget of the united states government skillbuilder interpreting graphs 1 by how much did the percentage of the federal budget for defense increase between 1950 and 1960.
2 why do you think it increased that much.
i main idea comparing compare joseph stalin with nikita khrushchev.
how were they alike.
how were they different.
rm m history video u 2 spy plane shot down 71.
1953 the soviet union for one leader to succeed few years a group of as time went by however one man did gain power.
that man was nikita khrushchev kroosh chef.
like stalin khrushchev believed that communism would take over the world but khrushchev thought it could triumph peacefully.
he favored a policy of peaceful coexistence in which two powers would compete economically and scientifically.
the space race in the competition for international prestige the soviets leaped to an early lead in what came to be known as the space race.
on october 4 1957 they launched sputnik the world s first artificial satellite.
sputnik traveled around the earth at 18 000 miles per hour circling the globe every 96 minutes.
its launch was a triumph of soviet technology.
the sputnik launch caused great concern in the united states.
it signaled that the soviets had surpassed american scientists in terms of technical skill and knowledge.
many americans worried this would translate into better more accurate weaponry.
the united states was quick to respond to the sputnik challenge and promptly poured money into their own space program.
on january 31 1958 the united states successfully launched its first satellite.
they also established a new agency the national aeronautics and space administration nasa to take charge of the nation s space exploration efforts.
the american people also took a hard look at their educational system.
many wondered whether a decline in the nation s schools had enabled the soviet union to surpass the united states in technological achievement.
in response to this concern congress in 1958 passed the national defense education act which provided hundreds of millions of dollars for public education.
a u 2 is shot down following the rejection of eisenhower s open skies proposal at the 1955 geneva summit conference the cia began making secret high altitude flights over soviet territory.
the plane used for these missions was the u 2 which could fly at high altitudes without detection.
as a u 2 passed over the soviet union its infrared cameras took detailed photographs of troop movement and missile sites.
by 1960 however many u s officials were nervous about the u 2 program for two reasons.
first the existence and purpose of the u 2 was an open secret among some members of the american press.
second the soviets had been aware of the flights since 1958.
626 chapter 18 texas test practice use the quotation below and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
in 1945 i had ordered the a bomb dropped on japan at two places devoted almost exclusively to war production.
we were at war.
we were trying to end it in order to save the lives of our soldiers and sailors.
we stopped the war and saved thousands of casualties on both sides.
in korea we were fighting a police action with sixteen allied nations to support the world organization which had set up the republic of korea.
we had held the chinese after defeating the north koreans and whipping the russian air force.
i just could not make the order for a third world war.
i know i was right.
off the record the private papers of harry s truman 1 according to president truman what was the main difference between using the atomic bomb on japan in 1945 and the possibility of using it on china in 1951.
a japan was more of a military power in 1945 than china was in 1951 b in 1945 we had many allies but in 1951 we had only two.
c in 1945 the bomb ended a world war but in 1951 it would have started one.
d the japanese were much fiercer fighters than the chinese were.
use the cartoon below and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 2.
2 what point of view about the arms race does this 1950 cartoon best support.
f the arms race between russia and the united states is as dangerous as a war.
g communism uncontained will spread.
h the bombs of the united states only threaten countries other than the united states.
j the united states needs to build up its arsenal in order to compete with russia 71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials ei interact with history j writesmart collaborative lear recall the issues that you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter.
then use the internet and library resources to research the stages of the entire cold war from 1945 to 1991 use relative chronology to arrange these stages in order on a time line.
then apply absolute chronology and use your research to assign a date range to each stage rearranging your time line as needed.
locus on writing j writesmart write a five paragraph essay that explains how the united states became involved in the korean war.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your essay cold war conflicts 631 end of chapter 18 pages 618 619 create a web diagram like the one above to make a generalization about the role of television in reporting news.
use information from textual and visual sources to support your generalization.
1 determine what information is common in the sources.
read each entry and look at the pictures.
what is the main idea of each entry.
what do the main ideas have in common.
what people places or events are you grouping together.
2 form a generalization that describes the common theme in a way that all sources would agree with.
what is the common theme that runs across the feature.
631 si jackie robinson integrates major league 119481 b 25a 25 b 26a 27b 29h 3 oc 31b section 1 postwar america main idea the truman and eisenhower administrations led the nation to make social economic and political adjustments following world war ii.
section 2 the american dream in the fifties main idea during the 1950s the economy boomed and many americans enjoyed material comfort.
section 3 popular culture main idea mainstream americans as well as the nation s subcultures embraced new forms of entertainment during the 1950s.
section 4 the other america main idea amidst the prosperity of the 1950s millions of americans lived in poverty.
1946 baby boom begins.
19503 disc jockey alan freed is the first to use the term rock n roll on the air.
usai world.
s truman is elected president.
jl949 mao zedong s communist forces gain control of china.
korean war begins.
632 chapter to answer the following questions.
postwar america pages 634 640 1 how did the gl bill of rights help world war ii veterans.
2 what domestic and foreign issues concerned voters during the 1952 presidential election.
the american dream in the fifties pages 641 649 3 what shift in employment trends had occurred by the mid 1950s.
4 how did life in the suburbs provide the model for the american dream.
popular culture pages 652 657 5 what strategies did radio stations use to counteract the mass popularity of television.
using your notes in a web like the one below show the postwar technological advances you consider most influential.
hypothesizing during americas first two centuries the national character was marked by individualism.
why do you think conformity became the norm in the 1950s.
analyzing causes and effects what factors caused the economic prosperity of the 1950s.
what were the effects of that prosperity.
did all americans benefit equally.
h highways and affordable homes make suburban living desirable.
equal rights remains a problem.
the cold war creates fear and anxiety.
life in postwar america 1945 1960 rock n roll and jazz pave the way for minority representation.
the beat movement rejects conformity.
recreation and consumerism flourish.
television portrays an idealized white america.
urban areas fall into decay.
minorities experience prejudice and discrimination.
1 minorities establish organizations to improve civil rights.
culture 664 chapter 20 for the next six days the world faced the terrifying possibility of nuclear war.
in the atlantic ocean soviet ships presumably carrying more missiles headed toward cuba while the u s navy prepared to quarantine cuba and prevent the ships from coming within 500 miles of it.
in florida 100 000 troops waited the largest invasion force ever assembled in the united states.
c douglas dillon kennedy s secretary of the treasury and a veteran of nuclear diplomacy recalled those tension filled days of october.
a personal voice c douglas dillon the only time i felt a fear of nuclear war or a use of nuclear weapons was on the very first day when wed decided that we had to do whatever was necessary to get the missiles out.
there was always some background fear of what would eventually happen and i think this is what was expressed when people said they feared they would never see another saturday.
quoted in on the brink the first break in the crisis occurred when the soviet ships stopped suddenly to avoid a confrontation at sea.
secretary of state dean rusk said we are eyeball to eyeball and the other fellow just blinked.
a few days later khrushchev offered to remove the missiles in return for an american pledge not to invade cuba.
the united states also secretly agreed to remove missiles from turkey.
the leaders agreed and the crisis ended.
for a moment the world had stood still robert kennedy wrote years later and now it was going around again.
key players john f kennedy 1917 1963 john f jack kennedy grew up in a politically powerful family that helped make his dreams possible.
his parents instilled in him the drive to accomplish great things.
during world war ii he enlisted in the navy and was decorated for heroism.
in 1946 he won his first seat in congress from a boston district where he had never lived.
while a senator he won a pulitzer prize for his book profiles in courage.
although he radiated self confidence kennedy suffered many ailments including addisons disease a debilitating condition that he treated with daily injections of cortisone.
at least one half of the days that he spent on this earth were days of intense physical pain recalled his brother robert.
nikita khrushchev 1894 1971 no matter how humble a mans beginnings boasted nikita khrushchev he achieves the stature of the office to which he is elected khrushchev the son of a miner became a communist party organizer in the 1920s.
within four years of stalins death in 1953 khrushchev had consolidated his power in the soviet union.
during his regime which ended in 1964 khrushchev kept american nerves on edge with alternately conciliatory and aggressive behavior.
during a 1959 trip to the united states he met for friendly talks with president eisenhower.
the next year in front of the un general assembly he took off his shoe and angrily pounded it on a desk to protest the u 2 incident.
kennedy and khrushchev take the heat the crisis severely damaged khrushchev s prestige in the soviet union and the world.
kennedy did not escape criticism either.
some people criticized kennedy for practicing brinkmanship when private talks might have resolved the crisis without the threat of nuclear war.
others believed he had passed up an ideal chance to invade cuba and oust castro.
it was learned in the 1990s that the cia had underestimated the num bers of soviet troops and nuclear weapons on the island.
the effects of the crisis lasted long after the missiles had been removed many cuban exiles blamed the democrats for losing cuba a charge that kennedy had earlier leveled at the republicans and switched their allegiance to the gop 676 chapter 20 jn y.
m t i j 4k a i.
montana w 7 j wyoming dakota i llchigah colorado new mexico iowa nebraska k ilk illinois vermont x new york indiana 0h pennsylvania n jnn west jvir nl l maryland virginia ij kentucky k 7 fc nti northv.
i carolina tennessee i oklahoma arkansas sou.
kansas missouri miss.
georgia caj l na 1 pacific coast paths midwest paths atlantic coast paths year round work migrant base areas texas la.
250 alabama 500 miles florw 250 500 kilometers the map above shows the three major streams of migrant worker movements in the 1960s.
thinking critically connect to history 1 analyzing patterns retrace the movement of migrant workers in the three regions.
why do you think migrant workers have to keep moving.
connect to today 2 creating a database pose a historical question about the relationship between crops and planting seasons.
for example what types of crops are harvested in michigan during the fall.
then research and create a database that answers this and other such questions.
i atlantic coast le some workers along the atlantic coast stream ain in florida others travel as far north as new ipshire and new york like the workers shown harvesting onions.
there they work from march ugh september.
due to the winters migrant ters in most of the midwest and atlantic regions find work for only six months out of the year.
the new frontier and the great society the great society main idea why it matters now terms names the demand for reform helped create a new awareness of social problems especially on matters of civil rights and the effects of poverty.
reforms made in the 1960s have had a lasting effect on the american justice system by increasing the rights of minorities.
lyndon baines johnson economic opportunity act great society medicare and medicaid immigration act of 1965 warren court reapportionment taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the programs of the great society and decisions of the warren court.
one american s story in 1966 family finances forced larry alfred to drop out of high school in mobile alabama.
he turned to the job corps a federal program that trained young people from poor backgrounds.
he learned to operate construction equipment but his dream was to help people.
on the advice of his job corps counselor he joined vista volunteers in service to america often called the domestic peace corps.
both the job corps and vista sprang into being in 1964 when president lyndon b johnson signed the economic opportunity act.
this law was the main offensive of johnson s war on poverty and a cornerstone of the great society.
vista assigned alfred to work with a community of poor farm laborers in robstown texas near the mexican border.
there he found a number of children with mental and physical disabilities who had no special assistance education or training.
so he established the robstown association for retarded people started a parents educa tion program sought state funds and created a rehabilitation center.
at age 20 larry alfred was a high school dropout job corps graduate vista volunteer and in robstown an authority on people with disabilities.
alfred embodied johnson s great society in two ways its programs helped him turn his life around and he made a difference in people s lives.
a vista volunteers worked in a variety of capacities.
this woman is teaching art to young pupils.
lbjs path to power by the time lyndon baines johnson or lbj as he was called succeeded to the presidency his ambition and drive had become legendary.
in explaining his frenetic energy johnson once remarked that s the way i ve been all my life.
my daddy used to wake me up at dawn and shake my leg and say lyndon every boy in town s got an hour s head start on you.
from the texas hills to capitol hill a fourth generation texan johnson grew up in the dry texas hill country of blanco county.
the johnsons never knew great wealth but they also never missed a meal.
686 chapter to answer the following questions.
kennedy and the cold war pages 670 678 1 explain the factors that led to kennedys victory over nixon in the 1960 presidential campaign.
2 what were the most significant results of the cuban missile crisis.
the new frontier pages 679 683 3 what was kennedys new frontier.
why did he have trouble getting his new frontier legislation through congress.
4 what two international aid programs were launched during the kennedy administration.
5 how did kennedys assassination affect the public.
the great society pages 686 693 6 describe ways that great society programs addressed the problem of poverty.
7 how did the courts increase the political power of people in urban areas and those accused of crimes.
critical thinking using your notes use a venn diagram to show the major legislative programs of the new frontier and the great society.
new frontier great society making generalizations john f kennedy said m y fellow americans ask not what your country can do for you ask what you can do for your country do you agree with his view about the relationship between individuals and the country.
explain your opinion.
explaining turning points what is the significance of the years 1968 1969 as a turning point in american history.
visual summary the new frontier and the great society fi i peace corps new flexible response strategy for cold war cuban missile crisis bay of pigs race to the moon boosted the economy by increasing government spending increased minimum wage to 1 25 extended unemployment insurance provided assistance to cities with high unemployment supported civil rights great society reform legislation and federal assistance programs war on poverty increased protection of individual rights pushed civil rights bill through congress eoa vista project head start 1 established medicare and medicaid changed immigration laws to open doors for many non european immigrants furthered environmental movement cut taxes but increased budget deficit 696 chapter how were these rights denied african americans.
how were they finally secured.
connect to today 2 writing about rights have you or anyone youve known had their civil rights denied them in any way.
research a current day instance of an alleged civil rights injustice.
write an account of the issue and share it with your class.
research web links civil rights chapter 21 texas test practice use the diagram and your knowledge of united states history to answer question 1 civil rights strategies and actions 1954 1968 use the quotation as well as your knowledge of united states history to answer question 2.
1 the venn diagram is partially filled in with the strategies of various civil rights groups in the 1960s.
which of the following could be added to the area of the diagram labeled x.
a provide social services to the needy b boycotts c nonviolent demonstrations d armed self defense an illegal attack an unjust attack and an immoral attack can be made against you by any one.
just because a person has on a police uniform does not give him the right to come and shoot up your neighborhood.
no this is not right and my suggestion would be that as long as the police department doesnt use those methods in white neighborhoods they shouldnt come.
and use them in our neighborhood malcolm x prospects for freedom in 1965 2 which of the following events justifies malcolm xs concerns about police brutality.
f the rosa parks incident in 1955 g the 1963 birmingham demonstrations h the desegregation of little rocks central high in 1957 j the first sit ins in 1942 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history writesmart collaborative learn think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 21 section 1 taking on segregation.
read one american s story on page 700 and analyze the quotation to understand the historical context that inspired jo ann gibson robinson to say those words.
1 identify the author or creator of the source.
who is featured in this section.
what do you know about her background.
2 determine the historical event the source is describing.
what historical event is the text describing.
3 analyze the information.
compare this speech to what you already know about segregation.
what details in the quotation tell you something you may not already know.
721 9 section 1 moving toward conflict main idea to stop the spread of communism in southeast asia the united states used its military to support south vietnam.
section 2 u s involvement and escalation main idea the united states sent troops to fight in vietnam but the war quickly turned into a stalemate.
section 3 a nation divided main idea an antiwar movement in the u s pitted supporters of the government s war policy against those who opposed it.
section 4 1968 a tumultuous year main idea an enemy attack in vietnam two assassinations and a chaotic political convention made 1968 an explosive year.
section 5 the end of the war and its legacy main idea president nixon instituted his vietnamization policy and america s longest war finally came to an end.
1963 kennedy is assassinated lyndon b johnson becomes president.
1964 lyndon b johnson is elected president.
03601 the national liberation front forms in south vietnam.
19651 first major u s combat units arrive in vietnam.
1965 196 j the african nation of uganda becomes independent.
1966 mao zedong begins the cultural revolution in china.
1967 israel captures gaza strip and west bank in six day war.
728 chapter 22 main idea developing historical perspective how did the tonkin gulf resolution lead to greater u s involvement in the vietnam war.
two days later the maddox and another destroyer were again off the north the navy destroyer vietnamese coast.
the crew reported enemy torpedoes and began firing.
it was later u s s.
revealed that radar interference could have been mistaken for enemy torpedoes.
the alleged attack on u s ships prompted president johnson to launch bombing strikes on north vietnam.
he asked congress for powers to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the united states and to prevent further aggression.
congress approved his request and adopted the tonkin gulf resolution on august 7 while not a declaration of war it granted johnson broad military powers in vietnam.
some felt it altered the u s constitution s system of checks and balances by allowing the executive branch to wage war without a declaration of war from the legislative branch.
johnson did not tell congress or the american people that the maddox had been in the gulf of tonkin to collect information for secret raids against north vietnam.
furthermore johnson had prepared the resolution months beforehand and was only waiting for the chance to push it through congress.
in february of 1965 president johnson used his newly granted powers.
in response to a vietcong attack that killed eight americans johnson unleashed operation rolling thunder the first sustained bombing of north vietnam.
in march of that year the first american combat troops began arriving in south vietnam.
by june more than 50 000 u s soldiers were battling the vietcong.
the vietnam war had become americanized.
main idea using your notes in a chart like the one below cite the vietnam policy for each of the following presidents truman eisenhower kennedy and johnson.
president vietnam policy 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
ho chi minh dien bien phu ngo dinh diem vietminh geneva accords vietcong domino theory ho chi minh trail tonkin gulf resolution critical thinking making inferences what were the reasons for u s involvement in the vietnam war.
explain your answer.
analyzing issues what constitutional issues were raised by the federal policy changes leading up to u s involvement in the vietnam war.
which founding principle applies to this historical event.
5 evaluating do you think congress was justified in passing the tonkin gulf resolution.
use details from the text to support your response.
think about the questionable report of torpedo attacks on two u s destroyers the powers that the resolution would give the president the fact that the resolution was not a declaration of war choose one of the four presidents and explain his goals in vietnam.
the vietnam war years 7 u s involvement and escalation main idea the united states sent troops to fight in vietnam but the war quickly turned into a stalemate.
why it matters now since vietnam americans are more aware of the positive and negative effects of using u s troops in foreign conflicts.
terms names robert mcnamara dean rusk william westmoreland army of the republic of vietnam arvn napalm agent orange search and destroy mission credibility gap one americans story sans taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the military tactics and weapons of the u s and the vietcong.
n ifatakl tim o brien is a novelist who has written several books about his experience in vietnam and its lasting effects.
drafted at the age of 21 o brien was sent to vietnam in august 1968 he spent the first seven months of his nearly two year duty patrolling the fields outside of chu lai a seacoast city in south vietnam.
o brien described one of the more nerve racking experiences of the war walking through the fields and jungles many of which were filled with land mines and booby traps.
a personal voice tim obrien you do some thinking.
you hallucinate.
you look ahead a few paces and wonder what your legs will resemble if there is more to the earth in that spot than silicates and nitrogen.
will the pain be unbearable.
will you scream and fall silent.
will you be afraid to look at your own body afraid of the sight of your own red flesh and white bone.
it is not easy to fight this sort of self defeating fear but you try.
you decide to be ultra careful the hard nosed realistic approach.
you try to second guess the mine.
should you put your foot to that flat rock or the clump of weeds to its rear.
paddy dike or water.
you wish you were tarzan able to swing on the vines.
you trace the footprints of the men to your front.
you give up when he curses you for following too closely better one man dead than two.
quoted in a life in a year the american infantryman in vietnam 1965 1972 deadly traps were just some of the obstacles that u s troops faced.
as the infiltration of american ground troops into vietnam failed to score a quick victory a mostly supportive u s population began to question its government s war policy.
a vietnams terrain was often treacherous such as the thick jungles and rivers these u s soldiers encountered in 1966 johnson increases u s involvement much of the nation supported lyndon johnson s determination to contain com munism in vietnam.
in the years following 1965 president johnson began send ing large numbers of american troops to fight alongside the south vietnamese.
736 chapter 22 f not shown alaska si hawaii ffi district of columbia nixon triumphs one beneficiary of this turmoil was republican presidential candidate richard m nixon who by 1968 had achieved one of the greatest political comebacks in american politics.
after his loss to kennedy in the presidential race of 1960 nixon tasted defeat again in 1962 when he ran for governor of california.
his political career all but dead nixon joined a new york law firm but he never strayed far from politics.
in 1966 nixon campaigned for republican candidates in congressional elections helping them to win back 47 house seats and 3 senate seats from democrats.
in 1968 nixon announced his candidacy for president and won the party s nomination.
during the presidential race nixon campaigned on a promise to restore law and order which appealed to many middle class americans tired of years of riots and protests.
he also promised in vague but appealing terms to end the war in vietnam.
nixon s candidacy was helped by the entry of former alabama governor george wallace into the race as a third party candidate.
wallace a democrat running on the american independent party ticket was a longtime champion of school segregation and states rights.
labeled the white backlash candidate wallace captured five southern states.
in addition he attracted a surprisingly high number of northern white working class voters disgusted with inner city riots and antiwar protests.
in the end nixon defeated humphrey and inherited the quagmire in vietnam.
he eventually would end america s involvement in vietnam but not before his war policies created even more protest and uproar within the country.
election of 1968 electoral popular party candidate votes votes republican richard m nixon 301 31 785 480 democratic hubert h humphrey 191 31 275 166 american george c wallace 46 9 906 473 independent skillbuilder interpreting charts 1 in what region did wallace carry states.
2 by how many electoral votes did nixon defeat humphrey.
assessment i i 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
tet offensive robert kennedy hubert humphrey clark clifford eugene mccarthy george wallace main idea using your notes create a time line of major events that occurred in 1968 use the months already plotted on the time line below as a guide.
i january 1 april august it l march june critical thinking analyzing events why do you think the tet offensive turned so many americans against the war.
support your answer with reasons.
making inferences refer to president johnsons quote on page 750 what do you think he meant when he said if i ve lost walter cronkite then its over ve lost mr average citizen.
making inferences describe responses to the vietnam war.
do you think there might have been a relationship between the violence of the vietnam war and the growing climate of violence in the united states during 1968.
why or why not.
which event do you think was most significant.
the vietnam war teks8d 8e 8f 17c 20a 23b the end of the war and its legacy mainjd 2 j why it matters now j terms names president nixon instituted since vietnam the united states richard nixon his vietnamization policy considers more carefully the risks henry kissinger and americas longest war to its own interests before inter vietnamization finally came to an end.
vening in foreign affairs.
silent majority my lai kent state university pentagon papers war powers act one american s i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the impact that the vietnam war had on the united states.
alfred s bradford served in vietnam from september 1968 to august 1969 a member of the 25th infantry division he was awarded several medals including the purple heart given to soldiers wounded in battle.
one day bradfords eight year old daughter elizabeth inquired about his experience in vietnam.
daddy why did you do it.
bradford recalled what he had told himself.
a personal voice alfred s bradford vietnam was my generations adventure.
i wanted to be part of that adventure and i believed that it was my duty as an american both to serve my country and particularly not to stand by while someone else risked his life in my place.
i do not regret my decision to go but i learned in vietnam not to confuse america with the politicians elected to administer america even when they claim they are speaking for america and i learned that i have a duty to myself and to my country to exercise my own judgment based upon my own conscience 99 quoted in some even volunteered the legacy of the war was profound it dramatically affected the way aus soldier sits americans viewed their government and the world.
richard nixon had promised near quang tri in 1968 to end the war but it would take nearly five more years and over 20 000 vietnam during more american deaths to end the nation s involvement in vietnam.
a break in the fighting.
president nixon and vietnamization in the summer of 1969 newly elected president richard nixon announced the first u s troop withdrawals from vietnam.
we have to get rid of the nightmares we inherited nixon later told reporters.
one of the nightmares is war without end.
however as nixon pulled out the troops he continued the war against north vietnam a policy that some critics would charge prolonged the war without end for several more bloody years.
754 chapter 23 r in the 1920s thousands of mexican people came to the u s and settled in barrios.
shown here hispanic men gather in a park in california main idea identifying problems aj what problems did different groups of latino immigrants share.
own pattern of settlement in the united states and its own set of economic social cultural and political concerns.
latinos of varied origins mexican americans the largest latino group have lived mostly in the southwest and california.
this group includes descendants of the nearly 100 000 mexicans who had lived in territories ceded by mexico to the united states in 1848 another million or so mexicans came to the united states in the 1910s following mexico s revolution.
still others came as braceros or temporary laborers during the 1940s and 1950s.
in the 1960s close to half a million mexicans immigrated most in search of better paying jobs.
puerto ricans began immigrating to the united states after the u s occupation of puerto rico in 1898 as of 1960 almost 900 000 puerto ricans were living in the continental united states including almost half a million on new york city s west side.
large cuban communities also formed in new york city and in miami and new jersey.
this is because hundreds of thousands of cubans many of whom were academics and professionals fled to the united states in 1959 to escape fidel castro s communist rule.
in addition tens of thousands of salvadorans guatemalans nicaraguans and colombians immigrated to the united states after the 1960s to escape civil war and chronic poverty.
wherever they had settled during the 1960s many latinos encountered ethnic prejudice and discrimination in jobs and housing.
most lived in segregated barrios or spanish speaking neighborhoods.
the latino jobless rate was nearly 50 percent higher than that of whites as was the percentage of latino families living in poverty y historical spotlight desperate journeys in the 1960s and 1970s thousands of poor mexicans illegally crossed the 2 000 mile border between the united states and mexico each year.
the journey these illegal aliens undertook was often made more difficult by coyotes guides who charged large amounts of money to help them cross the border but who often didnt deliver on their promises.
illegal immigrants problems didnt end when they entered the united states where they were denied many social services including unemployment insurance and food stamps.
in addition the immigration and naturalization service urged businesses to refrain from hiring them.
as a result some owners stopped employing people with latino names including legal immigrants latinos fight for change as the presence of latinos in the united states grew so too did their demand for greater representation and better treat ment.
during the 1960s latinos demanded not only equal opportunity but also a respect for their culture and heritage.
an era of social chai yty player cesar chavez 1927 1993 cesar chavez spoke from experience when he said many things in farm labor are terrible as a teenager chavez moved with his family from farm to farm picking such crops as grapes apricots and olives.
the worst crop was the olives chavez recalled.
the olives are so small you can never fill the bucket the seeds of protest grew early in chavez.
as a teenager he once went to see a movie only to find that the theater was segregated whites on one side of the aisle and mexicans on the other side.
i really hadnt thought much about what i was going to do but i had to do something chavez recalled.
the future union leader sat down in the whites only section and stayed there until the police arrived and arrested him.
the farm worker movement as jessie lopez de la cruz explained thousands working on california s fruit and vegetable farms did backbreaking work for little pay and few benefits.
cesar chavez believed that farm workers had to unionize that their strength would come from bargaining as a group.
in 1962 chavez and dolores huerta established the national farm workers association.
four years later this group merged with a filipino agricultural union also founded by huerta to form the united farm workers organizing committee ufwoc.
chavez and his fellow organizers insisted that california s large fruit and vegetable companies accept their union as the bargaining agent for the farm workers.
in 1965 when california s grape growers refused chavez launched a nationwide boycott of the companies grapes.
chavez like martin luther king jr believed in using nonviolence to reach his goal.
the union sent farm workers across the country to convince consumers not to buy california grapes.
chavez then went on a three week fast in which he lost 35 pounds.
he ended his fast by attending mass with senator robert f kennedy.
the efforts of the farm workers eventually paid off.
in 1970 huerta negotiated a contract between the grape growers and the ufwoc.
union workers would finally be guaranteed higher wages and other benefits long denied them.
cultural pride the activities of the california farm workers helped to inspire other latino brown power movements across the country.
in new york members of the puerto rican population began to demand that schools offer spanish speaking children classes taught in their own language as well as programs about their culture.
in 1968 congress enacted the bilingual education act which provided funds for schools to develop bilingual and cultural heritage programs for non english speaking children.
young mexican americans started to call themselves chicanos or chicanas a shortened version of mexicanos that expressed pride in their heritage.
a chicano community action group called the brown berets formed under the leadership of david sanchez.
in 1968 they organized walkouts in east los angeles high schools.
about 15 000 chicano students walked out of class demanding smaller classes more chicano teachers and administrators and programs designed to reduce the high latino dropout rate.
militant mexican american students also won the establishment of chicano studies programs at colleges and universities.
art was another outlet to express cultural pride.
chicano murals began to appear on buildings in cities across the southwest.
these murals reinvigorated a sense of shared cultural heritage.
some also conveyed political messages.
political power latinos also began organizing politically during the 1960s.
some worked within the two party system.
for example the mexican american political association mapa helped elect los angeles politician edward roybal to the house of representatives.
during the 1960s eight hispanic americans served in the house and one hispanic senator was elected joseph montoya of new mexico.
others like texan jose angel gutierrez sought to create an independent latino political movement.
in 1970 he established la raza unida the people united.
in the 1970s la raza unida ran latino candidates in five states and won races for mayor as well as other local political offices.
mam idea analyzing effects g what impact did the grape boycott have.
background prior to i960 32 hispanics had been elected to congress beginning with joseph hernandez in 1822.
770 chapter 23 texas test practice use the flowchart and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
1 which event accurately completes the cause and effect chain.
a eeoc rules that unhealthful working conditions amount to illegal discrimination.
b ufwoc disbands.
c grape boycott is extended to apricots and olives.
d working conditions for migrant farm workers are improved.
2 in the 1960s women fought in congress in the courts and in their everyday lives for treatment as political and social equals.
today job discrimination against women is illegal because of f the fourteenth amendment.
h the civil rights act of 1964 j the roe v wade decision.
3 which of the following statements is a fact.
a hippies believed that everyone should love each other.
b hippies spoiled the woodstock festival.
c the hippie movement failed because the hippies beliefs were too radical.
d hippies invented rock music in liverpool england.
4 the womens rights movement largely grew out of f the counterculture movement.
g the civil rights movement.
h the movement to organize farm workers.
j reaction to the warren court decisions.
71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history t writesmart multimedia activity think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 24 related cases united steelworkers of america v weber 1979 the court said a business could have a short term program for training minority workers as a way of fixing the results of past discrimination.
adarand constructors v pena 1995 the court struck a federal law to set aside 10 percent of highway construction funds for minority owned businesses.
the court also said that affirmative action programs must be focused to achieve a compelling government interest.
hei pprej gftsm.
rf wittts a on october 8 1977 protestors march in suppport of affirmative action at a park in oakland california.
why it mattered many people have faced discrimination in america.
the struggle of african americans for civil rights in the 1950s and 1960s succeeded in overturning jim crow segregation.
even so social inequality persisted for african americans as well as women and other minority groups.
in 1965 president lyndon johnson explained why more proactive measures needed to be taken to end inequality.
you do not take a person who for years has been hobbled by chains and.
bring him up to the starting line of a race and then say you are free to compete with all the others and still justly believe that you have been completely fair.
as a result johnson urged companies to begin to take affirmative action to hire and promote african americans helping them to overcome generations of inequality.
critics quickly opposed affirmative action plans as unfair to white people and merely a replacement of one form of racial discrimination with another.
university admissions policies became a focus of the debate over affirmative action.
the court s ruling in bakke allowed race to be used as one factor in admissions decisions.
schools could consider a prospective student s race but they could not use quotas or use race as the only factor for admission.
historical impact since bakke the court has ruled on affirmative action several times usually limiting affirmative action plans.
for example in adarand constructors v pena 1995 the court struck a federal law to set aside not less than 10 percent of highway construction funds for businesses owned by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals.
the court said that affirmative action programs must be narrowly focused to achieve a compelling government interest.
on cases regarding school affirmative action plans the courts have not created clear guidelines.
the supreme court refused to hear an appeal of a 1996 lower court ruling that outlawed any consideration of race for admission to the university of texas law school.
yet in the 2003 decision in grutter v bollinger the court protected a university of michigan law school admissions policy that required the admissions committee to consider the diversity of its student body.
the court reaffirmed the bakke view that student body diversity is a compelling state interest.
since the grutter decision several states have passed laws or constitutional amendments requiring race blind admissions effectively barring affirmative action.
these laws were passed by ballot initiative reflecting a popular view that sees affirmative action as reverse discrimination.
jthinking critically connect to history 1 evaluating research articles about bakke in the library or on the internet.
read the articles and write a paragraph for each one explaining the writers point of view on the case.
conclude by telling which article gives the best discussion of the case.
cite examples to support your choice.
connect to today v ttury 2 visit the links for historic decisions of the supreme court to research and read about proposition 209 californias 1996 law banning affirmative action at state universities.
prepare arguments for an in class debate about whether the law will have a positive or negative long term effect.
xcentui 71 internet activity s3 environmental activism main idea during the 1970s americans strengthened their efforts to address the nations environmental problems.
why it matters now the nation today continues to struggle to balance environmental concerns with industrial growth.
terms names rachel carson earth day environmentalist environmental protection agency epa three mile island oneamerican sstbry taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how concern for the environment grew in the united states.
lois gibbs in 1972 lois gibbs and her family moved to niagara falls new york.
underneath this quiet town however was a disaster in the making.
in the 1890s the love canal had been built to provide hydroelectric power for the niagara falls area.
chemical companies were dumping hazardous waste into the canal.
in 1953 bulldozers filled in the canal.
shortly thereafter a school and rows of homes were built nearby.
in 1977 when lois gibbs s son fell sick she decided to investigate.
she eventually uncovered the existence of the toxic waste and mobilized the community to demand government action.
in 1980 president carter authorized funds for many niagara falls families to move to safety.
years later lois gibbs wrote a book detailing her efforts.
a personal voice lois gibbs i want to tell you our story my story because i believe that ordinary citizens using the tools of dignity self respect common sense and perseverance can influence solutions to important problems in our society.
in solving any difficult problem you have to be prepared to fight long and hard sometimes at great personal cost but it can be done.
it must be done if we are to survive at all.
love canal my story lois gibbs s concerns about environmental hazards were shared by many americans in the 1970s.
through the energy crisis americans learned that their natural resources were limited they could no longer take the environment for granted.
americans from grassroots organizations to the government began to focus on conservation of the environment and new forms of energy.
the roots of environmentalism the widespread realization that pollution and overconsumption were damaging the environment began in the 1960s.
one book in particular had awakened 820 chapter to answer the following questions.
the nixon administration pages 794 801 1 in what ways did president nixon attempt to reform the federal government.
2 how did nixon try to combat stagflation.
watergate nixon s downfall pages 802 807 3 in what ways did the participants in watergate attempt to cover up the scandal.
4 how did the watergate scandal affect u s citizens trust in the federal government and its leaders.
the ford and carter years pages 810 817 5 what were gerald fords greatest successes as president.
6 how did president carter attempt to solve the energy crisis.
environmental activism pages 820 825 7 what factors increased americans concerns about environmental issues during the 1960s and 1970s.
8 what was the impact of the three mile island incident.
critical thinking using your notes in a chart like the one shown identify one major development for each issue listed that occurred between 1968 and 1980 indicate whether you think the impact of the development was positive or negative.
issue development impact economic conditions democratic government efficient energy use environmental protection analyzing events between 1972 and 1974 americans were absorbed by the fall of president nixon in the watergate scandal.
what might americans have learned about the role of the executive office.
interpreting graphs study the graph on page 813 describe the changes in unemployment as compared to inflation from 1970 to 1980 visual summary an age of limits if the nixon administration the ford administration v the carter administration revenue sharing law and order politics integration delays inflation recession and unemployment opening to china detente with the soviet union watergate scandal nixon resignation unelected president nixon pardon whip inflation now program economic recession mayagiiez incident helsinki accords energy crisis worsening inflation panama canal treaties camp david accords nuclear power iran hostage crisis 826 chapter 24 section 4 page 813 and read the passage the economic crisis worsens and examine the graph unemployment and inflation 1970 1980.
this line graph traces changes in unemployment and inflation rates over the course of the decade.
use library or internet resources to research the price of crude oil for the same time period.
create a chart that includes the unemployment rate inflation rate and crude oil prices.
then create a line graph tracking the crude oil data from 1970 to 1980.
1 decide how best to represent information.
create both a graph and a chart.
2 use a title that sums up the information include a time span.
what title best explains your graph and chart.
remember to add a time span.
3 use clear labels.
for your graph how will you label the vertical and horizontal axes based on the information you want to present.
what labels will you add to your table for each row and column.
4 if needed add a legend to indicate the meaning of any colors or symbols.
does your graph need a legend.
why or why not.
i 981j sandra day oconnor becomes the first woman appointed to the supreme court.
section 2 conservative policies under reagan and bush main idea presidents reagan and bush pursued a conservative agenda that included tax cuts budget cuts and increased defense spending.
section 3 social concerns in the 1980s main idea beneath the surge of prosperity that marked the conservative era of the 1980s lay serious social problems.
section 4 foreign policy after the cold war main idea the end of the cold war marked by the breakup of the soviet union in 1991 led to a redirection of many u s goals and policies.
119801 ronald reagan is elected president.
usa world 1980 1982 l980j zimbabwe claims independence.
1982 great britain and argentina go to war over the falkland islands.
11984 south african bishop desmond tutu receives the nobel peace prize.
1984 828 chapter 25 teks10f 13a 260 31 b social concerns in the 1980s nidea f why it matters now i terms liames beneath the surge of prosperity that marked the conservative era of the 1980s lay serious social problems.
issues involving health care aids acquired l douglas wilder education civil rights and equal immune jesse jackson rights for women continue to deficiency lauro cavazos challenge american society.
syndrome antonia coello pay equity novello yp iflking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on social problems and government responses during the reagan and bush years.
trevor ferrell lived an ordinary life in gladwyne an affluent suburb 12 miles from downtown philadelphia.
trevor had brothers and sisters his own room a favorite pillow a fondness for video games and a bike.
in short he seemed like a typical 11 year old boy until he watched a television news report about homeless people.
trevor was astonished.
do people really live like that.
he asked his parents.
i thought they lived like that in india but not here i mean in america.
trevor convinced his parents to drive downtown that night where he gave a pillow and a blanket to the first homeless man he saw.
soon he and his family were collecting food and clothes to give to the homeless.
a personal voice trevor ferrell they have to live on the streets and right after you see one of them you see somebody in a limousine pull up to a huge empty mansion.
its such a difference.
some people can get anything they want and these other people couldnt get a penny if they needed one.
trevor ferrell offers clothes to a homeless person in philadelphia 1983.
quoted in trevors place as trevor saw the restored american economy of the 1980s did not mean renewed prosperity for everyone.
as presidents reagan and bush pursued conservative domestic policies people disagreed about the impact of these policies.
health education and cities in crisis in the 1980s both in the cities and in rural and suburban areas local governments strove to deal with crises in health education and safety.
americans directed their attention to issues such as aids drug abuse abortion and education.
the conservative tide the aids quilt was displayed on the national mall in washington d c in 1987 each panel honors a person who died of aids.
aids worldwide in the year 2008 it was estimated that 2 7 million people worldwide became infected with hiv aids.
impoverished countries that lie in sub saharan africa remain hardest hit by the deadly pandemic accounting for an estimated 1 9 million or 70 percent of new cases during the year.
at the end of 2008 the number of adults and children living with hiv aids worldwide was estimated at 33 4 million people of whom the proportions of males and females were almost equal.
increasing numbers grew so did concern health issues one of the most troubling issues that concerned americans in the 1980s was aids acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
possibly beginning as early as the 1960s aids spread rapidly throughout the world.
caused by a virus that destroys the immune system aids weakens the body so that it is prone to infections and normally rare cancers.
aids is transmitted through bodily fluids and most of the early victims of the disease were either homosexual men or intravenous drug users who shared needles.
however many people also contracted aids through contaminated blood transfusions and children acquired it by being born to infected mothers.
as the 1980s progressed of heterosexuals began contracting aids.
as the epidemic over prevention and cure.
abortion many americans were concerned about abortion in the 1980s.
abortion had been legal in the united states since 1973 when the supreme court ruled in roe v wade that first trimester abortions were protected by a woman s right to privacy.
opponents of legalized abortion quickly organized under the pro life banner.
they argued that human life begins at conception and that no woman has the right to terminate a human life by her individual decision.
proponents of legalized abortion described themselves as pro choice.
they argued that reproductive choices were personal health care matters and noted that many women had died from abortions performed by unskilled people in unsterile settings before the procedure was legalized.
in july 1989 the supreme court ruled in webster v reproductive health care services that states had the right to impose new restrictions on abortion.
as a result abortion restrictions varied from state to state.
contrasting jy what are the two viewpoints on legalized abortion.
840 chapter 25 the profits from those illegal arms sales to the contras in nicaragua in direct violation of the boland amendment.
president reagan held a press conference to explain what had happened.
a personal voice ronald reagan i am deeply troubled that the implementation of a policy aimed at resolving a truly tragic situation in the middle east has resulted in such controversy.
as ive stated previously i believe our policy goals toward iran were well founded.
presidential press conference november 25 1986 in the summer of 1987 special committees of both houses of congress conducted a dramatic inquiry into the iran contra affair during a month of joint televised hearings.
among those testifying was lieutenant colonel oliver north a member of the national security council staff who played a key role in providing aid to the contras.
north appeared in military uniform adorned with service ribbons and badges.
in defending his actions north talked about patriotism and love of country.
he asserted that he thought he was carrying out the president s wishes and that the end of helping the contras justified almost any means.
after a congressional investigation special prosecutor lawrence e walsh early in 1988 indicted various members of the reagan administration who were involved in the scandal.
oliver north was found guilty of aiding the cover up.
he was fined and sentenced to perform community service.
his conviction was later overturned because he testified under a grant of limited immunity.
on christmas eve of 1992 president bush pardoned a number of reagan officials.
the persian gulf war regardless of the scandal surrounding the iran contra affair conflict with iraq which was iran s long standing enemy and its leader saddam hussein soon eclipsed u s problems with iran.
during the 1980s iran and iraq had fought a prolonged war and hussein found himself with enormous war debts to pay.
several times hussein had claimed that the oil rich nation of kuwait was really part of iraq.
on august 2 1990 iraqi troops invaded kuwait.
the iraqi invaders looted kuwait then they headed toward saudi arabia and counterpoint the united states must occasionally intervene militarily in regional conflicts proponents of u s military intervention abroad agreed with general norman schwarzkopf that as the only remaining superpower we have an awesome responsibility to the rest of the world the united states must take the lead in promoting democracy urged morton h halperin former director of the aclu american civil liberties union.
to say let the un do it is a cop out stated adviser robert g neumann.
political scientist jane sharp expressed a similar sentiment.
she asked can any nation that has taken no action in bosnia to stop the serbian practice of ethnic cleansing continue to call itself civilized thinking critically connect to today comparing and contrasting what do you think are the strongest arguments for and against military intervention in regional conflicts.
connect to history hypothesizing with at least one partner research the events leading up to u s involvement in one of these countries lebanon grenada panama or kuwait.
then negotiate to resolve the conflict.
the united states should not intervene militarily in regional conflicts a foreign policy analyst at the cato institute barbara conry stated that intervention in regional wars is a distraction and a drain on resources whats more she argued it does not work.
recalling the presence of american troops in lebanon conry argued that intervention not only jeopardized american soldiers it often obstructed what it sought to achieve.
the internal freedom of a political community can be achieved only by members of that community agreed professor stephen r shalom.
he added that using military action encourages quick fix solutions that ignore the underlying sources of conflict the conservative tide 853 geography skillbuilder 1 region what did un coalition forces probably hope to achieve by moving forces into southern iraq.
2 movement how did the movements of coalition ground forces show that the intention of the coalition in the gulf war was ultimately defensive not offensive.
main idea drawing conclusions what issue led to the conflict in the middle east.
its oil fields.
if iraq conquered saudi arabia as well as kuwait it would control one half of the world s known oil reserves which would severely threaten u s oil supplies.
for several months president bush and secretary of state james baker organized an international coalition against iraqi aggression.
with the support of congress and the un president bush launched operation desert storm to liberate kuwait from iraqi control.
on january 16 1991 the united states and its allies staged a massive air assault against iraq.
on february 23 they launched a successful ground offensive from saudi arabia.
on february 28 1991 president bush announced a cease fire.
operation desert storm was over.
kuwait was liberated.
millions of americans turned out for the victory parades that greeted returning soldiers.
after the debacle in vietnam they were thrilled the war was over with fewer than 400 casualties among un coalition forces.
however there were subsequent reports that gulf veterans were suffering from disabilities caused by chemicals used in the war.
by contrast iraq had suffered an estimated 100 000 military and civilian deaths.
during the embargo that followed many iraqi children died from outbreaks of cholera typhoid enteritis and other diseases.
bushs domestic policies despite his great achievement in the persian gulf war president bush was not as successful on the domestic front.
he was hurt by rising deficits and a recession that began in 1990 and lasted through most of 1992 bush was forced to raise taxes despite his campaign pledge.
his approval rating had dropped to 49 percent by 1992 the weak economy and the tax hike doomed bush s reelection campaign and 12 years of republican leadership came to an end.
key playefl h norman schwarzkopf 1934 in 1988 norman schwarzkopf shown above became commander in chief of forces in asia and africa.
during the persian gulf war more than 540 000 men and women served under the command of stormin norman schwarzkopf said of saddam hussein that he was neither a strategist nor is he schooled in the operational art nor is he a tactician nor is he a general nor is he a soldier.
other than that he is a great military man.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its meaning.
mikhail gorbachev perestroika tiananmen square inf treaty sandinistas contras operation desert storm main idea using your notes use a chart like the one below to describe u s involvement in world affairs.
foreign policy europe central america and caribbean critical thinking analyzing causes what factors caused the end of the cold war.
think about events in the soviet union events in germany and eastern europe how u s leaders responded to those events including reagans peace through strength policy middle east forming generalizations what factors do you think determined whether or not the united states intervened militarily in other nations.
5 hypothesizing is it possible for an authoritarian government to make economic reforms without also making political reforms.
support your answer with details from the text.
now write a paragraph in which you describe a trouble spot in one of these regions.
the conservative tide assessment terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its significance.
1 entitlement program 2 affirmative action 3 moral majority 4 ronald reagan 5 supply side economics 6 geraldine ferraro 7 aids 8 mikhail gorbachev 9 contras 10 operation desert storm main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter 26 the new global economy main idea j why it matters now j terms names because of technological new types of business have service sector general advances and new trade meant new work environments downsize agreement on laws the u s economy and new challenges for american bill gates tariffs and trade underwent a boom during workers.
dotcom gatt the late 20th century.
multinational corporation oneamericah s story r ihmimulxu it j use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major changes in the u s economy during the 1990s and early 2000s.
workers at the john roberts clothing factory as bill clinton took office in 1993 some regions of the nation particularly the northeast were still in an economic recession.
near kennebunkport maine the john roberts clothing factory faced bankruptcy.
with help from their union the factory workers were able to turn their factory into an employee owned company.
ethel beaudoin who worked for the company for more than 30 years was relieved that the plant would not be closing.
a personal voice ethel beaudoin its a nice feeling to be part of the process of deciding what this company buys for machinery and to know the customers more intimately.
theyre our customers and its a nicer feeling when the customers know that the coat that we put out is made by owners quoted in divided we fall beaudoin s experience offered one example of the economic possibilities in america.
a new global economy brought about by new technologies increased international competition and the end of the cold war changed the nation s economic prospects.
the shifting economy americans heard a great deal of good news about the economy.
millions of new jobs were created between 1993 and 1999 by the fall of 2000 the unemployment rate had fallen to the lowest it had been since 1970 the united states in today s worh y c onom e background greenspan and the fed alan greenspan was chairman of the federal reserve system the fed from 1987 when he was appointed by president ronald reagan until he retired in 2006 the fed has been described as the economic pacemaker of the united states because it helps determine how much money there will be in the american economy.
before being elected president in 2000 george w bush made it a point to meet with alan greenspan before meeting with any other government officials in washington.
but there was alarming news as well.
wage inequality between upper and lower income americans the income gap widened.
median household income began to drop.
although economists disagreed about the reasons for the economy s instability most everyone agreed it was undergoing significant changes.
more service less security chief among the far reaching changes in the workplace of the 1990s was the explosive growth of jobs in the service sector the part of the economy that provides services to consumers.
by 2008 nearly 80 percent of american workers were teachers medical professionals lawyers engineers store clerks waitstaff and other service workers.
low paying jobs such as sales and fast food grew fastest.
these positions often part time or temporary offered limited benefits.
many corporations rather than invest in salaries and benefits for full time staff hired temporary workers or temps and began to downsize trim payrolls to streamline operations and increase profits.
these private sector decisions to downsize were meant to create economic opportunities for some citizens.
by increasing profits they benefited the shareholders who owned corporate stock.
however they also had unintended consequences for the economy as a whole.
manpower inc a temporary services agency became the largest u s employer earning 2 billion in 1993 when 640 000 americans cashed its paychecks.
in 2008 about one fifth of the nation s labor force worked in temporary or part time positions.
of those cut in downsizing younger workers suffered higher rates of unemployment.
in 2008 about 14 percent of workers aged 16 to 24 were unemployed more than double the national rate.
and many young americans are living at home longer and are less financially secure than american youth in the past.
farms and factories the nation s shift to a service economy came at the expense of america s traditional workplaces.
manufacturing which surpassed farming mid century as the largest job sector experienced a sharp decline in the 1980s and 1990s.
in 1992 for example 140 000 steelworkers did the same work that 240 000 had accomplished ten years earlier.
the decline in industrial jobs contributed to a drop in union membership.
in 1945 35 percent of american workers belonged to unions by 2008 only 12 percent were union members.
in the 1990s and early 2000s unions had trouble organizing.
high tech and professional workers felt no need for unions while low wage service employees feared losing their jobs in a strike.
some workers saw their incomes decline.
the increased use of computer driven robots to make manufactured goods eliminated many jobs but it also spurred a vibrant high tech economy.
those with advanced training and specialized technical skills or a sense of entrepreneurial risk taking saw their salaries rise and their economic security expand.
high tech industries in the late 1990s entrepreneurs turned innovative ideas about computer technology into huge personal fortunes hoping to follow in the footsteps of bill gates the decade s most celebrated entrepreneur.
gates founded the software company microsoft.
by 2008 it had made him the second wealthiest individual in the world with assets estimated at about 53 billion.
a rapid outcropping of new businesses accompanied the explosive growth of the internet late in the decade.
the nasdaq national association of securities dealers automated quotation system a technology dominated stock index on main idea summarizing how did the change from an industrial economy to a service economy affect americans economic security.
main idea analyzing effects how did downsizing affect people.
870 chapter 26 wired so that a doctor can operate on a patient hundreds of miles away.
architects and engineers have used virtual reality to create models of their designs.
modeling also affected the nightly newscast.
using supercomputers and improved satellite data meteorologists could offer extended weather forecasts that reached the accuracy of one day forecasts of 1980 the use of such technologies has increased worker productivity.
as technology became more sophisticated computers increased in capability.
ibm s deep blue defeated chess champion garry kasparov in 1997 computational linguists steadily improved natural language understanding in computers thus fine tuning the accuracy of voice recognition systems.
robots grew more humanlike as engineers equipped them with high capacity chips simulating brain function.
by the early 2000s robots had the ability to walk on two legs interact with people learn taught behaviors and express artificial feelings with facial gestures.
background the international space station was established by joining and expanding upon the russian station mir and the american spacelab.
space exploration in the 1990s astronomy expanded our view of the universe.
in 1997 nasa s pathfinder and its rover sojourner transmitted live pictures of the surface of mars to millions of internet users.
shuttle missions meanwhile concentrated on scientific research and assembly transport and repair of orbiting objects paving the way to possible human missions to mars and other space travel in the coming century.
nasa concentrated on working with other nations to build the international space station iss.
the iss promised to offer scientists a zero gravity laboratory for research in medicine space mechanics and architecture and long term living in space.
ellen ochoa part of the first shuttle crew to dock to the iss hoped to inspire young students a personal voice ellen ochoa tm not trying to make everyone an astronaut but i want students to think about a career and the preparation theyll need tell students that the opportunities i had were a result of having a good educational background.
education is what allows you to stand out dr ellen ochoa quoted in stanford university school of engineering annual report 1997 98 a shuttle crew in 1993 aboard the endeavor repaired the hubble space telescope which returns dazzling intergalactic views.
in late 1995 astronomers using observatories discovered the first planet outside our own solar system.
since then dozens more have been detected.
on july 21 2011 the atlantis crew completed the final mission of nasa s 30 year shuttle program.
however u s space exploration goes on and continues to benefit americans quality of life in many ways.
in addition to the discoveries we can make about the universe the innovation required to develop vehicles and other systems for space travel has yielded many products of use on earth from sunglasses and smoke detectors to the magnetic resonance imagery mri machines used for medical scans.
also space exploration is inspiring to society as a whole convincing americans that no challenge is too big to overcome.
biotechnology the most profound insight into the book of life came from the field of biotechnology.
the human genome project an international effort to map the genes of the human body and celera a private company in molecular biology simultaneously announced in 2000 that they had sequenced nearly all of the human genome only a decade after the research began.
cooperation via the internet and access to computerized databases by multiple research groups vastly accelerated the scientists ability to identify and order over three billion chemical letters of the united states in today s world 87 researchers work at the beijing genomics institute at shenzhen in southern china.
the genetic code of dna.
molecular biologists hoped that this genetic map would offer the key to treating many inherited diseases and diagnosing congenital disabilities and that drug makers could one day design pharmaceuticals for each patient s particular profile.
dna had been in the spotlight before the breakthrough announcement.
in well publicized legal proceedings prosecutors relied on dna evidence to help prove the guilt of defendants who may have left behind a single hair at a crime scene.
others wrongly imprisoned were released when genetic analysis proved their innocence.
but different opinions arose over some of the new biotechnology.
some speculated that technological progress outpaced social evolution and societys ability to grapple with the consequences.
in 1997 scottish researchers cloned dolly the sheep from one cell of an adult sheep.
shortly thereafter two rhesus monkeys were cloned in oregon and many wondered whether human cloning was next.
firms sought to patent genes used for medical and research applications using the principle of invention and property.
advances such as these as well as gene therapy artificial human chromosomes and testing embryos for genetic defects all sparked heated debates among scientists ethicists religious leaders and politicians.
the use of genetic engineering the artificial changing of the molecular biology of organisms cells to alter an organism also aroused public concern.
however the federal department of agriculture fda holds that genetically engineered foods are safe and that they require no extra labeling.
scientists in the late 1990s modified corn and rice to provide resistance to pests and increase nutritional value.
in 1996 the european union limited the importation of such products in response to consumer pressure allowing only those clearly labeled as having been genetically modified.
medical progress people suffering from some diseases benefited from advances in medicine in the 1990s and early 2000s.
cancer survival rates improved drastically as clinicians explored the use of gene therapy genetically engineered antibodies and immune system modulation.
improvements in tracking the spread of hiv the virus that causes aids acquired immune deficiency syndrome through the body made researchers better prepared to find a cure.
aids patients were treated with combination therapies and public health officials advocated abstinence and safer sex practices to control the spread of hiv.
improved technology for making medical diagnoses offered new hope as well.
magnetic resonance imaging mri for example was used to produce cross sectional images of any part of the body.
advances that will make the mri procedure ten times faster will also make mri more widely available and cheaper to use.
medical researchers look ahead to using fleets of tiny nanosensors one thousandth the width of a human hair to find tumors and to deploying nano bots to repair tissues and even genes.
background in 2007 about 14 100 americans died from aids roughly one third the 1992 number.
880 chapter 27 golden state with much cleaner air.
other states are playing their part as well in the nation s ongoing conservation effort.
however there is still much to be done especially about water pollution.
one indicator is data collected by the environmental protection agency for the first decade of the 2000s which showed that beach closings mostly due to unsafe levels of water pollution were at historically high levels.
social action groups and private citizens not all action has been through government.
advocacy groups such as the marine conservation institute and oceana advocate for ocean and marine life conservation and protection.
private groups such as the nature conservancy and local land trusts have raised money to purchase forest and watershed lands and keep them pristine.
in texas several entrepreneurs created the fossil rim wildlife center a 1 700 acre wildlife sanctuary for more than 50 animal species.
private citizens also help.
private citizens can conserve resources such as water land plants and animals and protect them for future generations.
people can choose energy efficient appliances to help reduce energy and water use.
water management is a critical issue in some states where the demand exceeds the supply.
in such cases water ecosystems must be protected and managed carefully.
another way to become involved is by contributing money and time to conservation efforts.
some individuals join advocacy groups or non profits that work for land and water conservation or support political candidates who support their beliefs.
in texas 97 percent of the land is privately owned.
the governor s office issued a report outlining specific programs designed to help landowners with conservation efforts on their land.
one example is the texas parks and wildlife department s private lands and habitat program which provides support to individual landowners in helping them conserve wildlife habitats found on their property.
many states have wildlife departments such as the texas parks and wildlife department to address issues such as land use wildlife education and conservation.
critical thinking predicting effects do you think the united states eventually will engage in greater domestic exploration of its natural resources to meet its growing energy needs.
why or why not.
forming generalizations what role do you think the government and private citizens should have in managing the environment.
analyzing effects what are two effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment.
think about energy use manufacturing supply and demand of resources 4 hypothesizing is it possible for political leaders to address issues of conservation and balance economic progress simultaneously.
support your answer with details from the text.
issues for the 21st century teks25c 25d globalization and cultural diffusion how does american pop culture spread to other countries around the world.
in 1851 louise amelia knapp smith clappe wrote letters to her sister in massachusetts to describe her life in the gold mining camps near san francisco.
each letter took over three months to deliver.
today olivia can sit down at a computer in san antonio and update her blog about hollywood movies.
once she publishes her article online akili in kenya and hisako in japan can read her thoughts and share their own ideas about popular culture instantaneously.
technological advances and new inventions have changed the way people communicate ideas.
historical perspective smartphones allow people to have wireless internet access from almost any location.
in the 1940s when computers first came into use they took up huge rooms and required fans or elaborate air conditioning systems to cool the parts that provided them with power.
in the years since the parts that power computers have become miniaturized and have become much more powerful.
today not only can personal computers perform operations more quickly than the first giant computer did but they are also affordable for many people.
the development of inexpensive personal computers has made it possible for ordinary families to use the latest technology.
the numbers alone demonstrate the influence of computer technology on modern life.
in 1984 only 8 2 percent of households in the united states had a personal computer.
by 2003 more than 60 percent owned one.
by 2011 that number had grown to nearly 76 percent and nearly 72 percent were logging onto the internet both at home and at work.
what s more nearly every business in the nation from hospitals to accounting firms and airports has implemented computer systems to handle many daily operations.
technology and daily life the internet has linked computer users around the world.
developed in the late 1960s by the u s department of defense the internet soon spread to universities.
in the 1990s it boomed in popularity among the general public.
now millions of americans use the internet daily for activities that range from working to shopping for groceries to getting the news.
cellular phones have also transformed communication by allowing people to carry their phones anywhere.
in 1985 about 340 000 americans were cell phone subscribers.
in 2012 the pew research center noted that 88 of adults in the united states owned a cell phone.
the invention of tablets and smartphones has expanded access to music maps email news businesses and social networks from any location.
918 chapter skill activity using databases to pose and answer geographic questions defining the skill historians pose geographic questions to learn more about where and how people live in the world.
they ask questions to learn more about geographic patterns and distributions.
a geographic distribution shows where people plants and animals can be found in a certain area on earth.
geographic patterns refer to the pattern of a geographic idea or event you are discussing.
they can refer to repetitive distribution of such events as births deaths and life expectancies over time.
one way to find information about geographic patterns and distributions is by using a database.
a database is a collection of data or information that is organized so that you can find and retrieve information on a specific topic quickly and easily.
the database will provide a list of all information related to your topic.
understanding the skill strategy pose and answer questions using a database the following is a chart containing data from the american factfinder database on the u s census bureau website.
use the following strategies to use a database to pose and answer questions about geographic patterns and distributions.
l cumulative estimates of the components of population change april 1 2010 to july 1 2012 geography total population change natural increase vital events net migration births deaths total international domestic united states 5 166 532 3 315 603 8 918 468 5 602 865 1 850 929 1 850 929 n a northeast region 443 846 395 229 1 436 538 1 041 309 60 214 481 109 420 895 midwest region 388 808 573 004 1 875 748 1 302 744 181 688 237 208 418 896 south region 2 700 074 1 224 387 3 387 504 2 163 117 1 457 189 691 462 765 727 west region 1 633 804 1 122 983 2 218 678 1 095 695 515 214 441 150 74 064 source u s census bureau american factfinder database o choose your topic.
think about specific geographic patterns or distribution information you would like to examine.
for instance you might pose questions about the regional distribution of the u s population and how migration and vital events such as births and deaths affect that distribution.
identify a database you want to use to find information.
do research to determine the best database to use for the topic you are studying.
the u s census bureau is a good resource for data about the population of the united states.
another database might be a better choice for information about a different topic.
923 ski identify the headings and entries.
identify the column headings or categories and the row headings of the database to learn more about specific data.
this database provides information about such categories as total population change vital events and net migration.
use the database to help you quickly find the information to answer your questions.
you might ask which region of the united states experienced the greatest increase in population from april 1 2010 to july 1 2012 due to international migration strategy write a summary databases can provide an overwhelming amount of information.
it may help to summarize the information from the database in a paragraph.
the population rates continue to grow steadily in the united states.
the birth rate is almost twice the death rate.
population increases within the united states reflect both the natural increase due to birth and death rates as well as the effect of international migration.
from april 1 2010 to july 1 2012 the greatest net 1 increase was seen in the south.
in this region there was almost an even split between natural increase and net i international and domestic migration to the area.
the west also had a large increase in population but the f majority was due to a natural increase.
the net effect of international and domestic migration was a decrease in.
the northeast and midwest during this period.
however the overall population in these regions increased as a result of the birth rate.
applying the skill turn to.

chapter 6 life in colonial america 63 new england triangular trade mid atlantic colonies southern colonies magna carta pill of rights of 16s9 house of purgesses mayflower compact fundamental orders of connecticut john peter zenger pilgrims puritans creat awakening mercantilism atlantic slave trade cotton mather phillis wheatley questions what differences existed between the main regions of the thirteen colonies.
what was life like in colonial america.
what factors contributed to religious freedom in the thirteen colonies.
how did the economic system of mercantilism affect the thirteen colonies.
a different patterns of life developed in three regions of the colonies based on differences in geography climate settler origins and economic activities.
b in new england a short growing season cooler climates rocky soil and an influx of puritan settlers encouraged the development of small farms and the growth of fishing shipping and handicraft trades.
c in the southern colonies a long growing season and warmer climate as well as the arrival of mainly anglican settlers seeking to make their fortune encouraged the development of larger farms that often grew cash crops for sale to england.
along main water routes large plantations developed.
d part of the southern colonies economy was based on slave labor.
slaves grew cotton tobacco rice and indigo.
they were taken by force from africa and faced a horrific middle passage journey across the atlantic.
most southerners however did not own slaves.
e the middle atlantic colonies had greater ethnic and religious diversity than either new england or the southern colonies.
some of these colonies had once been under dutch rule and were conquered by the english in 1664 the middle atlantic colonies had fertile soil and grew food crops.
name chapter 6 life in colonial america 71 new yorks governor put zenger on trial.
zenger won his case when his lawyer andrew hamilton showed that his statements were true.
the case established the right of the press to criticize those in power so long as the writer told the truth.
what important individual rights and beliefs about government did the colonists bring from england.
what additional representative institutions did the american colonists create.
acting as an amateur historian select one of the thirteen colonies and conduct research on the internet or at school or your local library on how that colonys government operated.
include information on who ran the colony how laws were made and if the colony had its own court system.
the colonies also saw the growth of religious freedom.
the first two english colonies had people of very different religious backgrounds.
virginia was mainly founded by anglicans those who belonged to the church of england.
massachusetts was founded by pilgrims and puritans members of protestant groups who came to the americas to worship god in their own way.
in massachusetts bay colony puritans originally set high standards for church membership.
they wanted to promote virtue goodness.
puritans thought the members of their church were chosen by god and that only those elected would go to heaven.
each sunday was a day of rest in which the whole community went to church.
the minister often gave a sermon threatening sinners with the punishment of damnation after death.
puritans wore simple plain clothing.
observe the woman carrying a bible.
the puritans believed that a state endorsed religion would insure a bond between members of society helping to maintain order and stability.
they felt that having more than one religion might threaten social stability.
although they came to america to worship god in their own way they did not support religious toleration for others.
name chapter 6 life in colonial america 83 6 with which statement would a puritan minister in the colony of massachusetts in 1660 have most likely agreed.
f all men and women are created equal hist 3 c j g no man should be required to worship against his will h differences of opinion are essential for a society to improve j both the government and church have a common purpose of promoting virtue 7 how was the virginia house of burgesses important to the development of democracy in the thirteen colonies.
a it was the first representative assembly in the colonies.
f hist 3 b b it created the first written constitution in america c it included a bill of rights to protect individual rights.
d it introduced the principle of electing judges.
8 in which colonial region did good harbors abundant forests rocky soil and a short growing season most influence the economy.
f southern colonies geog 11 a j g northwest territory h middle atlantic colonies j new england colonies use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
t he word of god requires that to maintain the peace and union of a people there should be an orderly and decent government established according to god to order and dispose of the affairs of the people at all seasons as occasion shall require.
we do associate ourselves to be as one public state or commonwealth this case houses the original fundamental orders of connecticut.
it is ordered that there shall be yearly two general assemblies or courts one in april the other in september following the first shall be called the court of election it shall be yearly chosen from time to time magistrates and other public officers as needed whereof one is to be chosen governor for the year 9 this passage from the fundamental orders of connecticut was important to the concept of a democratic society because it represented a an effort by the colonists to use force to resist the king ihst 3 b b a step toward self government in colonial america c an early attempt to institute voting rights for all colonists d an effort by the colonists to establish freedom of religion name chapter 6 life in colonial america 85 17 which of these events is in the correct order in which they occurred.
hist 3jalj a start of the virginia house of burgesses magna carta great awakening fundamental orders of connecticut b magna carta fundamental orders of connecticut the great awakening start of the virginia house of burgesses c fundamental orders of connecticut great awakening magna carta start of the virginia house of burgesses d magna carta start of the virginia house of burgesses fundamental orders of connecticut great awakening 18 which statement most accurately describes the people who were allowed to vote in elections of representatives to colonial assemblies in british america.
f they were colonists of means bom in america.
hist 3 a j g they were men who owned property.
h they were women who were able to read and write.
j they were colonists bom in england.
19 which geographic conditions discouraged the development of a plantation economy in the new england colonies.
a a wide coastal plain and an absence of good harbors b rocky soil and a short growing season c numerous rivers and a humid climate d flatlands and a lack of forests use the painting and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
20 the painting to the right by john singleton copley 1765 shows dr joseph warren.
this painting by copley is typical of paintings in colonial america in that it f shows someone in the professions uitwjj g is religious in nature h is a portrait j depicts a government official 21 which city in the thirteen colonies is correctly paired with a geographic feature that contributed to its growth.
a new orleans great lakes geog io b j b new york city atlantic ocean c charleston mississippi river d boston appalachian mountains 22 which best explains why colonial farmers settled near oceans or coastal waterways.
f it was safer since fewer native american indians lived there.
geog ii a j g colonial governments often paid farmers to settle there.
h the land was easier to clear since it had fewer trees and rocks.
j transportation by water of goods and crops was easier.
name the american revolution the road to independence ck of teks covered in chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 91 the issue of taxation disagreements quickly arose over the right of the british parliament to tax the colonists.
after the french and indian war britain faced a huge national debt.
it also cost money to station british troops in the 13 colonies and the west indies.
in britain people already paid higher taxes than the colonists.
the british government therefore proposed a series of new taxes on the colonists.
however these taxes were passed by the british parliament without first consulting the colonists.
british leaders thought this was only right because the colonists were not paying their fair share towards their own defense.
since the colonists lived so far away from london it seemed impossible for them to participate effectively in the british parliament.
taxation without representation.
wealthy colonial merchants and landowners used to acting in their colonial assemblies with little british interference resented these new policies.
colonial leaders were also influenced by enlightenment writers like john locke and william blackstone.
locke had written that government was a social contract he said the purpose of government was to protect individual freedom and property.
if a government failed to do this locke argued its citizens had the right to overthrow it.
blackstone defined the rights of individuals in english law as well as property rights that could not be violated even by the king.
following both locke and english traditions samuel adams and other colonists argued that the british government should not tax the colonists w nists believed that taxation without representation wa the stamp act.
the next new british tax was the stamp act 1765.
parliament ordered that every newspaper pamphlet and other public or legal document had to be printed or written on paper with an official stamp or seal on it.
this was a form of tax because the british government was to be paid for the official stamp.
the stamp act created a firestorm of protests in the colonies.
colonists objected that the british government had imposed this new tax without their consent.
colonists held meetings boycotted refused to buy british goods and even attacked british officials in protest.
in virginia patrick henry 1736 1799 denounced the stamp act and the house of burgesses passed resolutions against it.
samuel adams organized a series of protests in boston.
a stamp act congress against the act was held in new york city.
colonists produced petitions to the king and parliament stating their position on these new taxes.
these petitions argued that the colonists could only be taxed by their own consent.
john locke liout their consent.
these colo tyranny a british tax collector is tied to a pole by an unruly crowd.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 99 this philosophy teaches that each individual is endowed at birth with rights that are unalienable because they were given to us by our creator.
this idea of unalienable rights became a basic belief of american government that some rights are derived from nature and may not be taken or violated by the government.
a acting as an amateur.
historian jefferson argued that citizens had the right to overthrow an oppressive government to protect these unalienable rights.
this argument is found in the most important paragraph of the declaration we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government briefly summarize this paragraph in your own words.
fc what justification did this paragraph give for the revolution against king george hi.
a the declaration of independence went on to list the grievances of the colonists against king george iii and his ministers.
most of these grievances related to the belief that the british crown was threatening the colonists rights in favor of tyrannical rule.
the king imposed taxes on the colonists without their consent.
he made the military superior to the civil government.
he refused to answer colonial petitions for the redress of grievances.
grievances against the king in the declaration of independence he asked citizens to give up their rights of representation.
he quartered large numbers of soldiers among the colonists.
he deprived the colonists of j trial by jury.
1 z z he dissolved the colonists rep he protected his soldiers against he waged war against the i resentative assemblies.
trial for murders of colonists.
american colonists.
1 the road to victory in the first years of the war the colonial army barely managed to escape disaster.
washington and the continental army occupied new york city in 1776 however the british drove washington and his army out of new york after the battle of long island.
british troops then occupied new york city.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 103 cornwallis surrenders to washington.
the battle of yorktown 1781 after several more years of fighting general washington managed with french help to force general charles cornwallis and the main british army into a comer at yorktown virginia.
the french fleet blocked their escape by sea.
after a few days of combat cornwallis and his 8 000 british soldiers were forced to surrender in october 1781 the battle of yorktown turned out to be the last major battle of the war.
occasional fighting contin ued after the surrender at yorktown and washington feared the war might still drag on for another year.
however when word reached england of the defeat at yorktown the prime minister was forced to resign and the new government decided to give up the fight.
independence recognized the treaty of paris of 1783 formally ended the american revolutionary war.
under its terms the british recognized the independence of the colonies.
the british promised to remove all of their troops from the country.
in addition they gave all the land between the mississippi river and the atlantic from the great lakes to the border with florida to the new united states.
this move gave the new nation twice the area of the former colonies.
a variety of factors were responsible for the american victory over great britain then the worlds richest and most powerful empire i the american victory was due to many factors hi fighting for their homeland.
the colonists were defending their own soil.
the british were fighting a war thousands of miles from their homeland.
methods of warfare.
colonial forces used unconventional methods to fight the british.
they took advantage of hiding behind trees and other tactics.
the british fought in a more traditional manner with soldiers aligned in a straight formation out in the open.
local support.
the continental army received support from the local population including women.
the british were fighting a war on a hostile terrain.
nevertheless the british did receive support from loyalists and used canada as a refuge and as a staging ground for attacks against the colonists.
leadership.
washington was a very capable general.
he received help from experienced foreign military leaders such as baron von steuben kasimir pulaski and marquis de lafayette.
these european volunteers helped turn the continental army into a more disciplined fighting force.
the french alliance.
volunteers money troops and naval support from france were essential to the american victory.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 129 individual rights you will leam about the issues surrounding the protection of individual rights in the next chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 139 use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
he the president shall have power with the advice and consent of the senate to make treaties provided two thirds of the senators present concur and he shall nominate with the advice and consent of the senate ambassadors and other public ministers article ii section 2 clause 2 u s constitution 11 12 13 which principle of the u s constitution is reflected in this passage.
a checks and balances c popular sovereignty b amendment process d federalism hist 15 6 what was a key argument used by the federalists for ratification of the u s constitution.
f it prohibited the power of the federal government to wage war.
g it provided for construction of a new capital in the south.
h it allowed the slave trade to continue for at least twenty more years.
j it had features that prevented the abuse of government power.
which historic document was written in support of ratification of the u s constitution.
a magna carta b mayflower compact c declaration of independence d the federalist papers use the passage below and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the nation deserves and i will select a supreme court justice that americans can be proud of.
the nation also deserves a dignified process of confirmation in the united states senate characterized by fair treatment a fair hearing and a fair vote.
i will choose a nominee in a timely manner so that the hearing and the vote can be completed before the new supreme court term begins president george w bush 2005 14 which constitutional principle is discussed in this quotation.
f federalism h statesrights govt 15 d g checks and balances j due process 15 why did the framers of the constitution create three separate branches of the national government.
a to insure that the legislative branch was bicameral govt 15 d b to make sure all laws were approved by the supreme court c to make sure that the president was superior to the legislature d to prevent any one branch of government from gaining too much power name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 149 the fifth amendment a citizen cannot be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law.
this means that certain legal procedures must be carried out according to established rules before a person can be punished.
eminent domain refers to the power of the government over property in its territory.
sometimes the government needs to take over property such as to build a public highway or construct a school.
a persons property cannot be taken away for public use without payment reasonable compensation.
a person cannot be tried for a serious federal crime that could lead to imprisonment or execution without an indictment by a grand jury.
an indictment is a formal accusation by a court before a person is arrested.
a grand jury is a group of citizens that meet to review if there is enough evidence available to hold a trial.
no person can be subject to double jeopardy being tried twice for the same crime.
the government with all its power and resources should not be allowed to make repeated attempts to convict an individual for a suspected offense subjecting him or her to embarrassment and great expense.
it an accused person cannot be forced to say things that will be used against him or herself seif incrimination.
a persons confession of a crime is not valid if he or she was not first informed of the right to have a lawyer.
this amendment guarantees a fair and impartial trial to all persons accused of a crime.
they must be told of the charges against them they have the right to a trial by jury and they have the right to be represented by a lawyer.
the eighth amendment federal courts cannot require unusually high bail.
bail is the money an accused pays to a court as security so that he or she need not remain in jail while awaiting trial.
this amendment also states that no one can be punished in a cruel or unusual way.
on this basis the supreme court has ruled that a state cannot pass a law with a mandatory death sentence.
some critics say that capital punishment itself should be prohibited by the eighth amendment but the supreme court has yet to agree.
the freedoms our citizens enjoy because of the bill of rights are important to the fabric of life in america.
design and create a poster that showcases these freedoms.
name chapter you will leam about the civil war.
some of the developments you read about in this chapter election of 1860 conscription praft william carney abraham lincoln stonewall jackson ulysses s grant confederate states of battle of antietam william t sherman america battle hymn of republic philip bazaar jefferson pavis emancipation election of 1864 lincoln s first inaugural proclamation second inaugural fort sumter battle of gettysburg address anaconda plan gettysburg address appomattox court house robert e lee battle of vicksburg john wilkes gooth ess ent ial questions what underlying factors caused the civil war.
what specific events led to the outbreak of the conflict.
what were the contrasting visions of lincoln and jefferson davis.
what roles did individuals play in determining the outcome of the war.
r the election of 1860 by the late 1850s deep divisions existed among americans over the future of the nation and especially over the institution of slavery.
in the presidential election of 1860 the republican party nominated the former u s representative from illinois abraham lincoln.
honest abe ran on a platform that opposed the extension of slavery in the territories but not the system of slavery in the south.
democrats could not agree on a candidate.
northern and southern democrats chose separate candidates.
the split in their party allowed lincoln to win the election with only 39 of the popular vote.
lincoln did not campaign in the south and not surprisingly did not win a single southern state.
lincoln as he looked after winning the 1860 election.
chapter 4 foundations background to american history 45 the bill of rights the original constitution contained few specific guarantees of individual rights.
ratification of the constitution was only obtained when its supporters promised to add a bill of rights to protect individual liberties.
as soon as the first congress assembled in 1789 it began deciding which rights to include in the bill of rights a list of possible rights was reduced to ten which were approved by the members of congress.
they were then sent to the states for approval.
two thirds of the state legislatures approved these amendments by 1791 when they came into effect.
the first amendment actually covers five separate rights at the same time.
lets look at each of these rights more closely.
freedom of religion the first amendment guarantees freedom of worship.
it also prohibits congress from establishing an official or state religion.
this is sometimes called the separation of church and state.
freedom of speech the first amendment protects our freedom to say or write most things in public.
americans cannot be put in jail just for criticizing the government or for expressing unpopular beliefs.
this does not mean however that we can say whatever we want.
in some circumstances our speech can be limited.
for example a person cannot yell fire in a crowded movie theater as a joke since this might threaten other peoples lives.
the supreme court has ruled that government can limit speech when that speech creates a clear and present danger freedom of the press the first amendment allows newspapers radio and television to write or announce what they want without fear of punishment.
this freedom is essential in a democratic society since people need to be well informed to vote.
the right of assembly the first amendment states that congress cannot deny individuals the right to peacefully assemble name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 53 tocqueville also found however that the system of democracy did not always place the best people in positions of leadership in government on my arrival in the united states i was surprised to find so much distinguished talent among the citizens and so little among the heads of the government.
it is a constant fact that at the present day the ablest men in the united states are rarely placed at the head of affairs indeed tocqueville came to the conclusion that by guaranteeing general prosperity and well being america did not necessarily promote the cultivation of excellence as he believed europe did.
historians studying tocqueville have identified five values that he found crucial to americas success as a constitutional republic egalitarianism equality egalitarianism refers to a society of equals.
in europe society was built around hereditary distinctions separating the nobles middle classes and peasants.
in america there were differences in wealth power and intelligence but everyone was equal socially.
the availability of free land also promoted equality.
owning land allowed americans to view themselves as equal to their neighbors and further contributed to their feeling of equality.
tocqueville believed that the primary concern of the nation should be to safeguard liberty since it created the conditions for americans to become economically prosperous.
two exceptions to this were slavery and the treatment of native americans which tocqueville also wrote about.
populism popular sovereignty tocqueville wrote that democratic government a government where the people more or less participate in their government is closely bound up with the idea of political liberty populism refers to the participation of the common people in political life another distinguishing characteristic that tocqueville found in american society in the early nineteenth century.
since everyone in society was equal everyone had the same right to participate in government.
the goal of such a society was peace and prosperity for all.
liberty by liberty tocqueville meant protection against tyrannical government.
the great danger in democratic government was the tyranny of the majority.
he noted that americans were devoted to the rule of law and that americas federal system helped prevent the rise of an over powerful government.
most important of all american customs and manners were devoted to the spirit of liberty.
in america tocqueville wrote religious faith helped strengthen the belief in individual liberty.
individualism in american society the government did not direct individual activity to the same extent as tocqueville had seen in europe.
people in america were free to flourish without hereditary distinctions and individuals believed they could rise in society.
individuals even organized themselves into their own private voluntary associations such as charities.
name chapter 4 foundations background to american history examine the question.
this question tests your ability to draw a conclusion from three amendments in the dill of rights.
you should read each excerpt carefully.
then think about what they have in common.
recall what you know.
you should realize that each of these amendments establishes rights for individuals accused of a crime.
these rights protect us from false accusations or unfair treatment by government officials.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice a all three of these amendments deal with rights for someone accused of a crime.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 the bill of rights was added to the u s constitution primarily to f provide the president with power in times of emergency hist i a g establish fair and impartial elections h protect individual liberties j guarantee voting privileges to minorities 3 which guarantees freedom of the press freedom of speech and freedom of religion to individuals in the united states.
a the treaty of paris of 1783 hisyi a b the articles of confederation c the first amendment to the u s constitution d the fifth amendment to the u s constitution use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
person a person b signed the declaration of independence signed the declaration of independence president of the continental congress father of american medicine signature on declaration became a symbol of freedom in the colonies favored educating women and making a public university to train public servants 4 which two individuals who played a role in the american revolution are described in the table above.
f john trumbull sr and charles carroll of carrollton hist i cj g benjamin rush and john witherspoon h john hancock and benjamin rush j alexis de tocqueville and john peter muhlenberg 5 which of the following was an important characteristic of american society as noted by alexis de tocqueville in 1831 1832.
a federalism c populism f citi 22 a b imperialism d isolationism name chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 75 ggbmesiabinbbainassimikebraiasbtbbmammbbibbmabamaewmabibsimaaarabmmabnbesaega great entrepreneurs rise of organized labor i i i robber barons or captains of industry.
robber barons.
businessmen sometimes i used ruthless tactics to destroy competition j 1 and to keep workers wages low.
i andrew carnegie i j fostered the gospel of wealth.
i steel production in pittsburgh.
i j had iron ore fields coal mines steel mills.
a philanthropist who gave to libraries.
i john d rockefeller standard oil company.
1 controlled the refining of oil.
i forced to dissolve it when his company ob i tained a stranglehold on the oil industry.
like carnegie a great philanthropist.
j problems faced by workers long hours low wages.
i poor working conditions repetitive tasks.
child labor.
i lack of job security.
rise of labor unions knights of labor terrence powderly.
5 american federation of labor begun by samuel gompers.
s government attitude towards unions j government had anti union bias.
many in government saw unions as driv j ing up the cost of goods.
haymarket affair of 1886.
chapter 6 american society in transition 89 in u s v wong kim ark 1898 the u s supreme court ruled that the children of chinese immigrants bom in the united states could not be denied citizenship.
this part of the chinese exclusion act the court held violated the 14th amendment.
applying what you have learned imagine you are a member of congress in 1882 write a speech giving arguments for or against the proposed chinese exclusion act.
your speech should try to persuade other members of congress to vote as you suggest.
complete the graphic organizer below by describing various aspects of urbanization and immigration in this period.
chapter 6 american society in transition 103 use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
today three fourths of our people live in tenements and the drift of the population to the cities is sending increasing multitudes to crowd them.
the fifteen thousand tenant houses that were the despair of past generations have swelled into thirty seven thousand and more than twelve hundred thousand persons call them home.
we know now that there is no way out the system that was the evil offspring of public neglect and private greed has come to stay forever in our civilization.
nothing is left but to make the best of a bad bargain jacob riis how the other half lives charles scribners sons 1890 17 what is the main idea of this passage.
a the conditions of tenement living have improved greatly.
hist 3 c b the number of people living in tenements is declining.
c many immigrants face crowded conditions and despair in tenement housing.
d living in tenements has led to improved working class conditions.
18 which demographic shift occurred in the united states in the late nineteenth century as a result of industrialization.
f northerners moved to the sun belt states.
i geoc i3 cl g rural residents moved into urban areas.
h working class people left the cities to move to the suburbs.
j african americans moved from the north to the south.
19 how did the passage of the dawes act affect native american indians.
a it supported their existing cultural traditions.
i cult 26 b b it started a series of indian wars on the great plains.
c it attempted to assimilate them into mainstream american culture.
d it forced their removal from areas east of the mississippi river.
20 which was a successful example of americanization.
f the dawes act led native americans to sell their lands.
cult 26jb j g the homestead act made federal land available to settlers.
h the children of new immigrants learned english in public schools.
j congress prohibited the immigration of chinese workers.
21 which factor helped farmers on the great plains overcome opposition from cattle ranchers.
f the farmers allied with native american indians.
c hist 3 b g barbed wire allowed farmers to enclose their lands.
h heavy rains made the great plains more suitable to planting than grazing.
j ranchers refused to divide up the open range.
name chapter 7 the progressive era 105 a maswa a farmers faced problems in the late 19th century.
new farm machinery and the opening of the great plains led to overproduction.
food prices fell as farmers expenses remained the same.
farmers fell into debt while they were also charged excessive rates by railroads and grain storage operators.
b farmers organized in the grange movement to fight for their special interests.
they passed laws regulating railroad rates.
when the law was overturned by the supreme court congress passed the interstate commerce act 1887.
c farmers next combined with industrial workers and miners into the populist party.
they advocated many reforms that were later adopted by the major political parties and enacted by congress.
populists believed the shortage of currency was responsible for falling prices.
in 1896 and 1900 william jennings bryan was the candidate for the populists and democrats.
bryan lost both elections.
d the progressive movement flourished in 1900 1920 like the populists progressives sought reform.
they were mainly educated members of the middle class.
they sought to correct abuses of big business such as exploiting workers.
they also sought to reform the corrupt practices of government.
the roots of the movement were with the populists muckrackers and social gospel movement.
muckrakers like upton sinclair were investigative reporters.
e states passed political reforms and social legislation.
f on the eve of the progressive era the federal government was reformed by the pendleton act which reduced the number of political appointments and replaced them with candidates who had passed a competitive examination.
g progressive reforms were introduced at the national level by presidents theodore roosevelt william howard taft and woodrow wilson.
h theodore roosevelt believed in a strong presidency and used his powers to safeguard the public interest.
he used the anti trust laws to curb the unfair practices of business.
his square deal program passed laws protecting consumers.
j william howard taft continued most of roosevelts policies.
when roosevelt decided to run as the bull moose candidate in 1912 he split the republican party helping woodrow wilson the democratic candidate to win the election.
k woodrow wilson furthered progressive reforms with his new freedom program.
he lowered tariff duties and introduced a graduated income tax made possible by the 16th amendment.
he created the federal reserve system to control the nations money supply.
to control the unfair practices of big business he passed the clayton anti trust act creating the federal trade commission.
l in art and literature realism was popular in the late 19th century.
realism attempted to show things as they were and gave writers and artists a way to depict the hardships and abuses of the new industrial workers.
some of the greatest writers included horatio alger mark twain and kate chopin.
noted artists included james mcneil whistler winslow homer and thomas eakins.
project without permission chapter 7 the progressive era 121 witnesses thought owners were tossing fabric out of windows but soon realized it was workers jumping to their deaths.
department of labor 1913.
congress created a separate cabinet post to study the problems of labor collect statistics and enforce federal labor laws.
the department of labor was the direct result of a campaign by organized labor for a voice in the cabinet and a goal of the progressive movement.
the purpose of the department was to promote and develop the welfare of working people and to improve their working conditions clayton anti trust act 1914.
a provision of this act prevented courts from applying anti trust laws to restrict unions.
the act also banned the use of federal injunctions court orders to prohibit strikes in labor disputes.
child labor act 1916.
wilson passed a law prohibiting the sale of goods created by child labor in interstate commerce.
however this law was overturned by the u s supreme court two years later.
acting as an amateur.
historian the federal reserve act created the federal reserve board a government agency that controls monetary policy.
the federal reserve sets the interest rates at which it lends money to banks.
it also decides how much of their money banks can lend and buys government bonds to affect the amount of money in circulation.
research the internet or your school library to leam more about the federal reserve.
then write a report describing how the federal reserve affects the american economy.
what role does it play in the economy today.
make a cause and effect diagram showing how different actions taken by the federal reserve affect the american economy.
for example what is the effect on the economy when the federal reserve lowers its interest rate.
chapter 8 america builds an empire 151 the first spadeful directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
use the cartoon and your knowledge of social studies to answer questions 1 and 2.
1 the cartoon shows the actions of president roosevelt in a securing an area for building a canal b leading troops in the spanish american war c ending a war between panama and colombia d improving diplomatic relations with latin american nations geog 12 a source w a.
a world worthwhile.
examine the question.
this question tests your ability to interpret a cartoon.
the question simply asks what the cartoon shows.
recall what you know.
think about what you can recall about this time period.
you should recognize the figure as president poosevelt.
americans at this time were calling for a canal through central america.
the flag on the hill says new treaty ships are waiting to go through the area where poosevelt is standing.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice a it shows poosevelt actively involved in building the panama canal.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 critics of the actions shown in this cartoon claimed president theodore roosevelt was f causing environmental damage in central america z hist 4 b g wrongfully instigating a revolution in panama h requiring massive tax increases in the united states j producing major trade deficits with china 3 what was a primary reason for the establishment of the open door policy.
a to protect united states trade in china econis c j b to gain control of the panama canal zone c to encourage chinese immigration to the united states d to improve relations with china name chapter these attitudes led to new restrictions on immigration.
the migration of african americans from the south to northern cities also led to increased racial tensions after the war.
the ku klux kian dead for decades found new life in 1915 kian members were hostile to immigrants catholics jews and african americans.
major race riots broke out just after the war in many american cities.
the worst riot occurred in chicago where 38 people were killed.
the lynching of african americans also continued as well as segregation in the south.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 181 fords new assembly line production was so efficient he was able to double wages overnight while slashing prices ford wanted to give workers enough buying power to purchase the cars and other goods they were mass producing.
the rise of other new industries the 1920s saw new discoveries and inventions in almost every field laying the framework for many new businesses.
these inventions included improvements in transmitting electrical power improved motors and a new trans atlantic telephone service.
new household appliances like the vacuum cleaner refrigerator and toaster were also introduced.
radio and motion pictures became widespread.
the american chemical industry expanded and the use of oil and natural gas increased.
these new industries created new jobs and changed the ways americans lived.
glenn curtiss.
the first airplane using an engine similar to that in a car was flown by the wright brothers at kitty hawk north carolina in 1902 glenn curtiss was an early aviation pioneer.
in 1908 he turned his attention to designing a seaplane that could take off and land on water.
three years later he successfully flew his hydroeroplane in san diego bay landing on a naval ship.
his landing marked the birth of u s naval aviation and convinced the secretary of the navy to buy the navys first aircraft.
in 1912 curtiss developed a larger flying boat in 1919 he constructed the first airplane to cross the atlantic ocean for the u s navy.
more efficient production techniques glenn curtiss 1878 1930 ford motors was the first to master the assembly line.
the 1920s saw remarkable improvements in manufacturing efficiency.
as you know ford had introduced electric conveyor belts to his assembly lines.
each car moved along the belt to different groups of workers who completed one small part of the assembly.
with this method production was suddenly six times faster.
use of the conveyer belt and other new techniques spread making industry generally more productive.
when manufacturers first adopted the assembly line to their production process they often achieved dramatic gains in productivity and consumers benefited from lower prices.
however one unforeseen consequence was a radical change in the nature of factory work.
skilled workers were no longer needed even in complex manufacturing operations like car assembly.
name chapter 10 the roaring twenties 183 applying what you have learned many historians believe the mass production of automobiles was the most important factor in the prosperity of the 1920s.
do you agree.
explain your answer.
did the use of buying on credit make the economy fragile.
learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing three factors that led to the prosperity of the 1920s.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 213 reform reform measures were aimed at remedying defects in the structure of the american economy in order to ensure that such a severe depression would never strike again.
many reform measures were based on the belief that government should protect individuals against risks they could not handle on their own.
federal deposit insurance corporation 1933 insured bank deposits so that people would not lose their savings in the event of a bank failure.
legislation during the new deal tennessee valley authority 1933 built 21 government owned dams along the tennessee river controlling floods and producing electricity.
some feared the tva as a form of socialism.
securities and exchange commission 1934 was i created to watch over the stock market prevent j fraud and guard against another stock market collapse.
national labor relations act 1935 often called the wagner act gave workers the right to form unions to bargain collectively and to submit grievances to a national labor relations board.
social security act 1935 was probably the most important measure of the new deal.
it provided workers with unemployment insurance old age pensions and insurance if they died early.
workers and their employers each paid new contributions to fund these benefits.
ft acting as an amateur historian in 1935 secretary of labor frances perkins delivered a radio broadcast to explain social security to the american people the process of recovery is not simple.
we cannot be satisfied merely with arrangements which will tide us over the present emergencies.
we must devise plans that will not merely lessen the ills of today but prevent as far as it is possible their recurrence in the future.
the task of recovery is inseparable from the task of social reconstruction.
among the objectives of that reconstruction president roosevelt in his message to congress placed the security of the men women and children of the nation first he went on to suggest that social insurances will provide safeguards against misfortunes which cannot be wholly eliminated in this man made world of ours social security the securities and exchange commission sec the federal deposit insurance corporation fdic and the tennessee valley authority tva still affect us today.
choose one of these programs and explain how it continues to affect us.
name chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 223 16 which aspect of the new deal was a continuation of progressive era policies.
f free health care for all americans govt i9 a g government regulation of business activities h restoration of the cultural traditions of native american indians j government purchase of surplus farm products 17 during the new deal period congress blocked president franklin d roosevelts attempt to a pay farmers not to produce crops govt 19 b b decrease federal spending c regulate the banking industry d appoint additional justices to the supreme court 18 the dust bowls described by john steinbeck in the grapes of wrath u sog 12 a had the greatest impact on f residents of urban slums h workers in factory sweatshops g plantation owners in the rural south j farmers on the great plains 19 what is the primary function of the federal reserve system.
a to prevent abuses in stock market trading econ 15 e b to preserve competition in business c to provide a stable supply of money and credit d to insure savings account deposits in member banks 20 after the election of 1932 a friend told president franklin d roosevelt that if he succeeded he would go down in history as the greatest american president.
roosevelt replied yet if i fail i may be the last one this response reflected president roosevelts belief that the f constitution limited him to two terms in the presidency ucon is c g great depression threatened the peoples faith in democracy h military was considering a takeover of the government j american people were opposed to major changes in the role of government 21 one difference between the administrations of president franklin d roosevelt and president herbert hoover was that roosevelt was a unwilling to allow government agencies to establish jobs programs ccn 16 d b unable to win congressional support for his economic program c able to ignore economic issues for most of his first term in office d more willing to use government intervention to solve economic problems 22 what was the main intent of the mexican repatriation act.
f to send mexican american immigrants back to mexico 16 c j g to encourage mexican american immigrants to work in the united states h to eliminate discrimination against mexican americans in the united states j to grant citizenship to mexican americans living in the u s for 5 years 225 a conditions in europe after world war i were favorable to the rise of dictatorships.
the russian revolution led to the worlds first communist state in the soviet union.
the dissolution of the german and austro hungarian empires led to the creation of fragile new democracies in other parts of europe.
b benito mussolini formed the fascist party which took power in italy in 1922 adolf hitler took power in germany in 1933 after the high unemployment caused by the great depression.
these new dictatorships glorified violence obedience to leaders and extreme nationalism.
they arrested imprisoned and often killed their opponents.
hitlers nazi party condemned jews and others.
c hitler had an expansionist foreign policy.
he re armed germany helped spanish dictator francisco franco annexed austria and demanded the sudentenland in czechoslovakia in 1938 the league of nations failed to stop aggressors.
british and french leaders gave in to hitlers demands in an attempt at appeasement.
hitler took the rest of czechoslovakia and then demanded part of poland in 1939 this time british and french leaders refused to give in.
after signing a non aggression pact with stalin hitler attacked poland starting world war ii in europe.
in asia japanese military leaders had already occupied manchuria in 1931 and had invaded eastern china in 1937 d the german army developed a new form of offensive warfare the blitzkrieg.
rapid coordinated movements of airplanes tanks mechanized troop carriers and infantry made it possible to advance at rapid speed.
germany quickly conquered poland defeated france and controlled most of europe by 1940 in 1941 germany violated its non aggression pact and invaded the soviet union.
e americans at first tried to stay neutral in the war.
after world war i there had been a return to isolationism.
congress passed the neutrality acts prohibiting americans from traveling on ships of nations at war or selling arms to nations at war.
they could only sell non military goods on a cash and carry basis.
f president roosevelt was concerned at the rise of totalitarian states and the threat it presented to democracy.
when japan attacked china in 1937 he proposed that peaceful states quarantine aggressive nations.
american volunteers also formed the flying tigers a squadron of airplanes that helped keep supply lines to china open.
after germany occupied france congress passed the first peace time draft.
in 1941 congress passed the lend lease act in order to sell rent or lend wartime equipment to britain which stood alone in facing the terror of nazi germany.
in 1941 roosevelt secretly met churchill and they agreed to the atlantic charter laying the foundation for the future united nations.
g surprisingly events in asia rather than europe brought the united states into the war.
roosevelt threatened an embargo to force japan to give up some of its conquests.
japanese leaders wanted to seize indonesia for its oil.
on december 7 1941 japanese planes launched a surprise attack on the u s fleet at pearl harbor.
the next day roosevelt asked for a declaration of war against japan.
chapter 12 america in world war ii 245 his successor president harry truman feared that an invasion of japan might lead to a million american casualties.
truman preferred to use the atomic bomb against japan rather than to sustain such high losses.
he selected centers of japanese military production as targets.
on august 6 an atomic bomb was exploded over the japanese city of hiroshima.
three days later a second bomb was exploded over nagasaki.
about 230 000 people were killed in both explosions combined.
critics argued that truman could have exploded bombs on unoccupied islands in the pacific as demonstrations instead of on heavily populated cities.
japan surrendered shortly after the second explosion once american leaders agreed to allow the japanese emperor to remain on his throne.
smoke rises 60 000feet after an atom bomb is dropped on nagasaki august 1945.
acting as an amateur historian presidents roosevelt and truman had different leadership styles.
president roosevelt came from wealth had an elite education and had an abundance of self confidence.
a life long politician he excelled at communicating with the public.
this was sharply different from president truman who spent his early years running a small clothing business and served as a local judge before being elected as u s senator.
he was chosen by roosevelt as his vice president in 1944 truman was vice president only 82 days when he suddenly found himself as president.
roosevelt rarely consulted with him and truman knew nothing at all about the development of the atomic bomb until after roosevelts death.
with limited foreign policy experience one might think that truman simply allowed his advisers to make decisions.
in fact nothing better describes his leadership style than the sign on his desk in the white house the buck stops here truman chaired morning staff meetings issued directions and assignments to his advisers and made all major policy decisions himself.
he tended to look at things as they were presented to him examined both sides of the issue and then made his decision much as during his earlier years as a judge.
select one of these presidents and evaluate his domestic and international leadership during world war ii.
conduct research on the internet or in your library for information.
you might consider how fdr forged a close relationship with churchill and mobilized americans for war.
or you might select how truman reached his decision to use the atomic bomb against japan.
then prepare a short report poster or oral presentation to communicate your conclusions about the leadership style of the president you researched.
chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years use the information in the map and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
15 which statement accurately describes the trend of african american voter registration in the map.
a the voting rights act had little impact on voter registration in the south.
b voter registration increased in the south after the voting rights act passed.
c fewer african americans registered to vote.
d passage of the voting rights act ended racial discrimination in the south.
c hist 9 f 287 percent of african americans registered to vote before and after the voting rights act 16 during the cold war the united states and the soviet union f broke all diplomatic ties hist 8 a g refused to trade with each other h formed competing military alliances j clashed over control of the mediterranean sea 17 the primary goal of southern democrats in congress was to a end the practice of racial segregation in the south f hist 9 6 b maintain the status quo in the south c litigate for equal rights for all races in the south d integrate the public schools throughout the south use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
and when this happens when we allow freedom to ring when we let it ring from every village and every hamlet from every state and every city yes we will be able to speed up that day when all of gods children black men and white men jews and gentiles protestants and catholics will be able to join hands and sing in the words of the old negro spiritual free at last.
free at last.
thank god almighty we are free at last 18 which statement best summarizes the message of this passage.
f freedom of religion is our most precious freedom.
q hist 9 c g some groups are better than others.
h equality and respect for others will benefit all americans.
j african americans should lead the civil rights movement.
name the sixties a decade of protest and change history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1968 1969 martin luther king jr assassination and u s lands on the moon.
history 6 a analyze causes and effects of events and social issues such as race relations and the changing role of women.
history 7 g explain the opportunities and obstacles for women and ethnic minorities.
history 8 a describe u s responses to soviet aggression after world war ii including john f kennedy s role in the cuban missile crisis.
history 8 d explain reasons and outcomes for u s involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the domino theory including the vietnam war.
history 8 e analyze the major issues and events of the vietnam war such as the tet offensive the escalation of forces vietnamization and the fall of saigon.
history 8 f describe the responses to the vietnam war such as the draft the 26th amendment the role of the media the credibility gap the silent majority and the anti war movement.
history 9 b describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights including ones from chicano american indian women s and other civil rights movements.
history 9 c identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements including cesar chavez hector p garcia and betty friedan.
history 9 d compare and contrast the approach taken by some civil rights groups such as the black panthers with the nonviolent approach of martin luther king jr history 9 f describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the united states including the civil rights acts of 1957 and 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965.
history 9 1 describe how litigation such as the landmark cases of mendez v westminster hernandez v texas delgado v bastrop i s d and edgewood i s d.
v kirby played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement.
economics 17 d identify actions of government and the private sector such as the great society affirmative action and title ix to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences of each.
government 19 b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including the 1960s.
government 20 a describe the impact of events such as the gulf of tonkin resolution and the war powers act on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government.
government 21 a analyze the effects of landmark u s supreme court decisions including u s supreme court decisions such as hernandez v texas wisconsin v yoder and white v regester.
citizenship 23 a identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process including lobbying non violent protesting litigation and amendments to the u s constitution.
citizenship 23 b evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights including the 24th and 26th amendment citizenship 24 b evaluate the contributions of significant political leaders in the united states such as barry goldwater h continued j covered in chapter 14 289 name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 321 examine the question.
this question tests your ability to identify the purpose behind the three legislative acts shown on the chart.
you should read each act and its description carefully.
recall what you know.
you should recall that all three of these acts were part of johnsons great society programs.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice 13 all three of these great society programs were focused on the goal of eliminating either poverty or discrimination in america.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 during the 1940s and 1950s the primary goal of mexican american litigation was to f eliminate the legal segregation of mexican americans y hist 9 i g form a new nation for mexican americans h create separate mexican american economic and social institutions j establish affirmative action programs to compensate for past wrongs use the statement and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
t he war against poverty will not be won here in washington.
it must be won in the field in every private home in every public office from the courthouse to the white house president lyndon b johnson state of the union address january 8 1964 3 this statement expresses president lyndon b johnsons belief that the a federal government is solely responsible for the war on poverty i econ 17 d j b court system must be held accountable for poverty c problem of poverty is easily solved d entire country must help in the struggle against poverty 4 the court decisions in delgado v bastrop isd and hernandez v texas held that f racially segregated schools are inherently unequal c histep j g a student has no guaranteed rights while in a public school h a students right to privacy is limited under certain conditions j mexican americans were entitled to protection from discrimination under the fourteenth amendment 5 the movements led by dr martin luther king jr and ceasar chavez were similar in that both a supported attempts to overthrow the established government hist 9 c b used civil disobedience to bring about social change c boycotted agricultural crops d were elected to national political office name chapter richard nixon iran hostage crisis moral majority tinker v pes moines newt gingrich iran contra affair wisconsin k yoder ronald reagan contract with america phyllis schlafly sun pelt george h w lush environmental peace through strength rust pelt protection act epa star wars persian gulf war endangered species reaganomics lill clinton act reagan poctrine impeachment petente sandra pay o connor hillary clinton watergate scandal catt wto lill gates gerald ford nafta sam walton opec national rifle estee lauder jimmy carter association nra robert johnson camp pavid accords heritage foundation lionel sosa chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 343 immigration policy.
president reagan introduced new changes to our immigration laws.
to deal with the problem of illegal immigration the mazzoli simpson act 1986 legalized illegal aliens who had lived continuously in the united states since 1981 sandra day o connor.
in 1981 president reagan nominated sandra day oconnor as the first woman justice on the u s supreme court.
bom in el paso texas she studied in california before moving to arizona.
oconnor had served as arizonas assistant attorney general state senator and a superior court judge.
during her early years on the u s supreme court she was a conservative who preferred judicial restraint she emerged in the late 1990s as a swing vote between the conservative and liberal groups on the court.
projected population changes 1980 2000 until the 1970s most americans lived in the northeast and midwest with its hot summers and cold winters.
the southeast was considered too hot and humid in summers while the west was too dry and remote.
a number of technological developments altered this situation.
government built dams made more water available to western cities.
with rising oil prices more americans preferred mild winters over frigid and snowy ones.
lastly air conditioning and hydro electric power made it possible to keep homes offices and factories cool in the summer.
hi population decline growth of 0 5 growth of j growth of 28 50 growth over 50 as a result the west and south known as the sun belt saw a sharp rise in their populations.
since the 1960s when air conditioning first came in wider use the northeast and midwest have increased in population just 27 while the south and west have grown more than four times as much.
california and texas have become the nation s largest states while urban regions like atlanta and las vegas are the nation s fastest growing urban centers.
as the population density of cities in the sun belt grew the environment of the area changed.
shopping malls and factories sprang up in place of grasslands mountains and deserts.
cities demanded more scarce supplies of water and energy which sometimes had to be brought from great distances placing a greater burden on the environment.
ne chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 347 the next president george h w.
bush had served two terms as reagans vice president.
bush promised to continue reagans policies but with greater compassion in dealing with the homeless and the poor.
he also promised to improve education and fight drug use.
bushs previous experience had mainly been in foreign policy but he faced several important challenges at home.
his greatest domestic challenge was to reduce the growing budget deficit.
events in eastern europe and the soviet union permitted cuts in military spending.
in late 1990 bush agreed to increase income taxes on the wealthy but he was never able to make a significant reduction in the budget deficit.
the impact of defense spending on the u s economy.
experts disagree on the impact that military spending can have on a countrys economy.
it can provide a shortterm stimulus pushing the nation through the business cycle from recession to prosperity.
for example military expenditures in world war ii helped achieve full employment after the great depression.
on the other hand military spending can divert or crowd out resources from other more productive uses and may thus slow long term economic growth.
heavy military spending can mean less investment in peacetime projects higher budget deficits and more borrowing or higher taxes.
less money will be available for example for education.
when president johnson increased american involvement in vietnam he thus had to cut back on many great society programs.
supreme court appointments.
president bush made several appointments to the supreme court leading to a conservative majority on the court.
the new supreme court toughened the rules for criminal defendants reduced the scope of abortion rights and introduced other important changes.
the recession.
the united states gradually moved back into a recession by 1990 economists blamed the economic downturn on reduced spending by consumers corporations and federal and state governments.
in addition greater foreign competition led to less demand for some american products.
this resulted in lay offs in several key industries.
while the 1970s and 1980s witnessed increases in population in the sunbelt the opposite was true of the rust belt areas of the northeast and midwest with coal and iron resources which had once been the center of american industry.
with the collapse of the u s steel industry cities such as gary indiana detroit michigan and milwaukee wisconsin have suffered a steady loss of manufacturing jobs to mexico and overseas.
name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 357.


chapters are in this book.
2 where in the front of the book can you find a political map of the united states.
5 what time period does chapter 6.
where can you find the thinking like a historian activity in each chapter 10.
what essential questions will you answer in chapter.
use the visual to answer these questions does the visual have a title.
what does the visual show.
could the information in this visual be presented in another type of visual map chart graph model or database.
did i learn anything new from the visual.
d reading progress check applying which type of map would most likely show the great plains.
population statistics are sometimes shown on a graph called a population pyramid.
a population pyramid can be drawn for any area such as a continent a country or a city.
q describing what statistics does this population pyramid show.
critical thinking comparing which age group has the most females.
the most males.
oe males population in millions 6 8 females source u s census bureau statistical abstract ofthe united states 2012 18 exploring social studies lines on globes and maps provide information that can help you locate places on earth.
these lines called latitude and longitude cross one another forming a pattern.
what is economics.
guiding question what economic choices must every society make.
economics is the study of how individuals and nations make choices about ways to use scarce resources to meet their needs and wants.
economics is also the study of how things are made bought sold and used.
there are four factors of production necessary to produce goods and services natural resources entrepreneurs capital and labor.
natural resources these are all the gifts of nature that make production possible.
natural resources include land and water as well as fish animals trees and vegetation and mineral deposits.
entrepreneurs an entrepreneur is a person who organizes and operates a business.
entrepreneurs assume risks in order to make a profit.
capital the machines buildings and tools that are used to make goods and services are known as capital.
economists also often think of money as a form of capital.
economics the study of how individuals make entrepreneur a person who choices about ways to use scarce resources to meet organizes and operates a business their needs and wants lesson 2 19 i the nation s workforce labor is its human resources.
labor includes anyone such as these workers at a garland texas factory who works to produce goods and services.
labor labor includes anyone who works to produce goods and services.
to put it simply labor is the nations workforce.
goods are products that are created in factories or grown on farms.
goods include bicycles jackets and ears of corn.
services are actions people perform for others such as cutting hair repairing cars or teaching.
scarcity is a problem that all societies face.
there are not enough resources to produce all the goods and services people want.
scarcity requires people to make choices.
because of scarcity every society must make three important choices what to produce how to produce and for whom to produce.
p reading progress check contrasting what is the difference between goods and services.
the u s free enterprise economy guidingquestion iwiflf freedoms do people have in a free enterprise system.
to help make economic decisions every country has its own economic system.
economic systems are different ways people use resources to make and exchange goods and services.
economic systems are often defined by their characteristics.
in a free enterprise economy the characteristics are 20 exploring social studies private property private property is anything owned by individuals or groups rather than by the government.
the right to own private property is guaranteed by the constitution of the united states.
property includes money land buildings machines and personal possessions.
as an individual you are free to buy whatever you can afford.
you also control how when and by whom your property is used.
choice each of us can choose the type of work or job we do.
we choose the products we buy.
if we think the price of a product is too high we can shop elsewhere or choose not to buy it.
businesses can choose which products to make or sell and choose the price at which to sell them.
voluntary exchange under free enterprise buying and selling is based on the principle of voluntary exchange.
a buyer voluntarily exchanges money for goods or services.
the seller voluntarily exchanges goods or service for money.
if you purchase a game at a flea market your transaction is an example of voluntary exchange.
you are choosing to buy the game and the seller is willing to sell it to you at the price you are willing to pay.
competition under free enterprise people are free to compete with one another.
as a consumer you benefit from sellers competing offers.
competition for land jobs and natural resources has shaped much of the nations history.
businesses also compete for customers.
this competition has been another major force in u s history.
economic incentives an incentive is something that causes a person to act.
for example money acts as an incentive for people to work.
money is also an incentive for businesses to produce goods and services and sell them for profit.
have you ever bought something you wanted because it was on sale.
have you ever not bought something you wanted because it cost too much.
both are examples of how price is an incentive.
the beginnings of free enterprise colonial americans were inspired by the work of british philosopher and economist adam smith.
his book the wealth of nations was published in 1776 the same year the declaration of independence was written.
in his book smith set forth the basic principles of free enterprise that people are free to buy sell and produce what they want with little or no government restriction.
incentive something that causes a person to act lesson 2 21 i as trade takes place the trading partners become interdependent.
each trading partner depends on the other to help provide his or her wants and needs.
this interdependence occurs between international trading partners and also between partners within countries such as the united states.
the term laissez faire economics from the french to let alone came to describe this idea.
smith s ideas influenced the founders ofthe united states who limited the role of government mainly to national defense and keeping the peace.
a free enterprise economic system also developed in the nation because the people had fought a war for independence to escape english control.
the british government had restricted the peoples right to trade with other nations imposed taxes on the colonists without their consent and held the power to quarter troops in the homes of colonists.
the founders established a nation in which the government played a limited role in the economy.
trade was subject to few restrictions.
taxes were levied but only through representatives elected by the citizens.
property rights were protected owners have the right to use their land homes and any other goods they possess as they see fit.
ethics and free enterprise ethics are the principles of conduct against which actions are determined to be right or wrong good or bad fair or unfair.
the u s free enterprise economy is an ethical system because its characteristics promote economic freedom by letting individuals pursue the occupation of their choice providing goods and services for various groups in society bestowing rewards on producers who make goods preferred by buyers supporting the liberty of individuals and allowing individuals to develop their skills and talents.
john locke was a british philosopher who inspired colonial americans.
locke argued for economic freedom and private property rights.
he wrote that a s every man has a property in his own person the labour of his body and the work of his hands are properly his locke also believed that it was the duty of the government to protect the life liberty and property of its citizens.
his ideas influenced the writers of our nations founding documents the declaration of independence the u s constitution and the bill of rights.
ethics principles against which actions are determined to be right or wrong exploring sodal studies historic events can bring about great economic change.
nearly 100 000 people came to california to search and pan for gold in the late 1840s.
agriculture shipping and trade expanded to meet the need ofthe growing population for food and other goods.
cities also flourished during the gold rush.
i i these documents guarantee the economic freedoms we all enjoy.
preserved in these documents are the freedoms of private property choice and competition.
these three documents also help preserve the political freedoms that we enjoy as americans.
q reading progress check i making connections how might competition among grocery stores help 1 you as a consumer.
hfoldables study organizer include this lesson s information in your foldable mio v tat k now i lesson 2 review i review vocabulary 1 using the map in this lesson write two sentences that describe the absolute location and the relative location of philadelphia.
29c answer the guiding questions 2 listing what are the five themes of geography.
ja 3 analyzing models view the model entitled ethnic populations.
this model shows distorted maps of the united states.
the colors indicate the population distribution.
study the model and write two questions about any ofthe maps.
exchange your questions with a partner and write answers to your partner s questions.
29j 4 identifying how did industrialization change life in the united states.
m 5 identifying what economic choices must every society make.
3oa 6 describing what freedoms do people have in a free enterprise system.
3oa expository writing write a paragraph that explains how minimal government intrusion taxation and property rights contributed to the development of a free enterprise system in the united states.
14a lesson 2 23 networks there s more online.
ef primary sources.
the declaration of independence the mayflower compact the u s constitution ef self check quiz sf video f t j a lesson 3 government and citizenship lquestion whydopeopieformgonmments.
texas essential knowledge and skills 15a identify the influence of ideas from historic documents including the magna carta the english bill of rights the mayflower compact the federalist papers and selected anti federalist writings on the u s system of government.
15d analyze how the u s constitution reflects the principles of limited government republicanism checks and balances federalism separation of powers popular sovereignty and individual rights.
19a define and give examples of unalienable rights.
19b summarize rights guaranteed in the bill of rights.
19c explain the importance of personal responsibilities including accepting responsibility for one s behavior and supporting one s family.
19d identify examples of responsible citizenship including obeying rules and laws staying informed on public issues voting and serving on juries.
19e summarize the criteria and explain the process for becoming a naturalized citizen of the united states.
19f explain how the rights and responsibilities of u s citizens reflect our national identity.
2oa explain the role of significant individuals such as thomas hooker charles de montesquieu john locke william blackstone and william penn in the development of self government in colonial america.
it matters because understanding the foundations of american government helps us to recognize the values beliefs principles and ideals that have been and still are important to the people of the united states.
beliefs and principles of a nation guidingquestion what american beliefs and principles are reflected in the declaration of independence and the u s constitution.
a government is the ruling authority tor a community or society.
any organization that has the power to make and enforce or carry out laws and decisions tor its members acts as a government.
most governments are based on constitutions.
a constitution is a detailed written plan of government.
the united states is a constitutional republic.
i bis is a system of government in which the people are the ultimate source of governmental power.
the united states is the oldest constitutional republic in the world.
foundations of american government abraham lincoln described our system of government as a government of the people by the people for the people lincolns words make three important points.
first the power of government comes from the citizens.
second americans themselves acting through their representatives make the decisions of government.
third the purpose of the government is to make the united states a better place for those who live here.
reading helpdesk taking notes summarizing use a graphic organizer like the one shown here to take notes about government and citizenship coring social studies government and citizenship beliefs and principles citizenship rights and responsibilities principles of the u s constitution poplular sovereignty republicanism limited government federalism separation of powers checks and balances people are the source of the government s power.
people elect their political representatives.
the constitution limits the actions of government by listing power it holds and does not hold.
in this government system power is divided between national and state governments.
each of the three branches of government has its own responsibilities.
each branch of government holds some control over the other two branches.
our nations founding documents the declaration of independence the u s constitution and the bill of rights express important principles.
these are all people are created equal.
all people possess certain basic rights.
the purpose of government is to secure these rights.
the authority of governments is derived from the people.
many of the principles outlined in these founding documents were first formed during a movement of the 1700s called the enlightenment.
many leaders of britains american colonies were familiar with the writings of john locke of england and the baron de montesquieu of france two thinkers of the enlightenment.
locke believed that all people were born equal with certain natural rights.
these included the right to life to freedom and to own property.
according to locke people form governments and choose leaders to protect these natural rights.
montesquieu developed the idea that the power of government should be divided among branches in order to prevent any person or group from becoming too strong.
our english and colonial heritage our nations founding documents were also influenced by earlier documents and agreements that promoted freedom and liberty.
the magna carta and the english bill of rights were essential building blocks for political principles found in the declaration of independence the u s constitution and the bill of rights.
the constitution sets forth the six basic principles upon which the u s system of government rests.
21a identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
23d analyze the contributions of people of various racial ethnic and religious groups to our national identity.
25c analyze the impact of the first amendment guarantees of religious freedom on the american way of life.
i content vocabulary academic vocabulary natural right a basic right to which all natural right magna carta english bill of rights mayflower compact unalienable right u s bill of rights source the place from which something comes or is obtained humans are entitled lesson 3 25 on november 21 1620 41 colonists aboard the mayflower drafted an agreement.
the mayflower compact was the first plan of self government ever put in force in the english colonies.
in 1215 english nobles forced the king to sign an agreement called the magna carta.
this document limited the power of the monarch by guaranteeing that no one would be above the law not even a king or queen.
in 1689 parliament drew up the english bill of rights.
this document further restricted the monarchs power.
it also guaranteed free elections to parliament englands legislature the right to a fair trial and the elimination of cruel and unusual punishments.
the mayflower compact signed by the pilgrims in 1620 stands as the first example of many colonial plans for self government.
in 1639 representatives of several connecticut towns wrote a plan of government for their colony.
that plan called the fundamental orders of connecticut was the first constitution in the colonies.
the influence of our founding documents in 1776 the american colonists began a revolution to defend their belief in equality natural rights and self government.
they made their beliefs clear in the declaration of independence which stated the reasons they were seeking freedom.
these beliefs later influenced frances declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen a statement of principles that accompanied a revolution in that country in 1789 inspired by american ideals of equality and freedom enslaved africans took up arms in the french held caribbean island of magna carta 1215 document that limited the power of england s monarch english bill of rights 1689 document that limited the monarch s power and guaranteed free elections the right to a fair trial and the elimination of cruel and unusual punishment mayflower compact 1620 document that was the first plan for self government in the colonies exploring social studies saint dominique present day haiti.
in 1804 haiti became the second country in the americas after the united states to gain independence.
over the next three decades mexico and other nations in central and south america also revolted against their european rulers and gained self government.
political parties and interest groups a political party is an organization of individuals with common interests who organize to win elections to operate the government and to thereby influence government policy.
in the 1790s the first two rival political groups organized in the united states.
secretary of state thomas jefferson led one group the democratic republicans.
secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton led the other group the federalist party.
they disagreed strongly about how the u s government should operate.
in the united states today the two major parties are the republican party and the democratic party.
competing political parties are a necessary part of democratic government.
they are a key link between citizens and their elected officials.
they give voters a choice between candidates and ideas.
a basic difference between the major parties is their view on the role of government.
democrats tend to believe that the federal government should be more directly involved in regulating the economy and in providing housing education and jobs.
republicans tend to favor less regulation of the economy as a way to help the nations economy grow.
other political parties called third parties have been part of the american political scene since the early days of the republic.
an interest group is a group of people that have common aims and try to influence citizens and government officials to act in their favor.
interest groups represent a variety of causes.
many interest groups deal with economic interests including groups like the national association of manufacturers and powerful labor organizations.
other interest groups deal with more specific causes.
the national taxpayers union works for lower taxes and less wasteful spending.
mothers against drunk driving madd seeks to stop drunk driving and prevent underage drinking.
o reading progress check identifying what document was the first plan for self government in what is now the united states.
skills practice look at the pictures headings and important words in your text.
retell the information using words you know.
reading strategy differentiating when you differentiate you highlight and describe the differences between two related people events or concepts.
read about political parties and interest groups and write a few sentences that differentiate the two.
lesson 3 27 j what is citizenship.
guiding question how is citizenship obtained.
1 a citizen is a person who owes loyalty to and is entitled to the protection of a state or nation.
how do you become a u s citizen.
j the u s constitution establishes two ways to become a citizen by birth and for foreign born people who choose to become i citizens by a legal process called naturalization.
j citizenship by birth if you were born in any of the 50 states or the district of columbia you became a u s citizen at birth.
you also are a citizen if you were born outside the country s borders but in u s territory such as puerto rico or guam.
even if you were born elsewhere you can claim citizenship if one of.
your parents is a u s citizen.
children born on american soil to non u s citizens also acquire u s citizenship at birth.
citizenship by naturalization immigrants who want to become citizens must meet certain requirements.
they must be 1 18 years old or older i a resident of the united states for five years able to read write and speak english of good moral character to become citizens applicants must also pass a citizenship test which measures their understanding of u s history government and the legal system.
the final step in naturalization is attending a ceremony and pledging an oath of allegiance.
the applicant swears to be loyal to the united states and to obey the constitution and other laws.
reading progress check our government is based on the principle of consent ofthe governed.
voting is one of american citizens most important responsibilities.
by voting citizens have the chance to shape the future of our communities states and nation.
specifying what two ways does the u s constitution set forth for a person to become a citizen.
21 coring social studies rights and responsibilities guidingquestion what are the rights and responsibilities of citizens ofthe united states.
as citizens of our nation we hold many rights.
however we must also fulfill the responsibilities of citizenship.
rights and the declaration of independence almost from the moment that the united states declared itself an independent country americans have valued and celebrated their rights and freedoms.
thomas jeffersons words in the declaration of independence made it clear that the citizens of the new country would never be denied certain basic rights rights that belong to all people.
these principles are brilliantly stated in the second paragraph of the declaration james madison introduced a set of amendments to the u s constitution during the first session of congress.
the states ratified 10 of them in 1791 these first 10 amendments became known as the bill of rights.
primary source m we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent ofthe governed.
99 declaration of independence 1776 the bridgeman art library getty images jefferson stated that the principles he was identifying were truths not just beliefs held by a few radicals.
he also noted that these principles were self evident or obvious.
in saying that people have unalienable rights or rights that cannot be taken away jefferson was borrowing from earlier thinkers such as william blackstone and from lockes writings on natural rights.
natural or unalienable rights have several characteristics they belong to every human being regardless of gender age or nationality.
they cannot be taken away or interfered with by any government.
there are other kinds of rights besides natural rights.
these rights are man made and codified into law.
yet many of the individual rights that americans enjoy and celebrate such as the right to worship as one pleases the right to assemble and the right to fair treatment under the law are based on the natural and unalienable rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness academic vocabulary unalienable right a right that cannot be consent agreement or permission taken away lesson 3 29 during earlier periods in our nation s history some people were not allowed to vote.
through the efforts of suffragists above and their supporters women gained the right to vote with the passage of the nineteenth amendment in 1920 today to be eligible to vote you must be a citizen of the united states and at least 18 years of age.
r i rights and the bill of rights in the declaration of independence jefferson laid the foundation for many of the rights that later became part of the u s constitution.
the first 10 amendments or changes to the constitution were added in 1791 they are known as the u s bill of rights and they list americans basic rights and freedoms.
the first amendment to the constitution protects five basic freedoms freedom of religion freedom of speech freedom of the press freedom of the assembly and freedom to petition the government.
how does the first amendment protect these freedoms.
the amendment safeguards religious freedom in two ways.
first the amendment prohibits congress from establishing an official religion in the united states.
this makes the united states different from countries in which a state church is established.
second the amendment guarantees americans the right to practice their faith as they wish.
the government may not favor one religion over another or treat people differently because of their personal beliefs.
many of the people who braved the journey to the american colonies did so because they were not allowed to practice their religions in their home countries.
the framers of the u s constitution wanted to be sure this would not happen in their new nation.
our responsibilities with citizenship come responsibilities things we are expected or are required to do.
as individuals we have personal responsibilities such as being accountable for how we behave and how we support our families.
as citizens we also have responsibilities.
the responsibilities of citizenship include respecting the law paying our taxes and supporting and defending the u s constitution.
rights right to a prompt fair trial by jury right to vote in elections for public officials right to run for elected office right to privacy personal responsibilities follow rules and laws at home school and in the community accept responsibility for your actions support your family u s bill of rights the first ten amendments to the u s constitution that list americans basic rights and freedoms exploring social studies art library getty citizenship responsibilities respect and obey federal state and local laws stay informed on issues affecting your community vote and serve on juries rules and laws help keep order.
they protect the safety property and freedom of citizens.
they also make it possible for people to live together peaceably.
our system of representative government makes it possible for citizens to work with elected leaders to change laws they do not like.
paying taxes gives government money to use for a variety of purposes such as defending the nation providing services to citizens and building roads and bridges.
defending the constitution means more than volunteering to serve in the military to protect the nation against enemies of freedom.
it also means serving on juries when called to do so.
americans have the right to a trial by a jury.
this right would be difficult to exercise if citizens neglected this responsibility.
jury duty is necessary to guarantee everyone a fair and speedy trial.
our rights and responsibilities define who we are as americans.
our national identity has been built through the nations history as a land of immigrants of many different racial and ethnic backgrounds.
it is not based on our belonging to one ethnic group or religion but on our shared values freedom liberty and equality.
we express our respect for these shared values through our patriotism and love of country by respecting our history traditions and symbols and by exercising our rights and responsibilities.
h reading progress check e identifying in what part of the u s constitution are many basic rights stated.
as citizens of the united states we all have certain responsibilities such as defending the nation.
include this lesson s information in your foldable v ho v hcft a k nov vay lesson 3 review review vocabulary 1 write a sentence that uses the terms government and constitution and that describes their relationship.
3oa 2 identify each of following terms and explain how they influenced the u s system of government isa a magna carta b english bill of rights c mayflower compact answer the guiding questions 3 summarizing what american beliefs and principles are reflected in the declaration of independence and the u s constitution.
29b 4 defining what are the characteristics of unalienable rights.
19a 5 explaining what does it mean to accept responsibility for your behavior and actions.
how could it affect others if you do not fulfill this responsibility.
19c expository writing part ofyour role as a citizen is the responsibility to be informed about issues in your community and the right to voice your opinion about them.
draft a speech you could give to your class outlining your views on an issue that your school or community is currently facing.
3od lesson 3 31 networks there s more online.
graphs immigration by region world population by religion image displayed in fine art i gf map immigrants to the 4 united states t ef self check quiz ef slideshow charts and graphs video immigrants by state lesson 4 culture science and society i al question howdonewideasdiangethtwayptoplelhfe.
teas texas essential knowledge and skills 23a identify selected racial ethnic and religious groups that settled in the united states and explain their reasons for immigration.
26a describe developments in art music and literature that are unique to american culture such as the hudson river school artists john james audubon battle hymn of the republic transcendentalism and other cultural activities in the history of the united states.
26b identify examples of american art music and literature that reflect society in different eras.
26c analyze the relationship between fine arts and continuity and change in the american way of life.
27a explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat the cotton gin and interchangeable parts.
27b analyze the impact of transportation and communication systems on the growth development and urbanization of the united states.
27d explain how technological innovations brought about economic growth such as how the factory system contributed to rapid industrialization and the transcontinental railroad led to the opening of the west.
28a compare the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in u s history.
28b identify examples of how industrialization changed life in the united states.
reading helpdesk it matters because we live in a nation and world very different from that of our ancestors.
culture and technology have played a major part in creating those differences.
learning more about culture and technology can help us better understand the changes that are shaping our world.
what is culture.
guiding question what influences have shaped american culture.
a culture is the way of life of people who share similar beliefs and customs.
a particular culture can be understood by looking at various elements what languages the people speak what religions they follow and what smaller groups are part of their society.
the study of cultures also includes examining peoples daily lives the history they share and the art forms they have created.
culture and ethnic groups culture is often understood by looking at dif ferent groups of people in a society.
each of us belongs to many social groups.
most social groups have rules of behavior that group members learn.
each member also has a certain status.
status refers to a persons importance or rank.
in all cultures the family is the most important social group.
although family structures vary from culture to culture most of us first learn how to behave from our families.
people also belong to an ethnic group.
this is a group that shares a language history religion and some physical traits.
some countries like the united states are multicultural or made up of many different ethnic or cultural groups.
such number of immigrants 2010 mill 100 000 or above 50 000 99 999 p 1 10 000 49 999 i i 1 000 9 999 i i 999 or fewer countries have a national culture that all their people share as well as the many diverse ethnic cultures.
a nation of immigrants the united states is a multicultural nation because immigration has shaped our history.
from the first english adventurers who settled virginia more than 400 years ago to the latino asian and other immigrants arriving today immigration has been the story of america.
no matter when they have come the nations immigrants have arrived for the same basic reasons.
the main factors that pushed them from their homelands were a lack of economic opportunity persecution for their religious or political beliefs or the desire to escape war or political unrest.
the factors that pulled them to the united states have been equally timeless such as the right to enjoy religious political and personal freedom the lure of land jobs and other economic opportunities and the chance to share in what is known worldwide as the american dream the arts through music painting sculpture dance and literature people express what they think is beautiful and meaningful.
the arts can tell stories about important figures and events in a cultures past.
the arts can also help us understand the issues of modern times.
taking notes summarizing use this graphic organizer to take notes about culture science and technology k32 exploring social studies new ideas and ways of living culture science and technology content vocabulary culture ethnic group multicultural immigration discovery innovation academic vocabulary factor any ofthe things that causes or influences something geography connection this map shows the number of immigrants in every state in the year 2010 regions in what area of the united states do the fewest number of immigrants live.
critical thinking categorizing find texas on the map and study the key.
what is the range of immigrant population in texas.
content vocabulary culture the way of life of people who share similar beliefs and customs ethnic group a group that shares a language history religion and some physical traits multicultural made up of many different ethnic or cultural groups immigration the process of coming to live in another country lesson 4 33 r during the colonial era and early 1800s items that could not be made at home were manufactured by local blacksmiths furniture makers and other craftspeople.
by the mid 1800s more of america s manufacturing shifted to mills and factories.
industrialization brought work and workers together.
during the colonial america era art music and literature were modeled after british and other european styles.
after the war of 1812 american writers inspired by nationalism began to develop their own literature.
they used settings characters and humor that were typically american.
one ofthe first authors to work on american themes was washington irving.
in rip van winkle and the legend of sleepy hollow irving wrote about life in the hudson river valley.
early american artists had traveled to europe to study.
many followed the british style of painting.
most often they painted portraits.
more often the nations artists began painting scenes of america.
george catlin lived and worked among native americans.
he painted scenes of their daily life.
george caleb bingham painted vivid scenes of everyday life on the missouri frontier.
art styles were changing.
but art also reflected the continuity and change in the american way of life.
the painting of the blacksmith shows a traditional feature of rural life.
the painting of the metal factory reflects change in america.
craftspeople like the blacksmith remained an important part of their communities.
many americans however were moving to urban areas to find work in factories.
americans also developed a new style of music.
stephen foster combined african and european music to create uniquely american songs about life in the south.
a boston music teacher lowell mason started a music program in the public schools.
he also composed the music for more than 1 600 church hymns.
many including nearer my god to thee are often sung today.
for many enslaved african americans christianity was a religion of hope and resistance.
their passionate beliefs found expression in the spiritual an african american religious folk song.
h reading progress check contrasting what is the difference between an ethnic group and a culture.
science and technology guidingquestion what effects have science and technology had on the nation s development.
americans have felt the huge impact of science and technology in almost every part of our daily lives.
science and technology affect our home and school life our work our leisure pursuits what we eat and the clothes we wear.
scientific discoveries influence daily life scientific and medical discoveries have changed the way people live.
1752 ben franklin experiments with electricity.
franklins experiments with electricity led him to develop the lightning rod.
when placed at the top of a building it conducted huge amounts of the electricity in lightning bolts harmlessly into the ground protecting the building.
franklins finding led to technology such as motors computers and light bulbs that harnessed and used electrical power.
1840s anesthesia improves surgery.
an important advance in medicine is credited to two physicians from the united states.
working independently dr crawford w long of georgia in 1842 and dr w t g morton of boston in 1846 were the first physicians to use ether as an anesthetic during surgery.
during the civil war ether and chloroform were widely used by military surgeons.
1955 salk polio vaccine becomes widely available.
in the early 1950s polio became the most feared disease of the era because it left many of its victims paralyzed for life.
in the mid 1950s dr jonas salk an american physician developed an effective vaccine against polio.
the threat of polio was almost completely eliminated.
think about which of these scientific discoveries has had the greatest effect on your life.
technology influences daily life in ways big and small technology has changed the way people live.
a technological innovation is a better way of doing things or improves on something that already exists.
many technological innovations from the past still affect our lives today.
skills practice as you read list the words you do not know well.
have a partner quiz you on the words until you know them by sight.
discovery the process of learning or finding readng strategy visualizing something new when you visualize you create pictures in your mind of what you are reading.
good readers see the author s words making it easier to remember details.
as you read the page above what do you visualize.
lesson 4 35 1876 alexander graham bell tests the telephone.
bells telephone revolutionized communications.
it replaced the telegraphs time consuming coded beeps with voice messages.
people at great distances could have conversations as it they were together.
1879 thomas edison perfects the incandescent light bulb.
edisons electric light bulb replaced oil and gas lamps and candles as a clean safe and reliable way to light homes streets and businesses.
1886 josephine cochrane invents a mechanical dishwasher.
cochrane saw the need for a way to save the labor and time involved in washing dishes by hand.
the development ot home appliances made domestic chores much easier.
1903 brothers orville and wilbur wright make the first powered airplane flight.
the development of airplanes had a huge impact on american culture.
the wright brothers invention made the world seem smaller and encouraged the spread of cultures ideas and goods.
1908 henry fords assembly line turns out the first mass produced automobile the model t the automobile revolutionized transportation and american life.
the automobile changed where people could live where they could work and how easily they could travel to new places.
1975 bill gates and paul allen start a company called microsoft to develop computer operating systems.
more than any other entrepreneurs gates and allen made the computer age possible.
using our computers we can instantly access information ideas and products from anywhere in the world.
innovation something that improves upon or makes a significant contribution to an existing product process or service academic vocabulary access to get at or obtain 36 exploring social studies think about which of these technological innovations do you use often.
which innovation do you think has had the greatest effect on the daily life of americans today.
technology and urbanization new technology revolutionized transportation and communications and began the change of the united states from an agricultural to an urban industrial nation.
the telephone and telegraph enabled people to communicate with others at a distance.
they shared ideas news and conducted business faster.
these forms of communication also drew people to urban areas.
industrialization drew thousands of people from farms and villages to cities in search of factory jobs with higher wages.
to serve industry facilities such as banks insurance companies and warehouses developed.
these in turn attracted more industry and workers.
the promise of jobs and new opportunity was one reason why many people moved to the cities.
urban areas also had other advantages.
in contrast to the isolation of farm life cities had running water modern plumbing access to telephones and other forms of communication museums libraries and convenient transportation.
many city populations doubled or tripled.
in 1820 only one american city had more than 100 000 residents.
by 1860 eight cities had reached that size.
between 1860 and 1900 american urban areas grew twice as fast as the total population.
h reading progress check categorizing which persons contributions have improved communications.
which have improved transportation.
include this lesson s information in your foldable v bo wtat 4 k hcw ww lesson 4 review review vocabulary 1 use the following words in a sentence that correctly shows the meaning of each and their relationship to each other.
3oa 3ob a ethnic group b dialect 2 write a sentence that shows how the following words are related joa a culture b multicultural answer the guiding questions 3 specifying why have various racial ethnic and religious groups immigrated to the united states.
23a 4 explaining what effects have science and technology had on the country s development.
2sb 5 analyzing view the paintings of the blacksmith and the metal factory.
which image represents continuity and tradition.
which represents change in the american way of life.
2c 6 analyzing why would forms of communication such as newspapers and telephones draw people to urban areas.
27b expository writing which of the technology advancements you learned about was the most important for our nation.
write a short essay that explains the reasons for your opinion.
3od j h lesson 4 37 4 networks there s more online.
chart virginia and new jersey plans gmte identification model division of powers ef self check quiz ef video safest lesson 5 social studies skills itial question how do we team aboutthepast.
7ek5 texas essential knowledge and skills 1b apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals events and time periods.
29b analyze information by sequencing categorizing identifying cause and effect relationships comparing contrasting finding the main idea summarizing making generalizations and predictions and drawing inferences and conclusions.
29c organize and interpret information from outlines reports databases and visuals including graphs charts timelines and maps.
29e support a point ofview on a social studies issue or event.
30a use social studies terminology correctly.
30b use standard grammar spelling sentence structure punctuation and proper citation of sources.
30d create written oral and visual presentations of social studies information.
31a use a problem solving process to identify a problem gather information list and consider options consider advantages and disadvantages choose and implement a solution and evaluate the effectiveness ofthe solution.
31b use a decision making process to identify a situation that requires a decision gather information identify options predict consequences and take action to implement a decision.
reading helpdesk it matters because critical thinking skills help you to analyze information and ideas.
these skills are important to good citizenship because they allow you to exercise your civic rights and responsibilities.
critical thinking skills guidingquestion howcan social studies skills help students organize and analyze information and ideas.
studying history is more than reading sources and viewing pictures or graphs.
historians need many different skills to analyze explain and find patterns in the events of history.
here are some of the social studies skills you will use in your study of u s history.
as you read you will be able to practice these skills.
identifying cause and effect a cause is an action that leads to an event.
an effect is the result of that action.
look for signal words or phrases that alert you to cause and effect such as so because as a result therefore produced and for the following reasons.
think about a personal achievement.
the achievement might be scoring a winning goal writing a funny story or fixing a bicycle.
what causes helped you accomplish this achievement.
how might knowing those causes help you to achieve the same effect again.
making predictions one way to analyze information is to think about what might happen next.
predicting future events is difficult.
sometimes taking hotes summarizing as you read use a table like this one to describe different tools you will use as you study history.
exploring sodal studies social studies skills critical thinking skills problem solving skills writing and communication skills native americans who were forced from their land traveled west in the 1830s.
though you can use knowledge of how certain causes led to certain effects in the past to make such a prediction.
this is one benefit that comes from having a knowledge of history.
for example in the 1830s white americans wanted the land on which the cherokee and four other native american peoples were living.
the government forced all of these peoples to give up their land so that white settlers could have it.
what do you think happened to these native americans in the west once the settlers took their land.
e drawing inferences and conclusions inferences and conclusions are two different types of explanations we form about things.
an inference is something we assume based on what appears to be true.
drawing an inference means choosing the most likely explanation based on that evidence.
for example you arrive at the school bus stop a little later than usual.
no one is there.
you draw the inference that you have missed the bus.
you do not know that for sure however.
you did not see the bus pulling away and there might be other reasons why no one is at the bus stop.
but based on the evidence you have that you were late and that no one is there you assume draw the inference that you missed the bus.
study the model of the division of powers between the national and state governments.
what is a power that is shared.
what inferences might you draw from this.
content vocabulary cause effect inference conclusion generalization plagiarize cause an action that leads to an event effect the result of an action inference something that we assume based on what appears to be true lesson 5 39 the framers ofthe u s constitution divided the powers of government into three types.
the powers granted to the national government are called enumerated powers or expressed powers.
reserved powers are powers set aside for the states.
powers that both the national government and the state governments share are concurrent powers.
a conclusion is a logical explanation that is based on known facts.
when you draw a conclusion you use all available information to form the explanation.
conclusions are often developed from inferences as more information is gathered.
these differences make conclusions more reliable explanations than inferences are.
once you have drawn a conclusion based on facts you can persuasively support your point of view on an issue.
for example by studying a variety of sources about an election such as news reports polling data and debates between the candidates you can effectively draw a conclusion about why a candidate won.
content vocabulary conclusion a logical explanation that is based on known facts academic vocabulary identify to find comparing and contrasting when making comparisons you examine two or more ideas objects or events.
you identify the similarities or what the two things have in common.
when you contrast you are noting differences between ideas objects or events.
at times you are asked to both compare and contrast.
signal words or phrases provide clues to what you need to do.
words such as similar and also tell you to compare.
words and phrases such as however and on the other hand tell you to contrast.
view the chart of the virginia and new jersey plans on page 239 which parts of the two plans are similar.
which parts are different.
sequencing sequencing involves putting events in the order in which they occurred.
using this skill will help you to see and understand relationships between events.
you can sequence events in two ways 0 exploring social studies absolute chronology when you sequence events in this way you are paying attention to the dates of the events.
relative chronology when you sequence events this way you only need to know which event came first which came second and so on without paying attention to their dates.
sequence the following events using relative chronology.
then identify the relationship between slavery and the civil war.
1860 abraham lincoln is elected president of the united states.
1850 some southern senators oppose compromising with the north over slavery.
1861 southern states leave the union and the civil war begins.
1858 northerner abraham lincoln rises to leadership in a political party that opposes slavery.
finding the main idea when you look for the main idea of a selection you look for the most important idea.
the examples and information that explain the main idea further are called supporting details.
some main ideas are clearly stated often in the first sentence of a paragraph or sometimes in the last sentence of a passage.
other times the writer does not directly state the main idea.
instead he or she provides details that help readers figure out what the main idea is.
to help you find the main idea ask yourself what is each sentence about.
is there one sentence that tells about the whole passage or that is more important than the other sentences.
what main idea do the supporting details point out.
summarizing when you summarize you reduce a large amount of information into short and simple form.
a summary is a short restatement of the informations important content.
summarizing helps you digest and remember the main points in what you have read.
categorizing as a student it is important that you know how to organize large amounts of information in an understandable way.
categorizing helps you arrange facts and information into 1 groups that have the same characteristics.
putting things into categories can make it easier to see similarities and differences 5 among them.
are e aad all in t iled to attead meeting of he friend f w wtsw ortw.
at the old t th kt boom rile building on saturday evening next t perfect the arrangement neeemary fer the dprtngfitu emtmtim and al a to attend a ether important hmdne.
a xoblk altna map 1841 see ry cent.
this is a presidential campaign poster from an election in 1840 follow these steps to identify the main idea who is the candidate.
what does the poster tell you about the candidate.
who is the poster addressing.
what main idea is presented.
lesson 5 41 anne hutchinson making generalizations generalizations are statements that are generally true based on the facts available.
for example by saying our school has great athletic teams you are making a generalization.
that s because great is probably not true of all your schools teams but just most of them which makes your statement generally true.
in studying history you may need to put bits and pieces of information together in order to see the overall picture.
to make an accurate generalization you must first collect facts about the subject.
then identify similarities among facts and use those similarities to form some general ideas about the subject.
the puritans came to america in 1630 and started a colony called massachusetts.
make a generalization about them from the following pieces of information.
the puritans left england because they wanted religious freedom.
the puritans drove baptists and other non puritans from their colony.
puritan anne hutchinson was expelled from massachusetts for challenging church teachings.
the puritans expelled roger williams because he challenged the churchs authority.
q reading progress check identifying which skill helps identify similarities in two or more things.
problem solving skills guidingquestion how are decision making and problem solving similar.
you will sometimes be called on to investigate a topic in depth.
you might be assigned to complete a project on your own.
your teacher will also assign group projects.
for some topics you will need to solve a problem or make a decision based on the evidence you gather.
a set process a series of steps can help you make the decision or solve the problem.
making decisions people make decisions every day.
some decisions affect other people can have serious results and must be made quickly.
you might be a person who requires a lot of information to make your decision.
or you may feel very comfortable relying on your instinct when making your decision.
whatever the decision and whatever your style decision making should generally follow a process similar to this 42 exploring social studies when your group is working to solve a problem a first step is to understand the problem.
ask the questions what do we know about the problem.
do we have enough information to solve the problem.
if not what information do we need.
determine if others should be involved in the decisionmaking process.
gather information to help you make the decision.
identify options alternatives.
weigh each option and predict the consequences of each.
choose the best option.
put your decision into action.
solving problems a planned and careful approach will assist you in arriving at a solution to a problem.
choosing not to deal with a problem is one option.
however problems very rarely go away by themselves.
here is a process that should help you solve a problem identify the problem.
gather information about the problem.
list and consider solutions to the problem.
consider the advantages and disadvantages of each possible solution.
choose a solution and put it into action.
evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
doing research i when you research a topic you must determine what you 1 want or need to learn about it.
create six questions to help you i find out the who what when where why and how of the topic.
academic vocabulary content vocabulary create to make something new or original generalization a statement that is generally true based on the facts available lesson 5 43 skills practice when the language spoken in the classroom is challenging list the words you do not know.
use a dictionary to look them up after the lesson.
if you are working in a group decide which member is doing which part.
after you create six questions the next step is to gather your research materials.
begin with general reference books such as encyclopedias and textbooks or your notes from class.
looking for information on the internet can be quick and rewarding.
however it can be a challenge to find out if the information you locate is true.
it is important to apply the following standards to information on the internet.
jf you answer no to any of the questions below the web site is probably not a reliable source.
is the authorship of the information clear.
can you easily find out who is responsible for the web site.
has the web site been updated recently.
does the writing seem balanced or does it contain a bias toward one point of view.
you must also organize the information you gather.
outlines and reports can be a great resource when doing research.
for example you could use an outline such as the table of contents for this book to organize information about u s history for a presentation.
similarly reports can help you organize data.
if you look at a government report on a topic such as the environment or education the level of detail devoted to certain topics can help you identify the most important subjects to address in an essay.
once you have organized your information you need to interpret or assign meaning to it.
again the organization of material in outlines and reports can provide insight on a topic.
how is the data organized.
in what order is information presented.
the structure of an outline or a report can help you interpret the relative importance of different pieces of data.
h reading progress check making decisions why is it important to decide what you want to find out before beginning your research.
writing and communication skills guiding question how do we communicate information.
we communicate information in three main ways.
one way is in written form as in a report a letter or an e mail.
another way is by voice as in a conversation a speech a song or a presentation at work or in class.
the third way we communicate is visually.
otographs film or video art maps and graphs are all forms of visua communication.
sometimes our communications involve two o t ese means.
for example this textbook uses writing and images to provide information about our nations history.
44 exploring social studies writing skills good writing meets certain standards.
it shows correct use of grammar the rules for how the words and other parts of a language are used.
the words chosen clearly convey the writers information and ideas.
all words are properly used and their spelling is correct.
it is also important that you use the special words of social studies correctly.
as you read the lessons you will see many special words and phrases identified as content vocabulary or academic vocabulary.
examples of special vocabulary include free enterprise and unalienable right.
sentences are complete and properly punctuated.
they also are not so long that they are confusing.
the sentences in good writing are organized into paragraphs.
a paragraph is a group of sentences about one idea or topic.
paragraphs are the building blocks of o deliberate plagiarism unintentional plagiarism passing off as ones own omitting or not properly or rewriting books citing original sources articles or works of others poor paraphrasing or summarizing copying and pasting from web sites or assuming something is o online sources without common knowledge citation when it is not buying borrowing or recycling your own work downloading the work of others from an old paper o most written communication.
keep these tips in mind to avoid the first paragraph of a composition usually introduces the plagiarism.
the next paragraphs present information about the topic in a logical easy to follow sequence.
then the final paragraph states the writers conclusion about the topic.
a very important standard of good writing is that the work be the writers own.
to plagiarize is to present the ideas or words of another person as your own without giving credit to the source.
plagiarism is similar to forgery or copying anything else that is not yours and violates the law.
if you copy an idea or a written text word for word that is plagiarism.
to avoid plagiarism follow these rules put information in your own words.
when you restate an opinion from something you read include a reference to the author for example according to smith and jones always include a footnote when you use a direct quotation from another author.
if you are writing a report you may be required to include a bibliography.
a bibliography is a list of the books articles internet sources and other sources you used to do your research.
these are listed at the end of your report and should include the author of the source the title of the source plagiarize to present someone else s ideas or words as your own lesson 5 45 president george w bush addresses members ofthe u s border patrol about policy issues.
communication skills are important to make sure the audience understands your message.
when you plan an oral presentation ask yourself who is your audience.
what does your audience already know about the topic.
what do you want your audience to know.
what details and vocabulary will help you accomplish this.
the publisher of the source or the web site and internet address url where it can be found the date the source was published or the web site was accessed writing a paragraph writing a good paragraph involves stating information clearly and arranging it in a logical order.
knowing how to write a well organized paragraph helps you express your ideas clearly.
to write a good paragraph follow these steps decide on the main point you want the paragraph to express.
write the idea in a sentence.
this sentence will become the topic sentence or main idea ot the paragraph.
next write detail sentences to support the main idea.
these sentences should add information that explains or expands the main idea stated in the topic sentence.
they may be facts examples or reasons.
they should be arranged in a logical order.
use transition words such as next then also finally because however and as a result to link sentences within the paragraph.
transitions can also be used to link two paragraphs together.
good writing checklist when you finish your writing check to make sure your work is free from errors.
this checklist can help you have i avoided run on sentences and sentence fragments.
have i punctuated sentences correctly.
have i used every word correctly including plurals and possessives.
46 exploring social studies have i correctly used social studies terminology.
do verbs and subjects agree.
have i spelled every word correctly.
have i checked unfamiliar ones in the dictionary.
are my paragraphs clear and arranged in a logical order.
are the words my own.
finally evaluate the paragraph you have written.
does the topic sentence state the main idea clearly.
do the other sentences support the main idea.
creating presentations many of the standards and skills that make for good written communication apply to voice communication too.
whether you are giving a speech oral report or other presentation your grammar should be correct.
your sentences should be complete short and in an order that makes your meaning clear.
these skills are especially important when you are delivering information orally.
it is often more difficult for people to understand something they listen to than something they read.
to help your audience understand you can ask key questions about the information you are presenting and then answer them in your presentation.
also allow your audience time at the end of your presentation to ask questions.
most social studies presentations are more interesting if they include visuals such as photographs slide shows videos maps graphs or diagrams.
multimedia is the combination of text images video audio and animation in an interactive computer program.
to create multimedia presentations use special software on your computer.
h reading progress check describing what are the elements of a good paragraph.
include this lesson s information in your foldable who wut k how why lesson 5 review review vocabulary 1 explain the difference between the following terms 3oa a inference b conclusion 2 use multimedia in a sentence that explains how it can benefit presentations.
3ob answer the guiding questions 3 explaining how can social studies skills help students understand information and ideas.
4 comparing how are decision making and problem solving similar.
29b 5 specifying how do we communicate information.
expository writing choose a research topic that interests you.
create six questions to ask yourself to guide you in your research.
lesson 5 47 i activities directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
ouse your 330 to explore the essential questions.
expository writing the principles of our nation were expressed in the declaration of independence the bill of rights and the u s constitution.
scan the chapter.
l o o canada i united t states mexico i central i j america south america chapter 2 place and time the americas c 1492 by the late 1400s native american groups had spread out across most of north america.
groups adapted to the different climates and conditions to form unique cultures.
i i i step into the place map focus each native american group had its own features yet groups within certain areas often shared similar characteristics.
regions how many different culture groups are shown on a the map.
29c place according to this map which part of north america was not populated by native americans.
29c a vkbiwiwi iso speculating what geographic factors do you think might have defined the different culture areas shown on this map.
0 0 step into the time timeline look at the time line.
had human beings reached north america before the end of f 1 arctic i 1 subarctic ii northwest coast 1 plateau bbi great basin p 1 california 1 1 southwest 1 1 great plains 1 1 i northeast woodlands i southeast 1 a a s pacific oa 500 miles j 500 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection c 18 000 b c.
humans have likely reached the americas 160 w hawaiian islands settled by polynesians a c 1200b c.
olmec civilization develops in mexico networks ef map explore the interactive version of there s more online.
this map on networks.
ef timeline explore the interactive version ofthis time line on networks.
40 w 60 w lampanoag equot rragansett 120 w c a d.
1300s hohokam civilization begins to decline c a d 1438 inca empire begins to expand atlantic ocean iroquois league cayuga mohawk ktan oneida onondaga seneca c a d 700 maya empire reaches its peak c a d 1200s drought strikes ancient puebloan anasazi communities a d 1492 christopher j columbus arrives in west indies networks there s more online.
game tic tac toe gf graphic organizer ft reasons early peoples migrated image the wooley mammoth map routes to the americas self check quiz video north america lesson 1 o 3 migration to the americas nt1al question what are characteristics that make up a culture.
fws texas essential knowledge and skills 10a locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 17th 18th and 19th centuries.
30a use social studies terminology correctly.
reading helpdesk it matters because human history in the americas began thousands of years ago.
the migration begins guiding question who were the first americans and how did they live.
the written history of the americas is several hundred years old yet human beings have been living on these continents for thousands of years.
where did these people come from.
how and when did they get here.
how did the different corners of north and south america get settled.
today scientists are still seeking answers to these questions.
experts in archaeology ahrkee ahluh jee the study of ancient peoples continue to piece together evidence that tells the story of the first americans.
archaeologists have learned a lot about the past from artifacts ahrtih fakts the tools weapons and other objects that early people left behind.
based on this and other types of evidence archaeologists have offered some possible answers to questions about the first americans.
a widely held theory of recent times is that the first humans might have come to the americas 20 000 or more years ago.
this theory maintains that early people traveled along a strip of land that once linked asia and the americas.
a land bridge revealed throughout earth s history the climate has changed.
several periods of extreme cold have occurred.
the most recent of these ice ages began 100 000 years ago and ended about 10 000 years taking notes identifying as you read use a chart like this one to record reasons early peoples migrated from place to place.
the first americans reasons early peoples migrated 1 content vocabulary archaeology migration carbon dating artifact nomad culture strait maize arctic ocean greenland europe 2000 miles j 1 i 1 t 0 2000 km miller projection pacific ocean key extent of ice sheet land now underwater possible migration routes geography connection over thousands of years prehistoric people migrated to and then throughout the americas.
movement based on this map how did prehistoric people get to north america from asia.
critical thinking analyzing why do you think prehistoric people moved from one place in the americas to another.
during these years a large share of earths water formed huge sheets of ice or glaciers.
the glaciers held so much water that ocean levels were lower.
the lower sea level exposed a strip of land a land bridge connecting northeastern asia to what is now alaska.
scientists today call this land bridge beringia.
it now lies beneath the bering strait a body of water named for explorer vitus bering.
a strait is a narrow body of water that connects two larger ones.
many scientists believe early people traveled from asia to north america across the land bridge.
yet not all scientists agree on how or when this might have happened.
for example some think people might have come to the americas by boat.
this might have allowed humans to spread faster throughout the americas.
as archaeologists discover new artifacts and evidence new theories emerge to challenge old ones.
searching for hunting grounds it is clear of course that humans arrived in the americas.
long ago they traveled throughout both continents.
in time settlements stretched as far east as the atlantic ocean and as far south as the tip of south america.
skills practice when you see a new word think about it.
do you already know something about it.
archaeology the study of the material strait a narrow passage of water between remains of ancient peoples two larger bodies of water artifact a tool weapon or other object left behind by early peoples lesson 1 55 what is the reason for this migration my gray shuhn or movement of people from one area to another.
why did these early americans travel such distances.
the answer may lie in the search for food.
early peoples were nomads noh madz people who moved from place to place in search of hunting grounds.
although they also ate wild grains and fruits they depended on hunting for much of their food.
the first americans did indeed find huge mammals to hunt.
these included giant shaggy beasts that resembled modern elephants mastodons and mammoths.
early americans were skilled at hunting these and other animals.
they stalked herds of bison mastodons or mammoths charging at the animals with spears.
r a single mammoth which averaged 12 feet 3 7 m tall could provide tons of meat enough to feed a group of people for months.
earth warms about 15 000 years ago the last ice age began to end.
temperatures started to rise and the glaciers began to melt.
ocean levels rose and beringia disappeared beneath the waves cutting off the land route between asia and the americas.
around the same time the large mammals on which humans depended for food began to disappear.
this might have been the result of overhunting or changes in the climate.
the decline in game populations meant that early americans had to find other sources of food.
reading progress check explaining how did the ice age expose a land bridge between asia and the americas.
settlement guidingquestion how did agriculture change the way of life for early americans.
reading helpdesk the constant search for food meant trying new methods.
early americans caught fish and hunted smaller animals while also gathering berries and grains.
farming was another new option that began to emerge.
its development would change the nomadic way of life of many groups.
migration the movement of people from one area to another nomad to place a person who moves from place the first americans maize a variety of corn carbon dating a scientific method of determining the age of an artifact culture a people s shared values beliefs traditions and behaviors academic vocabulary source a supply estimate a rough calculation of a number learning to farm around 10 000 years ago people in the area now known as mexico learned to plant an early form of maize mayz which is a type of corn.
these early farmers also planted pumpkins beans and squash.
the crops provided a steady reliable source of food.
the farming people no longer had to move from place to place to find things to eat.
farming also allowed the people to spend time on activities other than finding food.
this resulted in an improvement in the lives of early americans.
in the 1600s native americans taught the pilgrims of plymouth colony how to grow maize as well as beans and pumpkins.
establishing unique cultures studying artifacts such as this antler or bone tool helps scientists learn about early cultures.
items such as these give important clues about the way ancient people lived.
for example scientists may be able to use a tool to infer how early people worked what foods they ate and what other tools they may have used.
although some early americans remained nomadic hunters many others began to settle down.
they built permanent shelters from clay stone or wood.
they also made pottery and cloth.
scientists have a method of determining how old an artifact is.
using a process called carbon dating scientists can measure the amount of radioactive carbon in an artifact.
they can use this measurement to come up with an estimate of the artifacts age.
carbon dating has helped scientists to date some settled north american villages to about 5 000 years ago.
through the study and dating of artifacts from these villages scientists know that agriculture changed the lives of early americans.
common customs and beliefs also grew over time.
eventually the groups of people living in the americas developed their own cultures kuhl churz or shared traditions and behaviors.
b reading progress check identifying what were some changes that affected the nomadic way of life.
by studying tools such as this archaeologists can learn about the skills and ways of living of the people who made it.
include this lesson s information in your foldable i canada yt mexico l united central states 1 america south america lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 examine the three terms below.
then write a sentence explaining what the terms have in common 3oa 3ob a archaeology b artifact c carbon dating 2 use the following terms in a sentence about the ancient history of the americas.
3oa 3ob a nomad b migration answer the guiding questions 3 explaining why might people have migrated from asia to the americas.
4 explaining what factors likely led some early americans to change from hunting to farming.
5 summarizing how does carbon dating help scientists learn about early cultures.
expository writing write a short essay describing how farming changed the lives of early people.
include examples of the types of food they grew 3oo lesson 1 57 networks there s more online.
biography malinche et graphic organizer i 1 native american tr civilizations gf image the aztec calendar lesso ef maps fs ii.
civilizations of mexico and vlut centra i america et self check quiz enti lesson 2 cities and empires fcfffrrmi rmcctirtm unu in civilizations rise and faltt tcks texas essential knowledge and skills 2a identify reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
27a explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat the cotton gin and interchangeable parts.
30a use social studies terminology correctly.
reading helpdesk it matters because early americans developed rich cultures and complex civilizations in several locations.
great civilizations of mexico central america and south america guiding question what civilizations in mexico central america and south america predated the arrival of europeans.
centuries before the europeans arrived great civilizations sih vuhluhzay shuhnz or highly developed societies thrived in mexico central america and south america.
the largest and most advanced of these were the olmec maya aztec and inca.
each of these civilizations controlled areas covering hundreds of square miles.
they included millions of people and lasted for several centuries.
the accomplishments of the olmec maya aztec and inca rivaled any of the great civilizations in other parts of the world.
their people built grand cities in dense forests and on high mountains.
they created spectacular works of art and developed advanced tools.
they also came up with complex methods for tracking time counting and writing.
the olmec along the gulf coast of what is now mexico a people called the olmec ohl mehk once flourished.
between 1200 b c.
and 800 b c the olmec built stone houses monuments and drainage systems.
their farmers grew food for thousands of people.
for taking notes listing as you read use a chart like this to make note of the features of each of the following civilizations.
include when and where they existed what they accomplished and other features of their societies.
8 the first americans olmec maya aztec inca content vocabulary civilization theocracy hieroglyphic terrace t gianni dagli orti corbis b manuel reasons that are not fully understood the olmec civilization declined.
by about 300 b c it had collapsed.
yet the olmec had a strong influence on the cultures that followed.
the maya the maya my uh civilization followed the olmec and reached its peak between a d 250 and a d 900 maya farmers planted maize beans squash and other vegetables.
these crops helped feed a large population which may have peaked at 2 million people.
these people lived in the many large cities the maya built in the steamy rain forests of present day mexico guatemala honduras and belize.
maya civilization was a theocracy thee ahkruhsee a society ruled by religious leaders.
powerful maya priests believed the gods were visible in the stars sun and moon.
their understanding of astronomy and their advanced mathematics helped them predict eclipses and develop a 365 day calendar.
the maya also developed a system of writing that used hieroglyphics hy ruhglihfihks symbols or pictures that represent things ideas and sounds.
maya transport and trade the maya were active traders.
farmers brought maize and vegetables to city markets.
they exchanged their goods for items such as cotton cloth pottery deer meat and salt.
without wheeled vehicles or horses the maya carried goods on their backs.
traders traveled on a network of roads that were carved out of the jungle.
they also used canoes to ship goods such as jade statues turquoise jewelry and cacao beans used for making chocolate up and down mexicos east coast.
maya civilization declines in time the maya civilization declined.
by about 1200 its once great cities were nearly deserted.
the reason is a mystery.
recent studies indicate that overpopulation drought and warfare are possible reasons for the maya decline.
though their civilization declined the maya people did not disappear entirely.
descendants of this great civilization still live in parts of mexico and central america today.
this aztec calendar played an important role in religious as well as daily life.
the maya also had complex calendars.
each maya city had at least one stone pyramid some of which reached about 200 feet 61 m the height of a 20 story building.
the temples on top of the pyramids were religious and governmental centers.
critical thinking drawing conclusions what can you conclude about maya society based on their ability to build such large structures.
academic vocabulary complex highly detailed civilization a highly developed society theocracy a society that is ruled by religious leaders hieroglyphic a form of writing that uses symbols or pictures to represent things ideas and sounds lesson 2 59 i malinche c 1501 1550 much of what we know about individual native americans comes from europeans.
malinche is one example.
in 1519 she was enslaved and living under harsh aztec rule.
when the spanish arrived in 1519 she gave them information about aztec culture.
she also learned spanish quickly and served as a translator for the spanish who called her doha marina.
malinche helped build ties between the spanish and the many unhappy aztec subjects in the region.
critical thinking drawing inferences why might malinche have been willing to help the spanish.
r the aztec empire in 1325 centuries after the fall of the maya a group of hunters called the aztec az tehk were wandering through central mexico.
they were searching for a permanent home for their people.
one day they came upon an island in lake texcoco tehs koh koh.
there they saw what they thought was a sign from their god an eagle with a snake in its beak sitting on a cactus.
according to aztec legend this sign indicated that the island was to be their home.
it was on this site that the aztec would build their capital city tenochtitlan tay nawch teet lahn.
today it is the site of mexico city.
at its height tenochtitlan was the largest city in the americas and one of the largest in the world.
the city was a center of trade attracting thousands of merchants to its outdoor marketplaces.
tenochtitlans construction was a marvel of building skill knowledge and human labor.
workers toiled day and night under the direction of priests and nobles.
they dug soil from the bottom of the lake to make causeways or bridges of earth.
these causeways linked the island and the shore.
elsewhere they used earth to fill in parts of the lake creating fields for growing crops.
aztec culture the aztec created a military empire.
in the 1400s the aztec army conquered many neighboring communities.
conquered people had to pay tribute in food and other goods.
some were also forced to work as slaves in aztec cities and villages.
like maya culture aztec culture revolved around its religious beliefs.
the aztec believed they must perform human sacrifices to please the gods and ensure abundant harvests.
they sacrificed prisoners of war by the thousands for this purpose.
a great city remembered the aztec empire was still going strong when europeans arrived in the americas in 1492 the first europeans to see tenochtitlan were awed by its splendor.
in 1519 hernan cortes led 550 spanish soldiers into the aztec capital.
cortes wrote primary source there are forty towers at the least all of stout construction and very lofty the workmanship both in wood and stone could not be bettered anywhere 99 reading helpdesk from five letters academic vocabulary link to connect 60 the first americans geography connection the civilizations that developed in modern day mexico and central america rivaled those that grew in other parts of the world.
place which of the empires shown covered the largest area.
critical thinking drawing conclusions given what you have read about the aztec what do you think is the explanation for the small areas within the aztec empire that were not under aztec control.
bernal diaz del castillo one of the soldiers marveled at the great towers and cues temples and buildings rising from the water some of the spanish soldiers thought tenochtitlan was more magnificent than rome and the other great european capitals of the time.
spanish leaders eagerly made plans to explore the americas and establish colonies.
b reading progress check identifying what was the capital of the aztec empire and where was it located.
the great inca civilization guidingquestion why were the inca considered a highly developed culture.
in the western highlands of south america the largest of all early american civilizations grew the inca.
the inca people founded their capital city of cuzco koos koh around 1200 in 1438 the emperor pachacuti pah chah koo tee came to the throne.
he and his son topa inca expanded the empire by conquering others with their powerful army.
at its peak the inca empire stretched for more than 3 000 miles 4 828 km from present day colombia to northern argentina and chile.
this double headed serpent is an aztec wood carving covered in turquoise tiles.
it may have been worn as a chest decoration during important occasions.
lesson 2 61 geography connection the inca empire was divided into four provinces along the western coast of south america.
modern day countries are bordered and labeled in black.
location in which modern day countries did the inca empire have territory.
critical thinking analyzing how do you think the andes mountains shaped and affected the inca empire.
750 mites i 0 750 km lambert azimuthal equaf area projection 20qs the inca empire 1532 jmbiaj w brazil livia l 1 i tropic qf capricorn.
pacific ocean chi paraguay i i chinchaisuyo i antisuyo i collasuyo i contisuyo argentinac 1oow 80w 60w 40w v fearsome warriors the inca state was built around war.
all men between 25 and 50 years old could be drafted to serve in the army for up to five years.
their weapons included clubs spears and spiked copper balls on ropes.
using slings inca soldiers could throw stones 30 yards 27 m.
rather than fight this fearsome force many neighboring areas accepted inca rule.
the inca allowed those who cooperated to take part in the empires government.
those who resisted or rebelled faced harsh treatment.
inca culture the inca people believed their emperor was a descendant of the sun god.
the inca made magnificent gold jewelry and temple ornaments as gifts to the sun god.
inca workers also built great cities devoted to religious ceremonies including machu picchu mahchoo pee choo a site hidden high in the andes.
reading helpdesk terrace a broad platform of flat land skills practice cut into a slope work with a partner.
use one of your vocabulary words in a question you ask your partner.
have your partner use another vocabulary word in the answer.
62 th iu mericans society pic x rift incas used quipus to track resources such as food supplies.
different colors and lengths of string and different types of knots made up the system for recording important information.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
supporting the large inca population required a lot of food.
in order to farm their mountainous lands the inca cut terraces or broad platforms into steep slopes.
stone walls on the terraces held the soil and plants in place.
inca farmers grew maize squash tomatoes peanuts chili peppers cotton and potatoes.
managing and ruling over such a large territory was a great challenge.
the inca built at least 10 000 miles 16 093 km of stone paved roads to link distant parts of their empire.
the roads crisscrossed mountains deserts and dense forests.
to cross deep canyons or river valleys the inca built rope bridges.
runners carried messages from the emperor in cuzco to outposts throughout the empire.
the inca language quechua keh chuh wuh became the official language for the entire empire.
the inca had no written language but they did develop a system of record keeping using string called quipus kee poos.
by knotting different colors of string in special patterns the inca used quipus to record and keep track of information about resources like the aztec the inca were thriving in the early 1500s.
they too would soon come face to face with spanish soldiers and experience a dramatic change in fortunes.
d reading progress check explaining how did the inca empire grow so large.
1 o 0 canada 1 mexico south 1 america united central j states america lesson 2 review review vocabulary 1 use the following terms in a paragraph about the maya.
3oa 3od a civilization b theocracy c hieroglyphic answer the guiding questions 2 sequencing in what chronological order did the great civilizations of mexico central america and south america appear.
29b 3 describing what key features did the great civilizations of mexico central america and south america have in common.
4 contrasting in what ways were the great civilizations of mexico central america and south america different.
29b expository writing consider each of the four civilizations detailed in the lesson.
write a short essay discussing what life might have been like in one of these societies.
use facts from the chapter.
1585 nevv england colonies 1589 middle colonies 1607 southern colonies j i pocahontas played a key role in the early history of colonial virginia.
w langdon kihn national geographic society corbis 107 chapter.
1 o o conflicts v i jackson jacksonian u over tt and democracy s 1 land j the bank chapter of frederick douglasss autobiography.
he wrote the autobiography because many people doubted his story.
they had heard him speak against slavery and thought he spoke too well to have once been enslaved.
douglass decided to tell his life story as a way to quiet these critics.
frederick douglass escaped a life of slavery to become a leading abolitionist.
eft 4 k 470 the spiritof reform primarysource ui was born in tuckahoe near hillsborough and about twelve miles from easton in talbot county maryland.
i have no accurate knowledge of my age never having seen any authentic record containing it.
by far the larger part of the slaves know as little of their ages as horses know of theirs and it is the wish of most masters within my knowledge to keep their slaves thus ignorant.
i do not remember to have ever met a slave who could tell of his birthday.
they seldom come nearer to it than planting time harvest time cherry time spring time or fall time.
a want of information concerning my own was a source of unhappiness to me even during childhood.
the white children could tell their ages.
i could not tell why i ought to be deprived of the same privilege.
i was not allowed to make any inquiries of my master concerning it the nearest estimate i can give makes me now between twenty seven and twenty eight years of age.
i come to this from hearing my master say some time during 1835 1 was about seventeen years old my mother and i were separated when i was but an infant before i knew her as my mother.
it is a common custom in the part of maryland from which i ran away to part children from their mothers at a very early age.
frequently before the child has reached its twelfth month its mother is taken from it and hired out on some farm a considerable distance off and the child is placed under the care of an old woman too old for field labor.
for what this separation is done i do not know unless it be to hinder the development of the child s affection toward its mother and to blunt and destroy the natural affection of the mother for the child.
this is the inevitable result.
literary element first person point of view occurs when a story s narrator tells his or her own experiences.
first person narrators use the pronouns me and we.
these narrators tell readers a lot about their own experience but very little about the experiences of other people or characters in their stories.
as you read think about what you learn because douglass tells his own story and what you don t learn.
vocabulary hinder to prevent tidings news i never saw my mother to know her as such more than four or five times in my life and each of these times was very short in duration and at night.
she was hired by a mr stewart who lived about twelve miles from my home.
she made her journeys to see me in the night traveling the whole distance on foot after the performance of her day s work.
she was a field hand and a whipping is the penalty of not being in the field at sunrise i do not recollect of ever seeing my mother by the light of day death soon ended what little relationship we could have while she lived and with it her hardships and suffering.
she died when i was about seven years old i was not allowed to be present during her illness at her death or burial never having enjoyed to any considerable extent her soothing presence her tender and watchful care i received the tidings of her death with much the same emotions i should have probably felt at the death of a stranger.
m analyzing literature dbq 0 stating how old was frederick douglass when he wrote this narrative.
0 citing text evidence how does douglass feel about his age.
290 0 drawing inferences how does douglass feel about his mother and her death.
29b lesson 3 471 1 activities directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
use your faavhfl s to explore the essential questions.
expository writing take on the role of a mid 1800s reformer and explain your goals for american society.
write an essay in which you describe the changes you hope to achieve and the challenges you face in getting people to change their ideas over time.
290 social studies skill synthesizing review the chapter for information about the reasons that people opposed abolition temperance and women s rights.
then select a current problem or injustice that you feel deeply about.
use the information from the chapter 2 assessment directions on a separate sheet of paper answer the questions below.
make sure you read carefully and answer all parts to the question.
lesson review lesson 1 0 naming what major agricultural enterprise became vital to the settlement of the southern great plains.
why was it important.
3c 0 analyzing what social issues did mexican americans share when dealing with settlers from the east.
3b 0 analyzing how did the cattle industry boom affect the economy ofthe west.
12b 0 explaining identify and explain the reasons western political boundaries changed between 1870 and 1900 lesson 2 0 analyzing how did railroad companies help to encourage settlement of the great plains.
what other human geographic factors affected settlement ofthe great plains.
12a 0 evaluating how did the economic impact ofthe homestead act contribute to the close ofthe frontier in the late 19th century.
15a 0 analyzing how did the hardships offarmers in the west affect the economy ofthe area.
3b lesson 3 0 analyzing what factors caused social conflicts between settlers on the great plains and native americans.
3c 0 describing what was the americanization movement and what policies did its followers propose for native americans.
3a 26b 0 analyzing how did the indian policies ofthe united states government affect the relationship between settlers in the west and native americans.
3a 0 explaining what influenced the legislation they passer what actions did congress take to expand political rights for native americans.
26a exploring the essential question 0 discussing write an essay in which you describe the hardships of and advantages to emigrating west during the nineteenth century.
12a critical thinking 0 analyzing how did the physical geography of the grea plains impact the farmers who settled there.
12a 0 identifying how did population growth in the great plains affect the environment.
14a 0 describing what was the homestead act and how did contribute to the closing of the frontier.
15a 0 hypothesizing what happened to boomtowns once i mines that supported them were used up.
0 drawing conclusions what caused the increase in migration to the west and what effect did this migrati have on the demographic patterns ofthe united states 0 explaining what specific needs facing settlers on thi great plains led to new scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture.
how did thesi innovations contribute to the formation of the wheat e 0 evaluating what were the consequences of the dawi act and how did it reflect the americanization movement.
26b 0 evaluating how did the economic impact ofthe homestead act contribute to the close ofthe frontier ii late 19th century.
15a need extra help.
112 social studies skills o identifying cause and effect how did societal changes brought about by the gold rush impact hispanics in california.
3c synthesizing what territory did the wheat belt encompass.
use correct social studies terminology to explain the territories involved.
30b understanding relationships why did the dakota sioux launch a major uprising in minnesota.
problem solving what problems did sodbusters encounter when farming the great plains.
how did some sodbusters overcome these problems.
27b research skills use internet or print resources to research the major characteristics that defined the historical era ofthe 1860s to 1900 write a short summary ofthe era and how each characteristic ofthe era was important to the history ofthe country.
2a 2b identifying perspectives and differing interpretations conduct research to find statistics about the wages land prices and employment opportunities on the great plains.
create a video or print advertisement that uses those statistics to promote life in the west.
if you make a video advertisement write the script out ahead of time.
the advertisement should try to persuade people from different countries to move to the west and take advantages of its rich resources and economy.
3oc geography skills create a thematic map ofthe major cattle trails in the united states during the late 1800s.
compare the map with a classmate and then display the map in the classroom.
31a j problem solving suppose you lived in the 1800s and received a letter from a relative who was struggling to make a living farming on the frontier.
write a letter to the relative in return to suggest a solution for the problem and a suggestion as to how the solution can be implemented.
32a 32b native american population year total on reservations 1870 313 712 288 646 1880 306 543 256 127 1890 248 253 243 534 source nations within a nation u s census.
q geographic distributions and patterns what geographic patterns do you see in the chart.
is there a positive or negative correlation in the geographic distribution.
what is different about the distribution in 1880 compared to the other two years.
what might have caused this difference.
what questions would you need answered in order to be sure your explanation of why 1880 is different from the other two years is correct.
30c 31b dbq analyzing primary sources read the excerpt from chief joseph leader ofthe nez perce and answer the questions that follow.
primarysource our chiefs are killed the little children are freezing to death.
my people have no blankets no food hear me my chiefs i am tired my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will fight no more forever.
from his speech of surrender to the u s army 1877 j analyzing primary sources what does the quotation say about the government effort to americanize native americans into american culture.
26b 29a constructing arguments what argument could you have made to the u s army to help chief joseph and the nez perce instead of accepting their surrender.
need extra help.
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 go to page 1 1oo 104 1 107 104 94 96 99 96 1 109 110 1 110 i settling the west 113 analyzing visuals use the image to answer the following questions.
this engraving from 1889 depicts the oklahoma land rush.
interpreting what is the significance of the title of this engraving the rush for the promised land over the border to oklahoma.
13a analyzing visuals what impression does this image give about the settlers who are rushing into the vast frontier to the promised land.
13a use the map mining helps build a nation to answer the following questions.
identifying which territories gained statehood due to the growth of mining industries.
12b explaining what reasons led to the change from u5.
territory to statehood for these western states.
12b extended response question expository write an essay comparing two different perspectives of the settlement of the west.
analyze how the views of native americans and white settlers differs on settling the great plains.
how did each group view th government s involvement and the environment the essay should include an introduction at least three paragraphs and a conclusion that supports your opinion use information gathered from primary and secondary sources to provide examples to support your answer.
29a 3oa standardized test practice the indian peace commission was formed to end the conflict with native americans on the great plains.
they proposed 3a a a treaty to end the battle of the little bighorn b federal regulations for hunting buffalo c creating two large reservations for the plains india d removing sitting bull from power in 1889 the discovery of gold and copper led to the rapii development of the northern great plains.
which of the following places gained statehood.
12b f montana north dakota and south dakota g montana wyoming and arizona h north dakota south dakota and oklahoma j north dakota south dakota and utah industrialization 865 1901 networks there s more online about how industrialization changed life and business in the united states.
chapter to learn how the events of the late nineteenth century shaped the united states as it is today.
for many european immigrants the statue of liberty was their first glimpse of america.
the statue of liberty often represented the hopes and dreams of people looking for a better life.
photo photolink photodisc getty images 141 chapter 8 assessment directions on a separate sheet of paper answer the questions below.
make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
lesson review lesson 1 0 identifying describe two major scandals that plagued the harding administration.
what effect did these scandals have on american citizens.
19c 0 analyzing what did president warren harding mean when he promised a return to normalcy and what policies did his administration pursue to promote economic growth and prosperity.
16a 0 identifying causes which secretary ofthe treasury during the 1920s pushed for lower taxes.
why did he push for lower taxes and what term is used today to describe his ideas.
16a 0 making connections how did the dawes plan prevent an economic crisis in europe and help resolve the issues of war debt and reparations.
4f lesson 2 0 analyzing how did increased production efficiencies lead to economic growth and prosperity in the 1920s.
16a 0 analyzing how did technological innovations in the workplace such as the assembly line and mass production affect american workers and american businesses.
27c 0 analyzing identify four major scientific discoveries or technological innovations that occurred in the 1920s and explain how each improved the standard of living in the united states.
28a 0 identifying what inventions and developments made the rise ofthe airline industry possible.
6b 0 evaluating explain how scientific discoveries and new technology contributed to the quiet depression among farmers in the 1920s.
what policies did the government adopt that increased the problems of farmers.
27b analyzing how did the american free enterprise system apply innovations in transportation to improve the american standard of living.
what role did henry ford play in bringing about these developments.
6b 28a lesson 3 identifying cause and effect why was there a general rise in nativism in the 1920s.
how did congress respond to nativism.
6a explaining what was the fundamentalist movement.
what role did it play in shaping american culture.
26c explaining how did women s roles change during the 1920s.
what caused these changes and what were the effects.
6a analyzing what action by congress changed the demographic patterns of immigrants in the early 1920s.
what effect did congressional action have on the demographic pattern of immigrants.
13b lesson 4 making connections why did many members ofthe lost generation choose to leave the united states.
how does the book the great gatsby reflect their view of american culture at the time.
25a describing in what ways did hollywood films ofthe 1920s express the issues and characteristics ofthe time.
25a lesson 5 identifying what was the impact of 1920s american popular culture on the rest ofthe world overtime.
25c describing what major issues and characteristics ofthe 1920s were expressed in blues music.
25a identifying cause and effect what caused the great migration and what effect did it have on the political power of african americans.
6a 13a need extra help.
0 o o 0 263 265 265 265 266 268 265 270 273 272 271 mm 277 284 analyzing significance what impact did marcus garvey have on the african american community and what actions did he and his organization take to expand economic opportunity for african americans.
6b 13a 26a explaining what actions did the naacp take in the 1920s to protect and expand the political rights of african americans.
26a exploring the essential questions 0 comparing and contrasting how was the economy and society of the united states different in the 1920s from what it had been in the late 1800s.
describing what were some ofthe positive effects of the music and literature ofthe harlem renaissance.
what were some ofthe negative effects.
25b critical thinking making connections explain how literature ofthe 1920s reflected the issues and characteristics ofthe era.
25a analyzing evaluate the effects ofthe passage ofthe eighteenth amendment.
how did this reform change american society.
5a 6a describing what was the managerial revolution ofthe 1920s.
explain how new management ideas were applied to the workplace and their impact on american business.
how did these management innovations enhance the productivity of managers and workers.
27c 0 describing what issues and characteristics of life in the 1920s did modern art try to portray.
what was the positive impact of this type of art.
what was its negative impact.
25a 25b social studies skills making generalizations pick one ofthe following cultural categories art music film literature.
research several artists musicians writers or films from the 1920s in the category you have chosen.
identify the common elements and similar themes and ideas they shared.
prepare a presentation either online or on a poster board using images quotes audio recordings if possible and written descriptions that illustrate the common themes of 1920s culture.
25a 29b interpreting the past after world war ii it was common for historians to argue that the united states turned isolationist after world war i and that the isolationism was one of the causes of world war ii.
do you agree with that viewpoint.
analyze u s policies toward other nations in the 1920s and write a brief report on whether or not the united states was isolationist.
begin with an introduction where you define isolationism then write two paragraphs and a conclusion giving your interpretation of the past.
4f 29c dbq analyzing primary sources read the following excerpts from writings by w e b.
dubois and claude mckay and answer the questions that follow.
primary source yye return.
we return from fighting.
we return fighting.
make way for democracy.
we saved it in france and by the great jehovah we will save it in the united states of america or know the reason why.
dubois the crisis may 1919 primary source 0 kinsmen.
we must meet the common foe.
though far outnumbered let us show us brave and for their thousand blows deal one deathblow.
what though before us lies the open grave.
like men we ll face the murderous cowardly pack pressed to the wall dying but fighting back.
claude mckay if we must die 1919 interpreting what event is dubois referencing when he says we return.
when he says we saved it in france and we will save it in the united states what is he referring to and what is he calling on african americans to do.
25a 25b need extra help.
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 goto page 282 258 m w 1 274 268 1 275 275 257 281 279 thejazzage 285 comparing what emotions are both w e b dubois and claude mckay trying to instill in african americans with their writing.
25a 25b analyzing visuals use the cartoon to answer the following questions.
identifying what incident is depicted in the cartoon.
how do you know.
19c 29a 29h interpreting why do you think the artist named this cartoon the white house highway.
19c 29a 29h extended response question summarizing the policies ofthe harding and coolidge administrations were intended to promote economic growth and world peace.
write an essay explaining and summarizing the methods they used to create economic growth at home and to promote political and economic stability worldwide.
give your opinion as to whether they were successful or not and explain your reasoning.
your essay should include an introduction several paragraphs and a conclusion and should reference historical facts and details to support your conclusion.
4f 16a explaining identify and describe the contributions of each ofthe following people to american culture in the 1920s 25a.
carl sandburg edith wharton.
ernest hemingway langston hughes zora neale hurston bessie smith duke ellington standardized test questions the rise in the standard of living in the 1920s was partly the result of 16a 28a a increased government spending and new technology.
b decreased consumer spending and free trade.
c new technology and more disposable income.
d lower wages and easy consumer credit.
the great migration refers to the 13a f arrival of large numbers of european immigrants.
g relocation of many american soldiers after world war i h movement of americans from farms to urban factory jobs.
j movement of southern african americans to northern cities.
need extra help.
32 33 34 35 36 37 gotopage i 260 i 260 260 275 265 281 1 286 the great depression begins 1929 1932 networks there s more online about the great depression and its effects on society.
chapter covers.
applying the skill.
there has been much controversy over the years about the american decision to drop the atomic bomb on japan.
different historians have viewed the decision differently and have come to different i conclusions.
here are several secondary sources about the decision gar alperovitz the decision to use the atomic bomb 1995 herbert feis japan subdued 1961 gregg herken the winning weapon 1981 robert james maddox weapons for victory 1995 martin sherwin a world destroyed 1975 look up two of these secondary sources and apply the skills you have learned for analyzing secondary sources.
then answer these historical questions 1 acquiring information what are the major opinions of historians concerning trumans decision.
2 analyzing historical questions write a brief report on the kinds of evidence being used by historians analyzing the decision to drop the bomb.
how might the sources used affect their interpretation.
3 answering historical questions based on what you have learned why do you think president truman dropped the atomic bomb on japan.
do you agree with the decision.
389 chapter 13 the cold war shape postwar tensions affect american society.
lesson 1 the origins of the cold war lesson 2 the early cold war years lesson 3 the cold war and american society lesson 4 eisenhower s cold war policies 9 the story matters the destruction caused by the atomic bomb raised the stakes of military conflict.
american concerns about the lack of freedom in countries controlled by the soviet union created a growing tension between the two nations.
the united states and the soviet union would continue in a state of political conflict military tension and economic competition for almost 45 years.
conflict broke out in 1950 when communist north korea invaded south korea expanding the cold war.
dwight d eisenhower commander of the allied forces during world war ii and army chief of staff under truman became president in 1953 photo bettmann corbis ji 393 chapter.
what developments in the 1950s contributed to this geographic pattern and what consequences can you predict would happen in the future.
31b posing questions about geographic patterns what questions do you need to answer to know if the trend shown above resulted in the predictions you made in the previous question.
write a brief report identifying the questions that you need to answer.
conduct research at the library or online to find out if what you predicted actually occurred between the 1990s and the 2010s.
add the results to your report.
31b extended response question comparing and contrasting write an expository e that compares and contrasts the postwar domestic agendas of president harry truman and president dw eisenhower.
your essay should include an introductioi at least two paragraphs that categorizes how their idi and approaches to domestic issues were similar and different.
17b 29b 30a standardized test practice what was the reason for the passage ofthe 22nd amendment.
21b a to ensure that the president s veto powers are lii b to ensure that presidents are limited to only twc terms in office c to ensure that the military is desegregated d to ensure that veterans are guaranteed the righ an education what event led to defense spending to promote ediii in science math and technical subjects.
17c f the construction of eniac an early computer g the launch of sputnik h the berlin airlift j the discovery of a polio vaccine need extra help.
31 32 33 34 35 36 go to page 1 427 j 427 427 427 432 437 446 the new frontier and the great society 1960 1968 networks there s more online about the united states during the kennedy and johnson administrations.

chapter 1 t ey native american culture areas inuit 11 arctic mb northeast ib subarctic 1 great basin mb northwest coast 1 california j j plateau i southwest great plains mb southeast 0 250 500 miles 250 500 kilometers 30w 40w han saschutkenne c g tagish dogrib inuit 50w v a tiingit bird shaped pipe northwest coast culture area chit hudson bay inuit sewing tool with carved bone handle great plains culture area naskapi fhaisla cree m shuswap oksack nakum f qaiich columbiaa salish s kane chmopk yakima north america montagnais micmac blackfoot klickitat walla walla yaquina plains plains cree ojibway mandan algonquian ottawa flassachuset 6o w a crow northern paiute rv teton sioux nortwm qi8yenne s shoshone omaha.
v pawneey wappo r 3 arapaho kansa totowa j 49.
hjjpa f fcchon 87 1 sante sioux sauk i iowa foxl kickapoo miami miwok r costanoan rfonoy yfc f e elen kawafi s illinois missouri cahokia osage atla ntic ocean yokuts chun kiowa comanche nakipaf wichita caddo tonkawa 1 tuskegee ataban choctaw j sen ib.
gulf of mexico x cancel jlz troecos guachichil geography skills.
interpreting maps mesoameri.
human figure southwest culture area 1 region why did some culture areas have fewer groups of people than other culture areas did.
2 human environment interaction what natural features served as boundaries between culture areas.
caribbean sea pacific ocean the world before the l 110w 100 w 9o w 8ow the apache and navajo also lived in the southwest.
these groups were nomadic they moved from place to place hunting small animals and foraging for food.
the apache and navajo also supported themselves by raiding the villages of the pueblo and others.
great plains the huge great plains region stretches south from canada into texas.
this culture area is bordered by the mississippi valley on the east and the rocky mountains on the west.
the plains were mainly grassland home to millions of buffalo.
deer elk and other game also thrived there.
most great plains r eoples were nomadic hunters.
many groups hunted buffalo using bows and spears.
blackfoot and arapaho hunters sometimes chased the animals over cliffs drove them into corrals or trapped them in a ring of fire.
native americans used buffalo skins for shields clothing and coverings for their teepees cone shaped shelters.
some plains groups were farmers.
the mandan and pawnee settled in villages and grew corn beans and squash.
the pawnee lived in round lodges made of dirt.
like some other native american groups pawnee society was matrilineal.
this means that people traced their ancestry through their mothers not their fathers.
northeast and southeast eastern north america was rich in sources for food and shelter.
animals plant foods fish and wood for housing were plentiful in the region s woodlands and river valleys.
most southeastern groups including the cherokee creek and seminole lived in farming villages governed by village councils.
in the northeast groups like the algonquian survived by hunting and gathering plants.
those in the south farmed hunted gathered plants and fished.
many tribes used strings of beads known as wampum for money.
to the east of the algonquian lived the iroquois or haudenosaunee.
they were farmers hunters and traders who lived in longhouses or rectangular homes made from logs and bark that housed 8 to 10 families.
the iroquois created the iroquois league.
this confederation or alliance was established by the cayuga mohawk oneida onondaga and seneca.
the league waged war against and made peace with non iroquois peoples.
its goal was to strengthen the alliance against invasion.
the league helped the iroquois become one of the most powerful native american peoples in north america.
generalizing how did environment influence native american cultures in north america.
reading check j chapter to answer the question below.
17 look back at the diagram on page 30 which of the following is the main way to enter the castle.
a well b moat c drawbridge d windows j writesmart 18 writing your travelogue.
you have read about many cultures across a long span of history.
pick one area that you found the most interesting in the chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 before the arrival of europeans the most advanced native american societies were located in what is now a california.
b the eastern united states.
c the american southwest.
2 the trade in gold salt and slaves is closely related to f the inca empire.
g the roman empire.
h west africa.
j the renaissance.
3 which of the following statements best describes the cause of increased trade between europe and asia in the late middle ages.
a the interruption of trade caused by the crusades led many merchants to travel to asia in search of trade partners.
b european merchants traded with asia due to a lack of valuable natural resources in europe.
c the growth of towns during the middle ages led to an increased demand for asian trade goods.
d marco polos stories of asias great wealth led many europeans to seek out asian goods.
4 how did the societies of north america differ from those of central and south america.
f societies in north america did not create political units like those in central and south america.
g north american culture groups lacked the diversity of those in central and south america.
h north american societies were significantly more advanced than those to the south.
j culture groups in north america worshipped many gods while those in central and south america were monotheistic.
5 a result of johannes gutenbergs printing press was that a the renaissance began.
b more people could read the same books and share ideas.
c european trade and commerce grew.
d overseas trade and travel became more popular.
6 the exposure of a land bridge between asia and present day alaska during the last ice age resulted in f the introduction of new plants and animals to asia and europe.
g the development of farming in the americas.
h the migration of people into the americas.
j the establishment of advanced cultures in north america.
7 examine the following passage by marco polo about his travels through china.
then answer the question that follows.
z upon leaving ta in fu we traveled for seven days through a fine county in which there were many cities where commerce and manufactures goods prevailed.
we reached a large city named pi an fu which is very famous.
like ta in fu this city contains numerous merchants and artisans.
silk is produced here also in great quantity marco polo from the travels of marco polo the venetian document based question what is the main idea of this passage.
the world beforethe opening of the atlantic 33 multimedia connections click through iiirwwuii x inter activities the maya developed one of the most advanced civilizations in the americas but their story is shrouded in mystery.
around a d 250 the maya began to build great cities in southern mexico and central america.
they developed a writing system practiced astronomy and built magnificent palaces and pyramids with little more than stone tools.
around a d 900 however the maya abandoned their cities leaving their monuments to be reclaimed by the jungle and for a time forgotten.
explore some of the incredible monuments and cultural achievements of the ancient maya online.
you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources and more at ill ilffbg uh destroying the maya s past watch the video to learn how the actions of one spanish missionary nearly destroyed the written record of the maya world.
x 1 thus let it be done.
let the emptiness be filled.
let the water recede and make a void let the earth appear and become solid let it be done.
they said and instantly it was made.
eh finding the city of palenque watch the video to learn about the great maya city of palenque and the european discovery of the site in the eighteenth century.
pb the popol vuh read the document to learn how the maya believed the world was created.
pakal s tomb watch the video to explore how the discovery of the tomb of a great king helped archaeologists piece together the maya past.
the maya 33 mc2 writesmart i iis uui x fjv ui ij i ul v v vi iiiiiiiwiijwi 111 ix vii i uivi v vw iii their colonies.
s on writing writing a letter long before telephones and e mails most people communicated with friends and family far away by letter.
as you read this chapter you will learn about different groups of people who came to the americas.
you will pretend to be a member of one of these groups and write a letter home to tell your friends and family about the people you meet and the experiences you have in the americas.
34 chapter 2 you try it.
read the following passage from this chapter 2 murder if he killed a slave while punishing him.
enslaved africans on the other hand received harsh penalties for minor offenses such as breaking a tool.
runaways were often tortured and sometimes killed.
the treatment of enslaved africans varied.
some slaves reported that their masters treated them kindly.
to protect their investment some slaveholders provided adequate food and clothing for their slaves.
however severe treatment was very common.
whippings brandings and even worse torture were all part of american slavery.
generalizing how were enslaved africans treated in the americas.
reading check.
many slaves expressed themselves through art and dance.
dances were important social events in slave communities.
like most elements of slave culture art and dance were heavily influenced by african traditions.
identifying points of view why was religion important to slaves in the americas.
reading check i summary i wiped out and preview after disease much of the native american population colonists turned to slave labor.
in the next chapter review visual summary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter you are about to read.
read it and then answer the questions below.
the treaty of paris after yorktown only a few small battles took place.
lacking the money to pay for a new army great britain entered into peace talks with america.
benjamin franklin had a key role in the negotiations.
delegates took more than two years to come to a peace agreement.
in the treaty of paris of 1783 great britain recognized the independence of the united states.
the treaty also set america s borders.
a separate treaty between britain and spain returned florida to the spanish.
british leaders also accepted american rights to settle and trade west of the original thirteen colonies.
j after you have read the passage answer the following questions.
1 the main idea of the second paragraph is stated in a sentence.
which sentence expresses the main idea.
2 what is the first paragraph about.
what facts and details are included in the paragraph.
based on your answers to these questions what is the main idea of the first paragraph.
use appropriate academic and social studies vocabulary words in your main idea sentence.
3 with a partner discuss the main idea you each wrote down.
use your partner s main idea to further understand the paragraphs and to confirm your own interpretation of the main ideas.
chapter 4 reading check summarizing what did the second continental congress accomplish.
early battles while the congress discussed peace the massachusetts militia began to fight.
boston was a key city in the early days of the war.
both patriots and the british fought to hold it.
bunker hill desperate for supplies leaders in boston sent benedict arnold and a force of 400 men to new york state.
their objective was to attack the british at fort ticonderoga.
in may 1775 arnold captured the fort and its large supply of weapons.
meanwhile the poorly supplied patriots kept the british pinned down inside boston.
although british leaders were trying to form a battle plan they awoke on june 17 to a stunning sight.
the colonial forces had quietly dug in at breed s hill a point overlooking north boston.
the redcoats would have to cross boston harbor and fight their way uphill.
as the british force of 2 400 advanced 1 600 militia members waited.
low on gunpowder the commander ordered his troops not to fire until you see the whites of their eyes.
as they climbed the exposed hillside with their heavy packs the british soldiers were cut down.
twice they retreated.
stepping over the dead and wounded they returned for a third try.
the colonists were now out of ammunition and eventually they had to retreat.
this famous conflict is now known as the battle of bunker hill although it was actually launched from breed s hill.
while the patriots lost they proved they could take on the redcoats.
for the british the battle was a tragic victory.
to win they had sacrificed about double the number of patriot soldiers.
dorchester heights shortly after the battle of bunker hill general washington arrived in boston to command the continental army.
washington knew that he would need heavier guns to drive the british out of boston and he knew where to get them fort ticonderoga.
colonel henry knox was assigned to transport the captured cannons from fort ticonderoga to boston.
he successfully brought the heavy guns over 300 miles of rough terrain in the middle of winter.
when knox delivered the cannons washington was ready to regain control of boston.
on march 4 1776 washington moved his army to dorchester heights an area that overlooked boston from the south.
he stationed the cannons and his troops on nook s hill overlooking british general william howe s position.
when howe awoke the next morning and saw the patriots well positioned artillery he knew he would have to retreat.
the rebels have done more in one night than my whole army could do in months howe declared.
on march 7 howe retreated from boston to canada.
the birthplace of the rebellion was now in patriot hands.
reading check drawing inferences why was the geography of the boston area important in forming a battle plan.
i summary and preview some colonial i leaders became convinced that they could not avoid war with great britain.
in the next section you will read about another step toward war the writing of the declaration of independence.
section 1 assessment ml f online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what was the first continental congress.
b make inferences why did the first continental congress send the declaration of rights to the king.
c elaborate why did king george iii refuse to consider the colonists declaration.
2 a identify who warned the colonists of the british advance toward lexington and concord.
b analyze why did the british army march on lexington and concord.
c elaborate what is meant by the expression shot heard round the world.
3 a describe what was the purpose of the second continental congress.
b draw conclusions were the delegates to the second continental congress ready to revolt against george iii.
c evaluate defend george ill s response to the declaration of rights and the olive branch petition.
4 a identify what leader captured fort ticonderoga.
b draw conclusions how was the continental army able to drive british forces out of boston.
c evaluate how would you evaluate the performance of the continental army in the early battles of the war.
critical thinking 5 categorizing review your notes on the early battles of the revolution.
then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to categorize events in the early days of the revolution.
some events will be attempts at peace others will be movement toward war.
attempts at peace movement toward war 6 thinking about the beginning you ll have about five minutes for your report and only a minute or twoto talk about the beginning of the war.
what are the one or two most important things you want to say.
which ideas from your notes on class lectures might you include in your summary.
16 chapter 4 on christmas night 1776 with a winter storm lashing about them washington and 2 400 soldiers silently rowed across the ice clogged delaware river.
as morning broke the men short on supplies and many with no shoes marched through the snow to reach the enemy camp.
the hessians having celebrated the holiday the night before were fast asleep when the patriots sprang upon them.
the battle of trenton was an important patriot victory.
american soldiers took more than 900 prisoners.
british general charles cornwallis rushed to stop washington as he marched northeast to princeton.
on the night of january 2 1777 the patriots left their campfires burning then slipped into the darkness and circled behind the british troops.
in the morning washington attacked.
a local resident witnessed it the battle was plainly seen from our door and the guns went off so quick and many together that they could not be numbered almost as soon as the firing was over our house was filled and surrounded with general washington s men anonymous quoted in voices of 1776 by richard wheeler as washington watched the redcoats flee princeton he cheered it is a fine fox chase my boys.
now new soldiers joined the chase.
others re enlisted.
the army and the revolution was saved.
saratoga the two quick defeats stung the british.
in the spring of 1777 they wanted a victory.
british general john burgoyne decided to push through new york state and cut off new england from the other colonies.
the strategy required perfect timing.
according academic vocabulary strategy a plan for fighting a battle or war the american revolution 129 to the plan burgoyne s army would invade from canada recapture fort ticonderoga and sweep south to albany.
general howe in new york city would sail up the hudson river to meet him strangling new england.
indeed burgoyne took ticonderoga in early july and headed toward albany.
here the timing went wrong for the british.
unknown to burgoyne howe had left new york sailed up the chesapeake bay and captured philadelphia.
delegates to the continental congress were forced to flee.
meanwhile burgoyne s army bogged down in thick forests.
the patriots had chopped down large trees and dammed rivers to create obstacles.
all along the route the militia swarmed out of nowhere to attack the redcoats.
as burgoyne neared saratoga new york he found himself surrounded.
on october 17 1777 he was forced to surrender his entire army to general horatio gates.
the battle of saratoga in new york was the turning point of the revolutionary war.
it was the greatest victory yet for the american forces.
morale soared.
patriot james thacher wrote this event will make one of the most brilliant pages of american history.
help from europe the french and indian war had drastically changed the balance of power in north america.
the french and spanish had lost a large expanse of valuable land to the british.
both countries were delighted to see their powerful rival experiencing trouble in its american colonies.
the victory at saratoga gave the patriots something they had been desperately seeking foreign help.
not surprisingly it came from britain s enemies france and spain.
even britain s old ally holland joined the fight on the side of the patriots.
two remarkable europeans the welfare of america is closely bound up with the welfare of mankind declared a wealthy young frenchman the marquis de lafayette.
inspired by the ideas of the revolution lafayette bought his own ship and arrived in america in 1777 he brought with him a group of well trained soldiers and volunteered to serve in the continental army himself without pay.
lafayette spoke little english and had never seen battle.
however he quickly became a skillful commander earning the title of major general.
lafayette led 2 000 patriots to successfully pursue 6 000 redcoats throughout virginia during 1780 81 he gave 200 000 of his own money to support the revolution and wrote many letters home to powerful friends and family asking their aid for the patriot cause.
in february 1778 another european came to serve heroically under washington.
baron friedrich von steuben an experienced military officer from prussia led with a combination of respect and fear.
he started training the american troops focusing on basic military drills.
soon he turned the continental army into a finely tuned fighting force.
a historian called von steuben s feat perhaps the most remarkable achievement in rapid military training in the history of the world.
help from france benjamin franklin a skilled and experienced diplomat had gone to france to ask king louis xvi for support.
finally the battle of saratoga in 1777 persuaded the king that the colonists could win the war.
not until then did the king agree to an official alliance with the patriots.
in may 1778 the continental congress ratified the treaty of support with france.
the french had been helping the patriots all along with some supplies and ammunition.
after the treaty became official the french increased the level of supplies and provided soldiers and ships.
french naval support would be a key to defeating the british.
french loans were converted into cash by new yorker haym salomon.
he also convinced many hessians to leave the conflict.
help from spain spain also a bitter enemy of britain joined the war in 1779 bernardo de galvez the governor of spanish louisiana became a key ally to the patriots.
galvez gathered a small army of spanish soldiers french americans colonists and native americans.
together they made their way east from louisiana.
galvez seized british posts all the way to pensacola florida.
summarizing how did france and spain help the patriots.
reading check.
primary source r journal entry valley forge a surgeon at valley forge albigence waldo kept a journal of what he saw during the winter of 1777 78.
the army which has been surprisingly healthy hitherto now begins to grow sickly from the continued fatigues they have suffered this campaign.
yet they still show a spirit of alacrity cheerful readiness and contentment not to be expected from so young troops.
i am sick discontented and out of humour.
poor food hard lodging cold weather fatigue nasty cloaths clothes nasty cookery smoke and cold hunger and filthyness a pox on my bad luck albigence waldo from diary of surgeon albigence waldo of the connecticut line analysis skill.
analyzing primary sources why did waldo seem surprised by the soldiers attitude.
winter at valley forge the entry of france and spain into the war came at a crucial moment.
the continental army was running very low on food and clothing.
in december 1777 washington settled his 12 000 men at valley forge north of philadelphia.
to this day the name of valley forge brings to mind suffering and courage.
yet no battles took place here.
the only enemy was the brutal winter of 1777 78 washington s men lacked even the most basic protections against shin deep snows.
in spite of the general s repeated requests for supplies conflicts over funding between state authorities and congress kept supplies from coming.
washington wrote in a letter to see men without clothes without blankets to lie upon without shoes without a house or hut to cover them until those could be built and submitting without a murmur is a proof of patience and obedience which in my opinion can scarcely be paralleled matched george washington quoted in george washington a collection as winter roared in soldiers quickly built crude shelters that offered little protection against the weather.
some soldiers had no shirts.
others had marched the shoes off their feet.
at their guard posts they stood on their hats to keep their feet from touching the freezing ground.
one soldier wrote that getting food was the business that usually employed us.
during that terrible winter some 2 000 soldiers died of disease and malnutrition.
amazingly the survivors not only stayed they drilled and marched to the orders of baron von steuben becoming better soldiers.
while the soldiers suffered through the winter at valley forge the british lived a life of luxury in philadelphia.
most of the patriots had fled the city leaving only loyalists and british soldiers.
together they enjoyed the city s houses taverns and theaters and held parties and balls.
finding main ideas what challenges did the continental army face at valley forge.
reading check.
32 chapter 4 chapter review visual summary reviewing vocabulary terms and people 1 what were american colonists who remained loyal to great britain called.
a whigs c royalists b loyalists d democrats 2 what was the name of the battle in which the patriots finally defeated the british.
a battle of saratoga c battle of yorktown b battle of new jersey d battle of valley forge 3 what was the name for the colonial military force created to fight the british.
a mercenaries c hessians b redcoats d continental army 4 who was the french nobleman who helped the patriots fight the british.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 112 116 5 a recall what actions did the first and second continental congresses take.
b analyze how did the events at lexington and concord change the conflict between great britain and the colonies.
c elaborate why do you think that control of boston early in the revolutionary war was important.
section 2 pages 118 121 6 a identify why is july 4 1776 a significant date.
b draw conclusions what effect did common sense have on colonial attitudes toward great britain.
a bernardo de galvez c baron von steuben b marquis de lafayette d lord dunmore c predict how might the content of the declaration of independence lead to questions over the issue of slavery.
the american revolution 141 section 3 pages 126 134 7 a describe what difficulties did the patriots experience in the early years of the war.
b analyze how did the patriots turn the tide of the war.
why was the battle of saratoga important.
c elaborate could the patriots have succeeded in the war without foreign help.
section 4 pages 135 139 8 a recall why did the british think they might find support in the southern colonies.
b make inferences why did it take more than two years for the british and the americans to agree to the terms of the treaty of paris.
c evaluate in your opinion what was the most important reason for the patriots defeat of the british.
reading skills main ideas in social studies use the reading skills taught at the beginning of the chapter 5 section 1 magna carta p 152 constitution p 153 virginia statute for religious freedom p 153 suffrage p 153 articles of confederation p 154 ratification p 154 land ordinance of 1785 ip.
155 northwest ordinance of 1787 p 155 northwest territory ip.
155 section 2 tariffs p 159 interstate commerce ip.
160 inflation p 161 depression ip.
161 daniel shays p 161 shays s rebellion ip.
161 section 3 constitutional convention p 164 james madison ip.
164 virginia plan ip.
164 new jersey plan p 165 great compromise p 165 three fifths compromise p 166 popular sovereignty ip.
167 legislative branch ip.
167 executive branch p 167 judicial branch ip.
167 checks and balances ip.
167 federalism p 167 amendments ip.
168 section 4 antifederalists ip.
170 george mason p 170 federalists p 171 federalist papers ip.
171 bill of rights ip.
173 academic vocabulary in this chapter 5 examine old ideas and traditions.
philosopher john locke believed that a social contract existed between political rulers and the people they ruled.
baron de montesquieu argued that the only way to achieve liberty was through the separation of governmental powers.
american models of government americans had their own models of self government to follow like town meetings the virginia house of burgesses and the mayflower compact.
in 1639 the people of connecticut drew up the english colonies first written constitution.
a constitution is a set of basic principles and laws that states the powers and duties of the government.
in addition the declaration of independence clearly set forth the beliefs on which americans thought government should be based.
to keep individual leaders from gaining too much power the new state constitutions created limited governments or governments in which all leaders have to obey the laws.
most state constitutions had rules to protect the rights of citizens or those accused of crimes.
some banned slavery.
the massachusetts constitution of 1780 is the oldest state constitution still in effect.
thomas jefferson s ideas about religious freedom were included in the virginia statute for religious freedom.
this document declared that no person could be forced to attend a particular church or be required to pay for a church with tax money.
right to vote under british rule only free white men that owned land could vote.
many states constitutions expanded suffrage or the right to vote by allowing any white man who paid taxes to vote.
in every state however only land owners could hold public office.
some states originally allowed women and free african americans to vote but these rights were soon taken away.
suffrage would not be restored to these groups for decades to come.
comparing what two principles were common to state constitutions written during the revolutionary war.
reading check.
articles of confederation the second continental congress was organized to create a national government.
the continental congress appointed a committee of thirteen with one member from each colony.
this group was assigned to discuss and draft the articles of confederation the new national constitution.
under the articles of confederation congress would become the single branch of the national government but it would have limited powers in order to protect the liberties of the people.
each state had one vote in the congress.
congress could settle conflicts among the states issue coins borrow money and make treaties with other countries and with native americans.
congress could also ask the states for money and soldiers.
however states had the power to refuse these requests.
the government did not have a president or a national court system.
the second continental congress passed the articles of confederation on november 15 1777 then it sent the articles to each state legislature for ratification or official approval before the new national government could take effect.
conflicts over claims to western lands slowed the process but by 1779 every state except maryland had ratified the articles.
maryland s leaders refused to ratify until other states gave up their western land claims.
thomas jefferson assured maryland that western lands would be made into new states rather than increasing territory for existing states.
satisfied with this condition in march 1781 maryland ratified the articles.
this put the first national government of the united states into effect.
summarizing what were two weaknesses of the new national government.
reading check j 4 chapter 5 biography key events benjamin franklin how did one man accomplish so much.
when did he live.
1706 1790 where did he live.
benjamin franklin was born in boston but ran away to philadelphia at age 17 and made it his home.
he also crossed the atlantic ocean eight times and visited 10 countries.
what did he do.
what didn t he do.
he was a printer publisher creator of the first circulating library the first president of the university of pennsylvania inventor scientist philosopher musician economist and the first u s postmaster general.
in politics he was a leading revolutionary signer of the declaration of independence head of an antislavery organization delegate to the constitutional convention and diplomat.
why is he important.
benjamin franklin son of a candlemaker became a celebrity in his own time both in america and in europe.
few people have mastered so many fields of knowledge and accomplished so much.
he invented many useful objects from bifocal glasses to the lightning rod.
one of the oldest founding fathers franklin inspired younger revolutionaries such as thomas jefferson.
franklin believed strongly that people should volunteer and be active in public service.
finding main ideas how did benjamin franklin s life reflect his belief in public service.
1729 becomes owner and publisher of the pennsylvania gazette 41732 1758 publishes poor richard an almanack 1752 performs famous experiment using a kite to show that electricity exists in storm clouds 1775 submits the articles of confederation 1779 appointed minister to france 1782 helps negotiate the treaty of paris with britain poor richard a n.
for the year of chrift 1 7 3 jeing the fecond after leap year makes finee the creation years 169 what you will learn ratifying the constitution 1 federalists and antifederalists engaged in debate over the new constitution.
2 the federalist papers played an important role in the fight for ratification of the constitution.
3 ten amendments were added to the constitution to provide a bill of rights to protect citizens.
t americans carried on a vigorous debate before ratifying the constitution.
key terms and people antifederalists p 170 george mason p 170 federalists p 171 federalist papers p 171 bill of rights p 173 i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the differing views of the u s constitution.
if you were there you are a newspaper editor in philadelphia.
during colonial rule officials sometimes closed down your newspaper because you had criticized the governor.
now you are one of many americans who want to be sure the new constitution will guarantee individual rights.
you are writing an editorial in your paper explaining what you want.
what rights would you want the constitution to protect.
i building background the new constitution did not make i everyone happy.
even its framers knew they had not made a perfect document many people were afraid a strong national government j would become as tyrannical as the british government had been.
before f approving the constitution they wanted to be sure that their rights i would be protected.
l federalists and antifederalists when the constitution was made public a huge debate began among many americans.
antifederalists people who opposed the constitution thought that the constitutional convention should not have created a new government.
others thought the constitution gave too much power to the central government.
convention delegate george mason became an antifederalist for this reason.
in a speech to a virginia ratifying convention he stated this power is calculated to annihilate totally the state governments.
for some antifederalists the main problem was that the constitution did not have a section that guaranteed individual rights.
many antifederalists were small farmers and debtors.
some patriots including samuel adams and patrick henry were also strong antifederalists.
at the virginia ratifying convention henry spoke out against the lack of protection of individual freedoms.
the first thing i have at heart is american liberty he said.
the second thing is american union.
antifederalists were 0 chapter 5 chapter you will learn the following academic words distinct p 183 influence p 225a j as you read chapter 6 the sixth amendment protects the rights of a person who has been indicted.
under british rule colonists were sometimes held in jail for long periods or taken to britain before being brought to trial.
the british government also prevented some accused of crimes from having a jury trial.
the declaration of independence listed these and other interferences with trials as a reason for rebelling against britain.
the sixth amendment guarantees an indicted person a speedy public trial.
public trials ensure that laws are followed by allowing the public to witness the proceedings.
accused people have the right to know the charges against them and can hear and question witnesses who testify against them.
accused people have the right to an attorney.
if they cannot pay for one the government must provide it.
sometimes accused persons refuse their sixth amendment rights.
for example some defendants refuse the services of an attorney while others choose to have a trial in front of a judge alone instead of before a jury.
in many cases defendants can forgo trial and agree to a plea bargain.
this means that a defendant pleads guilty to a lesser charge and avoids risking conviction for a crime with a greater sentence.
the seventh amendment states that juries can decide civil cases.
it is possible to harm another person without committing a crime.
in such cases the injured party may sue or seek justice in a civil court.
civil cases usually involve disputes over money or property.
for example someone might bring a civil suit against a person who refuses to repay a debt.
amendment v no person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous crime unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury except in cases arising in the land or naval forces or in the militia when in actual service in time of war or public danger nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself nor be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation.
amendment vi in all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been committed which district shall have been previously ascertained by law and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation to be confronted with the witnesses against him to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.
amendment vii in suits at common law where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars the right of trial by jury shall be preserved and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined in any court of the united states than according to the rules of the common law.
a judge and jury listen to attorneys and witnesses from each side of a court case to determine a verdict.
citwiship and the constitution 219 amendment viii excessive bail shall not be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
a right to bail the eighth amendment allows for bail.
bail is a set amount of money that defendants promise to pay the court if they fail to appear in court at the proper time.
by posting or paying bail a defendant can avoid staying in jail before and during a trial.
if a defendant does not show up in court for trial the court demands the bail money be paid and issues a warrant for arrest.
the eighth amendment keeps courts from setting unfairly high bail.
however in cases of very serious crimes a judge may refuse to set bail altogether.
this can be the case for example if the court regards a j defendant as being potentially dangerous to the public by j being left free.
a judge can also deny bail if he or she thinks the defendant will not show up for trial.
in such cases the defendant must remain in jail through the trial.
focus on reading summarize the bill of rights.
cruel and unusual punishments the eighth amendment also bans cruel and unusual punishments against a person convicted of a crime.
for many years americans have debated the question of what exactly constitutes cruel and unusual punishment.
the debate has often centered on the issue of capital punishment.
in 1972 the supreme court ruled that the way in which most states carried out the death penalty was cruel and unusual.
the court also found that the ways in which many states sentenced people to death were unfair.
however a few years later the court ruled that not all executions were in themselves cruel and unusual.
most states still allow the death penalty.
those that do must follow the supreme court s rules.
to do so many states have changed the ways in which they carry out the death penalty.
reading check summarizing what is the purpose ofthe eighth amendment.
rights of states and citizens the final two amendments in the bill of rights give a general protection for other rights not addressed by the first eight amendments.
these amendments also reserve some governmental powers for the states and the people.
ninth amendment the ninth amendment says that the rights listed in the constitution are not the only rights that citizens have.
this amendment has allowed the courts and congress to decide other basic rights of citizens.
the constitution does not address the question of education.
however most americans believe that it is a basic and essential right.
this seems especially true in view of the fact that american citizens must be able to vote for the people who represent them in government.
education is not just another amendment ix the enumeration in the constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
amendment x the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people.
0 chapter you will see that disagreement often defined these early days.
drawing inferences about history focus on reading what s the difference between a good guess and a weak guess.
a good guess is an educated guess.
in other words the guess is based on some knowledge or information.
that s what an inference is an educated guess.
drawing inferences about what you read to draw an inference combine information from your reading with what you already know and make an educated guess about what it all means.
once you have made several inferences you may be able to draw a conclusion that ties them all together.
i question what kind of person was alexander hamilton.
inside the text hamilton ran a company when he was just a teenager.
he had a career as a lawyer.
he became the secretary of the treasury under washington.
outside the text running a company takes intelligence and cleverness.
becoming a lawyer takes dedication.
washington probably wanted someone clever and capable.
steps for drawing inferences 1 ask a question.
2 note information inside the text.
3 note information outside the text.
4 use both sets of information to make an educated guess or inference.
inference alexander hamilton was an intelligent clever and dedicated man.
chapter to answer the questions below.
get together with a group of three or four students and discuss the alien and sedition acts.
using the steps listed on page 254 answer the following questions individually and as a group.
14 do you think that limits should have been put on americans speeches and printed articles.
15 what other ideas might congress have considered to resolve the tensions over the issue.
j writesmart 16 writing a nobel nomination now that you ve chosen your nominee for the nobel prize you can start to write your nomination.
begin with a sentence that identifies the person you are nominating.
then give at least three reasons for your nomination.
each reason should include a specific achievement or contribution of this person.
end your nomination with a sentence that sums up your reasons for nominating this person for the nobel prize.
be persuasive.
you need to convince the nobel prize committee that this person deserves the prize more than anyone else in the world.
chapter 8 explorers head west americans knew little about western native americans or the land they lived on.
president jefferson wanted to learn more about the people and land of the west.
he also wanted to see if there was a river route that could be taken to the pacific ocean.
lewis and clark expedition in 1803 the president asked congress to fund an expedition to explore the west.
to lead it he chose former army captain meriwether lewis.
lewis then chose his friend lieutenant william clark to be the co leader of the expedition.
to prepare for the journey lewis spent weeks studying with experts about plants surveying and other subjects.
this knowledge would allow him to take careful notes on what he saw.
with clark lewis carefully selected about 50 skilled frontiersmen to join the corps of discovery as they called their group.
in may 1804 the lewis and clark expedition began its long journey to explore the louisiana purchase.
the corps of discovery traveled up the missouri river to the village of st charles.
once past this village the men would receive no more letters fresh supplies or reinforcements.
lewis and clark used the missouri river as their highway through the unknown lands.
as they moved upstream a lookout on the boats kept a sharp eye out for sandbars and for tree stumps hidden underwater.
when darkness fell the weary explorers would pull their boats ashore.
they cooked wrote in their journals and slept.
swarms of gnats flies and mosquitoes often interrupted their sleep.
august 12 i3q5f september 1805 november 7 1805 lewis climbs the first ridge to the continental divide.
the expedition nearly starves.
local peoples help the explorers.
the expedition reaches a bay of the pacific ocean.
august23 1805 th htiu or were mt tik those t kwh se b but tike the side of a tree straight ufk wtitiwusclark analysis skills reading time lines on what date did the explorers reach the westernmost point of their journey.
the jefferson era 275 primary source journal entry september 17 1804 great plains while traveling across the great plains meriwether lewis marveled at the richness of the land.
the shortness of gross gave the plain the appearance throughout its whole extent of besnuti ful bowling green let fine order this scenery already rick pleasing and beautiful uras still farther heightened by immense herds of buffoloe deer elk and antelopes which we saw in every dlredtion feeding ok the hills and plains i do not think i exaggerate when i estimate the number of buffalo which could be cousprejhendjed at one view to amount to 3000 meriwether lewis quoted in original journals of the lewis and clark expedition edited by reuben boldtheraites analysis skill i analyzing primary sources what did lewis find so impressive about the great plains.
insects were not the only cause of sleeplessness for the corps of discovery.
as weeks passed without seeing any native americans the explorers wondered what their first encounter would be like.
contact with native americans during the summer of 1804 the corps of discovery had pushed more than 600 miles upriver without seeing any native americans.
but when the men spotted huge buffalo herds in the distance they guessed that indian groups would be nearby.
many indian groups depended on the buffalo for food clothing and tools.
lewis used interpreters to talk to the leaders of each of the peoples they met.
he told them that the united states now owned the land on which they lived.
yet the explorers relied on the good will of the people they met.
sacagawea sak uh juh wee uh a shoshone from the rocky mountains accompanied the group with her husband a french fur trader who lived with the mandan indians and served as a guide and interpreter.
sacagawea helped the expedition by naming plants and by gathering edible fruits and vegetables for the group.
at one point the group met with sacagawea s brother who provided horses and a guide to lead the expedition across the mountains.
after crossing the rockies lewis and clark followed the columbia river.
along the way they met the powerful nez perce.
like the shoshone the nez perce provided the expedition with food.
at last in november 1805 lewis and clark reached the pacific ocean.
the explorers stayed in the pacific northwest during the rough winter.
in march 1806 lewis and clark set out on the long trip home.
lewis and clark had not found a river route across the west to the pacific ocean.
but they had learned much about western lands and paths across the rockies.
the explorers also established contact with many native american groups and collected much valuable information about western plants and animals.
pike s exploration in 1806 a young army officer named zebulon pike was sent on another mission to the west.
he was ordered to find the starting point of the red river.
this was important because the united states considered the red river to be a part of the louisiana territory s western border with new spain.
heading into the rocky mountains in present day colorado pike tried to reach the summit of the mountain now known as pikes peak.
in 1807 he traveled into spanish held lands until spanish cavalry arrested him.
they suspected pike of being a spy.
when he was finally released he returned to the united states and reported on his trip.
despite his imprisonment he praised the opportunities for doing business with the spanish in the southwest.
pike s 5 chapter review visual summary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter to answer the question below.
a rising nation spread over a wide and fruitful land traversing all the seas with the rich productions of their industry engaged in commerce with nations who feel power and forget right advancing rapidly to destinies beyond the reach of mortal eye thomas jefferson 1 st inaugural address 1801 n 14 using the historical context of the quote describe jefferson s point of view on the united states.
what frame of reference influenced jefferson.
j writesmart 15 writing your letter of recommendation you already have a main idea and an opinion statement for your letter thomas jefferson deserves to be on the list of the top ten american presidents.
now look at all your information and pick out three or four points actions or character traits that you think are the most important.
write a sentence on each of those points to add to your letter.
put the sentences in order from the least important to the most important.
finally conclude with one or two sentences that sum up why you think thomas jefferson was such an important president.
chapter 8 chapter is titled a new national identity because it explains how the united states government established relations with european powers and how americans developed a strong sense of national pride even as they struggled with important state issues.
you will learn about the monroe doctrine the missouri compromise the cumberland road project and the rise of american music literature and public schools events that changed the country s culture and politics.
comparing and contrasting focus on reading comparing and contrasting facts ideas or concepts is a good way to learn more about them.
that s one reason historians use comparison and contrast to explain people and events in history.
understanding comparison and contrast to compare is to look for likenesses or similarities.
to contrast is to look for differences.
sometimes writers point out similarities and differences.
other times you have to look for them yourself.
you can use a diagram like this one to keep track of similarities and differences as you read.
roads and canals clues for comparison contrast writers sometimes signal compari sons or contrasts with words like these j comparison similarly like in the same way too contrast however unlike but i although in contrast sentences or paragraphs that contain separate information on a single topic may be comparing and contrasting ideas on the topic.
6 chapter 10 you will read about the changing face of american democracy.
section 3 assessment j reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a describe what topics interested american writers in the early 1800s.
b draw conclusions why is washington irving considered an important american writer.
2 a identify what influence did the hudson river school and thomas cole have on american painters.
b describe how did american painting styles change from the early period to the mid 1800s.
3 a describe what effect did religious revivalism have i on american music.
b elaborate why do you think folk songs like hunters of kentucky were popular.
j 4 a identify on what historical examples did many american architects model their buildings.
b predict what might be some possible results of the growing interest in education in the united states.
critical thinking j 5 categorizing review your notes about new developments in american culture.
copy the graphic organizer i below and use it to show how these cultural develop.
ments reflected a new american identity.
analysis skill.
analyzing information cultural development new identity how do these artistic developments show americans increasing sense of identity.
cultural development cultural development new identity new identity 6 identifying values you can tell much about someone s values by what that person makes.
for instance you could guess that a person who creates a collage of personal mementos for a friend s birthday is creative and values personal relationships.
take notes on what the united states created and what it valued.
a new national identity 311 literaturein history 1 literature of the american guided reading word help j accoutrements dress and gear j rude crude rough j attenuated made thin indurated hardened unremitted ongoing 1 gartered fastened ingenious clever 1 o what do you learn about 1 natty bumppo in the first paragraph.
j a girdle of wampum is a belt strung with beads.
j wampum were used by native americans for both j money and decoration.
make a list of the items bumppo wears and carries.
i what does each item suggest about him.
frontier from the last of the mohicans by james fenimore cooper 1789 1851 about the reading the last of the mohicans is one of five novels known as the leatherstocking tales.
these novels follow the life and adventures of american pioneer natty bumppo also known as leatherstocking hawkeye and the deerslayer.
bumppo is the perfect woodsman resourceful honest kind to both his friends and his enemies but always a loner at heart.
as you read try to imagine what natty bumppo looks like.
on that day two men were lingering on the banks of a small but rapid stream while one of these loiterers showed the red skin and wild accoutrements of a native of the woods the other exhibited through the mask of his rude and nearly savage equipments the brighter though sunburnt and long faded complexion of one who might claim descent from a european parentage.
o the frame of the white man judging by such parts as were not concealed by his clothes was like that of one who had known hardships and exertion from his earliest youth.
his person though muscular was rather attenuated than full but every nerve and muscle appeared strung and indurated by unremitted exposure and toil.
he wore a hunting shirt of forest green fringed with faded yellow and a summer cap of skins which had been shorn of their fur.
he also bore a knife in a girdle of wampum like that which confined the scanty garments of the indian but no tomahawk.
his moccasins were ornamented after the fashion of the natives while the only part of his underdress which appeared below the hunting frock was a pair of buckskin leggings that laced at the sides and which were gartered above the knees with the sinews of a deer.
a pouch and horn completed his personal accoutrements though a rifle of great length which the theory of the more ingenious whites had taught them was the most dangerous of all firearms leaned against a neighboring sapling.
from the legend of sleepy hollow by washington irving 1783 1859 about the reading the legend of sleepy hollow has been called one of the first american short stories.
even though it is based on an old german folktale its setting a small village in the hudson river valley is american through and through.
irving s knack for capturing the look and the feel of the region made the story instantly popular as did the tale s eerie central character a horseman without a head.
guided reading word help dominant prevailing ruling apparition a ghostlike form that appears suddenly collating comparing spectre ghost allege to firmly state purport sense gist as you read try to picture both the ghost and the setting.
the dominant spirit however that haunts this enchanted region and seems to be commander in chief of all the powers of the air is the apparition of a figure on horseback without a head.
it is said by some to be the ghost of a hessian trooper o whose head had been carried away by a cannon ball in some nameless battle during the revolutionary war and who is ever and anon seen by the country folk hurrying along in the gloom of night as if on the wings of the wind.
his haunts are not confined to the valley but extend at times to the adjacent roads and especially to the vicinity of a church at no great distance.
indeed certain of the most authentic historians of those parts who have been careful in collecting and collating the floating facts concerning this spectre allege that the body of the trooper having been buried in the church yard the ghost rides forth to the scene of battle in nightly quest of his head and that the rushing speed with which he sometimes passes along the hollow like a midnight blast is owing to his being belated and in a hurry to get back to the church yard before day break.
such is the general purport of this legendary superstition which has furnished materials for many a wild story in that region of shadows and the spectre is known at all the country firesides by the name of the headless horseman of sleepy hollow.
o a hessian trooper is a german mercenary soldier from the american revolution.
how and when is the horseman said to have died.
why does the horseman ride forth each night.
what is happening at all the country firesides.
what does this suggest about how early americans entertained themselves.
connecting literature to history 1 drawing inferences the writing of the period reflects a new national culture and identity.
what do these passages suggest about the thoughts feelings or lives of early americans.
2 making predictions the last of the mohicans takes place during the french and indian war.
whose side do you think natty bumppo would most likely take that of the french and indians that of the english or neither.
3 drawing conclusions both of these stories were very popular in their time.
why do you think these stories were so popular.
what is it about the stories that makes them entertaining.
313 social studies skills analysis i critical thinking civic participation study identifying central issues define the skill the reasons for historical events are often complex and difficult to determine.
an accurate understanding of them requires the ability to identify the central issues involved.
a central issue is the main topic of concern in a discussion or dispute.
in history these issues are usually matters of public debate or concern.
they generally involve political social moral economic or territorial matters.
being able to identify central issues lets you go beyond what the participants in an event said and gain a more accurate understanding of it.
the skill is also useful for understanding issues today and for evaluating the statements of those involved.
learn the skill in this chapter 10 biography andrew jackson if you were president how would you use your powers.
when did he live.
1767 1845 where did he live.
jackson was born in waxhaw a region along the border of the north and south carolina colonies.
in 1788 he moved to nashville tennessee which was still a part of north carolina.
there he built a mansion called the hermitage.
he lived in washington as president then retired to the hermitage where he died.
key events 4ft 1796 1797 served in u s house of representatives 4ft 1797 1798 served as u s senator 41 1798 1804 served on tennessee supreme court 4ft1815 defeated british at battle of new orleans what did he do.
jackson had no formal education but he taught himself law and became a successful lawyer.
he became tennessee s first representative to the u s congress and also served in the senate.
jackson became a national hero when his forces defeated the creek and seminole indians.
he went on to battle the british in the battle of new orleans during the war of 1812 jackson was elected as the nation s seventh president in 1828 and served until 1837 why is he so important.
jackson s belief in a strong presidency made him both loved and hated.
he vetoed as many bills as the six previous presidents together.
jackson also believed in a strong union.
when south carolina tried to nullify or reject a federal tariff he threatened to send troops into the state to force it to obey.
identifying cause and effect why did jackson gain loyal friends and fierce enemies.
1821 governor of florida territory 1823 1825 served as u s senator 1829 1837 served as president of the united states 4 1830 signed indian removal act 1832 vetoed rechartering the second bank of the united states.
threatened to send troops to south carolina when it tried to nullify federal tarif section 2 b v teks 5a 5b 7a 7d 12a 12d 17b 22b what you will learn y main ideas regional differences grew during jackson s presidency.
2 the rights of the states were debated amid arguments about a national tariff.
3 jackson s attack on the bank sparked controversy.
4 jackson s policies led to the panic of 1837 r 1 v jackson s jajd nni i fli i st ri cb mi if you were there you live on a small farm in south carolina in 1829 your family grows corn and cotton to sell as well as vegetables for your own table.
although you grow your own food you also depend on imported wool flax iron and hemp to make ropes.
but the government has just put new taxes on these products from europe.
now they re too expensive for you to buy.
how would you feel about the new taxes on imports.
andrew jackson s presidency was marked by political conflicts.
key terms and people tariff of abominations p 327 states rights doctrine p 328 nullification crisis p 328 daniel webster p 328 mcculloch v maryland p 330 whig party p 330 panic of 1837 p 331 william henry harrison p 331 building background even though americans had a new feeling of national unity different sections of the country still had very different interests.
the industrial north competed with the agricultural south and the western frontier.
as congress favored one section over another political differences grew.
j taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the conflicts that andrew jackson faced during his administration.
sectional differences increase regional differences had a major effect on andrew jackson s presidency.
americans views of jackson s policies were based on where they lived and the economy of those regions.
three regions emerge there were three main u s regions in the early 1800s.
the north first of all had an economy based on trade and on manufacturing.
northerners supported tariffs because tariffs helped them compete with british factories.
northerners also opposed the federal government s sale of public land at cheap prices.
cheap land encouraged potential laborers to move from northern factory towns to the west.
the second region was the south.
its economy was based on farming.
southern farmers raised all types of crops but the most popular were the cash crops of cotton and tobacco.
southerners sold a large portion of their crops to foreign nations.
26 chapter 10 chapter 11 you try it.
read the following passages about views of the texas annexation.
as you read look for the main point each man makes in his writing.
foreign policy the proof is clear and satisfactory to my mind that texas once constituted a part of the territory of the united states the title to which i regard to have been as indisputable as that to any other portion of our territory.
james polk april23 1844 but are we perfectly sure that we should be free from injury in a state of war with mexico.
have we any security that countless numbers of foreign vessels under the authority and flag of mexico would not prey upon our defenceless commerce in the mexican gulf on the pacific ocean and on every other sea and ocean.
what commerce on the other hand does mexico offer as an indemnity for our losses to the gallantry and enterprise of our countrymen.
henry clay april 17 1844 after you read the passages answer the following questions.
1 what was the main point polk made in his speech.
2 what was the main point clay made in his letter.
3 how can a comparison of polk s and clay s views help you understand the issues that shaped americans view of texas and mexico in the mid 1800s.
chapter 11 1 movement which trails took the longest to travel.
2 human environment interaction what difficulties do you think travelers on the trails faced.
beckwourth survived many hardships during their search for wealth and adventure.
to survive on the frontier mountain men adopted native american customs and clothing.
in addition they often married native american women.
the indian wives of trappers often worked hard to contribute to their success.
pioneer william ashley saw that frequently bringing furs out of the rocky mountains was expensive.
he asked his traders to stay in the mountains and meet once a year to trade and socialize.
this practice helped make the fur trade more profitable.
the yearly meeting was known as the rendezvous.
at the rendezvous mountain men and native american trappers sold their fur to fur company agents.
it was thus important to bring as many furs as possible.
one trapper described the people at a typical rendezvous in 1837 he saw americans canadian french some europeans and indians of nearly every tribe in the rocky mountains.
the rendezvous was filled with celebrating and storytelling.
at the same time the meeting was also about conducting business.
western artist alfred jacob miller described how trade was begun in the rendezvous camp.
the fur company s great tent is raised the indians erect their picturesque beautiful white lodges the accumulated collected furs of the hunting season are brought forth and the company s tent is a busy place.
alfred jacob miller quoted in the fur trade of the american west by david j wlshart in 1811 john jacob astor founded a furtrading post called astoria at the mouth of the columbia river.
astoria was one of the first american settlements in what became known as oregon country.
american indians occupied the region which was rich in forests rivers and wildlife.
however britain russia spain and the united states all claimed the land.
the united states based its claim on expanding west 3 the exploration of merchant captain robert gray who had reached the mouth of the columbia river in 1792 recognizing the huge economic value of the pacific northwest the united states made treaties in which spain and russia gave up their claims to various areas.
the united states also signed treaties w 1 britain allowing both countries to occupy oregon country the columbia river and its surrounding lands.
by the 1840s the era of american fur trading in the pacific northwest was drawing to a close.
the demand for beaver furs had fallen because fashions changed.
too much trapping had also greatly reduced the number of beavers.
some mountain men gave up their work and moved back east.
their daring stories however along with the treaties made by the u s government inspired other americans to move west.
lured by rich resources and a mild climate easterners poured into oregon country in the 1840s.
these new settlers soon replaced the mountain men on the frontier.
the oregon trail many settlers moving to oregon country and other western areas followed the 2 000 mile long oregon trail which stretched from places such as independence missouri or council bluffs iowa west into oregon country.
the trail followed the platte and sweetwater rivers over the plains.
after it crossed the rocky mountains the trail forked.
the northern branch led to the willamette valley in oregon.
the other branch went to california and became known as the california trail.
traveling the trail challenged the strength and determination of pioneer families.
the journey usually began after the rainy season ended in late spring and lasted about six months.
the cost about 600 for a family of four was high at a time when a typical worker usually made about 1 50 per day.
young families made up most groups of settlers.
they gathered in wagon trains for the trip.
there could be as few as 10 wagons or as many as several dozen in a wagon train.
the wagons were pulled by oxen mules or horses.
pioneers often walked to save their animals strength.
they kept up a tiring pace traveling from dawn until dusk.
settler jesse applegate recalled the advice he received from one experienced oregon pioneer travel travel travel.
nothing is good that causes a moment s delay.
some pioneers brought small herds of cattle with them on the trail.
they faced severe hardships including shortages of food supplies and water.
rough weather and geographic barriers such as rivers and mountains sometimes forced large numbers of pioneers to abandon their wagons.
in the early days of the oregon trail many native americans helped the pioneers acting as guides and messengers.
they also traded goods for food.
although newspapers sometimes reported native american massacres of pioneers few settlers died from indian attacks.
the settlers who arrived safely in oregon and california found generally healthy 348 chapter 11 and pleasant climates.
by 1845 some 5 000 settlers occupied the willamette valley.
the santa fe trail the santa fe trail was another important path west.
it led from independence missouri to santa fe new mexico.
it followed an ancient trading route first used by native americans.
american traders loaded their wagon trains with cloth and other manufactured goods to exchange for horses mules and silver from mexican traders in santa fe.
the long trip across blazing deserts and rough mountains was dangerous.
but the lure of high profits encouraged traders to take to the trail.
one trader reported a 2 000 percent profit on his cargo.
the u s government helped protect traders by sending troops to ensure that native americans were not a threat.
three communities eventually failed and an anti mormon mob murdered smith in 1844 following smith s murder brigham young became head of the mormon church.
young chose what is now utah as the group s new home and thousands of mormons took the mormon trail to the area near the great salt lake where they prospered.
by 1860 there were about 40 000 mormons in utah.
reading check finding main ideas why did mormons move west.
i summary and preview some of the i first americans to move west were fur traders and trappers.
settlers soon followed.
in the next section you will learn about the texas revolution.
reading check a contrasting how were the oregon and santa fe trails different.
section 1 assessment mormons travel west one large group of settlers traveled to the west in search of religious freedom.
in 1830 a young man named joseph smith founded the church of jesus christ of latter day saints in western new york.
the members of joseph smith s church became known as mormons.
smith told his followers that he had found and translated a set of golden tablets containing religious teachings.
the writings were called the book of mormon.
church membership grew rapidly but certain beliefs and practices caused mormons to be persecuted.
for example beginning in the 1850s some mormon men practiced polygamy a practice in which one man is married to several women at the same time.
this practice was outlawed by the church in 1890 in the early 1830s smith and his growing number of converts left new york.
they formed new communities first in ohio then in missouri and finally in illinois.
all reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what was the oregon trail.
who used it.
b elaborate would you have chosen to leave your home ito travel west.
2 a identify who are the mormons.
b summarize what difficulties led mormons to move to utah.
s critical thinking i 3 drawing conclusions review your notes on early ameri i can settlement in the west.
then copy the chart below and use it to identify challenges of the trip that western travelers faced.
travelers challenges faced j writesmart 4 describing trails west make a list noting important topics that you might want to cover in your documentary film.
in addition write down ideas about how you might present information about each topic.
for example will you use a narrator to tell the life story of joseph smith or will you have actors present it dramatically.
expanding west 3 section 2 teks 1 a 6e 10a 10b ioc 11 a 11b 12d 23d what you will learn 1 many american settlers moved to texas after mexico achieved independence from spain.
2 texans revolted against mexican rule and established an independent nation.
in 1836 texas gained its independence from mexico.
the texes revolution if you were there you are the father of a large farm family in missouri.
there is not enough land for everyone so you re looking for another opportunity.
one day a mexican government official comes to town.
he is looking for people to settle in texas.
the mexican government is offering generous tracts of land to colonists.
however you have to become a citizen of mexico and follow mexican laws.
would you decide to move your family to texas.
key terms and people father miguel hidalgo y costilla p 350 empresarios p 350 stephen f austin p 351 antonio lopez de santa anna p 351 alamo p 352 battle of san jacinto p 352 building background what do you already know about the history of texas.
many towns in texas have streets or neighborhoods named after early settlers and heros of the texas revolution.
travis austin bowie and houston are all early texas heros.
use the knowledge you already have about texas and texas history to help you understand this section.
i taking notes use the annotation tools in your ebook to take notes on the events that led to the independence of texas.
american settlers move to texas mexico had a long unprotected border that stretched from texas to california.
mexico s spanish rulers worried constantly about attacks from neighbors.
they also were concerned about threats from within mexico.
their fears were justified.
mexicans moved to overthrow spanish rule in the early 1800s.
in september 1810 father miguel hidalgo y costilla a mexican priest led a rebellion of about 80 000 poor indians and mestizos or people of indian and spanish ancestry.
they hoped that if mexico became independent from the spanish monarchy their lives would improve.
hidalgo s revolt failed but the rebellion he started grew.
in 1821 mexico became independent.
in 1824 it adopted a republican constitution that declared rights for all mexicans.
the new mexican government contracted with empresarios or agents to bring settlers to texas.
they paid the agents in land.
350 chapter 11 in 1821 one young agent stephen f austin started a texas colony on the lower colorado river.
the first 300 families became known as the old three hundred.
austin s successful colony attracted other agents and american settlers flocked to the region.
the anglo american settlers became known as texians and were often protestant.
the mexican residents were called tejanos and were usually catholic.
the two groups lived in separate communities but eventually texas developed a culture that was distinct from the rest of mexico as well as the united states.
in exchange for free land settlers had to obey mexican laws.
but some settlers often explicitly ignored these laws.
for example despite the ban on slavery many brought slaves.
concerned that it was losing control of the growing american population mexico responded.
in 1830 it banned further settlement by americans.
angry about the new law many texans began to think of gaining independence from mexico.
meanwhile mexico had come under the rule of general antonio lopez de santa anna.
he soon suspended mexico s republican constitution and turned his attention to the growing unrest in texas.
reading check finding main ideas why did settlers move to texas.
mi i texans revolt against mexico in october 1835 the mexican army tried to remove a cannon from the town of gonzales texas.
rebels stood next to the cannon.
their flag read come and take it.
in the following battle the rebels won.
the texas revolution also known as the texas war for independence had begun.
texas independence on march 2 1836 texans declared their independence from mexico and adopted a constitution.
the new republic of texas was bom.
both the declaration and the constitution were modeled after the u s documents.
the texas constitution however made slavery legal.
delegates to the new texas government chose politician david bumet as president and lorenzo de zavala as vice president.
another revolutionary sam houston was named to head the texas army.
austin went to the united states to seek money and troops.
academic vocabulary explicit fully revealed without vagueness expanding west 35 history video independence for texas 711.
battle at the alamo the texans actions angered the mexican government.
santa anna began assembling a force of thousands to stop the rebellion.
the force included both texians and tejanos.
a hastily created army of texas volunteers had been clashing with mexican troops for months.
under edward burleson a texian force took the town of san antonio.
it then occupied the alamo a former mission near san antonio that became an important battle site in the texas revolution.
texas settler jim bowie and volunteers from the united states including frontiersman davy crockett joined the alamo s defense.
the rebels numbering about 200 hoped for reinforcements from the army that sam houston was assembling.
for almost two weeks from february 23 to march 6 1836 the texans held out against the large mexican force.
colonel william travis managed to get a message to other texans through enemy lines i call on you in the name of liberty of patriotism and everything dear to the american character to come to our aid with all dispatch speed victory or death.
william travis from a letter written at the alamo 1836 before dawn on march 6 the mexican army attacked.
despite heavy losses the army overcame the texans.
all the defenders of the alamo were killed though some civilians survived.
following a later battle at goliad santa anna ordered the execution of 350 prisoners who had surrendered.
texans were enraged by the killings.
battle of san jacinto santa anna now chased the untrained forces of sam houston.
outnumbered the texans fled east.
finally they reorganized at the san jacinto river near galveston bay.
there the texans took a stand.
santa anna was confident of victory but he was careless in choosing the site for his camp.
on the afternoon of april 21 1836 while mexican troops were resting houston s forces swarmed the camp shouting remember the alamo.
remember goliad.
the fighting ended swiftly.
santa anna s army was destroyed.
in the battle of san jacinto the texans captured santa anna and forced him to sign a treaty giving texas its independence.
352 apter j an independent nation sam houston was the hero of the new independent nation of texas.
the republic created a new town named houston and made it the capital.
voters elected sam houston as president.
stephen f austin became secretary of state.
to increase the population texas offered land grants.
american settlers came from nearby southern states often bringing slaves with them to help grow and harvest cotton.
most texans hoped that the united states would annex or take control of texas making it a state.
some in congress wanted to annex texas but president andrew jack son did not pursue the issue.
although he wanted to annex the area he was concerned that admitting texas as a slave state would upset the fragile balance of free and slave states.
the president also did not want to have a war with mexico over texas.
finally jackson did recognize texas as an independent nation.
france did so in 1839 britain which wanted to halt u s expansion recognized texas in 1840 the mexican government however did not recognize santa arma s forced handover of texas.
for this reason in 1837 the jfcaw republic organized the texas rangers to guard its long frontier from mexican and native american attacks.
finally in 1844 texas and mexico signed an armistice.
mexico never recognized texas independence however.
reading check finding main ideas what issues did the new nation of texas face.
summary and preview american set i tiers in texas challenged the mexican government and won their independence.
in the next section you will learn about the war between mexico and the united states.
section 2 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what role did stephen f austin play in the settlement of texas.
b make inferences why did mexican officials want to bring more settlers to texas.
c evaluate do you think mexico s requirements for foreign immigrants were reasonable or unreasonable.
2 a describe what were the important battles in the war for texas independence.
why was each important.
b make inferences why did texas offer land grants to settlers.
c predict what problems might the republic of texas face.
critical thinking 3 sequencing review your notes on american settlement in texas.
then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to show the significant events in the history of the republic oftexas.
significant events lihu k l jm 1 houston is founded and made the capital.
writesmart 4 explaining the texas revolution make a list of the most important players and events in the story of how texas gained independence from mexico.
consider also how you will present information about these people and events to your film s audience.
what words images and sounds will make the story of the revolution come alive for the audience.
expanding west 35 butf teks 1a 6a 6b 6c 6d 6e 7d 10a 10b 10c 11a 11b 12a 12d 22b 23c 23d what you will learn 1 many americans believed that the nation had a manifest destiny to claim new lands in the west.
2 as a result of the mexican american war the united states added territory in the southwest.
3 american settlement in the mexican cession produced conflict and a blending of cultures.
l j the mexican american war if you were there your family are californios spanish settlers who have lived in california for many years.
you raise horses on your ranch.
so far you have gotten along with american settlers.
but it has become clear that the american government wants to take over california.
you hear that fighting has already started.
how might life change under american rule.
the ideal of manifest destiny and the outcome of the mexican american war led to u s expansion to the pacific ocean.
building background mexican independence setthe stage for conflict and change in the west and southwest.
at the same time americans continued to move westward settling in the mexican territories of texas new mexico and california.
american ambitions led to clashes with mexico and the people who already lived in mexico s territories.
key terms and people manifest destiny p 355 james k polk p 355 vaqueros p 357 californios p 357 bear flag revolt p 358 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo p 361 gadsden purchase p 361 taking notes use the annotation tools in your ebook to take notes on manifest destiny and the mexican american war.
manifest destiny we have it in our power to start the world over again.
thomas paine from his pamphlet common sense americans had always believed they could build a new better society founded on democratic principles.
in 1839 writer john o sullivan noted we are the nation of human progress and who will what can set limits to our onward march.
actually there was one limit land.
from the beginnings of the colonies americans had been moving west in search of land and economic opportunity.
at the end of the revolution the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787 established the method for dividing and governing new territories.
by the 1840s the united states had a booming economy and population.
barely 70 years old the nation needed even more room for farms ranches businesses and ever growing families.
americans looked west to what they saw as a vast wilderness ready to be taken.
the regions of oregon new mexico and texas were being settled by americans and the national government worked to annex those lands to the united states.
354 chapter you will learn about the industrial revolu tion in america.
summary i moved we section 4 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a recall where was sutter s mill.
why was it important.
b summarize what types of people participated in the california gold rush and how did they take part in it.
c elaborate what are some possible problems caused by the arrival of so many new settlers to california.
2 a describe how did some people hope to solve the problem of california s isolation from the rest of the country.
b draw inferences what effect did california s rapid population growth have on californios and native americans.
c evaluate overall do you think that the gold rush had a positive or negative effect on california.
critical thinking 3 evaluating review your notes on the gold rush.
then copy the graphic organizer below.
use it to show how the discovery of gold changed california.
4 describing the california gold rush review this section and list the significant events and effects of the gold rush.
consider also how your film can convey the excitement of that time in american history.
expanding west 361 history and geography america s tflsfclbsi vc a.
n a water rights water was critical in the dry west.
bitter disputes arose over who had the water rights to streams.
gold rush miners developed a simple system whoever used the water first owned the rights to it.
in other parts of the west the community as a whole had a right to use the water source.
in the 1830s a new dream began to shape the american mind manifest destiny.
manifest destiny was the belief that the united states should extend all the way to the pacific ocean.
by 1850 that dream had become a reality.
in 1845 the united states annexed texas.
in 1848 it acquired oregon and the huge mexican cession.
by 1853 with the gadsden purchase the united states had taken the basic shape it still has today.
5 manifest destiny supporters of manifest destiny believed it was god s will that the united states should expancj ancj spreac democracy across north america.
huge numbers of settlers headed west to tame new lands.
organized america s population 1850 23 6 million wtritory 2 mr 1 ethnic groups 1850 white european african american native american 0 asian mexican american indian i r gold fever the discovery of gold in california in 1848 set off a massive migration.
in 1849 some 80 000 forty niners headed toward california.
san francisco located on an excellent natural port grew quickly as a result.
x territory the rocky mountains the rocky mountains were a gigantic obstacle to settlers on their way west.
pathfinders like lt john c fremont traveled widely in the region making maps and noting possible trails.
the south pass through which the oregon trail ran was one of the few easy ways through the great chain of mountains.
religions 1850 protestant catholic jewish other c v w v w v v.
texas annexation 1845 p claim recognized in oregon treaty 1848 mexican cession 1848 gadsden purchase 1853 h x va 150 300 miles 150 300 kilometers j claimed by texas le a t iv j 1 movement why did san francisco grow so rapidly.
2 human environment interaction why was water so important in the west.
70 w sic of cancer social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic particioation study interpreting and creating maps define the skill maps show features on earth s surface.
these can be physical features such as mountains and rivers or human features such as roads and settlements.
historical maps show an area as it was in the past.
interpreting and creating maps can answer questions about history as well as geography.
learn the skill follow these steps to gain information from a map.
1 read the title to determine what the map is about and the time period it covers.
2 study the legend or key to understand what the colors or symbols on the map mean.
note the map scale which is used to measure distances.
note the map s other features.
maps often contain labels and other information in addition to what is explained in the legend or key.
3 to create a map research the information you want to include.
then draw the features to represent this information including borders labels symbols a key and a title.
practice the skill interpret the map below to answer the first two questions below.
the create the map described in question 3.
1 the addition of which territory almost doubled the size of the united states.
2 what was the smallest expansion of u s borders and when did it take place.
3 research the important battles of the texas revolution then make a map that includes their locations troop movements and the winner of each battle.
what questions can the map answer.
growth of the united states to 1853 united states 1783 bui louisiana purchase 1803 h red river basin 1818 i spanish cession 1819 texas annexation 1845 bm oregon country 1846 hh mexican cession 1848 i l gadsden purchase 1853 s disputed territory 0 300 600 miles 600 kilometers 372 chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 use the map below to answer the following question.
the part of the present day united states that was once claimed by britain spain and russia is shown on the map by which letter.
a w b x c y d z 2 in general what position did californios take toward the mexican american war.
f they supported the war because they wanted independence from mexico.
g they supported the war because they wanted to become u s citizens.
h they opposed the war because they feared it might bring an end to slavery.
j they opposed the war because they did not want to lose control of california.
3 what was the main reason john jacob astor founded astoria at the mouth of the columbia river in 1811.
a plenty of freshwater and salt water fish were available for residents to eat.
b the soil there was rich and good for farming.
c trappers could use the river to bring furs from the mountains to trade.
d the location offered easy protection from attacks by native americans or the french.
4 the main attraction of texas for many americans in the 1820s and 1830s was the f freedom to practice the catholic faith.
g availability of cheap or free land.
h desire to become citizens of mexico.
j mexican rebellion against spain.
5 which of the following occurred after the mexican american war.
a mexican foods and festivals became more important to american culture.
b prosperity of mexican landowners in the southwest increased under u s rule.
c mexican americans left the united states.
d the size of the united states was reduced.
6 examine the following flier about cheap land available in the dakota territory and then use it to answer the question below.
document based question who might have been attracted by this description of dakota.
expanding west 37 multimedia connections click through history 4i in mutual protection trading mining co inter activities j 4 a mci multimedia connections 8 vftt b ioh 4k 5.
if any man has his health will work he can make more than ten times as much here as he can in the states in the same length of time.
but many veiy many that come here meet with bad success thousands will leave their bones here.
s shufelt a miner s letter home read the document to learn about one miner s opinion on the possibility of becoming rich in california.
heading west watch the video to learn about the dangers that overland travelers faced when trying to get to california from the eastern united states.
fj i search for the mother lode watch the video to see the various methods that forty niners used to mine the gold in california.
when gold was discovered in northern california in 1848 it caused a sensation.
gold seekers from the united states and the rest of the world rushed to california to find their fortunes.
the conditions of the trip were difficult as was the labor required to extract the gold from rivers and mines.
although some people became wealthy many more never found the riches they had expected.
so many people arrived so quickly that california became a state within three years of gold being discovered.
explore some of the history and documents of the california gold rush online.
you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources activities and more at 71 hi statehood watch the video to discover the political issues surrounding the admission of california as a free state and its implications for the rest of the nation.
the realwest rush for gold 375 m assignment write a paper explaining the causes or the effects of the war of 1812 cause and effect in history historians try to make sense of an event by considering why the event happened and what resulted from it.
exploring causes and effects can provide a deeper understanding of historical events and how they are connected to one another.
qub using a graphic organizer use a graphic organizer like this to organize your research.
cause 1 cause 2 1 event or situation i effect effect a writer s framework 1 prewrite identifying causes and effects a cause is an action or a situation that makes something else happen.
what happens is called an effect.
for example if you stay up too late watching tv cause you might find yourself nodding off in class effect.
often an event or situation will have several causes as well as several effects.
in those cases we may look at the order in which the causes or effects occurred or we may look at their relative importance.
researching and organizing for this paper you will write about the causes or the effects of the war of 1812 gather information from the chapters you will learn about two regions in the united states and how they were alike and different.
explore the art this painting shows a bustling street scene in new york city around 1797 what does the scene indicate about business in the city during this period.
chapter you will learn about how developments in science and technology brought about what is called the industrial revolution.
as a result of the industrial revolution you will see how american economic patterns changed.
next you will read about how family life changed as more and more people went to work in factories.
finally you will see how new methods of transportation changed where people lived and how new inventions affected daily life and work.
causes and effects in history focus on reading have you heard the saying we have to understand the past to avoid repeating it.
that is one reason we look for causes and effects in history.
cause and effect chains you might say that all of history is one long chain of causes and effects.
it may help you to understand the course of history better if you draw out such a chain as you read.
recognizing causes and effects in a passage is sometimes easier if the author uses that signal the reader to look for a since the 1790s wars between european powers had interfered with u s trade.
american customers were no longer able to get all the manufactured goods they were used to buying from british and european manufacturers.
americans began to buy the items they needed from american manufacturers instead of from foreign suppliers.
as profits for american factories grew manufacturers began to spend more money expanding their factories at the same time many americans began to realize that the united states had been relying too heavily on foreign goods p 389 cause or effect.
these words include because therefore as a result and thus.
sentences that include two separate events linked by one of these words show a cause and effect relationship between the events.
382 chapter 12 economy.
steam powered ships soon connected the united states with european mar kets spurring the economy even more.
reading check finding main ideas what benefits did the transportation revolution bring to trade and daily life.
steamboats american and european inventors had developed steam powered boats in the late 1700s.
however they were not in wide use until the early 1800s.
steamboat era in 1803 american robert fulton tested his first steamboat design in france.
several years later he tested the first full sized commercial steamboat called the clermont in the united states.
on august 9 1807 the clermont traveled against the current up the hudson river without trouble.
demand for steamboat ferry service soon arose.
the steamboat was well suited for river travel.
it could move upriver and did not rely on wind power.
steamboats increased trade and profits because goods could be moved quickly and thus more cheaply.
more than 500 steamboats were in use in the united states by 1840 by the 1850s steamboats were also being used to carry people and goods across the atlantic ocean.
gibbons v ogden increased steamboat shipping led to conflict over waterway rights.
in 1819 aaron ogden sued thomas gibbons for operating steamboats in new york waters that ogden said he owned.
gibbons did not have a license to operate in new york but argued that his federal license gave him the right to use new york waterways.
in the case of gibbons v ogden which reached the supreme court in 1824 the court reinforced the federal government s authority to regulate trade between the states by ending monopolistic control over waterways in several states.
the ruling freed up waters to even greater trade and shipping.
almost the north 3.
overnight there were many more shipping companies traveling the waterways.
competition between the businesses brought prices down and more people could afford to buy the products brought to their local markets.
reading check summarizing explain the effects of the gibbons v ogden ruling.
american railroads o history video wild west tech train tech.
what the steamboat did for water travel the train did for overland travel.
steam powered trains had first been developed in great britain in the early 1800s.
however they did not become popular in the united states until the 1830s.
in 1830 peter cooper built a small but powerful locomotive called the tom thumb.
he raced the locomotive against a horse drawn railcar.
eyewitness john latrobe later described the race in which tom thumb had a slow start and fell behind.
latrobe wrote the pace increased the passengers shouted the engine gained on the horse then the engine passes the horse and a great hurrah hailed the victory.
unfortunately for coo per victory was spoiled when tom thumb broke down and lost the race near the end.
despite the defeat the contest showed the power and speed of even a small locomotive.
railroad fever soon spread.
by 1840 railroad companies had laid about 2 800 miles of track more than existed in all of europe.
french economist michel chevalier described americans as having a perfect passion for railroads.
as more railroads were built engineers and mechanics overcame many tough challenges.
most british railroads for example ran on straight tracks across flat ground.
in the united states however many railroads had to run up and down steep mountains around tight curves and over swift rivers.
railroad companies also built the tracks quickly and often with the least expensive materials available.
as time went on engineers and mechanics built heavier faster and more powerful steam locomotives.
by 1860 about 30 000 miles of railroad linked almost every major city in the eastern united states.
as a result the economy surged forward.
for example american loco the steam train connect to science and technology boiling water produces steam which pushes pistons back and forth in a steam engine.
these pistons are connected to rods that rotate the wheels of the locomotive.
why does the train have a firebox.
as steam follows the path of the white arrows into the cylinder the pressure pushes the piston in the direction of the large blue arrow.
connecting rods turn the wheel half a turn.
q when the small valve rod moves the other valve is blocked pushing steam into the other side of the cylinder.
the pressure moves the piston in the direction of the large blue arrow and the wheel completes a turn.
398 chapter you will learn about life in the south during the first half of the nineteenth century.
read the chapter 13 pp.
414 415 keyterais chapter 13 attacked the family that held turner as a slave.
soon they had killed about 60 white people in the community.
more than 100 innocent slaves who were not part of turner s group were killed in an attempt to stop the rebellion.
turner himself led authorities on a chase around the countryside for six weeks.
he hid in caves and in the woods before he was caught and brought to trial.
before his trial turner made a confession.
he expressed his belief that the revolt was justified and worth his death i am willing to suffer the fate that awaits me.
turner was executed on november 11 1831 after the rebellion many states strengthened their slave codes.
the new codes placed stricter control on enslaved people.
despite resistance slavery continued to spread.
reading check finding main ideas what was nat turner s rebellion and what happened as a result.
i summary and preview several groups i of african americans attempted to end slavery by rebellion.
all of the attempts failed.
in the next chapter 14 sojourner truth was a former slave who became a leading abolitionist.
interfere with their way of life.
after nat turner s rebellion in 1831 when turner led some slaves to kill slaveholders open talk about slavery disappeared in the south.
it became dangerous to voice antislavery sentiments in southern states.
abolitionists like the grimke sisters left rather than air unpopular views to hostile neighbors.
racism fear and economic dependence on slavery made emancipation all but impossible in the south.
reading check drawing conclusions why did many northern workers oppose the abolition movement.
summary and preview the issue of slavery grew more controversial in the united states during the first half of the nineteenth century.
in the next section you will learn about women s rights.
section 4 assessment online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what contributions did william lloyd garrison make to the abolition movement.
f b draw conclusions in what ways did contribu t tions from african americans aid the struggle for abolition.
j c elaborate what do you think about the american colonization society s plan to return free african americans to liberia.
2 a describe how did the underground railroad work.
b explain why did harriet tubman first become involved with the underground railroad.
c evaluate do you think the underground railroad was a success.
why or why not.
3 a describe what action did congress take to block abolitionists.
what action did john quincy adams take to support abolition.
b analyze why did some americans oppose equality for african americans.
c predict how did southerners views of slavery reflect the idea of states rights.
how might the debate over slavery lead to conflict in the future.
critical thinking 4 identifying cause and effect review your notes on the abolitionist movement.
then use a graphic organizer like the one below to show the reasons for opposition to the movement and the effects of that opposition.
reasons for opposing the end of slavery j effects of opposition k to the movement 1 d 5 describing abolition add notes about the abolitionist movement and its leaders to your chart.
be sure to note how abolitionists influenced life in the united states.
what were they fighting for.
who opposed them and why.
new movements in america 4 fvl r history and geography african aa b9r txn united r i ml free blacks in the north slavery had been allowed in the northern colonies but by 1804 the last northern state had abolished the practice.
free african americans in the north however experienced racism and social and economic segregation.
free blacks had some access to formal education especially in the cities but were barred from most white schools.
often they created their own towns and communities that provided their own jobs goods churches and services.
while they were legally able to participate in the political life of the north few of them gained political influence.
will the experiences of african americans in the north and in the south were drastically different.
although there were free blacks in the south their lives were overshadowed by the slavery in the region.
each of these three groups slaves free blacks in the north and free blacks in the south had different economic social and political lives.
at america s population 1830 1 1 2 1 population of north iit i 3u x j k r 35 62 1 i w white free black other population of south white enslaved black free black other source historical statistics of the united states lw a i slaves in the south almost all african americans in the south were slaves.
their labor was crucial to the agricultural economy of the region.
their daily activities were dictated by owners but their food music and spirituality showed influences of their ancestors african origins.
they were given no voice in the government of the region and numerous laws restricted their freedom.
rri slave state m free state.
u s territories republic of texas h mason dixon line 0 150 300 miles 150 300 kilometers r w a.
1 sfi geography skills.
interpreting maps 1 movement why did some free blacks stay in the south.
1 2 location which region had the most african americans.
free blacks in the south free blacks in the south struggled with extreme racism but sometimes owned businesses or farms.
even in the cities their access to education and opportunities were limited.
former slaves often left the region but many more stayed in the south.
sometimes this was because of family ties or because their former owners gave them land upon freeing them.
more free blacks lived in the south than in the north but those that were former slaves often left the region.
southern states had many laws that limited the lives and opportunities of free blacks including access to political power.
as in the north they often formed their own communities and neighborhoods.
1 frederick douglass as a freed slave how would you help people still enslaved.
when did he live.
1817 1895 where did he live.
frederick douglass was bom in rural maryland.
at age six he was sent to live in baltimore and at age 20 he escaped to new york city.
for most of his life douglass lived in rochester new york making his home into a stop along the underground railroad.
he traveled often giving powerful antislavery speeches to audiences throughout the north and in europe.
key events 1817 born a slave in maryland 11837 escapes slavery disguised as a sailor 0 1841 begins his career as a speaker on abolition 01845 writes narrative of the life of frederick douglass his first autobiography 1847 publishes first issue of the north star 1863 meets president lincoln and becomes an adviser 1889 named american consul general to haiti 1895 dies in washington d c what did he do.
after hearing the abolitionist william lloyd garrison speak in 1841 douglass began his own speaking tours about his experiences as a slave.
in midlife he wrote an autobiography and started an abolitionist newspaper called the north star.
during the civil war douglass persuaded black soldiers to fight for the north.
la oihgri s rights if you were there you are a schoolteacher in new york state in 1848 although you earn a small salary you still live at home.
your father does not believe that unmarried women should live alone or look after their own money.
one day in a shop you see a poster about a public meeting to discuss women s rights.
you know your father will be angry if you go to the meeting.
but you are very curious.
teks 1a 21az22bz23ez24b what you will learn b8i would you attend the meeting.
i building background women were active in the movements i to reform prisons and schools.
they fought for temperance and worked for abolition.
but with all their work for social change women still lacked many rights and opportunities of their own.
throughout the 1800s the women s rights movement gradually became stronger and more organized.
1 influenced by the abolition movement many women struggled to gain equal rights for themselves.
2 calls for women s rights met opposition from men and women.
3 the seneca falls convention launched the first organized women s rights movement in the united states.
reformers sought to improve women s rights in american society.
v women s struggle for equal rights fighting for the rights of african americans led many female abolitionists to fight for women s rights.
in the mid 1800s these women found that they had to defend their right to speak in public particularly when a woman addressed both men and women.
for example members of the press the clergy and even some male abolitionists criticized the grimke sisters.
these critics thought that the sisters should not give public speeches.
they did not want women to leave their traditional female roles.
the grimkes protested that women had a moral duty to lead the antislavery movement.
early writings for women s rights in 1838 sarah grimke published a pamphlet arguing for equal rights for women.
she titled it letters on the equality of the sexes and the condition of women.
i ask no favors for my sex all i ask our brethren brothers is that they will take their feet from off our necks and permit us to stand upright on that ground which god designed us to occupy sarah grimke quoted in the grimke sisters from south carolina edited by gerda lerner key terms and people elizabeth cady stanton p 464 lucretia mott p 464 seneca falls convention p 464 declaration of sentiments p 464 lucy stone p 465 susan b anthony p 465 i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to show some of the significant events in the struggle for women s rights.
w movements in america 4c sarah grimke also argued for equal educational opportunities.
she pointed out laws that negatively affected women.
in addition she demanded equal pay for equal work.
sarah grimke never married.
she explained that the laws of the day gave a husband complete control of his wife s property.
therefore she feared that by marrying she would become more like a slave than a wife.
her sister angelina did marry but she refused to promise to obey her husband during their marriage ceremony.
she married theodore weld an abolitionist.
weld agreed to give up his legal right to control her property after they married.
for the grimkes the abolitionist principles and women s rights principles were identical.
in 1845 the famous transcendental ist margaret fuller published woman in the nineteenth century.
this book used well known sayings to explain the role of women in american society.
fuller used democratic and transcendentalist principles to stress the importance of individualism to all people especially women.
the book influenced many leaders of the women s rights movement.
sojourner truth sojourner truth was another powerful supporter of both abolition and women s rights.
she had been bom into slavery in about 1797 her birth name was isabella baumfree.
she took the name sojourner truth because she felt that her mission was to be a sojourner or traveler and spread the truth.
though she never learned to read or write she impressed many well educated people.
one person who thought highly of her was the author harriet beecher stowe.
stowe said that she had never spoken with anyone who had more personal presence than this woman.
truth stood six feet tall and was a confident speaker.
in 1851 truth gave a speech that is often quoted to this day.
that man over here says that women need to be helped into carriages and lifted over ditches and to have the best place everywhere.
nobody ever helps me into carriages or over mud puddles or gives me any best place look at me.
i have ploughed and planted and no man could head outwork me.
and ain t i a woman.
sojourner truth quoted in a history of women in america by carol hymowitzand michaele weissman truth the grimke sisters and other supporters of the women s movement were determined to be heard.
reading check drawing inferences why would reformers link the issues of abolition and women s rights.
time line women s rights 1776 abigail adams asks her husband john adams to remember the ladies and their rights in the declaration of independence.
462 chapter.
the passage contains both a primary and a secondary source.
review the information on page 486 analyze the passage and answer the questions that follow.
sheriff jones at the head of an army of missourians marched into lawrence.
in broad daylight they threw the printing presses of two newspapers into a river.
they burned down the free state hotel and other buildings.
antislavery kansans seethed with rage.
here is how one eyewitness described the attack sheriff jones after looking at the flames rising from the hotel and saying that it was the happiest day of his life dismissed the troops and they began their lawless destruction 1 which side did the author of the primary source likely support.
what clues in the passage suggest this.
2 for whom was the primary source likely written.
3 which source is more reliable for information about this incident.
explain why.
4 do research to find another primary and secondary sources on the topic.
498 chapter to answer the question below.
15 look back at the list of henry clay s ideas in the compromise of 1850 then categorize each idea by whether it addresses the issue of slavery states rights or sectionalism.
are there any ideas that address more than one of these categories.
social studies skills assessing primary and secondary sources use the social studies skills taught in this chapter 16 primary source speech jefferson davis s inaugural address j in his inauguration speech jefferson davis gave the reasons southern leaders 5 believed they had a right to secede and he stated that they would do so peace l fully if allowed the south s right to secede is based on the american idea that governments rest on the consent of the governed and that it is the right of the people to alter or abolish them at will whenever they become destructive of the ends for which they were established actuated solely by the desire to preserve our own.
rights and promote our own welfare the separation by the confederate states has been marked by no aggression upon others and followed by no domestic convulsion1.
h he claimed that the liberties guaranteed to citizens and states in the declaration of independence the u s constitution and the bill of rights had been violated by attempts to limit the spread of slavery.
he compared the constitution of the new government with that of the united states saying that they were similar.
the main difference was the clear protection of slavery in the confederate constitution.
mutual interest will invite to good will and kind offices on both parts.
if however passion or lust of dominion should cloud the judgment or inflame the ambition of those states we must prepare to meet the emergency and to maintain by the final arbitrament2 of the sword the position which we have assumed among the nations of the earth but davis also spoke of the urgent need for an army and a navy.
davis speech only mentions equality once in a list of ideals that he counts as the south s ideals.
davis did not mention equality between the races even in reference to the lack of equal rights for african americans.
he also did not directly discuss the nature of the confederate government and union.
even leaders that strongly supported the confederate cause could not answer whether or not a southern state would have the rightto secede from the confederacy if it chose to in the future.
the issue would soon become hotly debated in virginia.
residents of western virginia wanted to remain part of the union and seceded from eastern virginia only a few months after the south s secession.
virginia s legislature fought the action but the region became the union state of l l esf virginia the next year.
1 domestic convulsion internal revolution 2 arbitrament decision davis defended the act of secession as a protection of the rights of slaveholders.
primary source speech w lincoln s first inaugural address lincoln s first inaugural address on march 4 1861 described his desire to maintain the union and prevent war with the southern states.
although slavery was a huge issue in the debate over secession lincoln did not say that he would work to free the slaves.
he stated that preserving the union was his primary goal even if that meant that slavery remained legal.
lincoln suggested that in a democratic government the correct course of action for the south was to work toward an amendment to the constitution instead of rejecting the union.
he stated his reasons for disagreeing with southern leaders on the issue of whether or not secession was legal.
no state upon its own mere motion can lawfully get out of the union and that resolves and ordinances to that effect are legally void lincoln knew that southern leaders had already considered this argument and that some were calling for armed rebellion.
they believed the constitution protected their liberty to own slaves.
in your hands my dissatisfied fellow countrymen and not in mine is the momentous issue of civil war.
the government will not assail you.
you can have no conflict without being yourselves the aggressors he pointed out that because the union was agreed to by every state all of them had to agree in order to break it.
lincoln warned that any revolutionary actions would be met with union military force.
primary source the first lines are some of the most quoted lines of any american speech.
this was the type of nation one where everyone was entitled to liberty and equality that the union troops fought and died for.
he hoped the dedication of the battlefield as a national cemetery would remind northerners of the soldiers sacrifice.
speech gettysburg address after the bloody battle of gettysburg lincoln gave a speech that supported the union s goal of continuing the fight for the union.
four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal w e here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation under god shall have a new birth of freedom and that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth march 4 1861 abraham lincoln is inaugurated to his first term.
april 17 1861 may 21 1861 virginia arkansas tennessee and north carolina secede from the union.
january 1 1863 the emancipation proclamation goes into effect freeing slaves in rebelling territories.
november 19 1863 president lincoln delivers the gettysburg address.
515c chapter 16 chapter to answer the question below.
13 write a summary of abraham lincoln s ideas about liberty equality union and government as found in his first and second inaugural addresses and the gettysburg address.
then compare and contrast his ideas with the ideas found in jefferson davis s inaugural address.
summarize how the differences in ideas reflected the political conflicts between the sections.
reviewing themes 14 society and culture when was the civil war.
what were its causes and what were its effects on american society.
15 politics what political difficulties did the emancipation proclamation cause for president lincoln.
16 politics choose three heroes mentioned in the chapter and write three sentences explaining the significance of each.
then choose two of the following and write three sentences explaining their significance fort sumter antietam gettysburg vicksburg emancipation proclamation or appomattox court house.
using the internet 17 activity writing a poem soldiers in the civil war came from all walks of life.
despite hoping for glory and adventure many encountered dangerous and uncomfortable conditions.
through your online textbook learn more about civil war soldiers.
after viewing photographs and reading letters write a poem describing the life of a soldier.
your poem should reflect on the soldier s emotions and experiences.
71 mywritesmart 18 write your newspaper article review your notes.
then choose the subject you think would make the best newspaper article.
write an attention grabbing headline.
then write your article giving as many facts as possible.
546 chapter 17 section 1 reconstruction p 552 ten percent plan p 553 thirteenth amendment p 554 freedmen s bureau p 556 andrew johnson p 557 section 2 black codes p 558 radical republicans p 559 civil rights act of 1866 p 560 fourteenth amendment p 561 reconstruction acts p 561 impeachment p 562 fifteenth amendment p 563 section 3 hiram revels p 565 ku klux kian p 566 compromise of 1877 p 568 poll tax p 568 segregation p 569 jim crow laws p 569 plessyv.
ferguson p 569 sharecropping p 570 section 4 homestead act p 571b morrill act p 571c exodusters p 571c buffalo soldiers p 571f dawes general allotment act p 571 f academic vocabulary success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions.
in this chapter you will leam about america s continued westward expansion.
section 3 assessment jk reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify who were some prominent african american leaders during reconstruction.
why was the election of hiram rhodes revels significant.
b evaluate what do you think was the most important change made by reconstruction state governments.
explain your answer.
2 a recall for what reasons did some local govern ments not stop the ku klux kian.
b draw conclusions how did the ku klux kian s use of terror interfere with elections in the south.
3 a summarize what was the compromise of 1877.
b evaluate how did plessy v ferguson affect life in the united states.
c explain what was the relationship between jim crow laws and segregation.
4 a identify who was henry grady and why was he important.
b predict what are some possible results of the rise of the new south.
how did life change with the increase in industry.
c identify how were women affected by reconstruction.
what political effects did women have.
critical thinking 5 identifying causes and effects review your notes on reconstruction governments.
then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to show why reconstruction ended as well as the results of its end.
causes effect cause end of reconstruction effects ywritesmart 6 relating historical change to individual choice despite the difficulties of reconstruction the freedmen s bureau and plans to bring industry to the new south did create new jobs.
what might have led people to leave their jobs for new ones.
571a chapter of the westward movement.
by the early 1890s the u s frontier had largely ceased to exist.
understanding cause and effect how did the closing of the frontier affect native americans.
reading check.
summary in this section you learned about the final stages of western settlement and how they affected native americans.
section 4 assessment jjji writesmart 5 understanding the effects of government policies government policies affected the jobs available to people in the west.
how might people have adjusted their lives to make use of the policies and laws.
reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what effect did the homestead act have on settlers.
how was it related to the northwest ordinance.
b describe how did the morrill act benefit settlers.
c draw conclusions why might so many african americans have been attracted to living in the west.
d describe what ethnic groups settled in the west.
why did immigrants find the west especially hard to live in.
2 a identify who were the sodbusters.
b analyze how did railroads affect the economy of the west.
c evaluate which aspect of the western economy do you think was most important.
3 a define who were the buffalo soldiers.
b explain why did u s troops come into conflict with native americans.
how was the conflict resolved.
c identify what were the effects of the dawes general allotment act.
critical thinking 4 finding the main idea review your notes on the u s policies and laws that affected settlement in the west.
then copy the graphic organizer below.
use it to rank the importance of each policy in the settlement of the west.
explain your reasons for your ranking order.
reconstruction 571 fj social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation study using databases and modeling information using databases modeling information understand the skill understand the skill a database is a collection of information that is organized to be searched for a specific piece of data.
almost any kind of information can be stored in a database including statistics or text.
it can be in print or digital and it can be simple or complex.
the table of state facts in the back of this book is a database.
so is the u s census web site.
learn the skill learn how to read a database to create one.
1 look at the title to identify the topic.
2 read the column and row headings.
these keywords tell what data is included.
locate specific data where rows and columns intersect.
3 use critical thinking to organize and interpret data identify relationships and note patterns.
when you use or create a model you show a place process relationship or event in a visual way.
a model might be a sketch diagram or three dimensional construction such as a globe or diorama.
learn the skill titles and labels are important for explaining the information in a model.
this information must be researched in primary and secondary sources just as they would be for written reports.
if you build a relief map of the united states for example you must research the altitudes of different mountain ranges to make your map is accurate.
take notes on and sketch the information you want to include.
these sketches will help you draw or build the final model.
practice the skill practice the skill use the database of state facts on pages r20 and r21 to answer the following questions.
1 what is the capital of new mexico.
what year did texas become a state.
2 organize the information in the order of population from highest to lowest.
3 using reports from official sources locate information about the birthrate in each state.
then organize the information into a database.
then write a summary of the population of five states.
using library and internet research find information on housing used by pioneers on the great plains.
then build a three dimensional model of one type of dwelling.
present your model to the class and lead a discussion of the facts that you discovered during your research.
answer any questions that are posed by other students and ask other students questions about their projects as they present them to you.

