chapter 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies profit and piety competing visions for english settlement in the spring of 1644 john winthrop governor of massachusetts bay learned that native americans had overrun the scattered tobacco plantations of virginia killing as many as five hundred colonists.
winthrop never thought much of the chesapeake settlements.
he regarded the people who had migrated to that part of america as grossly materialistic and because virginia had recently expelled several puritan ministers winthrop decided the hostilities were gods way of punishing the tobacco planters for their worldliness.
it was observable he related that this massacre came upon them soon after they had driven out the godly ministers we had sent to them when virginians appealed to massachusetts for military supplies they received a cool reception.
we were weakly provided ourselves winthrop explained and so could not afford them any help of that kind in 1675 the tables turned.
native americans declared all out war against the new englanders and soon reports of the destruction of puritan communities were circulating in virginia.
the indians in new england have burned considerable villages wrote one leading tobacco planter and have made them the new englanders desert more than one hundred and fifty miles of those places they had formerly seated sir william berkeley virginias royal governor was not displeased by news of new englands adversity.
he and his friends held the puritans in contempt.
indeed the new englanders reminded them of the religious fanatics who had provoked civil war in england and who in 1649 had executed charles i.
during this particular crisis berkeley noted that he might have shown more pity for the beleaguered new englanders had they deserved it of the king the governor sounding like a puritan himself described the warring indians as the instruments with which god intended to destroy the kings enemies for good measure virginia outlawed the export of foodstuffs to their embattled northern neighbors.
in 1608 powhatan the father of pocahontas gave this shell decorated ceremonial cloak to captain christopher newport commander of the fleet that brought the first english settlers to jamestown.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies uch extraordinary disunity in the colonies not to mention lack of compassion comes as a surprise to anyone searching for the roots of modern nationalism in this early period.
english colonization in the seventeenth century did not spring from a desire to build a centralized empire in the new world similar to that of spain or france.
instead the english crown awarded colonial charters to a wide variety of entrepreneurs religious idealists and aristocratic adventurers who established separate and profoundly different colonies.
not only did new englanders have little in common with the earliest virginians and carolinians but they were often divided among themselves.
migration itself helps to explain this striking competition and diversity.
at different times different colonies appealed to different sorts of people.
men and women moved to the new world for various reasons and as economic political and religious conditions changed on both sides of the atlantic during the course of the seventeenth century so too did patterns of english migration.
s breaking away what were some of the social problems facing britain in the 16th and 17th centuries that helped push english colonists to cross the atlantic.
english people in the early decades of the seventeenth century experienced what seemed to them an accelerating pace of social change.
what was most evident was the rapid growth of population.
between 1580 and 1650 a period during which many men and women elected to journey to the new world the population of england expanded from about 3 5 million to more than 5 million.
among other things the expansion strained the nations agrarian economy.
competition for food and land drove up prices and people desperate for work took to the roads.
those migrants many of them drawn into the orbit of london by tales of opportunity frightened the traditional leaders of english society.
to the propertied class the wandering poor represented a threat to good order and particularly during the early decades of the seventeenth century landholders urged local magistrates throughout the kingdom to enforce the laws against vagrancy.
even by modern standards the english population of this period was quite mobile.
to be sure most men and women lived out their days rooted in the tiny country villages of their birth.
a growing number of english people however were migrant laborers who took seasonal work.
many others relocated from the countryside to london already a city of several hundred thousand inhabitants by the early seventeenth century.
because health conditions in london were poor a large number of the new arrivals quickly died and had their places not been taken by other migrants from the rural villages the population of london would almost certainly have decreased.
other more exotic destinations also beckoned.
a large number of english settlers migrated to ireland while lucrative employment and religious freedom attracted people to holland.
the pilgrims people who separated themselves from the established church of england initially hoped to make a new life in leyden.
the migrations within europe serve as reminders that ordinary people had choices.
a person who was upset about the state of the church of england or who had lost a livelihood did not have to move to america.
that some men and women consciously selected this much more dangerous and expensive journey set them apart from their contemporaries.
english colonists crossed the atlantic for many reasons.
some wanted to institute a purer form of worship more closely based on their interpretation of scripture.
others dreamed of owning land and improving their social position.
a few came to the new world to escape bad marriages jail terms or the dreary prospect of lifelong poverty.
since most seventeenth century migrants especially those who transferred to the chesapeake colonies left almost no records of their previous lives in england it is futile to try to isolate a single cause or explanation for their decision to leave home.
whatever their reasons for crossing the ocean english migrants to america in this period left a nation wracked by recurrent often violent political and religious controversy.
during the 1620s autocratic stuart monarchs james i r 1603 1625 and his son charles i r 1625 1649 who succeeded queen elizabeth on the english throne fought constantly with the elected members of parliament.
at stake were rival notions of constitutional and representative government.
many royal policies the granting of lucrative commercial monopolies to court favorites for example fueled popular discontent but the crowns hostility to far reaching religious reform sparked the most vocal protest.
throughout the kingdom puritans became adamant in their demand for radical purification of ritual.
tensions grew so severe that in 1629 charles attempted to rule the country without parliaments assistance.
the autocratic strategy backfired.
when charles finally was forced to recall parliament in 1640 because he was running out of money parliament demanded major constitutional reforms.
militant puritans supported by many members of parliament insisted on restructuring the church abolishing the office of bishop was high on their list.
in this angry political atmosphere charles took up arms against the supporters of parliament.
the confrontation between royalists and parliamentarians set off a long and bloody conflict known as the english civil war.
in 1649 the victorious parliamentarians beheaded charles and for almost a decade oliver cromwell a skilled general and committed puritan governed england as lord protector.
in 1660 following cromwells death from natural causes the stuarts returned to the english throne.
during a period known as the restoration neither charles ii r 1660 1685 nor james ii r 1685 1688 both sons of charles i was able to establish genuine political stability.
when the authoritarian james lifted some of the restrictions governing catholics a protestant nation rose up in what the english people called the glorious revolution 1688 and sent james into permanent exile.
the glorious revolution altered the course of english political history and therefore that of the american colonies as well.
the monarchs who followed james ii surrendered some of the prerogative powers that had destabilized english politics for almost a century.
the crown was still a potent force in the political life of the nation but never again would an english king or queen attempt to govern without parliament.
the chesapeake dreams of wealth the stuart monarchs james i r 1603 1625 charles i r 1625 executed 1649 james ii r 1685 deposed 1688 charles ii r 1660 1685 william iii prince of orange r 1688 1702 m mary ii r 1688 1695 new world.
these advocates argued that the north american mainland contained resources of incalculable value.
an innovative group they insisted might reap great profits and at the same time supply england with raw materials that it would otherwise be forced to purchase from european rivals holland france and spain.
moreover any enterprise that annoyed catholic spain or revealed its weakness in america seemed a desirable end in itself to patriotic english protestants.
anti catholicism and hatred of spain became an integral part of english national identity during this period and unless one appreciates just how deeply those sentiments ran in the popular mind one cannot fully understand anne i r 1702 1714 view the map the colonies to 1740 such political events coupled with periodic economic recession and religious repression determined in large measure the direction and flow of migration to america.
during times of political turmoil religious persecution and economic insecurity men and women thought more seriously about transferring to the new world than they did during periods of peace and prosperity.
obviously people who moved to america at different times came from different social and political environments.
a person who emigrated to pennsylvania in the 1680s for example left an england unlike the one that a virginian in 1607 or a bay colonist in 1630 might have known.
moreover the young men and women who migrated to london in search of work and who then in their frustration and poverty decided to move to the chesapeake carried a very different set of memories from those people who moved directly to new england from the small rural villages of their homeland.
regardless of the exact timing of departure english settlers brought with them ideas and assumptions that helped them make sense of their everyday experiences in an unfamiliar environment.
their values were tested and sometimes transformed in the new world but they were seldom destroyed.
settlement involved a complex process of adjustment.
the colonists developed different subcultures in america and in each it is possible to trace the interaction between the settlers values and the physical elements such as the climate crops and soil of their new surroundings.
the chesapeake the new england colonies the middle colonies and the southern colonies formed distinct regional identities that have survived to the present day.
susquehannock re wa la de lenni lenape delaware maryland ar law de conoy po to severn m ac r r e ba y no an ah pp ra ck r nanticoke r r parnunkey eake bay esap jam es ch st mary s city jamestown nottoway at l a n t i c ocean virginia tutelo tuscarora pamlico the chesapeake dreams of wealth why did the chesapeake colonies not prosper during the earliest years of settlement.
after the roanoke debacle in 1590 english interest in american settlement declined and only a few aging visionaries such as richard hakluyt kept alive the dream of colonies in the 50 miles 100 kilometers chesapeake colonies 1640 the many deep rivers flowing into the chesapeake bay provided scattered english planters with a convenient transportation system linking them directly to european markets.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies why ordinary people who had no direct financial stake in the new world so generously supported english efforts to colonize america.
soon after james i ascended to the throne adventurers were given an opportunity to put their theories into practice in the colonies of virginia and maryland an area known as the chesapeake or somewhat later as the tobacco coast.
entrepreneurs in virginia during elizabeths reign the major obstacle to successful colonization of the new world had been raising money.
no single person no matter how rich or well connected could underwrite the vast expenses a new world settlement required.
the solution to this financial problem was the joint stock company a business organization in which scores of people could invest without fear of bankruptcy.
a merchant or landowner could purchase a share of stock at a stated price and at the end of several years the investor could anticipate recovering the initial amount plus a portion of whatever profits the company had made.
joint stock ventures sprang up like mushrooms.
affluent english citizens and even some of more modest fortunes rushed to invest in the companies and as a result some projects were able to amass large amounts of capital enough certainly to launch a new colony in virginia.
on april 10 1606 james issued the first virginia charter.
the document authorized the london company to establish plantations in virginia.
the london company was an ambitious business venture.
its leader sir thomas smith was reputedly londons wealthiest merchant.
smith and his partners gained possession of the territory lying between present day north carolina and the hudson river.
these were generous but vague boundaries to be sure but the virginia company as the london company soon called itself set out immediately to find the treasures hakluyt had promised.
in december 1606 the susan constant the godspeed and the discovery sailed for america.
the ships carried 104 men and boys who had been instructed to establish a fortified outpost somehundred miles up a large navigable river.
the natural beauty and economic potential of the region was apparent to everyone.
a voyager on the expedition reported seeing faire meaddowes and goodly tall trees with such fresh waters running through the woods as almost ravished us at first sight the leaders of the colony selected without consulting resident native americans what the europeans considered a promising location more than thirty miles from the mouth of the james river.
a marshy peninsula jutting out into the river became the site for one of americas most unsuccessful villages jamestown.
modern historians have criticized the choice for the low lying ground proved to be a disease ridden death trap even the drinking water was contaminated with salt.
but the first virginians were neither stupid nor suicidal.
jamestown seemed the ideal place to build a fort since surprise attack by spaniards or native americans rather than sickness appeared the more serious threat in the early months of settlement.
almost immediately dispirited colonists began quarreling.
the adventurers were not prepared for the challenges that confronted them in america.
part of the problem was cultural.
most of them had grown up in a depressed agricultural economy that could not provide full time employment for all who wanted it.
in england laborers shared what little work was available.
one man for example might perform a certain chore while others simply watched.
later the men who had been idle were given an opportunity to work for an hour or two.
this labor system may have been appropriate for england but in virginia it nearly destroyed the colony.
adventurers sat around jamestown while other men performed crucial agricultural tasks.
it made little sense of course to share work in an environment in which people were starving because too little labor was expended on the planting and harvesting of crops.
not surprisingly some modern historians those who assumed all workers should put in an eight hour day branded the early virginians as lazy irresponsible beings who preferred to play while others labored.
in point of fact however the first settlers were merely attempting to replicate a traditional work experience.
avarice exacerbated the problems.
the adventurers had traveled to the new world in search of the sort of instant wealth they imagined the spaniards to have found in mexico and peru.
published tales of rubies and diamonds lying on the beach probably inflamed their expectations.
even when it must have been apparent that such expectations were unfounded the first settlers often behaved in virginia as if they fully expected to become rich.
instead of cooperating for the common good guarding or farming for example individuals pursued personal interests.
they searched for gold when they might have helped plant corn.
no one was willing to take orders and those who were supposed to govern the colony looked after their private welfare while disease war and starvation ravaged the settlement.
spinning out of control virginia might have gone the way of roanoke had it not been for captain john smith.
by any standard he was a resourceful man.
before coming to jamestown he had traveled throughout europe and fought with the hungarian army against the turks and if smith is to be believed he was saved from certain death by various beautiful women.
because of his reputation for boasting historians have discounted smiths account of life in early virginia.
recent scholarship however has affirmed the truthfulness of his curious story.
in virginia smith brought order out of anarchy.
while members of the council in jamestown debated petty politics he traded with the local indians for food mapped the chesapeake bay and may even have been rescued from execution by a young indian girl pocahontas.
in the fall of 1608 he seized control of the ruling council and instituted a tough military discipline.
under smith no one enjoyed special privilege.
individuals whom he forced to work came to hate him.
but he managed to keep them alive no small achievement in such a deadly environment.
leaders of the virginia company in london recognized the need to reform the entire enterprise.
after all they had spent considerable sums and had received nothing in return.
in 1609 the company directors obtained a new charter from the king which completely reorganized the virginia government.
henceforth all commercial and political decisions affecting the colonists rested with the company a fact that had not been made sufficiently clear in the 1606 charter.
moreover in the chesapeake dreams of wealth read the document john smith the starving time john smith c 1580 1630 was a professional mercenary and adventurer who fought against both the spanish and the ottomans before being hired by the virginia company to assist in the establishment of its new colony at jamestown.
an effort to raise scarce capital the original partners opened the joint stock company to the general public.
for a little more than 12 approximately one years wages for an unskilled english laborer a person or group of persons could purchase a stake in virginia.
it was anticipated that in 1616 the profits from the colony would be distributed among the shareholders.
the company sponsored a publicity campaign pamphlets and sermons extolled the colonys potential and exhorted patriotic english citizens to invest in the enterprise.
between 1609 and 1611 the remaining virginia settlers lacked capable leadership and perhaps as a result they lacked food.
the terrible winter of 1609 1610 was termed the starving time a few desperate colonists were driven to cannibalism an ironic situation since early explorers had assumed that only native americans would eat human flesh.
in england smith heard that one colonist had killed his wife powdered salted her and had eaten part of her before it was known for which he was executed the captain who possessed a droll sense of humor observed now whether she was better roasted broiled or carbonadoed sliced i know not but such a dish as powdered wife i never heard of other people simply lost the will to live.
the presence of so many native americans heightened the danger.
the first colonists found themselves living or attempting to live in territory controlled by what was probably the most powerful indian confederation east of the mississippi river.
under the leadership of their werowance powhatan these indians had by 1608 created a loose association of some thirty tribes and when captain john smith arrived to lead several hundred adventurers the powhatans named for their king numbered some fourteen thousand people of whom thirty two hundred were warriors.
these people hoped initially to enlist the europeans as allies against native enemies.
when it became clear that the two groups holding such different notions about labor and property and about the exploitation of the natural environment could not coexist in peace the powhatans tried to drive the invaders out of virginia once in 1622 and again in 1644.
the failure of the second campaign ended in the complete destruction of the powhatan empire.
in june 1610 the settlers who had survived despite starvation and conflicts with the indians actually abandoned virginia.
through a stroke of luck however they encountered a small fleet led by the colonys governor the baron de la warr just as they commenced their voyage down the james river.
de la warr and the deputy governors who succeeded him sir thomas gates and sir thomas dale ruled by martial law.
the new colonists many of them male and female servants employed by the company were marched to work by the beat of the drum.
such methods saved the colony but could not make it flourish.
in 1616 company shareholders received no profits.
their only reward was the right to a piece of unsurveyed land located three thousand miles from london.
stinking weed the economic solution to virginias problems grew in the vacant lots of jamestown.
only indians bothered to cultivate tobacco until john rolfe a settler who achieved notoriety by marrying pocahontas realized this local weed might be a valuable export.
rolfe experimented with the crop eventually growing in virginia a milder variety that had been developed in the west indies and was more appealing to european smokers.
virginians suddenly possessed a means to make money.
tobacco proved relatively easy to grow and settlers who had avoided work now threw themselves into its production with single minded diligence.
in 1617 one observer found that jamestowns streets and all other spare places are planted with tobacco.
the colony dispersed all about planting tobacco although king james i originally considered smoking immoral and unhealthy he changed his mind when the duties he collected on tobacco imports began to mount.
he was neither the first nor the last ruler who decided a vice that generates revenue is not really so bad.
the company sponsored another ambitious effort to transform virginia into a profitable enterprise.
in 1618 sir edwin chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies read the document james i a counterblaste to tobacco this tobacco label advertises virginias valuable export tobacco.
despite king jamess initial attitude toward the stinking weed once the government saw that tobacco made a profit it dropped its moral criticism of the american crop.
sandys pronounced sands led a faction of stockholders that began to pump life into the dying organization by instituting a series of sweeping reforms and eventually ousting sir thomas smith and his friends.
sandys wanted private investors to develop their own estates in virginia.
before 1618 there had been little incentive to do so but by relaxing dales martial law and promising an elective representative assembly called the house of burgesses sandys thought he could make the colony more attractive to wealthy speculators.
even more important was sandyss method for distributing land.
colonists who covered their own transportation cost to america were guaranteed a headright a 50 acre lot for which they paid only a small annual rent.
adventurers were granted additional headrights for each servant they brought to the colony.
this procedure allowed prosperous planters to build up huge estates while they also acquired dependent laborers.
this land system persisted long after the companys collapse.
so too did the notion that the wealth of a few justified the exploitation many others.
time of reckoning between 1619 and 1622 colonists arrived in virginia in record number.
company records reveal that during this short period 3 570 individuals were sent to the colony.
people seldom moved to virginia in families.
although the first women arrived in jamestown in 1608 most emigrants were single males in their teens or early twenties who came to the new world as indentured servants.
in exchange for transportation across the atlantic they agreed to serve a master for a stated number of years.
the length of service depended in part on the age of the servant.
the younger the servant the longer he or she served.
in return the master promised to give the laborers proper care and at the conclusion of their contracts to provide them with tools and clothes according to the custom of the country powerful virginians corrupted the system.
poor servants wanted to establish independent tobacco farms.
as they discovered however headrights were awarded not to the newly freed servant but to the great planter who had borne the cost of the servants transportation to the new world and paid for food and clothing during the indenture.
and even though indentured servants were promised land at the moment of freedom they were most often cheated becoming members of a growing disaffected landless class in seventeenth century virginia.
whenever possible planters in virginia purchased ablebodied workers in other words persons preferably male capable of performing hard agricultural labor.
this preference dramatically skewed the colonys sex ratio.
in the early decades men outnumbered women by as much as six to one.
as one historian edmund s morgan observed women were scarcer than corn or liquor in virginia and fetched a higher price such gender imbalance meant that even if a male servant lived to the end of his indenture an unlikely prospect he could not realistically expect to start a family of his own.
moreover despite apparent legal safeguards masters could treat dependent workers as they pleased after all these people were legally considered property.
servants were sold traded even gambled away in games of chance.
it does not require much imagination to see that a society that tolerated such an exploitative labor system might later embrace slavery.
most virginians then did not live long enough to worry about marriage.
death was omnipresent.
indeed extraordinarily high mortality was a major reason the chesapeake colonies developed so differently from those of new england.
on the eve of the 1618 reforms virginias population stood at approximately 700.
the company sent at least 3 000 more people but by 1622 only 1 240 were still alive.
it consequentilie followes declared one angry shareholder that we had then lost 3 000 persons within those 3 yeares the major killers were contagious diseases.
salt in the water supply also took a toll.
and on good friday march 22 1622 the powhatan indians slew 347 europeans in a well coordinated surprise attack.
no one knows for certain what effect such a horrendous mortality rate had on the men and women who survived.
at the very least it must have created a sense of impermanence a desire to escape virginia with a little money before sickness or violence ended the adventure.
the settlers who drank to excess aboard the tavern ships anchored in the james river described the colony not as a place of habitacion but only of a short sojourninge corruption and reform on both sides of the atlantic people wondered who should be blamed.
why had so many colonists died in a land so rich in potential.
the burden of responsibility lay in large measure with the chesapeake dreams of wealth read the document wessell webling his indenture 1622 indentured white servants provided much of the labor necessary for the founding of the early colonies.
here workers are shown clearing lands for agriculture and splitting logs to make boards for building or sale.
the virginia company.
sandys and his supporters were in too great a hurry to make a profit.
settlers were shipped to america but neither housing nor food awaited them in jamestown.
weakened by the long sea voyage they quickly succumbed to contagious disease.
the companys scandalous mismanagement embarrassed the king and in 1624 he dissolved the bankrupt enterprise and transformed virginia into a royal colony.
the crown appointed a governor and a council.
no provision was made however for continuing the local representative assembly an institution the stuarts heartily opposed.
the house of burgesses had first convened in 1619.
while elections to the burgesses were hardly democratic the assembly did provide wealthy planters with a voice in government.
even without the kings authorization the representatives gathered annually after 1629 and in 1639 charles recognized the bodys existence.
he had no choice.
the colonists who served on the council or in the assembly were strong willed ambitious men.
they had no intention of surrendering control over local affairs.
since charles was having political troubles of his own and lived three thousand miles from jamestown he usually allowed the virginians to have their own way.
in 1634 the assembly divided the colony into eight counties.
in each one a group of appointed justices of the peace the wealthy planters of the area convened as a court of law as well as a governing body.
the county court was the most important institution of local government in virginia and long after the american revolution it served as a center for social political and commercial activities.
changes in government had little impact on the character of daily life in virginia.
the planters continued to grow tobacco ignoring advice to diversify and as the indians were killed made into tributaries or pushed north and south virginians took up large tracts of land along the colonys many navigable rivers.
the focus of their lives was the isolated plantation a small cluster of buildings housing the planters family and dependent workers.
these were modest wooden structures.
not until the eighteenth century did the chesapeake gentry build the great georgian mansions that still attract tourists.
the dispersed pattern of settlement retarded the development of institutions such as schools and churches.
besides jamestown there were no population centers and as late as 1705 robert beverley a leading planter reported that virginia did not have a single place that may reasonably bear the name of a town maryland a troubled refuge for catholics the driving force behind the founding of maryland was sir george calvert later lord baltimore.
calvert a talented and well educated man enjoyed the patronage of james i.
he was awarded lucrative positions in the government the most important being the kings secretary of state.
in 1625 calvert shocked almost everyone by publicly declaring his catholicism in this fiercely anti catholic society persons who openly supported the church of rome were immediately stripped of civil office.
although forced to resign as secretary of state calvert retained the crowns favor.
before resigning calvert sponsored a settlement on the coast of newfoundland but after visiting the place the proprietor concluded that no english person whatever his or her religion would transfer to a place where the ayre is so intolerably cold he turned his attention to the chesapeake and on june 30 1632 charles i granted george calverts son cecilius a charter for a colony to be located north of virginia.
the boundaries of the settlement named maryland in honor of charless queen were so vaguely defined that they generated legal controversies not fully resolved until the mid eighteenth century when charles mason and jeremiah dixon surveyed their famous line between pennsylvania and maryland.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies read the document george aslop from a character of the province of maryland cecilius calvert the second lord baltimore insisted that maryland tolerate all christian religions including catholicism something no other colony was willing to do.
the young slave in the background reminds us who did the hard labor in the chesapeake colonies.
cecilius the second lord baltimore wanted to create a sanctuary for englands persecuted catholics.
he also intended to make money.
without protestant settlers it seemed unlikely maryland would prosper and cecilius instructed his brother leonard the colonys governor to do nothing that might frighten off hypersensitive protestants.
the governor was ordered to cause all acts of the roman catholic religion to be done as privately as may be and.
to instruct all roman catholics to be silent upon all occasions of discourse concerning matters of religion on march 25 1634 the ark and dove carrying about 150 settlers landed safely and within days the governor purchased from the yaocomico indians a village that became st marys city the capital of maryland.
the colonys charter was an odd document a throwback to an earlier feudal age.
it transformed baltimore into a palatine lord a proprietor with almost royal powers.
settlers swore an oath of allegiance not to the king of england but to lord baltimore.
in england such practices had long ago passed into obsolescence.
as the proprietor lord baltimore owned outright almost 6 million acres he possessed absolute authority over anyone living in his domain.
on paper at least everyone in maryland was assigned a place in an elaborate social hierarchy.
members of a colonial ruling class persons who purchased 6 000 acres from baltimore were called lords of the manor.
these landed aristocrats were permitted to establish local courts of law.
people holding less acreage enjoyed fewer privileges particularly in government.
baltimore figured that land sales and rents would adequately finance the entire venture.
baltimores feudal system never took root in chesapeake soil.
people simply refused to play the social roles the lord proprietor had assigned.
these tensions affected the operation of marylands government.
baltimore assumed that his brother acting as his deputy in america and a small appointed council of local aristocrats would pass necessary laws and carry out routine administration.
when an elected assembly first convened in 1635 baltimore allowed the delegates to discuss only those acts he had prepared.
the members of the assembly bridled at such restrictions insisting on exercising traditional parliamentary privileges.
neither side gained a clear victory in the assembly and for almost twenty five years legislative squabbling contributed to the widespread political instability that almost destroyed maryland.
the colony drew both protestants and catholics and the two groups might have lived in harmony had civil war not broken out in england.
when cromwell and the puritan faction executed charles transforming england briefly into a republic it seemed baltimore might lose his colony.
to head off such an event and to placate marylands restless protestants in 1649 the proprietor drafted the famous act concerning religion which extended toleration to all individuals who accepted the divinity of christ.
at a time when european rulers regularly persecuted people for their religious beliefs baltimore championed liberty of conscience.
however laudable the act may have been it did not heal religious divisions in maryland and when local puritans seized the colonys government they promptly repealed the act.
for almost two decades vigilantes roamed the countryside and during the plundering time 1644 1646 one armed group temporarily drove leonard calvert out of maryland.
in 1655 civil war flared again.
in this troubled sanctuary ordinary planters and their workers cultivated tobacco on plantations dispersed along riverfronts.
in 1678 baltimore complained that he could not find fifty houses in a space of thirty miles.
tobacco affected almost every aspect of local culture.
in virginia and maryland one calvert explained tobacco as our staple is our all and indeed leaves no room for anything else a steady stream of indentured servants supplied the plantations with dependent laborers until they were replaced by african slaves at the end of the seventeenth century.
europeans sacrificed much by coming to the chesapeake.
for most of the century their standard of living was primitive when compared with that of people of the same social class who had reforming england in america remained in england.
two thirds of the planters for example lived in houses of only two rooms and of a type associated with the poorest classes in contemporary english society.
reforming england in america how did differences in religion affect the founding of the new england colonies.
the pilgrims enjoy almost mythic status in american history.
these brave refugees crossed the cold atlantic in search of religious liberty signed a democratic compact aboard the mayflower landed at plymouth rock and gave us our thanksgiving day.
as with most legends this one contains only a core of truth.
the pilgrims were not crusaders who set out to change the world.
rather they were humble english farmers.
their story began in the early 1600s in scrooby manor a small community located approximately 150 miles north of london.
many people living in this area believed the church of england retained too many traces of its catholic origin.
to support such a corrupt institution was like winking at the devil.
its very rituals compromised gods true believers and so in the early years of the reign of james i the scrooby congregation formally left the established state church.
like others who followed this logic they were called separatists.
since english statute required citizens to attend anglican services the scrooby separatists moved to holland in 1608 1609 rather than compromise.
the netherlands provided the separatists with a good home too good.
the members of the little church feared they were losing their distinct identity their children were becoming dutch.
in 1617 therefore a portion of the original scrooby congregation vowed to sail to america.
included in this group was william bradford a wonderfully literate man who wrote of plymouth plantation one of the first and certainly most poignant accounts of an early american settlement.
poverty presented the major obstacle to the pilgrims plans.
they petitioned for a land patent from the virginia company of london.
at the same time they looked for someone willing to underwrite the staggering costs of colonization.
the negotiations went well or so it seemed.
after stopping in england to take on supplies and laborers the pilgrims set off for america in 1620 aboard the mayflower armed with a patent to settle in virginia and indebted to a group of english investors who were only marginally interested in religious reform.
because of an error in navigation the pilgrims landed not in virginia but in new england.
the patent for which they had worked so diligently had no validity in the region.
in fact the crown had granted new england to another company.
without a patent the colonists possessed no authorization to form a civil government a serious matter since some sailors who were not pilgrims threatened mutiny.
to preserve the struggling community from anarchy forty one men signed an agreement known as the mayflower compact to covenant and combine our selves together into a civil body politick although later praised for its democratic character the mayflower compact could not ward off disease and hunger.
during the first months in plymouth death claimed approximately half of the 102 people who had initially set out from england.
moreover debts contracted in england severely burdened the new colony.
to their credit the pilgrims honored their financial obligations but it took almost twenty years to satisfy the english investors.
without bradford whom they elected as governor the settlers might have allowed adversity to overwhelm them.
through strength of will and self sacrifice however bradford persuaded frightened men and women that they could survive in america.
bradford had a lot of help.
almost anyone who has heard of the plymouth colony knows of squanto a patuxt indian who welcomed the first pilgrims in excellent english.
in 1614 unscrupulous adventurers had kidnapped squanto and sold him in spain as a slave.
somehow this resourceful man escaped bondage making his way to london where a group of merchants who owned land in newfoundland taught him to speak english.
they apparently hoped that he would deliver moving public testimonials about the desirability of moving to the new world.
in any case squanto returned to the plymouth area just before the pilgrims arrived.
squanto joined massasoit a local native american leader in teaching the pilgrims much about hunting and agriculture a debt that bradford freely acknowledged.
although evidence for the so called first thanksgiving is extremely sketchy it is certain that without native american support the europeans would have starved.
in time the pilgrims replicated the humble little farm communities they had once known in england.
they formed separatist congregations to their liking the population slowly increased.
the settlers experimented with commercial fishing and the fur trade but the efforts never generated substantial income.
most families relied on mixed husbandry grain and livestock.
because plymouth offered only limited economic prospects it attracted only a trickle of new settlers.
in 1691 the colony was absorbed into its larger and more prosperous neighbor massachusetts bay.
the great migration in the early decades of the seventeenth century an extraordinary spirit of religious reform burst forth in england and before it had burned itself out puritanism had transformed the face of england and america.
modern historians have difficulty comprehending this powerful spiritual movement.
some consider the puritans rather neurotic individuals who condemned liquor and sex dressed in drab clothes and minded their neighbors business.
the crude caricature is based on a profound misunderstanding of the actual nature of this broad popular movement.
the seventeenth century puritans were more like todays radical political reformers men and women committed to far reaching institutional change than like naive do gooders or narrow fundamentalists.
to their enemies of course the puritans were irritants always pointing out civil and ecclesiastical imperfections and urging everyone to try to fulfill the commands of scripture.
a great many people however shared their vision and not only did they found several american colonies but they also sparked the english civil war an event that generated bold new thinking about republican government and popular sovereignty.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies the puritans were products of the protestant reformation.
they accepted a calvinist notion that an omnipotent god predestined some people to salvation and damned others throughout eternity see chapter 1.
but instead of waiting passively for judgment day the puritans examined them selves for signs of grace for hints that god had in fact placed them among his elect a member of this select group they argued would try to live according to scripture to battle sin and eradicate corruption.
for the puritans the logic of everyday life was clear.
if the church of england contained unscriptural elements clerical vestments for example then they must be eliminated.
if the pope in rome was in league with the antichrist then protestant kings had better not form alliances with catholic states.
if god condemned licentiousness and intoxication then local officials should punish whores and drunks.
there was nothing improper about an occasional beer or passionate physical love within marriage but when sex and drink became ends in themselves the puritans thought englands ministers and magistrates should read the document john winthrop a model of christian charity 1830 voters in massachusetts who were called freemen reelected john winthrop governor many times an indication of his success in translating puritan values into practical policy.
persons of this temperament were more combative than the pilgrims had been.
they wanted to purify the church of england from within and before the 1630s at least separatism held little appeal for them.
from the puritan perspective the early stuarts james i and charles i seemed unconcerned about the spiritual state of the nation.
james tolerated corruption within his own court he condoned gross public extravagance.
his foreign policy appeased european catholic powers.
at one time he even tried to marry his son to a catholic princess.
neither king showed interest in purifying the anglican church.
in fact charles assisted the rapid advance of william laud a bishop who represented everything the puritans detested.
laud defended church ceremonies that they found obnoxious.
he persecuted puritan ministers forcing them either to conform to his theology or lose their licenses to preach.
as long as parliament met puritan voters in the various boroughs and countries throughout england elected men sympathetic to their point of view.
these outspoken representatives criticized royal policies and hounded laud.
because of their defiance charles decided in 1629 to rule england without parliament and four years later named laud archbishop of canterbury.
the last doors of reform slammed shut.
the corruption remained.
john winthrop the future governor of massachusetts bay was caught up in these events.
little about his background suggested such an auspicious future.
he owned a small manor in suffolk one that never produced sufficient income to support his growing family.
he dabbled in law.
but the core of winthrops life was his faith in god a faith so intense his contemporaries immediately identified him as a puritan.
the lord he concluded was displeased with england.
time for reform was running out.
in may 1629 he wrote to his wife i am verily perswaded god will bringe some heavye affliction upon this lande and that speedylye he was however confident that the lord would provide a shelter and a hidinge place for us other puritans some wealthier and politically better connected than winthrop reached similar conclusions about englands future.
they turned their attention to the possibility of establishing a colony in america and on march 4 1629 their massachusetts bay company obtained a charter directly from the king.
charles and his advisers apparently thought the massachusetts bay company was a commercial venture no different from the dozens of other joint stock companies that had recently sprung into existence.
winthrop and his associates knew better.
on august 26 1629 twelve of them met secretly and signed the cambridge agreement.
they pledged to be ready in our persons and with such of our severall familyes as are to go with us.
to embark for the said plantation by the first of march next there was one loophole.
the charters of most joint stock companies designated a specific place where business meetings were to be held.
for reasons not entirely clear a timely bribe is a good guess the charter of the massachusetts bay company did not contain this standard clause.
it could hold meetings anywhere the stockholders called freemen desired even america and if they were in america the king and his archbishop could not easily interfere in their affairs.
reforming england in america a city on a hill the winthrop fleet departed england in march 1630.
by the end of the first year almost two thousand people had arrived in massachusetts bay and before the great migration concluded in the early 1640s more than sixteen thousand men and women had arrived in the new puritan colony.
a great deal is known about the background of these particular settlers.
a large percentage of them originated in an area northeast of london called east anglia a region in which puritan ideas had taken deep root.
london kent and the west country also contributed to the stream of emigrants.
in some instances entire villages were reestablished across the atlantic.
many bay colonists had worked as farmers in england but a surprisingly large number came from industrial centers such as norwich where cloth was manufactured for the export trade.
whatever their backgrounds they moved to massachusetts as nuclear families fathers mothers and their dependent children a form of migration strikingly different from the one that peopled virginia and maryland.
moreover because the settlers had already formed families in england the colonys sex ratio was more balanced than that found in the chesapeake colonies.
finally and perhaps more significantly once they had arrived in massachusetts these men and women survived.
indeed their life expectancy compares favorably to that of modern americans.
many factors help explain this phenomenon clean drinking water and a healthy climate for example.
while the puritans could not have planned to live longer than did colonists in other parts of the new world this remarkable accident reduced the emotional shock of long distance migration.
the first settlers possessed another source of strength and stability.
they were bound together by a common sense of purpose.
god they insisted had formed a special covenant with the people of massachusetts bay.
on his part the lord expected them to live according to scripture to reform the church in other words to create an old testament city on a hill that would stand as a beacon of righteousness for the rest of the christian world.
if they fulfilled their side of the bargain the settlers could anticipate peace and prosperity.
no one not even the lowliest servant was excused from this divine covenant for as winthrop stated wee must be knitt together in this worke as one man even as the first ships were leaving england john cotton a popular puritan minister urged the emigrants to go forth with a publicke spirit looking not on your owne things only but also on the things of others many people throughout the ages have espoused such communal rhetoric but these particular men and women went about the business of forming a new colony as if they truly intended to transform a religious vision into social reality.
the bay colonists gradually came to accept a highly innovative form of church government known as congregationalism.
under the system each village church was independent of outside interference.
the american puritans of course wanted nothing of bishops.
the people the saints were the church and as a body they pledged to uphold gods law.
in the salem church for example the members covenanted with the lord and with one another and do bind ourselves in the presence of god to walk together in all his ways simply because a person happened to live in a certain community did not mean he or she automatically belonged to the local church.
th e churches of massachusetts were voluntary institutions and in order to join one a man or woman had to provide testimony a confession of faith before neighbors who had already been admitted as full members.
it was a demanding process.
whatever the personal strains however most men and women in early massachusetts aspired to full membership which entitled them to the sacraments and gave some of them responsibility for choosing ministers disciplining backsliders and determining difficult questions of theology.
although women and blacks could not vote for ministers they did become members of the congregational churches.
over the course of the seventeenth century women made up an increasingly large share of the membership.
some aspects of community religiosity in early massachusetts may of course strike modern americans as morbid.
ministers expected people convicted of capital crimes to offer a full public confession of their sins just before their own execution.
such rituals reinforced everyday moral values by reminding ordinary men and women those who listened to the confession of the fatal consequences awaiting those who ignored the teachings of scripture.
in creating a civil government the bay colonists faced a particularly difficult challenge.
their charter allowed the investors in a joint stock company to set up a business organization.
when the settlers arrived in america however company leaders men like winthrop moved quickly to transform the commercial structure into a colonial government.
an early step in this direction took place on may 18 1631 when the category of freeman was extended to all adult males who had become members of a congregational church.
this decision greatly expanded the franchise of massachusetts bay and historians estimate that during the 1630s at least 40 percent of the colonys adult males could vote in elections.
while this percentage may seem low by modern or even jacksonian standards it was higher than anything the emigrants would have known in england.
the freemen voted annually for a governor a group of magistrates called the court of assistants and after 1634 deputies who represented the interests of the individual towns.
even military officers were elected every year in massachusetts bay.
two popular misconceptions about this government should be dispelled.
it was neither a democracy nor a theocracy.
the magistrates elected in massachusetts did not believe they represented the voters much less the whole populace.
they ruled in the name of the electorate but their responsibility as rulers was to god.
in 1638 winthrop warned against overly democratic forms since the best part of the people is always the least and of that best part the wiser is always the lesser and second the congregational ministers possessed no formal political authority in massachusetts bay.
they could not even hold civil office and it was not unusual for the voters to ignore the recommendations of a respected minister such as john cotton.
in new england the town became the center of public life.
in other regions of british america where the county was the focus of local government people did not experience the same density of social and institutional interaction.
in massachusetts complete the assignment the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion on myhistorylab feature essay the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion portrait of esther wheelwright as an ursuline nun.
t he spread of terrorism throughout the modern world and reports of journalists and civilian workers captured in war zones have forced many americans to contemplate a deeply unsettling question how would they behave if they were kidnapped by members of a group hostile to the fundamental values of the united states.
such concerns are not new.
during the colonial period new englanders who settled along the frontier with french canada knew that at any moment they might be carried away to quebec or montreal as captives and under fearful conditions might discover the fragility of their own ethnic and religious identities.
between 1675 and 1763 the french and british empires waged almost constant war.
often the conflicts turned on dynastic rivalries in europe but whatever the causes the fighting extended to north america where in an effort to contain the expansion of english settlement the french and their indian allies raided exposed communities from the coast of maine to western massachusetts.
during these years approximately 1 641 english colonists were taken captive nearly half of them children and many other people died in the violent clashes.
on the long trek back to canada the french and indians killed those prisoners who resisted or who were too weak to keep up the pace.
the reverend cotton mather new englands most influential late seventeenth century minister invited his parishioners to imagine the terrifying experience of capture the captives.
are every minute looking when they shall be roasted alive to make a sport and a feast for the most execrable cannibals.
captives that must see their nearest relations butchered before their eyes and yet be afraid of letting those eyes drop a tear although the french aimed to advance their imperial designs through attacks on english settlements their indian allies often entered the frontier wars for different reasons.
the abenaki for example harbored grievances against the english colonists from earlier conflicts and hoped with the help of the french to reap vengeance on them.
other indian groups regarded the english captives as a source of revenue.
after all someone from massachusetts was sure to offer a ransom for an unfortunate relative and as one might predict in such a market the price of liberation rose substantially over time.
the mohawk indians however viewed the captives as replacements for warriors killed in battle and whenever possible they worked to incorporate the new englanders into their own culture.
they knew from experience that children especially young girls offered the best prospects for successful adoption.
for the french and many of their indian allies who had converted to catholicism religion served to justify frontier violence.
french officials championed the catholic faith and they regarded new englanders not only as representatives of the british empire but also as protestant heretics.
the english gave as good as they got.
they accepted as absolute truth that catholicism was an utterly corrupt religion and that priests especially jesuits could not be trusted in spiritual matters.
french religious and political leaders looked upon new england captives as possible converts to catholicism for in this ongoing imperial controversy news that an english protestant had given up his or her faith for rome represented a major symbolic victory.
as historian james axtell explained if the english could not preserve their religious identities as captives then their pretensions to the status as gods chosen people.
would be cast in grave doubt the odds of converting young new englanders to catholicism in these circumstances must have appeared extraordinarily small.
the captives taken in war had come from highly religious communities where they had received regular instruction in the basic tenets of reformed protestantism.
as children puritans learned to equate the pope with satan.
their forefathers had traveled to the new world to cleanse the church of england from practices associated with catholicism.
and yet amazingly once they arrived in canada a significant number of prisoners perhaps as much as fifty percent accepted the catholic faith married french or indian spouses and settled comfortably into the routines of life in canada.
one such convert was esther wheelwright.
abenaki indians captured her in wells maine in 1703 when she was only seven years old and adopted her.
she was later taken in by nuns who taught her french.
she became a keen student of catholicism.
over time the sincerity of her new faith won her many admirers and eventually esther renamed esther marie joseph de lenfant jesus became an ursuline nun.
some years later she was appointed superior of the entire ursuline order in canada.
when new englanders attempted to negotiate her release they discovered that she does not wish to return because of the change of her religion esthers mother and father reluctantly accepted their daughters decision.
they even gave money to her convent and in recognition of their generosity and forgiveness she sent a portrait of herself as a nun to her bewildered protestant family.
in the long contest for religious and cultural superiority eunice williams posed an even more difficult challenge for new englanders.
after all she was the daughter of a leading congregational minister no one doubted the quality of her religious instruction.
eunices ordeal began on february 29 1704 when a large force of french and indians overran deerfield an agricultural community in western massachusetts.
within a short time the raiders killed many inhabitants including several members of her family.
her mother died during the long march to canada.
eventually the reverend williams negotiated his freedom as well as that of several surviving children.
eunice refused to join them.
she had fallen in love with an indian and although friends and relatives begged her to reject catholicism and life among the kahnawake mohawks she politely but firmly rejected their pleas.
over the next several decades eunice and her indian husband visited new england.
on one occasion in 1741 her cousin the reverend solomon williams pointed out in a sermon that eunice had accepted the thickness of popish darkness superstition lamenting her pitiful and sorrowful condition he urged her to reaffirm the faith of her father.
unhappily for solomon eunice had forgotten all that she once knew of the english language and so the force of his shrill condemnation was lost on her.
no society easily accepts rejection.
new englanders struggled to comprehend why so many of their children would not come home and they tried as best they could to explain to themselves why eunice and the other captives refused to be redeemed.
they assured each other that crafty priests had bribed or even coerced the children.
a few ministers such as cotton mather and eunices father suggested that god had punished the protestant communities for their sinful behavior.
whatever contemporaries may have thought of these accounts modern historians have demonstrated that catholic priests seldom employed force or promises of worldly goods in winning converts.
some captives may have felt gratitude to the french and indians who had spared their lives.
but undoubtedly love marriage and a growing sense of security in a new society helped sever ties with a new england culture that slowly faded from memory.
the reverend john williamss own narrative of the deerfield captives entitled the redeemed captive returning to zion 1707 addressed the crisis.
it became a best seller in a colony eager to hear the story of those redeemed from captivity those returned to the fold.
at the end of the day however the problem of abandoning ones nation and ones faith continued to haunt ordinary men and women who fervently identified with england and protestantism.
by turning their backs on european civilization english culture and the protestant religion these captives challenged foundational values even more powerfully than did the french and indians.
questions for discussion 1.
why did so many new england captives refuse to return home.
why did the french and indians view english children especially young girls as the most likely converts to their religion and way of life.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies groups of men and women voluntarily covenanted together to observe common goals.
the community constructed a meetinghouse where religious services and town meetings were held.
this powerful sense of shared purpose something that later americans have greatly admired should not obscure the fact that the founders of new england towns also had a keen eye for personal profit.
seventeenth century records reveal that speculators often made a good deal of money from selling shares in village lands.
but acquisitiveness never got out of control and recent studies have shown that entrepreneurial practices rarely disturbed the peace of the puritan communities.
inhabitants generally received land sufficient to build a house to support a family.
although villagers escaped the kind of feudal dues collected in other parts of america they were expected to contribute to the ministers salary pay local and colony taxes and serve in the militia.
limits of religious dissent the european settlers of massachusetts bay managed to live in peace at least with each other.
this was a remarkable achievement considering the chronic instability that plagued other colonies at this time.
the bay colonists disagreed over many issues sometimes vociferously whole towns disputed with neighboring villages over common boundaries.
but the people inevitably relied on the civil courts to mediate differences.
they believed in a rule of law and in 1648 the colonial legislature called the general court drew up the lawes and liberties the first alphabetized code of law printed in english.
this is a document of fundamental importance in american constitutional history.
in clear prose it explained to ordinary colonists their rights and responsibilities as citizens of the commonwealth.
the code engendered public trust in government and discouraged magistrates from the arbitrary exercise of authority.
the puritans never supported the concept of religious toleration.
they transferred to the new world to preserve their own freedom of worship about religious freedom of those deemed heretics they expressed little concern.
the most serious challenges to puritan orthodoxy in massachusetts bay came from two brilliantly charismatic individuals.
the first roger williams arrived in 1631 and immediately attracted a body of loyal followers.
indeed everyone seemed to have liked williams as a person.
williamss religious ideas however created controversy.
he preached extreme separatism.
the bay colonists he exclaimed were impure in the sight of the lord so long as they remained even nominal members of the church of england.
moreover he questioned the validity of the colonys charter since the king had not first purchased the land from the indians a view that threatened the integrity of the entire colonial experiment.
williams also insisted that the civil rulers of massachusetts had no business punishing settlers for their religious beliefs.
it was gods responsibility not mens to monitor peoples consciences.
the bay magistrates were prepared neither to tolerate heresy nor to accede to williamss other demands and in 1636 after attempts to reach a compromise had failed they banished him from the colony.
williams worked out the logic of his ideas in providence a village he founded in what would become rhode island.
the magistrates of massachusetts bay rightly concluded that the second individual anne hutchinson posed an even graver threat to the peace of the commonwealth.
this extremely intelligent woman her husband william and her children followed john cotton to the new world in 1634.
even contemporaries found her religious ideas usually termed antinomianism somewhat confusing.
whatever her thoughts hutchinson shared them with other bostonians many of them women.
her outspoken views scandalized orthodox leaders of church and state.
she suggested that all but two ministers in the colony had lost touch with the holy spirit and were preaching a doctrine in the congregational churches that was little better than that of archbishop laud.
when authorities demanded she explain her unusual opinions she suggested that she experienced divine inspiration independently of either the bible or the clergy.
in other words hutchinsons teachings could not be tested by scripture a position that seemed dangerously subjective.
indeed hutchinsons theology called the very foundation of massachusetts bay into question.
without clear external standards one persons truth was as valid as anyone elses and from winthrops perspective hutchinsons teachings invited civil and religious anarchy.
but her challenge to authority was not simply theological.
as a woman her aggressive speech sparked a deeply misogynistic response from the colonys male leaders.
when this woman described congregational ministers some of them the leading divines of boston as unconverted men the general court intervened.
for two very tense days in 1637 the ministers and magistrates of massachusetts bay crossexamined hutchinson in this intense theological debate she more than held her own.
she knew as much about the bible as did her inquisitors.
hutchinson defied the ministers and magistrates to demonstrate exactly where she had gone wrong.
just when it appeared hutchinson had outmaneuvered indeed thoroughly embarrassed her opponents she let down her guard declaring forcefully that what she knew of god came by an immediate revelation.
by the voice of his own spirit to my soul here was what her accusers had suspected all along but could not prove.
she had confessed in open court that the spirit can live without the moral law.
this antinomian statement fulfilled the worst fears of the bay rulers and they were relieved to exile hutchinson and her followers to rhode island.
mobility and division massachusetts bay spawned four new colonies three of which survived to the american revolution.
new hampshire became a separate colony in 1677.
its population grew very slowly and for much of the colonial period new hampshire remained economically dependent on massachusetts its commercial neighbor to the south.
far more people were drawn to the fertile lands of the connecticut river valley.
in 1636 settlers founded the villages of hartford windsor and wethersfield.
no one forced these men and women to leave massachusetts and in their new surroundings they created a society that looked much like the one they had reforming england in america connecti cut r maine part of mass.
new hampshire part of mass.
hudson r portsmouth massachusetts bay salem boston hartford new haven providence plymouth wethersfield connecticut new haven new haven conn conn new n e t h e r l and narragansett bay rhode island atlantic ocean not surprisingly these men and women appreciated the need for toleration.
no one was persecuted in rhode island for his or her religious beliefs.
one might have thought the separate rhode island communities would cooperate for the common good.
they did not.
villagers fought over land and schemed with outside speculators to divide the tiny colony into even smaller pieces.
in 1644 parliament issued a patent for the providence plantations and in 1663 the rhode islanders obtained a royal charter.
these successes did not calm political turmoil.
for most of the seventeenth century colonywide government existed in name only.
despite their constant bickering however the settlers of rhode island built up a profitable commerce in agricultural goods.
allies and enemies plymouth windsor 100 miles 100 kilometers new england colonies 1650 the early settlers quickly carved up new england.
new haven briefly flourished as a separate colony before being taken over by connecticut in 1662.
long island later became part of new york plymouth was absorbed into massachusetts and in 1677 new hampshire became a separate colony.
known in the bay colony.
through his writings thomas hooker connecticuts most prominent minister helped all new englanders define congregational church polity.
puritans on both sides of the atlantic read hookers beautifully crafted works.
in 1639 representatives from the connecticut towns passed the fundamental orders a blueprint for civil government and in 1662 charles ii awarded the colony a charter of its own.
in 1638 another group led by theophilus eaton and the reverend john davenport settled new haven and several adjoining towns along long island sound.
these emigrants many of whom had come from london lived briefly in massachusetts bay but then insisted on forming a puritan commonwealth of their own one that established a closer relationship between church and state than the bay colonists had allowed.
the new haven colony never prospered and in 1662 it was absorbed into connecticut.
rhode island experienced a wholly different history.
from the beginning it drew people of a highly independent turn of mind and according to one dutch visitor rhode island was the receptacle of all sorts of riff raff people.
all the cranks of new england retire thither this description of course was an exaggeration.
roger williams founded providence in 1636 two years later anne hutchinson took her followers to portsmouth.
other groups settled around narragansett bay.
puritan expansion in new england did not occur unopposed.
during the 1620s the pequots a numerous tribe whose home territory centered on the thames and mystic rivers dominated the trade of southern new england.
the pequots collected furs from other indian peoples in the region sold them to the dutch and then resold the european goods they obtained to their indian clients.
this middleman status proved highly profitable for the pequots giving them first access to the metal weapons firearms and other tools sold by the dutch.
their commercial and military power allowed the pequots to impose their political control over much of the region and to force their trading partners to pay them tribute.
the founding of the english colonies offered potential new trading partners for the indians of new england.
the pilgrims and puritans may have come to new england for religious reasons but this did not stop them from participating in the regions lucrative fur trade.
the pequots resented this intrusion.
they saw the english traders as a threat to their regional power.
the english for their part saw the dutch and their pequot trading partners as a challenge to english control of new england.
in 1636 an english trader named john oldham was killed by unknown indians.
the english eventually came to blame the pequots resulting in war.
the english allied themselves with the mohegan indians a tribe that had formerly been tributaries to the pequots and the narragansetts who had recently had some of their land seized by the pequots.
the pequot nation was already in decline when the war started.
the pequots had been ravaged by epidemic disease in 1619 and 1633.
from a pre contact population of 13 000 only 3 000 pequots remained.
the pequot war as it came to be known all but destroyed the tribe.
the english and their allies quickly routed the pequots.
the english waged an especially vicious campaign.
for example in 1637 english soldiers surrounded a pequot village on the mystic river that contained mostly women children and old men.
the english soldiers set the village on fi re and then shot down any pequots who tried to escape.
after the war the english took most of the surviving pequots as slaves giving some to their allies and selling the remainder to the english plantations in the west indies.
the english won the war but their savage tactics alienated their indian allies.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies diversity in the middle colonies how did ethnic diversity shape the development of the middle colonies.
new york new jersey pennsylvania and delaware were settled for quite different reasons.
william penn for example envisioned a quaker sanctuary the duke of york worried chiefly about his own income.
despite the founders intentions however some common characteristics emerged.
each colony developed a strikingly heterogeneous population men and women of different ethnic and religious backgrounds.
this cultural diversity became a major influence on the economic political and ecclesiastical institutions of the middle colonies.
the raucous partisan public life of the middle colonies foreshadowed later american society.
anglo dutch rivalry on the hudson by the early decades of the seventeenth century the dutch had established themselves as europes most aggressive traders.
holland a small loosely federated nation possessed the worlds largest merchant fleet.
its ships vied for the commerce of asia africa and america.
dutch rivalry with spain a fading though still formidable power was in large measure responsible for the settlement of new netherland.
while searching for the ce fran abenaki lake champlain new york lake ontario mahican ware r ela hudson r mass.
na r ehan susqu d pennsylvania n h albany iroquois confederation ie er ke a l connecticut r.
w ne delaware lenni lenape conn new york east jersey germantown philadelphia susquehannock md.
va west jersey atlantic ocean three counties of delaware 100 miles 100 kilometers middle colonies 1685 until the revolution the iroquois blocked european expansion into western new york.
the jerseys and pennsylvania initially attracted english and irish quakers who were soon joined by thousands of protestant irish and germans.
elusive northwest passage in 1609 henry hudson an english explorer employed by a dutch company sailed up the river that now bears his name.
further voyages led to the establishment of trading posts in new netherland and on the connecticut river although permanent settlement at new netherland did not occur until 1624.
the area also seemed an excellent base from which to attack spains colonies in the new world.
the directors of the dutch west india company sponsored two small outposts fort orange albany located well up the hudson river and new amsterdam new york city on manhattan island.
the first dutch settlers were not actually colonists.
rather they were salaried employees and their superiors in holland expected them to spend most of their time gathering animal furs.
they did not receive land for their troubles.
needless to say this arrangement attracted relatively few dutch immigrants.
the colonys population may have been small only 270 in 1628 but it contained an extraordinary ethnic mix.
one visitor to new amsterdam in 1644 maintained he had heard eighteen different languages spoken in the city.
even if this report was exaggerated there is no doubt the dutch colony drew english finns germans and swedes.
by the 1640s a sizable community of free blacks probably former slaves who had gained their freedom through self purchase had developed in new amsterdam adding african tongues to the cacophony of languages.
the colonys culture was further fragmented by new england puritans who left massachusetts and connecticut to stake out farms on eastern long island.
new netherland lacked capable leadership.
the company sent a number of director generals to oversee judicial and political affairs.
without exception these men were temperamentally unsuited to govern an american colony.
they adopted autocratic procedures lined their own pockets and in one case blundered into a war that needlessly killed scores of indians and settlers.
the company made no provision for an elected assembly.
as much as they were able the scattered inhabitants living along the hudson river ignored company directives.
they felt no loyalty to the trading company that had treated them so shabbily.
long island puritans complained bitterly about the absence of representative institutions.
the dutch system has aptly been described as unstable pluralism in august 1664 the dutch lost their tenuous hold on new netherland.
the english crown eager to score an easy victory over a commercial rival dispatched a fleet of warships to new amsterdam.
the commander of this force colonel richard nicolls ordered the colonists to surrender.
the last director general a colorful character named peter stuyvesant 1647 1664 rushed wildly about the city urging the settlers to resist the english.
but no one obeyed.
even the dutch remained deaf to stuyvesants appeals.
they accepted the articles of capitulation a generous agreement that allowed dutch nationals to remain in the province and to retain their property.
charles ii had already granted his brother james the duke of york a charter for the newly captured territory and much else besides.
the duke became absolute proprietor over maine marthas vineyard nantucket long island and the rest of new york all the way to delaware bay.
the king perhaps diversity in the middle colonies read the document father isaac jogues description of new york 1640 it had been under the dutch west india company a loose collection of independent communities ruled by an ineffectual central government.
confusion in new jersey only three months after receiving a charter for new york the duke of york made a terrible mistake something this stubborn humorless man was prone to do.
as a gift to two courtiers who had served charles during the english civil war the duke awarded the land lying between the hudson and delaware rivers to john lord berkeley and sir george carteret.
this colony was named new jersey in honor of carterets birthplace the isle of jersey in the english channel.
when nicolls heard what the duke had done he exploded.
in his estimation this fertile region contained the most improveable land in all new york and to give it away so casually seemed the height of folly.
the dukes impulsive act bred confusion.
soon it was not clear who owned what in new jersey.
before nicolls had learned of jamess decision the governor had allowed migrants from new england to take up farms west of the map of new york city presented to james duke of york the future james ii shortly after the english hudson river.
he promised the settlers an captured new amsterdam from the dutch in 1664 opportunity to establish an elected assembly a headright system and liberty of wanted to encircle new englands potentially disloyal puritan conscience.
in exchange for these privileges nicolls asked only that population but whatever his aims may have been he created a they pay a small annual quitrent to the duke.
the new proprietors bureaucratic nightmare.
berkeley and carteret recruited colonists on similar terms.
they assumed of course that they would receive the rent money.
during the english civil war the duke had acquired a thorthe result was chaos.
some colonists insisted that nicolls had ough aversion to representative government.
after all parliament authorized their assembly.
others equally insistent claimed that had executed the dukes father charles i and raised up oliver berkeley and carteret had done so.
both sides were wrong.
neither cromwell.
the new proprietor had no intention of letting such a the proprietors nor nicolls possessed any legal right whatsoever participatory system take root in new york.
i cannot but suspect to set up a colonial government.
james could transfer land to the duke announced that an assembly would be of dangerous favorite courtiers but no matter how many times the land changed consequence the long islanders felt betrayed.
in part to appease hands the government remained his personal responsibility.
these outspoken critics governor nicolls one of the few compeknowledge of the law failed to quiet the controversy.
through it all tent administrators to serve in the middle colonies drew up in the duke showed not the slightest interest in the peace and welfare march 1665 a legal code known as the dukes laws.
it guaranteed of the people of new jersey.
religious toleration and created local governments.
berkeley grew tired of the venture.
it generated headaches there was no provision however for an elected assembly or rather than income and in 1674 he sold his proprietary rights for that matter for democratic town meetings.
the legal code disapto a group of surprisingly quarrelsome quakers.
the sale necespointed the puritan migrants on long island and when the dukes sitated the division of the colony into two separate governments officers attempted to collect taxes these people protested that they known as east and west jersey.
neither half prospered.
carteret were inslavd under an arbitrary power and his heirs tried unsuccessfully to turn a profit in east jersey.
the dutch kept silent.
for several decades they remained in 1677 the quaker proprietors of west jersey issued a remarka large unassimilated ethnic group.
they continued to speak able democratic plan of government the laws concessions and their own language worship in their own churches dutch agreements.
but they fought among themselves with such intenreformed calvinist and eye their english neighbors with sity that not even william penn could bring tranquility to their suspicion.
in fact the colony seemed little different from what chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies affairs.
penn wisely turned his attention to the unclaimed territory across the delaware river.
the west jersey proprietors went bankrupt and in 1702 the crown reunited the two jerseys into a single royal colony.
in 1700 the population of new jersey stood at approximately fourteen thousand.
largely because it lacked a good deepwater harbor the colony never developed a commercial center to rival new york city or philadelphia.
its residents lived on scattered often isolated farms villages of more than a few hundred people were rare.
visitors commented on the diversity of the settlers.
there were colonists from almost every european nation.
congregationalists presbyterians quakers baptists anabaptists and anglicans somehow managed to live together peacefully in new jersey.
read the document william penn model for government 1681 quakers in america how did the quaker religion influence the development of pennsylvania.
the founding of pennsylvania cannot be separated from the history of the quaker movement.
believers in an extreme form of antinomianism the quakers saw no need for a learned ministry since one persons interpretation of scripture was as valid as anyone elses.
this radical religious sect a product of the social upheaval in england during the civil war gained its name from the derogatory term that english authorities sometimes used to describe those who tremble at the word of the lord the name persisted even though the quakers preferred being called professors of the light or more commonly friends.
quaker beliefs and practice by the time the stuarts regained the throne in 1660 the quakers had developed strong support throughout england.
one person responsible for their remarkable success was george fox 1624 1691 a poor shoemaker whose own spiritual anxieties sparked a powerful new religious message that pushed beyond traditional reformed protestantism.
according to fox he experienced despair so that i had nothing outwardly to help me.
but then i heard a voice which said there is one even christ jesus that can speak to thy condition throughout his life fox and his growing number of followers gave testimony to the working of the holy spirit.
indeed they informed ordinary men and women that if only they would look they too would discover they possessed an inner light this was a wonderfully liberating invitation especially for persons of lower class origin.
with the lords personal assistance they could attain greater spiritual perfection on earth.
gone was the stigma of original sin discarded was the notion of eternal predestination.
everyone could be saved.
quakers practiced humility in their daily lives.
they wore simple clothes and employed old fashioned forms of address that set them apart from their neighbors.
friends refused to honor worldly position and accomplishment or to swear oaths in courts of law.
they were also pacifists.
according to fox all persons were william penn 1644 1718 received a charter for pennsylvania from king charles ii in 1681.
penn intended his colony to serve as a religious haven for both his fellow quakers who faced persecution both from the church of england and from the puritans in new england and for members of other persecuted protestant sects.
equal in the sight of the lord a belief that generally annoyed people of rank and achievement.
moreover the quakers never kept their thoughts to themselves.
they preached conversion constantly spreading the truth throughout england ireland and america.
the friends played important roles in the early history of new jersey rhode island and north carolina as well as pennsylvania.
in some places the publishers of truth wore out their welcome.
english authorities harassed the quakers.
thousands including fox himself were jailed and in massachusetts bay between 1659 and 1661 puritan magistrates ordered several friends put to death.
such measures proved counterproductive for persecution only inspired the martyred quakers to redouble their efforts.
penns holy experiment william penn lived according to the inner light a commitment that led eventually to the founding of pennsylvania.
penn possessed a curiously complex personality.
he was an athletic quakers in america person who threw himself into intellectual pursuits.
he was a bold visionary capable of making pragmatic decisions.
he came from an aristocratic family and yet spent his entire adult life involved with a religious movement associated with the lower class.
precisely when penns thoughts turned to america is not known.
he was briefly involved with the west jersey proprietorship.
this venture may have suggested the possibility of an even larger enterprise.
in any case penn negotiated in 1681 one of the more impressive land deals in the history of american real estate.
charles ii awarded penn a charter making him the sole proprietor of a vast area called pennsylvania literally penns woods.
the name embarrassed the modest penn but he knew better than to look the royal gift horse in the mouth.
why the king bestowed such generosity on a leading quaker remains a mystery.
perhaps charles wanted to repay an old debt to penns father.
the monarch may have regarded the colony as a means of ridding england of its troublesome quaker population or quite simply he may have liked penn.
in 1682 the new proprietor purchased from the duke of york the so called three lower counties that eventually became delaware.
this astute move guaranteed that pennsylvania would have access to the atlantic and determined even before philadelphia had been established that it would become a commercial center.
in designing his government penn drew heavily on the writings of james harrington 1611 1677.
this english political philosopher argued that no government could ever be stable unless it refl ected the actual distribution of landed property within society.
both the rich and poor had to have a voice in political affairs neither should be able to overrule the legitimate interests of the other class.
the frame of government envisioned a governor appointed by the proprietor a 72 member provincial council responsible for initiating legislation and a 200 person assembly that could accept or reject the bills presented to it.
penn apparently thought the council would be filled by the colonys richest landholders or in the words of the frame persons of most note for their wisdom virtue and ability the governor and council were charged with the routine administration of justice.
smaller landowners spoke through the assembly.
it was a clumsy structure and in america the entire edifice crumbled under its own weight.
settling pennsylvania penn promoted his colony aggressively throughout england ireland and germany.
he had no choice.
his only source of revenue was the sale of land and the collection of quitrents.
penn commissioned pamphlets in several languages extolling the quality of pennsylvanias rich farmland.
the response was overwhelming.
people poured into philadelphia and the surrounding area.
in 1685 alone eight thousand immigrants arrived.
most of the settlers were irish welsh and english quakers and they generally moved to america as families.
but penn opened the door to men and women of all nations.
he asserted that the people of pennsylvania are a collection of divers nations in europe as french dutch germans swedes danes finns scotch irish and english the settlers were by no means all quakers.
the founder of germantown francis daniel pastorius called the vessel that read the document letter by william penn to the committee of the free society of traders 1683 william penns plan for philadelphia shows the city laid out where the schuylkill and delaware rivers parallel each other.
four of the five public squares were intended to be parks while the fifth at the center was designated for public buildings.
today it is the site of philadelphias city hall.
brought him to the new world a noahs ark of religions and within his own household there were servants who subscribed to the roman catholic to the lutheran to the calvinistic to the anabaptist and to the anglican church and only one quaker ethnic and religious diversity were crucial in the development of pennsylvanias public institutions and its politics took on a quarrelsome quality absent in more homogeneous colonies such as virginia and massachusetts.
penn himself emigrated to america in 1682.
his stay however was unexpectedly short and unhappy.
the council and assembly reduced now to more manageable size fought over the right to initiate legislation.
wealthy quaker merchants most of them residents of philadelphia dominated the council.
by contrast the assembly included men from rural settlements and the three lower counties who showed no concern for the holy experiment.
penn did not see his colony again until 1699.
during his absence much had changed.
the settlement had prospered.
its agricultural products especially its excellent wheat were in demand throughout the atlantic world.
despite this economic success however the population remained deeply divided.
even the quakers had briefly split into hostile factions.
penns handpicked governors had failed to win general support for the proprietors policies and one of them exclaimed in anger that each quaker prays for his neighbor on first days and then preys on him the other six as the seventeenth century closed few colonists still shared the founders desire to create a godly paternalistic society.
in 1701 legal challenges in england again forced penn to depart for the mother country.
just before he sailed penn signed the charter of liberties a new frame of government chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies that established a unicameral or one house legislature the only one in colonial america and gave the representatives the right to initiate bills.
penn also allowed the assembly to conduct its business without proprietary interference.
the charter provided for the political separation of the three lower counties delaware from pennsylvania something people living in the area had demanded for years.
this hastily drafted document served as pennsylvanias constitution until the american revolution.
his experience in america must have depressed penn now both old and sick.
in england penn was imprisoned for debts incurred by dishonest colonial agents and in 1718 pennsylvanias founder died a broken man.
planting the carolinas how did the barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the carolinas.
in some ways carolina society looked much like the one that had developed in virginia and maryland.
in both areas white planters forced african slaves to produce staple crops for a world market.
but such superficial similarities masked substantial regional differences.
in fact the south certainly the fabled solid south of the early nineteenth century did not exist during the colonial period.
the carolinas joined much later by georgia stood apart from their northern neighbors.
as a historian of colonial carolina explained the southern colonies were never a cohesive section in the same way that new england was.
the great diversity of population groups.
discouraged southern sectionalism proprietors of the carolinas carolina was a product of the restoration of the stuarts to the english throne.
court favorites who had followed the stuarts into exile during the civil war demanded tangible rewards for their loyalty.
new york and new jersey were obvious plums.
so too was carolina.
sir john colleton a successful english planter returned from barbados organized a group of eight powerful courtiers who styled themselves the true and absolute lords proprietors of carolina.
on march 24 1663 the king granted these proprietors a charter to the vast territory between virginia and florida and running west as far as the south seas the failure of similar ventures in the new world taught the carolina proprietors valuable lessons.
unlike the first virginians for example this group did not expect instant wealth.
rather the proprietors reasoned that they would obtain a steady source of income from rents.
what they needed of course were settlers to pay those rents.
recruitment turned out to be no easy task.
economic and social conditions in the mother country improved considerably after its civil war and english people were no longer so willing to transfer to the new world.
even if they had shown interest the cost of transporting settlers across the atlantic seemed prohibitively expensive.
the proprietors concluded therefore that with the proper incentives a generous land policy for example they could attract men and women from established american colonies and thereby save themselves a great deal of money.
unfortunately for the men who owned carolina such people were not easily persuaded.
they had begun to take for granted certain rights and privileges and as the price of settlement they demanded a representative assembly liberty of conscience and a liberal headright system.
colleton and his associates waited for the money to roll in but to their dismay no one seemed particularly interested in moving to the carolina frontier.
a tiny settlement at port royal failed.
one group of new englanders briefly considered taking up land in the cape fear area but these people were so disappointed by what they saw that they departed leaving behind only a sign that tended not only to the disparagement of the land.
but also to the great discouragement of all those that should hereafter come into these parts to settle by this time a majority of surviving proprietors had given up on carolina.
the barbadian connection anthony ashley cooper later earl of shaftesbury was the exception.
in 1669 he persuaded the remaining carolinian proprietors to invest their own capital in the colony.
without such financial support cooper recognized the project would surely fail.
once he received sufficient funds this energetic organizer dispatched three hundred english colonists to port royal under the command of joseph west.
the fleet put in briefly at barbados to pick up additional recruits and in march 1670 after being punished by atlantic gales that destroyed one ship the expedition arrived at its destination.
only one hundred people were still alive.
the unhappy settlers did not remain long at port royal an unappealing low lying place badly exposed to spanish attack.
they moved northward locating eventually along the more secure ashley river.
later the colonys administrative center charles town it did not become charleston until 1783 was established at the junction of the ashley and cooper rivers.
cooper also wanted to bring order to the new society.
with assistance from john locke the famous english philosopher 1632 1704 cooper devised the fundamental constitutions of carolina.
like penn cooper had been influenced by the writings of harrington.
the constitutions created a local aristocracy consisting of proprietors and lesser nobles called landgraves and cassiques terms as inappropriate to the realities of the new world as was the idea of creating a hereditary landed elite.
persons who purchased vast tracts of land automatically received a title and the right to sit in the council of nobles a body designed to administer justice oversee civil affairs and initiate legislation.
a parliament in which smaller landowners had a voice and could accept or reject bills drafted by the council.
the very poor were excluded from political life altogether.
cooper thought his scheme maintained the proper balance of government between aristocracy and democracy a concept central to harringtons philosophy.
not surprisingly the constitutions had little impact on the actual structure of government.
planting the carolinas before 1680 almost half the men and women who settled in the port royal area came from barbados.
this small caribbean island which produced an annual fortune in sugar depended on slave labor.
by the third quarter of the seventeenth century barbados had become overpopulated.
wealthy families could not provide their sons and daughters with sufficient land to maintain social status and as the crisis intensified barbadians looked to carolina for relief.
these migrants many of whom were quite rich traveled to carolina both as individuals and family groups.
some even brought gangs of slaves with them to the american mainland.
the barbadians carved out plantations on the tributaries of the cooper river and established themselves immediately as the colonys most powerful political faction.
so it was wrote historian richard dunn that these caribbean pioneers helped to create on the north american coast a slave based plantation society closer in temper to the islands they fled from than to any other mainland english settlement much of the planters time was taken up with the search for a profitable crop.
the early settlers experimented with a number of plants tobacco cotton silk and grapes.
the most successful items turned out to be beef skins and naval stores especially tar used to maintain ocean vessels.
by the 1680s some carolinians had built up great herds of cattle seven or eight hundred head in some cases.
traders who dealt with indians brought back thousands of deerskins from the interior and they often returned with indian slaves as well.
these commercial resources together with tar and turpentine enjoyed a good market.
it was not until the 1690s that englands principal mainland colonies original purpose virginia new amsterdam new york plymouth commercial venture 1607 commercial venture 1613 made english colony 1664 captain john smith peter stuyvesant duke of york tobacco furs grain 64 560 19 107 refuge for english 1620 absorbed by separatists massachusetts 1691 commercial venture 1623 william bradford grain john mason refuge for english puritans refuge for english catholics expansion of massachusetts refuge for dissenters from massachusetts commercial venture john winthrop wood naval stores grain wood included with massachusetts 4 958 55 941 tobacco 34 100 lord baltimore george calvert thomas hooker grain 25 970 roger williams grain 5 894 peter minuit william penn grain 2 470 anthony ashley cooper anthony ashley cooper sir george carteret wood naval 10 720 stores tobacco naval stores 5 720 rice indigo grain 14 010 william penn grain 18 950 james oglethorpe rice wood naval stores 5 200 in 1750 new hampshire massachusetts maryland connecticut rhode island new sweden delaware date of founding north carolina 1638 included in penn grant 1681 given separate assembly 1703 commercial venture 1663 south carolina commercial venture 1663 new jersey consolidation of new 1664 english territory quaker settlement refuge for english quakers discourage spanish 1733 expansion charity pennsylvania georgia principal founder major export estimated population ca.
1700 name sources u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 washington dc 1975 john j mccusker and russell r menard the economy of british america 1607 1789 chapel hill 1985.
new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies pennsylvania claimed by virginia ee r an tuscarora ca north pe carolina r r chattahoochee wilmington cape fear south carolina yamasee georgetown charles town savannah creek added to georgia 1763 st marks albemarle sound r new bern r d oa br georgia chesapeake bay.
rr catawba roa no ke a fe pa cherokee williamsburg virginia d ee ap i ch la ta un mo s in e pe te nn es s carolina grant 1663 n j baltimore del.
shenandoah r james r spani the founding of georgia md.
va er sa l ge mu oc the planters came to appreciate fully the value of rice but once they had done so it quickly became the colonys main staple.
proprietary carolina was in a constant political uproar.
factions vied for special privilege.
the barbadian settlers known locally as the goose creek men resisted the proprietors policies at every turn.
a large community of french huguenots located in craven county distrusted the barbadians.
the proprietors an ineffectual group following the death of cooper appointed a series of utterly incompetent governors who only made things worse.
one visitor observed that the inhabitants of carolina should be as free from oppression as any people in the universe.
if their own differences amongst themselves do not occasion the contrary by the end of the century the commons house of assembly had assumed the right to initiate legislation.
in 1719 the colonists overthrew the last proprietary governor and in 1729 the king created separate royal governments for north and south carolina.
r chapt er 2 coo sa atlantic ocean altamaha r sh st augustine timucua f carolina grant 1663 ri da the early history of georgia was strikingly different from that of britains other mainland colonies.
its settlement was really an act of aggression against spain a country that had as good a claim to this area as did the english.
during the eighteenth century the two nations were often at war see chapter 4 and south carolinians worried that the spaniards moving up from bases in florida would occupy the disputed territory between florida and the carolina grant.
the colony owed its existence primarily to james oglethorpe a british general and member of parliament who believed that he could thwart spanish designs on the area south of charles town while at the same time providing a fresh start for londons worthy poor saving them from debtors prison.
although oglethorpe envisioned georgia as an asylum as well as a garrison the military aspects of his proposal were especially appealing to the leaders of the british government.
in 1732 the king granted oglethorpe and a board of trustees a charter for a new colony to be located between the savannah and altamaha rivers and from sea to sea the trustees living in the mother country were given complete control over georgia politics a condition the settlers soon found intolerable.
during the first years of colonization georgia fared no better than had earlier utopian experiments.
the poor people of england showed little desire to move to an inclement frontier and the trustees in their turn provided little incentive for emigration.
each colonist received only 50 acres.
another 50 acres could be added for each servant transported to georgia but in no case could a settler amass more than 500 acres.
moreover land could be passed only to an eldest son and if a planter had no sons at the time of his death the holding reverted to the trustees.
slavery was prohibited.
so too was rum.
almost as soon as they arrived in georgia the settlers complained.
the colonists demanded slaves pointing out to the gulf of mexico lo how was the founding of the carolinas different from the founding of georgia.
lake okeechobee boundary lines of colonies 1740 200 miles 200 kilometers the carolinas and georgia caribbean sugar planters migrated to the goose creek area where with knowledge supplied by african slaves they eventually mastered rice cultivation.
poor harbors in north carolina retarded the spread of european settlement in that region.
trustees that unless the new planters possessed an unfree labor force they could not compete economically with their south carolina neighbors.
the settlers also wanted a voice in local government.
in 1738 121 people living in savannah petitioned for fundamental reforms in the colonys constitution.
oglethorpe responded angrily the idle ones are indeed for negroes.
if the petition is countenanced the province is ruined the settlers did not give up.
in 1741 they again petitioned oglethorpe this time addressing him as our perpetual dictator while the colonists grumbled about various restrictions oglethorpe tried and failed to capture the spanish fortress at saint augustine 1740.
this personal disappointment coupled with the growing popular unrest destroyed his interest in georgia.
the trustees were forced to compromise their principles.
in 1738 they eliminated all restrictions on the amount of land a man could own they allowed women to inherit land.
in 1750 they permitted the settlers to import slaves.
soon georgians could drink rum.
in 1751 the trustees returned georgia to the king undoubtedly relieved to be free of what had become a hard drinking slave owning plantation society much like that study resources in south carolina.
the king authorized an assembly in 1751 but even with these social and political changes georgia attracted very few new settlers.
conclusion living with diversity long after he had returned from his adventures in virginia captain john smith reflected on the difficulty of establishing colonies in the new world.
it was a task for which most people were not temperamentally suited.
it requires smith counseled all the best parts of art judgment courage honesty constancy diligence and industry even to do neere well on another occasion charles i warned lord baltimore that new settlements commonly have rugged and laborious beginnings over the course of the seventeenth century women and men had followed leaders such as baltimore smith winthrop bradford penn and berkeley to the new world in anticipation of creating a successful new society.
some people were religious visionaries others were hardheaded businessmen.
the results of their efforts their struggles to survive in an often hostile environment and their interactions with various native american groups yielded a spectrum of settlements along the atlantic coast ranging from the quasifeudalism of south carolina to the puritan commonwealth of massachusetts bay.
the diversity of early english colonization must be emphasized precisely because it is so easy to overlook.
even though the colonists eventually banded together and fought for independence persistent differences separated new englanders from virginians pennsylvanians from carolinians.
the interpretive challenge of course is to comprehend how european colonists managed over the course of the eighteenth century to overcome fragmentation and to develop the capacity to imagine themselves a nation.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 2 new world experiments on myhistorylab time line 1607 first english settlers arrive at jamestown 1608 1609 scrooby congregation pilgrims 1634 colony of maryland is founded 1636 harvard college is established puritan settlers found leaves england for holland 1609 1611 starving time in virginia threatens survival of the colonists 1616 1618 plague destroys native american populations of coastal new england 1619 virginia assembly called house of burgesses meets for the first time first slaves sold at jamestown 1620 pilgrims sign the mayflower compact 1622 surprise indian attack devastates virginia 1624 dutch investors create permanent settlements along hudson river james i king of england dissolves virginia company 1625 charles i ascends english throne 1630 john winthrop transfers massachusetts bay charter to new england hartford and other connecticut valley towns anne hutchinson exiled to rhode island theophilus eaton and john davenport lead settlers to new haven colony connecticut towns accept fundamental orders second major indian attack in virginia charles i executed during english civil war stuarts restored to the english throne rhode island obtains royal charter proprietors receive charter for carolina english soldiers conquer new netherland new hampshire becomes a royal colony william penn granted patent for his holy experiment east and west jersey unite to form single colony james oglethorpe receives charter for georgia chapt er 2 chapter review chapter review breaking away what were some of the social problems facing britain in the 16th and 17th centuries that helped push english colonists to cross the atlantic.
the colony and ethnic rivalries shaped the politics of new york for decades.
in 1681 charles ii granted william penn a quaker a charter to establish pennsylvania.
penns guarantee to respect all christian settlers liberty of conscience drew immigrants from across northern europe.
p 44 quakers in america between 1580 and 1650 an expanding population strained englands agrarian economy.
competition for food and land threatened to disrupt law and order and drove many people to migrate from rural areas to london or across the atlantic.
p 30 te nn es s a fe roa m tuscarora no n ke ca r ia north pe ee ch carolina la pa cherokee catawba ap r r coo sa hattahoochee.
rr georgia w r ca south carolina yamasee georgeto charles town savannah how did the barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the carolinas.
about half the early settlers of carolina came from barbados a british caribbean island where the economy depended on the production of sugar by slave labor.
in the carolina colony these migrants recreated a similar slave based plantation economy that by the 1690s was based primarily on the cultivation of rice as a cash crop.
p 48 p ohio r.
claimed by virginia the founding of georgia shenandoah r s in ta un mo tuscarora n c r ia north ee ch carolina la pa cherokee catawba ap d ee r georgia how was the founding of the carolinas different from the founding of georgia.
r r ah nn va sa mu oc r e pe te nn es s carolina grant 1663 d oa br how did ethnic diversity shape the development of the middle colonies.
virginia r diversity in the middle colonies carolina grant 1663 r ah nn.
va er sa lge mu oc religious persecution drove thousands of puritans to new england.
john winthrop hoped the settlers would reform english protestantism and create a city on a hill the puritans did not welcome dissent.
they exiled roger williams and anne hutchinson to rhode island for their religious beliefs.
stable nuclear families and good health helped puritans avoid the social turmoil that plagued the chesapeake colonies.
p 37 planting the carolinas james r ns ai nt ou d oa br how did differences in religion affect the founding of the new england colonies.
m shenandoah r d ee reforming england in america pennsylvan ohio r.
claimed by virginia e pe until tobacco began to be cultivated as a profitable cash crop around 1617 the virginia colony suffered from disease hunger misgovernment and social dissension.
maryland which had been founded as a refuge for english catholics in the late 1630s and where tobacco also became the economic mainstay endured decades of political and religious conflict before a stable government was established there in the 1660s.
p 31 coo sa why did the chesapeake colonies not prosper during the earliest years of settlement.
william penn the founder of pennsylvania was a quaker a protestant sect that emphasized simplicity and the possibility of salvation for all in religious practice and belief and humility and tolerance in daily life.
he guaranteed that settlers in pennsylvania would enjoy liberty of conscience freedom from persecution no taxation without representation and due process of law.
the chesapeake dreams of wealth how did the quaker religion influence the development of pennsylvania.
south carolina immigrants from barbados began settling in the carolinas in the 1670s.
barbadian immigrants to the carolinas many of whom were wealthy planters seeking new lands for plantations brought slavery with them when they moved.
georgia was founded in 1732 as an alternative to debtors prison for impoverished englishmen and as a military outpost to guard against the spanish in florida.
p 50 after conquering the dutch colony of new netherland in 1664 the english renamed it new york.
despite the conquest the dutch remained an influential minority in key terms and definitions joint stock company business enterprise that enabled investors to pool money for commerce and funding for colonies.
p 32 house of burgesses virginia.
p 34 the elective representative assembly in colonial headright system of land distribution in which settlers were granted a 50 acre plot of land from the colonial government for each servant or dependent they transported to the new world.
it encouraged the recruitment of a large servile labor force.
p 34 mayflower compact agreement among the pilgrims aboard the mayflower in 1620 to create a civil government at plymouth colony.
p 37 puritans members of a reformed protestant sect in europe and america that insisted on removing all vestiges of catholicism from religious practice.
p 37 great migration migration of 16 000 puritans from england to the massachusetts bay colony during the 1630s.
p 39 antinomianism religious belief rejecting traditional moral law as unnecessary for christians who possess saving grace and affirming that a person could experience divine revelation and salvation without the assistance of formally trained clergy.
p 42 quakers members of a radical religious group formally known as the society of friends that rejects formal theology and stress each persons inner light a spiritual guide to righteousness.
p 46 study resources critical thinking questions 1.
would the first chesapeake colonies have survived if the settlers had 3.
how did william penns leadership style compare to those of john not discovered tobacco as a profitable cash crop.
would the historical development of new england have been winthrop and captain john smith.
how were the european migrants who were attracted to georgia and different if the puritans had developed a profitable cash crop like tobacco or rice.
the carolinas different from the migrants from the chesapeake and middle colonies.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 2 on myhistorylab the chesapeake dreams of wealth view the map diversity in the middle colonies the colonies to 1740 p 31 read the document father isaac jogues description of new york 1640 p 45 read the document john smith the starving quakers in america time p 33 read the document james i a counterblaste to tobacco p 34 read the document wessell webling his indenture 1622 p 35 read the document george aslop from a character of the province of maryland p 36 reforming england in america read the document john wintrhrop a model of christian charity 1830 p 38 complete the assignment the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion p 40 read the document william penn model for government 1681 p 46 read the document letter by william penn to the committee of the free society of traders 1683 p 47 indicates study plan media assignment putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society contents and learning objectives sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century pg.
56 rise of a commercial empire pg.
66 what factors explain the remarkable social stability achieved in early new england.
colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 pg.
68 the challenge of the chesapeake environment pg.
59 how did colonial revolts affect the political culture of virginia and new england.
what factors contributed to political unrest in the chesapeake region during this period.
feature essay anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek race and freedom in british america pg.
61 how did african american slaves preserve an independent cultural identity in the new world.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab why did england discourage free and open trade in colonial america.
law and society witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692.
chapter 3 putting down roots families in an atlantic empire the witherspoon family moved from great britain to the south carolina backcountry early in the eighteenth century.
although otherwise indistinguishable from the thousands of other ordinary families that put down roots in english america the witherspoons were made historical figures by the candid account of pioneer life produced by their son robert who was only a small child at the time of their arrival.
the witherspoons initial reaction to the new world at least that of the mother and children was utter despondence.
my mother and us children were still in expectation that we were coming to an agreeable place robert confessed but when we arrived and saw nothing but a wilderness and instead of a fine timbered house nothing but a very mean dirt house our spirits quite sunk for many years the witherspoons feared they would be killed by indians become lost in the woods or be bitten by snakes.
the witherspoons managed to survive the early difficult years on the black river.
to be sure the carolina backcountry did not look very much like the world they had left behind.
the discrepancy however apparently did not greatly discourage roberts father.
he had a vision of what the black river settlement might become.
my father robert recounted gave us all the comfort he could by telling us we would get all these trees cut down and in a short time there would be plenty of inhabitants and that we could see from house to house obert witherspoons account reminds us just how much the early history of colonial america was an intimate story of families and not as some commentators would have us believe of individuals.
neither the peopling of the atlantic frontier the cutting down of the forests nor the creation of new communities where one could see from house to house was a process that involved what we would today recognize as state policy.
men and women made significant decisions about the character of their lives within families.
it was within this primary social unit that most colonists earned their livelihoods educated their children defined gender sustained religious tradition and nursed each other in sickness.
in short the family was the source of their societal and cultural identities.
early colonial families did not exist in isolation.
they were part of larger societies.
as we have already discovered the r the mason children david joanna and abigail c 1670 an early portrait of three children from a wealthy massachusetts bay colony family.
the artist lavished attention on the details of the childrens clothing and the objects they hold marks of their social status and prosperity.
character of the first english settlements in the new world varied substantially see chapter 2.
during much of the seventeenth century these initial differences grew stronger as each region responded to different environmental conditions and developed its own traditions.
the various local societies in which families like the witherspoons put down roots reflected several critical elements supply of labor abundance of land unusual demographic patterns and commercial ties with european markets.
in the chesapeake for example an economy based almost entirely on a single staple tobacco created an insatiable demand for indentured servants and black slaves.
in massachusetts bay the extraordinary longevity of the founders generated a level of social and political stability that virginians and marylanders did not attain until the very end of the seventeenth century.
by 1660 it seemed regional differences had undermined the idea of a unified english empire in america.
during the reign of charles ii however a trend toward cultural convergence began.
although subcultures had evolved in strikingly different directions countervailing forces such as common language and religion gradually pulled english american settlers together.
parliament took advantage of this trend and began to establish a uniform set of rules for the expanding american empire.
the process was slow and uneven often sparking violent colonial resistance.
by the end of the seventeenth century however england had made significant progress toward transforming new world provinces into an empire that produced needed raw materials and purchased manufactured goods.
if a person was black and enslaved however he or she was more apt to experience oppression rather than opportunity in british america.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century what factors explain the remarkable social stability achieved in early new england.
seventeenth century new englanders successfully replicated in america a traditional social order they had known in england.
the transfer of a familiar way of life to the new world seemed less difficult for these puritan migrants than it did for the many english men and women who settled in the chesapeake colonies.
their contrasting experiences fundamental to an understanding of the development of both cultures can be explained at least in part by the extraordinary strength and resilience of new england families.
immigrant families and new social order early new englanders believed god ordained the family for human benefit.
it was essential to the maintenance of social order since outside the family men and women succumbed to carnal temptation.
such people had no one to sustain them or remind them of scripture.
without family care declared the reverend benjamin wadsworth the labour of magistrates and ministers for reformation and propagating religion is likely to be in great measure unsuccessful the godly family at least in theory was ruled by a patriarch father to his children husband to his wife the source of authority and object of unquestioned obedience.
the wife shared responsibility for the raising of children but in decisions of importance especially those related to property she was expected to defer to her spouse.
the new englanders concern about the character of the godly family is not surprising.
this institution played a central role in shaping their society.
in contrast to those who migrated to the colonies of virginia and maryland new englanders crossed the atlantic within nuclear families.
that is they moved within established units consisting of a father mother and their dependent children rather than as single youths and adults.
people who migrated to america within families preserved local english customs more fully than did the youths who traveled to other parts of the continent as single men and women.
the comforting presence of immediate family members reduced the shock of adjusting to a strange environment three thousand miles from home.
even in the 1630s the ratio of men to women in new england was fairly well balanced about three males for every two females.
persons who had not already married in england before coming to the new world could expect to form nuclear families of their own.
the great migration of the 1630s and early 1640s brought approximately twenty thousand persons to new england.
after 1642 the english civil war reduced the flood of people moving to massachusetts bay to a trickle.
nevertheless by the end of the century the population of new england had reached almost one hundred twenty thousand an amazing increase considering the small number of original immigrants.
the explanation for this impressive growth lies in the long lives enjoyed by early new englanders.
put simply people who under normal conditions would have died in contemporary europe lived in new england.
indeed the life expectancy of seventeenth century settlers was not very different from our own.
males who survived infancy might have expected to see their seventieth birthday.
twenty percent of the men of the first generation reached the age of eighty.
the figures for women were only slightly lower.
why the early settlers lived so long is not entirely clear.
no doubt pure drinking water a cool climate that retarded the spread of fatal contagious disease and a dispersed population promoted general good health.
longer life altered family relations.
new england males lived not only to see their own children reach adulthood but also to witness the birth of grandchildren.
one historian john murrin has suggested that new englanders invented grandparents.
in other words this society produced real patriarchs males of recognized seniority and standing.
this may have been one of the first societies in recorded history in which a person could reasonably anticipate knowing his or her grandchildren a demographic surprise that contributed to social stability.
the traditions of particular families and communities literally remained alive in the memories of the colonys oldest citizens.
commonwealth of families the life cycle of the seventeenth century new england family began with marriage.
young men and women generally initiated courtships.
if parents exercised a voice in such matters it was to discourage union with a person of unsound moral character.
in this highly religious society there was not much chance that young people would stray far from shared community values.
the overwhelming majority of the regions population married for in new england the single life was not only morally suspect but also physically difficult.
a couple without land could not support an independent and growing family in these agrarian communities.
while men generally brought farmland to the marriage prospective brides were expected to provide a dowry worth approximately one half what the bridegroom offered.
women often contributed money or household goods.
the household was primarily a place of work very demanding work.
the primary goal of course was to clear enough land to feed the family.
additional cultivation allowed the farmer to produce a surplus that could then be sold or bartered and since agrarian families required items that could not be manufactured at home metal tools for example they usually grew more than they consumed.
early american farmers were not economically self sufficient the belief that they were is a popular misconception.
during the seventeenth century men and women generally lived in the communities of their parents and grandparents.
new englanders usually managed to fall in love with a neighbor and most marriages took place between men and women living less than 13 miles apart.
moving to a more fertile region might have increased their earnings but such thoughts seldom occurred to early new englanders.
religious values a sense of common purpose and the importance of family reinforced traditional communal ties.
towns in fact were collections of families not individuals.
over time these families intermarried so the community became an elaborate kinship network.
social historians have discovered that in many new england towns the original founders dominated local politics and economic affairs for several generations.
not surprisingly newcomers who were not absorbed into the family system tended to move away from the village with greater frequency than did the sons and daughters of the established lineage groups.
sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century congregational churches were also built on a family foundation.
during the earliest years of settlement the churches accepted persons who could demonstrate they were among gods elect members were drawn from a broad social spectrum.
once the excitement of establishing a new society had passed however new englanders began to focus more attention on the spiritual welfare of their own families.
this quite normal parental concern precipitated a major ecclesiastical crisis.
the problem was the status of the children within a gathered church.
sons and daughters of full church members regularly received baptism usually as infants but as these people grew to adulthood they often failed to provide testimony of their own election moreover they wanted their own children to be baptized.
a church synod a gathering of congregational ministers responded to this generational crisis by adopting the so called half way covenant 1662.
the compromise allowed the grandchildren of persons in full communion to be baptized even though their parents could not demonstrate conversion.
congregational ministers assumed that god cast the line of election in the loins of godly parents colonists regarded education as primarily a family responsibility.
parents were supposed to instruct children in the principles of christianity and so it was necessary to teach boys and girls how to read.
in 1642 the massachusetts general court reminded the bay colonists of their obligation to catechize their families.
five years later the legislature ordered towns containing at least fifteen families to open an elementary school supported by local taxes.
villages of a hundred or more families had to maintain more advanced grammar schools which taught a basic knowledge of latin.
at least eleven schools were operating in 1647 and despite their expense new schools were established throughout the century.
this family based education system worked.
a large majority of the regions adult males could read and write an accomplishment not achieved in the chesapeake colonies for another century.
the literacy rate for women was somewhat lower but by the standards of the period it was still impressive.
a printing press operated in cambridge as early as 1639.
the new england primer first published in 1690 in boston by benjamin harris taught children the alphabet as well as the lords prayer.
this primer announced women as inferior to men.
other historians however depict the colonial period as a golden age for women.
according to this interpretation wives worked alongside their husbands.
they were not divorced from meaningful productive labor.
they certainly were not transformed into the frail dependent beings allegedly much admired by middle class males of the nineteenth century.
both views provide insights into the lives of early american women but neither fully recaptures their community experiences.
womens labor and the skilled services that they provided were essential for the economic survival of colonial households.
to be sure women worked on family farms.
they did not however necessarily do the same jobs that men performed.
women usually handled separate tasks including cooking washing clothes making dairying gardening and caring for young children.
girls began to help their mothers with some of this work as early as age four beginning their domestic education so that they could one day manage their own household.
the average puritan woman in this period married in her early twenties compared to the midtwenties for puritan men and it was common for young women who were not yet married to be hired out as servants in other households.
just putting food on the table was an impressive chore in an age before modern conveniences.
women helped butcher meat harvested garden crops built and tended cooking fires and read the document prenuptial agreement 1653 he who neer learns his abc forever will a blockhead be.
but he who to his books inclined will soon a golden treasure find.
many new englanders memorized the entire poem.
after 1638 young men could attend harvard college the first institution of higher learning founded in englands mainland colonies.
the school was originally intended to train ministers and of the 465 students who graduated during the seventeenth century more than half became congregational divines.
harvard had a demanding curriculum.
the boys read logic rhetoric divinity and several ancient languages including hebrew.
yale college followed harvards lead admitting its first students in 1702.
womens lives in puritan new england the role of women in the agrarian societies north of the chesapeake is a controversial subject among colonial historians.
some scholars point out that common law as well as english custom treated puritans viewed marriage as a civil compact rather than a religious sacrament.
the families created through marriage formed both the social and economic foundation of puritan society.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society read the document one of her children anne bradstreet before the birth of was extremely difficult to obtain in any colony before the american revolution.
indeed a person married to a cruel or irresponsible spouse had little recourse but to run away or accept the unhappy situation.
yet most women were neither prosperous entrepreneurs nor abject slaves.
surviving letters indicate that men and women generally accommodated themselves to the gender roles they thought god had ordained.
one of early americas most creative poets anne bradstreet wrote movingly of the fulfillment she had found with her husband.
in a piece titled to my dear and loving husband bradstreet declared if ever two were one then surely we.
if ever man were lovd by wife then thee if ever wife was happy in a man compare with me ye woman if you can.
although puritan couples worried that the affection they felt for a husband or a wife might turn their thoughts away from gods perfect love this was a danger they were willing to risk.
social hierarchy in new england during the seventeenth century the new england colonies attracted neither noblemen nor paupers.
the absence of these social groups meant that the american social structure seemed incomplete by contemporary european standards.
anne bradstreet c 1612 1672 was a puritan wife mother and poet.
a collection of her poems entitled the tenth muse lately sprung up in america was the first work the settlers were not displeased that the poor remained in ever published in englands american colonies.
the old world.
the lack of very rich persons and in this period great wealth frequently accompanied noble title stood for long hours inside large open hearth fireplaces tending was quite another matter.
according to the prevailing hierarchical to dishes as they roasted or simmered.
this last task sometimes view of the structure of society well placed individuals were natural resulted in injury when stray sparks caught clothing on fire.
rulers people intended by god to exercise political authority over often wives and the overwhelming majority of adult the rank and file.
migration forced the colonists however to choose seventeenth century women were married raised poultry or their rulers from men of more modest status.
one minister told a performed extra sewing or spinning and thereby achieved some plymouth congregation that since its members were not furnished economic independence.
when people in one new england comwith any persons of special eminency above the rest to be chosen by munity chided a man for allowing his wife to peddle her fowl he you into office of government they would have to make due with responded i meddle not with the geese nor turkeys for they are neighbors not beholding in them the ordinariness of their persons hers in fact during this period women were often described as the colonists gradually sorted themselves out into distinct social deputy husbands a label that drew attention to their dependence on groupings.
persons who would never have been natural rulers in family patriarchs as well as to their roles as decision makers.
england became provincial gentry in the various northern colonies.
women also joined churches in greater number than men.
it helped of course if an individual possessed wealth and education within a few years of founding many new england congregations but these attributes alone could not guarantee a newcomer would contained two female members for every male a process historians be accepted into the local ruling elite at least not during the early describe as the feminization of colonial religion contemporaries decades of settlement.
in massachusetts and connecticut puritan offered different explanations for the gender shift.
cotton mather the voters expected their leaders to join congregational churches and leading congregational minister of massachusetts bay argued that defend orthodox religion.
god had created far more godly women than men.
others thought the winthrops dudleys and pynchons just to cite a few that the life threatening experience of childbirth gave women a of the more prominent families fulfilled these expectations and deeper appreciation of religion.
the quakers gave women an even in public affairs they assumed dominant roles.
they took their larger role in religious affairs which may help to explain the popularresponsibilities quite seriously and certainly did not look kindly on ity of this sect among ordinary women.
anyone who spoke of their ordinariness a colonist who jokingly in political and legal matters society sharply curtailed the called a puritan magistrate a just ass found himself in deep rights of colonial women.
according to english common law a trouble with civil authorities.
wife exercised no control over property.
she could not for examthe problem was that while most new englanders accepted ple sell land although if her husband decided to dispose of their a hierarchical view of society they disagreed over their assigned holdings he was free to do so without her permission.
divorce places.
both massachusetts bay and connecticut passed sumptuary the challenge of the chesapeake environment laws statutes that limited the wearing of fine apparel to the wealthy and prominent to curb the pretensions of those of lower status.
yet such restraints could not prevent some people from rising and others from falling within the social order.
governor john winthrop provided a marvelous description of the unplanned social mobility that occurred in early new england.
during the 1640s he recorded in his diary the story of a master who could not afford to pay a servants wages.
to meet this obligation the master sold a pair of oxen but the transaction barely covered the cost of keeping the servant.
in desperation the master asked the employee a man of lower social status how shall i do.
when all my cattle are gone the servant replied you shall then serve me so you may have your cattle again in the margin of his diary next to this account winthrop scribbled insolent most northern colonists were yeomen independent farmers who worked their own land.
while few became rich in america even fewer fell hopelessly into debt.
their daily lives especially for those who settled new england centered on scattered little communities where they participated in village meetings church related matters and militia training.
possession of land gave agrarian families a sense of independence from external authority.
as one man bragged to those who had stayed behind in england here are no hard landlords to rack us with high rents or extorting fines.
here every man may be master of his own labour and land.
and if he have nothing but his hands he may set up his trade and by industry grow rich it was not unusual for northern colonists to work as servants at some point in their lives.
this system of labor differed greatly from the pattern of servitude that developed in seventeenth century virginia and maryland.
new englanders seldom recruited servants from the old world.
the forms of agriculture practiced in this region mixed cereal and dairy farming made employment of large gangs of dependent workers uneconomic.
rather new england families placed their adolescent children in nearby homes.
these young persons contracted for four or five years and seemed more like apprentices than servants.
servitude was not simply a means by which one group exploited another.
it was a form of vocational training program in which the children of the rich as well as the poor participated.
by the end of the seventeenth century the new england puritans had developed a compelling story about their own history in the new world.
the founders had been extraordinarily godly men and women and in a heroic effort to establish a purer form of religion pious families had passed over the vast ocean into this vast and howling wilderness although the children and grandchildren of the first generation sometimes questioned their own ability to please the lord they recognized the mission to the new world had been a success they were as prosperous as ever there is peace plenty the country flourisheth the challenge of the chesapeake environment what factors contributed to political unrest in the chesapeake region during this period.
an entirely different regional society developed in englands chesapeake colonies virginia and maryland.
this contrast with new england seems puzzling.
after all the two areas were founded at roughly the same time by men and women from the same mother country.
in both regions settlers spoke english accepted protestantism and gave allegiance to one crown.
and yet to cite an obvious example seventeenth century virginia looked nothing like massachusetts bay.
in an effort to explain the difference colonial historians have studied environmental conditions labor systems and agrarian economies.
the most important reason for the distinctiveness of these early southern plantation societies however turned out to be the chesapeakes death rate a frighteningly high mortality that tore at the very fabric of traditional family life.
family life at risk unlike new englands settlers the men and women who emigrated to the chesapeake region did not move in family units.
they traveled to the new world as young unmarried servants youths cut off from the security of traditional kin relations.
although these immigrants came from a cross section of english society most had been poor to middling farmers.
it is now estimated that 70 to 85 percent of the white colonists who went to virginia and maryland during the seventeenth century were not free that is they owed four or five years labor in exchange for the cost of passage to america.
if the servant was under age 15 he or she had to serve a full seven years.
the overwhelming majority of these laborers were males between the ages of 18 and 22.
in fact before 1640 the ratio of males to females stood at 6 to 1.
this figure dropped to about 2 to 1 by the end of the century but the sex ratio in the chesapeake was never as favorable as it had been in early massachusetts.
most immigrants to the chesapeake region died soon after arriving.
it is difficult to ascertain the exact cause of death in most cases but malaria and other diseases took a frightful toll.
recent studies also indicate that drinking water contaminated with salt killed many colonists living in low lying areas.
throughout the entire seventeenth century high mortality rates had a profound effect on this society.
life expectancy for chesapeake males was about 43 some ten to twenty years less than for men born in new england.
for women life was even shorter.
a full 25 percent of all children died in infancy another 25 percent did not see their twentieth birthdays.
the survivors were often weak or ill unable to perform hard physical labor.
these demographic conditions retarded normal population increase.
young women who might have become wives and mothers could not do so until they had completed their terms of servitude.
they thus lost several reproductive years and in a society in which so many children died in infancy late marriage greatly restricted family size.
moreover because of the unbalanced sex ratio many adult males simply could not find wives.
migration not only cut them off from their english families but also deprived them of an opportunity to form new ones.
without a constant flow of immigrants the population of virginia and maryland would have actually declined.
high mortality compressed the family life cycle into a few short years.
one partner in a marriage usually died within seven years.
only one in three chesapeake marriages survived as long as a decade.
not only did children not meet grandparents they often did not even know their own parents.
widows and widowers quickly remarried bringing children by former unions into their new homes and it was not uncommon for a child to grow chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society up with persons to whom he or she bore no blood relation.
the psychological effects of such experiences on chesapeake settlers cannot be measured.
people probably learned to cope with a high degree of personal insecurity.
however they adjusted it is clear family life in this region was vastly more impermanent than it was in the new england colonies during the same period.
womens lives in chesapeake society women were obviously in great demand in the early southern colonies.
possibly as a result women married much younger in the south than in new england with most married by their late teens.
chesapeake men on the other hand often married for the first time in their late twenties if they married at all.
some historians have argued that scarcity heightened the womans bargaining power in the marriage market.
if she was an immigrant she did not have to worry about obtaining parental consent.
she was on her own in the new world and free to select whomever she pleased.
if a woman lacked beauty or strength if she were a person of low moral standards she could still be confident of finding an american husband.
such negotiations may have provided chesapeake women with a means of improving their social status.
nevertheless liberation from some traditional restraints on seventeenth century women must not be exaggerated.
most women came to the colonies as indentured servants.
masters often frowned on romantic relationships for fear it would distract from work.
if a man and woman wished to marry and the would be brides term of indenture was not up the prospective groom would have to come up with the money to purchase his intendeds contract.
as servants women were also vulnerable to sexual exploitation by their masters.
once married a woman in the south took on the same duties as her counterparts in new england though field work likely took up more of her time as households tried to make a go of it in the tobacco economy.
because of the high mortality rate in the chesapeake young women often found themselves caring for children that her husband brought to the family from his first marriage.
moreover in this unhealthy environment childbearing was extremely dangerous and women in the chesapeake usually died twenty years earlier than their new england counterparts.
the structure of planter society colonists who managed somehow to survive grew tobacco as much tobacco as they possibly could.
this crop became the chesapeake staple and since it was relatively easy to cultivate anyone with a few acres of cleared land could harvest leaves for export.
cultivation of tobacco did not however produce a society roughly equal in wealth and status.
to the contrary tobacco generated inequality.
some planters amassed large fortunes others barely subsisted.
labor made the difference for to succeed in this staple economy one had to control the labor of other men and women.
more workers in the fields meant larger harvests and of course larger profits.
since free persons showed no interest in growing another mans tobacco not even for wages wealthy planters relied on white laborers who were not free as well as on slaves.
the social structure that developed in the seventeenth century chesapeake reflected a wild often unscrupulous scramble to bring men and women of three races black white and indian into various degrees of dependence.
great planters dominated chesapeake society.
the group was small only a trifling portion of the population of virginia and maryland.
these ambitious men arrived in america with capital.
they invested immediately in laborers and one way or another they obtained huge tracts of the best tobacco growing land.
the members of this gentry were not technically aristocrats for they did not possess titles that could be passed from generation to generation.
they gave themselves military titles sat as justices of the peace on the county courts and directed local anglican church affairs as members of the vestry.
over time these gentry families intermarried so frequently that they created a vast network of cousins.
during the eighteenth century it was not uncommon to find a half dozen men with the same surname sitting simultaneously in the virginia house of burgesses.
freemen formed the largest class in chesapeake society.
their origins were strikingly different from those of the gentry or for that matter from those of new englands yeomen farmers.
chesapeake freemen traveled to the new world as indentured servants and by sheer good fortune managed to remain alive to the end of their contracts.
if they had dreamed of becoming great planters they were gravely disappointed.
most seventeenth century freemen lived on the edge of poverty.
some freemen of course did better in america than they would have in contemporary england but in both virginia and maryland historians have found a sharp economic division separating the gentry from the rest of white society.
below the freemen came indentured servants.
membership in this group was not demeaning after all servitude was a temporary status.
but servitude in the chesapeake colonies was not the benign institution it was in new england.
great planters purchased servants to grow tobacco.
no one seemed overly concerned whether these laborers received decent food and clothes much less whether they acquired trade skills.
young people thousands of them cut off from family ties sick often to the point of death unable to obtain normal sexual release regarded their servitude as a form of slavery.
not surprisingly the gentry worried that unhappy servants and impoverished freemen what the planters called the giddy multitude would rebel at the slightest provocation a fear that turned out to be fully justified.
sometime after the 1680s the precise date is impossible to establish a dramatic demographic shift occurred.
although infant mortality remained high life expectancy rates for those who survived childhood in the chesapeake improved significantly and for the first time in the history of virginia and maryland important leadership positions went to men who had actually been born in america.
this transition has been described by one political historian as the emergence of a creole majority in other words as the rise of an indigenous ruling elite.
before this time immigrant leaders had died without heirs or had returned as quickly as possible to england.
the members of the new creole class took a greater interest in local government.
their activities helped give the tobacco colonies the kind of political and cultural stability that had eluded earlier generations of planter adventurers.
not surprisingly it was during this period of demographic transition that creole leaders founded the college of william and mary 1693 and authorized the construction of an impressive new capital called williamsburg.
these were changes that in the words of one creole virginian provided the colony with a sense of permanence and legitimacy.
it had never before possessed race and freedom in british america the key to success in this creole society was ownership of slaves.
those planters who held more blacks could grow more tobacco and thus could acquire fresh capital needed to purchase additional laborers.
over time the rich not only became richer they also formed a distinct ruling elite that newcomers found increasingly difficult to enter.
opportunities for advancement also decreased for freemen in the region.
studies of mid seventeenth century maryland reveal that some servants managed to become moderately prosperous farmers and small officeholders.
but as the gentry consolidated its hold on political and economic institutions ordinary people discovered it was much harder to rise in chesapeake society.
those men and women with more ambitious dreams headed for pennsylvania north carolina or western virginia.
social institutions that figured importantly in the daily experience of new englanders were either weak or nonexistent in the chesapeake colonies.
in part the sluggish development resulted from the continuation of high infant mortality rates.
there was little incentive to build elementary schools for example if half the children would die before reaching adulthood.
the great planters sent their sons to england or scotland for their education and even after the founding of the college of william and mary in virginia the gentry continued to patronize english schools.
as a result of this practice higher education in the south languished for much of the colonial period.
tobacco influenced the spread of other institutions in the region.
planters were scattered along the rivers often separated from their nearest neighbors by miles of poor roads.
since the major tobacco growers traded directly with english merchants they had no need for towns.
whatever items they required were either made on the plantation or imported from europe.
other than the centers of colonial government jamestown and later williamsburg and st marys city and later annapolis there were no villages capable of sustaining a rich community life before the late eighteenth century.
seventeenth century virginia did not even possess a printing press.
in fact governor sir william berkeley bragged in 1671 there are no free schools nor printing in virginia for learning has brought disobedience and heresy.
into the world and printing had divulged them.
god keep us from both race and freedom in british america how did african american slaves preserve an independent cultural identity in the new world.
many people who landed in the colonies had no desire to come to the new world.
they were africans taken as slaves to cultivate rice sugar and tobacco.
as the native americans were exterminated and the supply of white indentured servants dried up european planters demanded ever more african laborers.
roots of slavery a great deal is known about the transfer of african peoples across the atlantic.
during the entire history of this human commerce between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries slave traders carried almost eleven million blacks to the americas.
most of these men and women were sold in brazil or in the caribbean.
a relatively small number of africans reached british north america and of this group the majority arrived after 1700.
slavery existed in each of the thirteen colonies but the vast majority of slaves lived in the southern colonies where masters put them to work on plantations that grew staple crops for export.
because slaves performed hard physical labor planters preferred purchasing young males.
in many early slave communities men outnumbered women by a ratio of two to one.
english colonists did not hesitate to enslave black people or for that matter native americans.
while the institution of slavery had long before died out in the mother country new world settlers quickly discovered how well this particular labor system operated in the spanish and portuguese colonies.
the decision to bring african slaves to the colonies therefore was based primarily on economic considerations.
english masters however seldom justified the practice purely in terms of planter profits.
indeed they adopted a quite different pattern of rhetoric.
english writers associated blacks in africa with heathen religion barbarous behavior sexual promiscuity in fact with evil itself.
from such a racist perspective the enslavement of africans seemed unobjectionable.
the planters maintained that if black slaves converted to christianity shedding their supposedly savage ways they would benefit from their loss of freedom.
africans first landed in virginia in 1619 as a cargo of slaves stolen by a dutch trader from a spanish merchant ship in the caribbean.
for the next fifty years the status of the colonys black people remained unclear.
english settlers classified some black laborers as slaves for life as chattel to be bought and sold at the masters will.
but other africans became servants presumably for stated periods of time and it was even possible for a few blacks to purchase their freedom.
several seventeenth century africans became successful virginia planters.
these rare exceptions in a long history of oppression remind modern americans that once long ago it was possible to imagine a more open less racially defined society.
see the feature essay anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek pp.
one reason virginia lawmakers tolerated such confusion was that the black population remained very small.
by 1660 fewer than fifteen hundred people of african origin lived in the entire colony compared to a white population of approximately twenty six thousand and it hardly seemed necessary for the legislature to draw up an elaborate slave code to control so few men and women.
if the planters could have obtained more black laborers they certainly would have done so.
there is no evidence that the great planters preferred white indentured servants to black slaves.
the problem was supply.
during this period slave traders sold their cargoes on barbados or the other sugar islands of the west indies where they fetched higher prices than virginians could afford.
in fact before 1680 most blacks who reached englands colonies on the north american mainland came from barbados or through new netherland rather than directly from africa.
by the end of the seventeenth century the legal status of virginias black people was no longer in doubt.
they were slaves for life and so were their children after them.
this transformation reflected changes in the supply of africans to british north america.
after 1672 the royal african company was chartered to meet the colonial planters demands for black laborers.
historian k g davies terms this organization the strongest and most effective of all european companies formed exclusively for the african chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 europe 2 north america at l a n t i c o c e a n british north america 4 2 mexico and central america 42 west indies 6 spanish south america west africa 6 guianas africa central africa equator 38 brazil pa c i f i c ocean southeast africa south america main source of slaves percentage of slaves brought to various transatlantic destinations origins and destinations of african slaves 1619 1760 although many african slaves were carried to britains north american colonies far more slaves were sold in the caribbean sugar colonies and brazil where because of horrific health conditions the death rate far exceeded that of the british mainland colonies.
trade between 1695 and 1709 more than eleven thousand africans were sold in virginia alone many others went to maryland and the carolinas.
although american merchants most of them based in rhode island entered the trade during the eighteenth century the british continued to supply the bulk of the slaves to the mainland market for the entire colonial period.
the expanding black population apparently frightened white colonists for as the number of africans increased lawmakers drew up ever stricter slave codes.
it was during this period that racism always a latent element in new world societies was fully revealed.
by 1700 slavery was unequivocally based on the color of a persons skin.
blacks fell into this status simply because they were black.
a vicious pattern of discrimination had been set in motion.
even conversion to christianity did not free the african from bondage.
the white planter could deal with his black property as he alone saw fit and one revolting virginia statute excused masters who killed slaves on the grounds that no rational person would purposely destroy his own estate black women constantly had to fear sexual violation by a master or his sons.
children born to a slave woman became slaves regardless of the fathers race.
unlike the spanish colonies where persons of lighter color enjoyed greater privileges in society the english colonies tolerated no mixing of the races.
mulattoes and pure africans received the same treatment.
constructing african american identities the slave experience varied substantially from colony to colony.
the daily life of a black person in south carolina for example was quite different from that of an african american who happened to live in pennsylvania or massachusetts bay.
the size and density of the slave population determined in large measure how successfully blacks could maintain a separate cultural identity.
in the lowlands of south carolina during the eighteenth century 60 percent of the population was black.
the men and women were placed on large isolated rice plantations and their contact with whites was limited.
in these areas blacks developed creole languages which mixed the basic vocabulary of english with words borrowed from various african tongues.
until the end of the nineteenth century one creole language gullah was spoken on some of the sea islands along the georgia south carolina coast.
slaves on the large rice plantations also were able to establish elaborate and enduring kinship networks that may have helped reduce the more dehumanizing aspects of bondage.
in the new england and middle colonies and even in virginia african americans made up a smaller percentage of the population 40 percent in virginia 8 percent in pennsylvania and 3 percent in massachusetts.
in such environments contact between race and freedom in british america outlandish negroes as they were called were forced by blacks as well as whites to accept elements of english culture.
it was especially important for newcomers to speak english.
consider for example the pain of young olaudah equiano an african sold in virginia in 1757.
this 12 year old slave declared i was now exceedingly miserable and thought myself worse off than any.
of my companions for they could talk to each other in english but i had no person to speak to that i could understand.
in this state i was constantly grieving and pining and wishing for death despite such wrenching experiences black slaves creatively preserved elements of an african heritage.
the process of establishing african american traditions involved an imaginative reshaping of african and european customs into something that was neither african nor european.
it was african american.
the slaves accepted christianity but they did so on their own terms terms their masters seldom fully understood.
blacks transformed christianity into an expression of religious feeling in which an african element remained vibrant.
in music and folk art they gave voice to a cultural identity that even the most degrading conditions could not eradicate.
a major turning point in the history of african american people occurred during the early decades of the eighteenth century.
at this time blacks living in englands mainland colonies began to reproduce successfully.
the number of live births exceeded deaths and from that date the expansion of the african american population owed more to natural increase than to the importation of new slaves.
even though thousands of new africans arrived each year the creole population was always much larger than that of the immigrant blacks.
not that white masters allowed african american family life to interfere with the work routines of the plantation.
husbands and wives often belonged except for brief excursions on deck for forced exercise slaves remained below decks where the air to different masters and found it hard to find grew foul from the vomit blood and excrement in which the terrified victims lay.
some slaves went insane others refused to eat.
on many voyages between 5 and 20 percent of slaves perished from time to visit one another.
difficulties in formdisease and other causes which was another reason for captains to pack their ships tightly.
ing stable families meant that slave women often did not bear children until relatively late in life.
slave women usually worked in the fields alongside men.
blacks and whites was more frequent than in south carolina and elderly female slaves often no longer physically fit for field labor georgia.
these population patterns had a profound effect on northern were assigned to watch children while their parents toiled durand chesapeake blacks for while they escaped the physical drudging the long work day.
despite these hardships north american ery of rice cultivation they found the preservation of an indepenblacks enjoyed a healthier climate and better diet than did other dent african identity difficult.
in northern cities slaves working as new world slaves resulting in a demographic shift that did not take domestics and living in the houses of their masters saw other blacks place in the caribbean or south american colonies until a much but had little opportunity to develop creole languages or reaffirm a later date.
common african past.
although mainland blacks lived longer than the blacks of in eighteenth century virginia native born or creole blacks jamaica or barbados they were after all still slaves.
they propeople who had learned to cope with whites on a daily basis looked tested their debasement in many ways some in individual acts of with contempt on slaves who had just arrived from africa.
these view the closer look plan and sections of a slave ship and an illustration of a slave camp complete the assignment anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek on myhistorylab feature essay anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek a few months after anthony johnson died in 1670 a virginia court ruled that because he was a negro and by consequence an alien the 250 acres of land that he had owned should revert to england.
shown here is a portion of the court document with that decree.
d uring the first decades of settlement a larger proportion of virginias black population achieved freedom than at any time until the civil war ended slavery.
despite considerable obstacles these free black men and women their number in these early years was quite small formed families acquired property earned community respect and helped establish a distinctive african american culture.
one member of this group was anthony johnson an immigrant who rose from slavery to prominence on virginias eastern shore.
johnson came to virginia aboard the english vessel james in 1621 just two years after the first blacks had arrived in the colony.
as a slave known simply as antonio a negro johnson found life a constant struggle for survival.
working in the tobacco fields of the bennett plantation located on the south side of the james river he endured long hours poor rations fearful epidemics and haunting loneliness conditions that more often than not brought an early death to slaves as well as indentured servants.
johnson however was a tough intelligent and lucky man.
exactly how johnson achieved freedom is not known.
early records reveal that while still living at the bennett plantation he took a wife mary a negro woman anthony was fortunate to find her.
because of an exceedingly unequal sex ratio in early virginia few males regardless of color had an opportunity to form families.
anthony and mary reared at least four children.
even more remarkable in a society in which most unions were broken by death within a decade their marriage lasted more than forty years.
sometime during the 1630s anthony and mary gained their freedom perhaps with the help of someone named johnson.
their bondage probably ended through self purchase an arrangement that allowed enterprising slaves to buy their liberty through labor.
later again under unknown circumstances the johnsons migrated to northampton county on the eastern shore of virginia.
during the 1640s they acquired an estate of 250 acres on pungoteague creek where they raised cattle horses and hogs and cultivated tobacco.
to work these holdings anthony johnson apparently relied on the labor of indentured servants and at least one black slave named casor.
as the patriarch of pungoteague creek johnson participated as fully as most whites in northampton society.
he traded with wealthy white landowners and apparently shared their assumptions about the sanctity of property and the legitimacy of slavery.
when two white neighbors attempted to steal casor johnson hauled them into court and forced them to return his laborer.
on another occasion johnson appealed to the court for tax relief after an unfortunate fire destroyed much of his plantation.
the johnsons also maintained close ties with other free blacks such as anthony payne and emmanuel driggus who had similarly attained freedom and prosperity through their own efforts.
johnsons strongest links were with his family.
although his children lived in separate homes after reaching adulthood his two sons laid out holdings in the 1650s adjacent to their fathers plantation and in times of crisis parents and children participated in family conferences.
these close bonds persisted even after the johnson clan moved to somerset county maryland in the 1660s and anthony johnsons subsequent death.
when he purchased land in somerset in 1677 johnsons grandson a third generation free black colonist named his plantation angola perhaps in memory of his grandfathers african homeland.
interpreting johnsons remarkable life has proved surprisingly difficult.
an earlier generation of historians considered johnson a curiosity a sort of black englishman who did not fit neatly into familiar racial categories.
even some recent writers concerned about tracing the roots of slavery and prejudice in the united states have paid scant attention to johnson and the other free blacks on the eastern shore.
most historians would now agree that johnsons life illustrated the complexity of race relations in early virginia.
his surprising progression from slave to slaveholder and his easy participation in the world of the white gentry and in a network of black friendships and family ties demonstrated that relations among blacks and whites conformed to no single pattern in the fluid society of mid seventeenth century virginia.
rather they took a variety of forms conflict cooperation exploitation accommodation depending on the goals status experience and environment of the participants.
race was only a single factor and by no means the decisive one shaping relations among colonists.
the opportunities that had been available to anthony johnson and other virginia blacks however disappeared during the last quarter of the seventeenth century.
a growing reliance on slave labor rather than white indentured servitude brought about a rapid increase in the black population of virginia and an accompanying curtailment of civil liberties on racial grounds.
the rise of a group of great planters who dominated the colonial economy soon drove free black farmers into poverty.
no longer did they enjoy the security as had one black farmer in the 1640s of having myne owne ground and i will work when i please and play when i please it is not surprising that after 1706 a time when virginias experiment in a genuinely multiracial free society was all but over the johnson family disappeared from the colonial records.
when modern americans discuss the history of race relations in the united states they might consider the factors that allowed some of the first blacks who settled in america to achieve economic and social success.
questions for discussion 1.
how does the life of anthony johnson illustrate the complexity of race relations in early virginia.
why did the opportunities that free blacks like anthony johnson enjoyed disappear in virginia in the late seventeenth century.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society violence others in organized revolt.
the most serious slave rebellion of the colonial period was the stono uprising which took place in september 1739.
one hundred fifty south carolina blacks rose up and seizing guns and ammunition murdered several white planters.
with colours displayed and two drums beating they marched toward spanish florida where they had been promised freedom.
the local militia soon overtook the rebellious slaves and killed most of them.
although the uprising was short lived such incidents helped persuade whites everywhere that their own blacks might secretly be planning bloody revolt.
when a white servant woman in new york city announced in 1741 that blacks intended to burn the town authorities executed 34 suspected arsonists 30 blacks and 4 whites and dispatched 72 others either to the west indies or to madeira off the north coast of africa.
while the level of interracial violence in colonial society was quite low everyone recognized that the blacks in the words of one virginia governor longed to shake off the fetters of slavery even within the constraints of slavery african americans sometimes found opportunities that afforded a degree of personal freedom.
recent scholarship has discovered for example that during the eighteenth century a large number of black men became mariners.
it is now estimated that by 1803 african americans held at least 18 percent of all jobs open to american seamen and although the number of positions may have been fewer before the revolution read the document olaudah equiano the middle passage 1788 read the document james oglethorpe the stono rebellion 1739 slave masters often claimed that their slaves loved them and were happy to live in bondage.
but events like the stono uprising or rebellion of 1739 proved this reassuring fiction to be untrue.
southern whites lived in constant fear that their slaves might one day rise up and repay violence with violence.
black colonial sailors many of them slaves sought work on sailing vessels to escape the drudgery of life on rice or tobacco plantations.
these african american seamen connected black communities scattered throughout the caribbean and along the mainland coast bringing news about distant rebellions and spreading radical political ideologies to slaves who might otherwise not have known much about the transforming events of the eighteenth century.
rise of a commercial empire why did england discourage free and open trade in colonial america.
as a young boy olaudah equiano c 1745 1797 was kidnapped from his home in what is now nigeria and sold into slavery in america.
equiano eventually earned his freedom by working as a sailor.
british abolitionists pointed to the narrative of his extraordinary life to highlight the evils of the slave trade.
until the middle of the seventeenth century english political leaders largely ignored the american colonists.
private companies and aristocratic proprietors had created these societies some for profit others for religious sanctuary but in no case did the crown provide financial or military assistance.
after the restoration of charles ii in 1660 intervention replaced indifference.
englishmen of various sorts courtiers merchants parliamentarians concluded that the colonists should be brought more tightly under the control of the mother country.
the newly restored stuart monarchy began to establish rules for the entire empire and the planters of the chesapeake as well as the puritans of new england soon discovered they were not as independent as they had imagined.
the regulatory policies that evolved during this period formed a framework for an empire that survived with only minor adjustment until 1765.
rise of a commercial empire response to economic competition england.
since the americans had to pay import duties in england for this purpose colonists did not count as englishmen on such items as sugar and tobacco the legislation also provided the crown with another source of income.
in 1663 parliament passed a second navigation act known as the staple act which stated that with a few noted exceptions nothing could be imported into america unless it had first been transshipped through england a process that greatly added to the price ultimately paid by colonial consumers.
the navigation acts attempted to eliminate the dutch against whom the english fought three wars in this period 1652 1654 1664 1667 and 1672 1674 as the intermediaries of american commerce.
just as english merchants were celebrating their victory however an unanticipated rival appeared on the scene new england merchant ships sailed out of boston salem and newport to become formidable world competitors in maritime commerce.
view the map maine lumber skins lake o lak n h ntario beef cattle n y sheep hogs rie ee beef cattle conn n j pa ine of 1763 am ati on l regulating colonial trade p cl ro skins lumber md.
whales newport new york philadelphia wheat del.
skins cod boston r i.
skins beef cattle after some legislation in that direction during the commonwealth parliament passed a navigation act in 1660.
the statute was the most important piece of imperial legislation drafted before the american revolution.
colonists from new hampshire to south carolina paid close attention to the details of this statute which stated 1 that no ship could trade in the colonies unless it had been constructed in either england or america and carried a crew that was at least 75 percent english for these purposes colonists counted as englishmen and 2 that certain enumerated goods of great value that were not produced in england tobacco sugar cotton indigo dyewoods ginger could be transported from the colonies only to an english or another colonial port.
in 1704 parliament added rice and molasses to the enumerated list in 1705 rosins tars and turpentines needed for shipbuilding were included.
the act of 1660 was masterfully conceived.
it encouraged the development of domestic shipbuilding and prohibited european rivals from obtaining enumerated goods anywhere except in colonial products part of mass.
n lake huro by the 1660s the dominant commercial powers of europe adopted economic principles that later critics would term mercantilism.
proponents of this position argued that since trading nations were engaged in a fierce competition for the worlds resources mostly for raw materials transported from dependent colonies one nations commercial success translated directly into a loss for its rivals.
it seemed logical therefore that england would want to protect its own markets from france or holland.
for seventeenth century planners free markets made no sense.
they argued that trade tightly regulated by the central government represented the only way to increase the nations wealth at the expense of competitors.
many discussions of mercantilism suggested that english policy makers during the reign of charles ii had developed a wellintegrated set of ideas about the nature of international commerce and a carefully planned set of mercantilist government policies to implement them.
they did nothing of the sort.
administrators responded to particular problems usually on an individual basis.
in 1668 charles informed his sister the thing which is nearest the heart of the nation is trade and all that belongs to it national interest alone however did not shape public policy.
instead the needs of several powerful interest groups led to the rise of english commercial regulation.
each group looked to colonial commerce to solve a different problem.
for his part the king wanted money.
for their part english merchants were eager to exclude dutch rivals from lucrative american markets and needed government assistance to compete successfully with the dutch even in virginia or massachusetts bay.
from the perspective of the landed gentry who sat in parliament england needed a stronger navy and that in turn meant expansion of the domestic shipbuilding industry.
and almost everyone agreed england should establish a more favorable balance of trade that is increase exports decrease imports and grow richer at the expense of other european states.
none of these ideas was particularly innovative but taken together they provided a blueprint for englands first empire.
atlantic ocean corn hemp hogs norfolk wheat beef cattle naval stores beef cattle lumber n c hogs lumber naval stores wheat and corn beef cattle naval s c stores beef cattle tobacco rice and indigo fishing charles town ga ironworks savannah corn 200 miles 200 kilometers shipbuilding rum distilleries colonial products the above interactive map of colonial products demonstrates the economic reliance of the colonies on exports of certain raw materials food and agricultural products.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society during the 1660s the colonists showed little enthusiasm for the new imperial regulations.
reaction to the navigation acts varied from region to region.
virginians bitterly protested them.
the collection of english customs on tobacco greatly reduced the colonial planters profits.
moreover the exclusion of the dutch from the trade meant that growers often had to sell their crops at artificially low prices.
the navigation acts hit the small planters especially hard for they were least able to absorb increased production costs.
even though the governor of virginia lobbied on the planters behalf the crown turned a deaf ear.
by 1670 import duties on tobacco accounted for almost 100 000 a sum the king could scarcely do without.
at first new englanders simply ignored the commercial regulations.
indeed one massachusetts merchant reported in 1664 that boston entertained near one hundred sail of ships this year of ours and strangers the strangers of course were the dutch who had no intention of obeying the navigation acts so long as they could reach colonial ports.
some new england merchants found clever ways to circumvent the navigation acts.
these crafty traders picked up cargoes of enumerated goods such as sugar or tobacco sailed to another colonial port thereby technically fulfilling the letter of the law and then made directly for holland or france.
along the way they paid no customs.
to plug the loophole parliament passed the navigation act of 1673.
this statute established a plantation duty a sum of money equal to normal english customs duties to be collected on enumerated products at the various colonial ports.
new englanders could now sail wherever they pleased within the empire but they could not escape paying customs.
despite these legal reforms serious obstacles impeded the execution of imperial policy.
the customs service did not have enough effective agents in american ports to enforce the navigation acts fully and some men sent from the mother country did more harm than good.
edward randolph head of the imperial customs service in new england was such a person.
he was dispatched to boston in 1676 to gather information about the conduct of colonial trade.
his behavior was so obnoxious his reports about new englanders so condescending that he became the most hated man in late seventeenth century massachusetts.
parliament passed the last major piece of imperial legislation in 1696.
among other things the statute tightened enforcement procedures putting pressure specifically on the colonial governors to keep englands competitors out of american ports.
the act of 1696 also expanded the american customs service and for the first time set up vice admiralty courts in the colonies.
this decision eventually rankled the colonists.
established to settle disputes that occurred at sea viceadmiralty courts required neither juries nor oral cross examination both traditional elements of the common law.
but they were effective and sometimes even popular for resolving maritime questions quickly enough to send the ships to sea again with little delay.
the members of parliament believed these reforms would belatedly compel the colonists to accept the navigation acts and in large measure they were correct.
by 1700 american goods transshipped through the mother country accounted for a quarter of all english exports an indication the colonists found it profitable to obey the commercial regulations.
in fact during the eighteenth century smuggling from europe to america dried up almost completely.
colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 how did colonial revolts affect the political culture of virginia and new england.
the navigation acts created an illusion of unity.
english administrators superimposed a system of commercial regulation on a number of different often unstable american colonies and called it an empire.
but these statutes did not remove long standing differences.
within each society men and women struggled to bring order out of disorder to establish stable ruling elites to diffuse ethnic and racial tensions and to cope with population pressures that imperial planners only dimly understood.
during the final decades of the seventeenth century these efforts sometimes sparked revolt.
first the virginians rebelled and then a few years later political violence swept through maryland new york and massachusetts bay englands most populous mainland colonies.
these events were not in any modern sense of the word ideological.
in each colony the local gentry split into factions usually the outs versus the ins and each side proclaimed its political legitimacy.
civil war in virginia bacons rebellion after 1660 the virginia economy suffered a prolonged depression.
returns from tobacco had not been good for some time and the navigation acts reduced profits even further.
into this unhappy environment came thousands of indentured servants people drawn to virginia as the governor explained in hope of bettering their condition in a growing country the reality bore little relation to their dreams.
a hurricane destroyed one entire tobacco crop and in 1667 dutch warships captured the tobacco fleet just as it was about to sail for england.
indentured servants complained about lack of food and clothing.
no wonder that virginias governor sir william berkeley despaired of ever ruling a people where six parts of seven at least are poor endebted discontented and armed in 1670 he and the house of burgesses disfranchised all landless freemen persons they regarded as troublemakers but the threat of social violence remained.
enter nathaniel bacon.
this ambitious young man arrived in virginia in 1674.
he came from a respectable english family and set himself up immediately as a substantial planter.
but he wanted more.
bacon envied the government patronage monopolized by berkeleys cronies a group known locally as the green spring faction.
when bacon attempted to obtain a license to engage in the fur trade he was rebuffed.
this lucrative commerce was reserved for the governors friends.
if bacon had been willing to wait he probably would have been accepted into the ruling clique but as subsequent events would demonstrate bacon was not a man of patience.
events beyond bacons control thrust him suddenly into the center of virginia politics.
in 1675 indians reacting to white encroachment attacked several outlying plantations killing a few colonists and virginians expected the governor to send an army to retaliate.
instead early in 1676 berkeley called for the construction of a line of defensive forts a plan that seemed to the settlers both expensive and ineffective.
indeed the strategy raised embarrassing questions.
was berkeley protecting his own fur monopoly.
was he planning to reward his friends with contracts to build useless forts.
colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 read the document later refused to grant her a pardon.
another outspoken rebel lydia chiesman defended her husband before governor berkeley noting that the man would not have joined bacons forces had she not persuaded him to do so.
therefore lydia chiesman concluded.
since what her husband had done was by her meanes and so by consequence she most guilty that she might be hanged and he pardoned when charles ii learned of the fighting in virginia he dispatched a thousand regular soldiers to jamestown.
by the time they arrived berkeley had regained full control over the colonys government.
in october 1676 bacon died after a brief illness and within a few months his band of rebel followers had dispersed.
berkeley now an old and embittered man was recalled to england in 1677.
his successors especially lord culpeper 1680 1683 and lord howard of effingham 1683 1689 seemed interested primarily in enriching themselves at the expense of the virginia planters.
their self serving policies coupled with the memory of near anarchy helped heal divisions within the virginia ruling class.
for almost a century in fact the local gentry formed a united front against greedy royal appointees.
nathaniel bacons declaration july 30 1676 in 1676 nathaniel bacon and about 500 men from the virginia frontier marched on the colonial capital of jamestown to demand access to indian lands.
when the house of burgesses took too long in responding the rebels set fire to the capital.
while people speculated about such matters bacon stepped forward.
he boldly offered to lead a volunteer army against the indians at no cost to the hard pressed virginia taxpayers.
all he demanded was an official commission from berkeley giving him military command and the right to attack other indians not just the hostile susquehannocks.
the governor steadfastly refused.
with some justification berkeley regarded his upstart rival as a fanatic on the subject of indians.
the governor saw no reason to exterminate peaceful tribes simply to avenge the death of a few white settlers.
what followed would have been comic had not so many people died.
bacon thundered against the governors treachery berkeley labeled bacon a traitor.
both men appealed to the populace for support.
on several occasions bacon marched his followers to the frontier but they either failed to find the enemy or worse massacred friendly indians.
at one point bacon burned jamestown to the ground forcing the governor to flee to the colonys eastern shore.
bacons bumbling lieutenants chased berkeley across chesapeake bay only to be captured themselves.
thereupon the governor mounted a new campaign.
as bacons rebellion dragged on it became increasingly apparent that bacon and his gentry supporters had only the vaguest notion of what they were trying to achieve.
the members of the planter elite never seemed fully to appreciate that the rank and file soldiers often black slaves and poor white servants had serious legitimate grievances against berkeleys corrupt government and were demanding substantial reforms not just a share in the governors fur monopoly.
although women had not been allowed to vote in colony elections they made their political views clear enough during the rebellion.
some were apparently more violent than others.
sarah glendon for example agitated so aggressively in support of bacon that berkeley the glorious revolution in the bay colony during john winthrops lifetime massachusetts settlers developed an inflated sense of their independence from the mother country.
after 1660 however it became difficult even to pretend that the puritan colony was a separate state.
royal officials such as edward randolph demanded full compliance with the navigation acts.
moreover the growth of commerce attracted new merchants to the bay colony men who were anglicans rather than congregationalists and who maintained close business contacts in london.
these persons complained loudly of puritan intolerance.
the anglican faction was never large but its presence coupled with randolphs unceasing demands divided bay leaders.
a few puritan ministers and magistrates regarded compromise with england as treason a breaking of the lords covenant.
other spokesmen recognizing the changing political realities within the empire urged a more moderate course.
in 1675 in the midst of this ongoing political crisis the indians dealt the new englanders a terrible setback.
metacomet a wampanoag chief the whites called king philip declared war against the colonists.
the powerful narragansett indians whose lands the settlers had long coveted joined metacomet and in little more than a year of fighting the indians destroyed scores of frontier villages killed hundreds of colonists and disrupted the entire regional economy.
more than one thousand indians and new englanders died in the conflict.
the war left the people of massachusetts deeply in debt and more than ever uncertain of their future.
as in other parts of colonial america the defeated indians were forced off their lands compelled by events to become either refugees or economically marginal figures in white society.
in 1684 the debate over the bay colonys relation to the mother country ended abruptly.
the court of chancery sitting in london and acting on a petition from the king annulled the charter of the massachusetts bay company.
in one stroke of a pen the patent that chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society winthrop had so lovingly carried to america in 1630 the foundation for a city on a hill was gone.
the decision forced the most stubborn puritans to recognize they were part of an empire run by people who did not share their particular religious vision.
james ii a monarch who disliked representative institutions after all parliament a representative assembly had executed his father charles i decided to restructure the government of the entire region in the dominion of new england.
in various stages from 1686 to 1689 the dominion incorporated massachusetts connecticut rhode island plymouth new york new jersey and new hampshire under a single appointed royal governor.
for this demanding position james selected sir edmund andros pronounced andrews a military veteran of tyrannical temperament.
andros arrived in boston in 1686 and within a matter of months he had alienated everyone puritans moderates and even anglican merchants.
not only did andros abolish elective assemblies but he also enforced the navigation acts with such rigor that he brought about commercial depression.
andros declared normal town meetings illegal collected taxes the people never approved and packed the courts with supporters who detested the local population.
eighteenthcentury historian and royal governor thomas hutchinson compared andros unfavorably with the roman tyrant nero.
early in 1689 news of the glorious revolution reached boston.
the previous fall the ruling class of england had deposed james ii an admitted catholic and placed his protestant daughter mary and her husband william of orange on the throne as joint monarchs see the chart of the stuart monarchs on p 31.
as part of the settlement william and mary accepted a bill of rights a document stipulating the constitutional rights of all englishmen.
almost immediately the bay colonists overthrew the hated andros regime.
the new england version of the glorious revolution april 18 1689 was so popular that no one came to the governors defense.
andros was jailed without a single shot having been fired.
according to cotton mather a leading congregational minister the colonists were united by the most unanimous resolution perhaps that was ever known to have inspird any people however united as they may have been the bay colonists could not take the crowns support for granted.
william iii could have declared the new englanders rebels and summarily reinstated andros.
but thanks largely to the tireless lobbying of increase mather cottons father who pleaded the colonists case in london william abandoned the dominion of new england and in 1691 massachusetts received a new royal charter.
this document differed substantially from the company patent of 1629.
the freemen no longer selected their governor.
the choice now belonged to the king.
membership in the general court was determined by annual election and these representatives in turn chose the men who sat in the council or upper house subject always to the governor veto.
moreover the franchise restricted here as in other colonies to adult males was determined on the basis of personal property rather than church membership a change that brought massachusetts into conformity with general english practice.
on the local level town government remained much as it had been in winthrops time.
contagion of witchcraft the instability of the massachusetts government following andross arrest what reverend samuel willard described as the short anarchy accompanying our late revolution allowed what under normal political conditions would have been an isolated though ugly local incident to expand into a major colonial crisis.
excessively fearful men and women living in salem village a small unprosperous farming community nearly overwhelmed the new rulers of massachusetts bay.
accusations of witchcraft were not uncommon in seventeenth century new england.
puritans believed that an individual might make a compact with the devil but during the first decades of settlement authorities executed only about fifteen alleged witches.
sometimes villagers simply left suspected witches alone.
never before had fears of witchcraft plunged an entire community into panic.
the terror in salem village began in early 1692 when several adolescent girls began to behave in strange ways.
they cried out for no apparent reason they twitched on the ground.
when concerned neighbors asked what caused their suffering the girls announced they were victims of witches seemingly innocent persons who lived in the community.
the arrest of several alleged witches did not relieve the girls fits nor did prayer solve the problem.
additional accusations were made and at least one person confessed providing a frightening description of the devil as a thing all over hairy all the face hairy and a long nose in june 1692 a special court convened and began to send men and women to the gallows.
by the end of the summer the court had hanged nineteen people another was pressed to death.
several more suspects died in jail awaiting trial.
then suddenly the storm was over.
led by increase mather a group of prominent congregational ministers belatedly urged leniency and restraint.
especially troubling to the clergymen was the courts decision to accept spectral evidence that is reports of dreams and visions in which the accused appeared as the devils agent.
worried about convicting people on such dubious testimony mather declared it were better that ten suspected witches should escape than that one innocent person should be condemned the colonial government accepted the ministers advice and convened a new court which promptly acquitted pardoned or released the remaining suspects.
after the salem nightmare witchcraft ceased to be a capital offense.
no one knows exactly what sparked the terror in salem village.
the community had a history of religious discord and during the 1680s the people split into angry factions over the choice of a minister.
economic tensions played a part as well.
poorer more traditional farmers accused members of prosperous commercially oriented families of being witches.
the underlying misogyny of the entire culture meant the victims were more often women than men.
terror of attack by native americans may also have played a part in this ugly affair.
indians in league with the french in canada had recently raided nearby communities killing people related to the families of the bewitched salem girls and significantly during the trials some victims described the devil as a tawny man for further discussion of the salem witchcraft trials see witches and the law pp.
the glorious revolution in new york and maryland the glorious revolution in new york was more violent than it had been in massachusetts bay.
divisions within new yorks ruling class ran deep and involved ethnic as well as religious differences.
english newcomers and powerful anglo dutch families who conclusion local aspirations within an atlantic empire had recently risen to commercial prominence in new york city opposed the older dutch elite.
much like nathaniel bacon jacob leisler was a man entangled in events beyond his control.
leisler the son of a german minister emigrated to new york in 1660 and through marriage aligned himself with the dutch elite.
while he achieved moderate prosperity as a merchant leisler resented the success of the anglo dutch.
when news of the glorious revolution reached new york city in may 1689 leisler raised a group of militiamen and seized the local fort in the name of william and mary.
as leader of leislers rebellion he apparently expected an outpouring of popular support but it was not forthcoming.
his rivals waited watching while leisler desperately attempted to legitimize his actions.
through bluff and badgering leisler managed to hold the colony together especially after french forces burned schenectady february 1690 but he never established a secure political base.
in march 1691 a new royal governor henry sloughter reached new york.
he ordered leisler to surrender his authority but when sloughter refused to prove he had been sent by william read the document cotton mather memorable providences relating to witchcraft rather than by the deposed james leisler hesitated.
the pause cost leisler his life.
sloughter declared leisler a rebel and in a hasty trial a court sentenced him and his chief lieutenant jacob milbourne to be hanged by the neck and being alive their bodyes be cutt downe to earth and their bowells to be taken out and they being alive burnt before their faces.
in 1695 parliament officially pardoned leisler but he not being alive the decision arrived a bit late.
long after his death political factions calling themselves leislerians and anti leislerians struggled to dominate new york government.
indeed in no other eighteenth century colony was the level of bitter political rivalry so high.
during the last third of the seventeenth century the colony of maryland stumbled from one political crisis to another.
protestants in the colonys lower house resisted lord baltimores catholic friends in the upper house or council.
when news of jamess overthrow reached maryland early in 1689 pent up antiproprietary and anti catholic sentiment exploded.
john coode a member of the assembly and an outspoken protestant formed a group called the protestant association which in august forced baltimore governor william joseph to resign.
coode avoided leislers fatal mistakes.
the protestant association citing many wrongs suffered at the hands of local catholics petitioned the crown to transform maryland into a royal colony.
after reviewing the case william accepted coodes explanation and in 1691 the king dispatched a royal governor to maryland.
a new assembly dominated by protestants declared anglicanism the established religion.
catholics were excluded from public office on the grounds that they might be in league with french catholics in canada.
lord baltimore lost control of the colonys government but he and his family did retain title to marylands undistributed lands.
in 1715 the crown restored to full proprietorship the fourth lord baltimore who had been raised a member of the church of england and maryland remained in the hands of the calvert family until 1776.
conclusion local aspirations within an atlantic empire the publication of cotton mathers memorable providences relating to witchcrafts and possessions 1689 contributed to the hysteria that resulted in the salem witchcraft trials of the 1690s but he did not take part in the trials.
he is shown here surrounded by some of the forms a demon assumed in the documented case of an english family besieged by witches.
it is no little blessing of god cotton mather announced proudly in 1700 that we are part of the english nation a half century earlier john winthrop would not have spoken these words at least not with such enthusiasm.
the two men were of course products of different political cultures.
it was not so much that the character of massachusetts society had changed.
in fact the puritan families of 1700 were much like those of the founding generation.
rather the difference was in englands attitude toward the colonies.
rulers living more than three thousand miles away now made political and economic demands that mathers contemporaries could not ignore.
the creation of a new imperial system did not however erase profound sectional differences.
by 1700 for example the chesapeake colonies were more not less committed to the cultivation of tobacco and slave labor.
although the separate regions were being pulled slowly into englands commercial orbit they did not have much to do with each other.
the elements that sparked a powerful sense of nationalism among colonists dispersed over a huge territory would not be evident for a very long time.
it would be a mistake therefore to anticipate the coming of the american revolution.
complete the assignment witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 on myhistorylab law and society witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 this seventeenth century house is the former home of jonathan corwin one of the magistrates who presided over the salem witch trials.
despite having received the nickname of the witch house no accused witches actually resided here nor were trials ever held within its walls.
t he events that occurred at salem village in 1692 haunt modern memory.
in popular american culture the incident has come to represent our worst nightmare a communitysanctioned witch hunt that ferrets out deviants in the name of law.
what seems most unsettling about the incident is the failure of allegedly good men and women to bear witness against judicial terror.
the ordeal of salem village links a distant colonial past with the infamous mccarthy hearings of the 1950s as well as other more recent witch hunts.
the story of this deeply troubled town challenges us to confront the possibility that we too might allow law and authority to become instruments of injustice.
the challenge in exploring law and society is how best to interpret the salem trials.
it would be easy to insist that puritan magistrates were gross hypocrites figures who consciously manipulated the law for their own hateful purposes.
but such conclusions are simplistic they fail to place the salem nightmare in proper historical context.
the participants in this intense social drama acted on a complex set of seventeenth century assumptions legal religious and scientific and if judges and jurors wronged innocent people they did so by the standards of a society very different from our own.
few new englanders doubted the existence of witches.
for centuries european communities had identified certain persons as agents of the devil and when the puritans migrated to america they carried these beliefs with them.
they recognized no conflict between rational religion and the possible existence of a satanic world populated by witches.
ordinary farmers regarded unusual events the strange death of a farm animal for example as evidence of witchcraft.
new englands intellectual leaders sustained popular superstition in impressive scientific publications.
in his memorable providences relating to witchcrafts and possessions 1689 the reverend cotton mather declared i am resolvd.
never to use.
one grain of patience with any man that shall.
impose upon me a denial of devils or of witches.
count him down right impudent if he assert the non existence of things which we have had such palpable convictions of colonial new englanders did more than talk and write about witches as early as 1647 they executed several.
before the salem outbreak ninety one people had been tried for witchcraft in massachusetts and connecticut and sixteen of them were hanged not burned as some historians have claimed.
in addition hundreds of people had accused neighbors of witchcraft but for many reasons usually lack of convincing evidence they stopped short of taking such disputes before the court.
these were isolated incidents.
before 1692 fear of witches had not sparked mass hysteria.
salem village was different.
in this instance charges of witchcraft shattered a community already deeply divided against itself.
the predominantly agricultural salem village lay a few miles up the ipswich road from the bustling commercial port of salem town.
the farmers of the village envied their neighbors prosperity.
even more they resented the control that town authorities exerted over the village church and government.
this tension found expression in numerous personal and family rivalries.
in 1689 the congregation at salem village ordained the reverend samuel parris a troubled figure who provoked disquietness and restlessness and who fanned the factionalism that had long plagued the community.
the witchcraft crisis began suddenly in mid january 1692 when two girls in the parris household experienced violent convulsions and frightening visions.
a local physician examined the afflicted children but found no natural cause for their condition.
soon anxious families raised the possibility of witchcraft a move which set off a storm of accusations that did not abate until october.
by that time 20 people had died and more than 150 prisoners still awaited trial.
although the witch hysteria affected everyone men and women rich and poor farmers and merchants the accusers and their targets were not evenly distributed among the population of salem village.
twenty of the thirty four persons who claimed to have been bewitched were girls between the ages of 11 and 20.
women a full generation older than the accusers were most likely to be identified as witches more than 40 percent of the accused fell into this category.
although men and women from many different backgrounds were accused one widely shared characteristic was a history of socially unacceptable behavior.
sarah good for example smoked a pipe and was known for cursing her enemies.
john aldins accusers described him as a bold fellow.
who lies with indian squaws.
and stands with his hat on before the judges bridget bishop ran a scandalous tavern and dressed in a particularly flashy immodest manner.
those who testified against the supposed witches came from all classes both genders and every age group.
indeed virtually the entire community was drawn into the ugly business of charge and countercharge fear and betrayal.
new englands intellectual leaders most of them harvard educated clergymen tried to make sense out of reports coming out of salem.
since the colonies did not yet have a newspaper the reflections of these prominent figures significantly shaped how the entire society interpreted the frightening events of 1692.
during the spring of that year accusations of witchcraft mounted while magistrates interrogated everyone touched by the contagion.
arriving from england in mid may at the height of the witch hunt the new royal governor of massachusetts bay william phips appointed a special court of law a court of oyer and terminer to try the cases at salem village.
the seven judges he appointed all had previous experience in the colonys law courts.
phips wanted the trials to be as fair as possible and procedurally correct.
a proper jury was impaneled.
despite precautions however the court itself soon succumbed to the frenzy.
chief judge and deputy governor william stoughton for example staunchly believed the girls had been bewitched and he had little doubt that real witches were responsible for the trouble at salem village.
by contrast nathaniel saltonstall was highly skeptical of the witchcraft charges.
after witnessing the first round of executions saltonstall resigned from the court and turned to alcohol to persuade himself the court had not made a terrible mistake.
although the judges and jury may have felt ambivalent about what was happening the law stated that persons convicted as witches must die.
everything turned on evidence.
confession offered the most reliable proof of witchcraft and it occurred surprisingly often.
we will never know what compelled people to confess.
some may have actually believed they had cast spells on their neighbors or had foretold the future.
many women though believing themselves innocent may have confessed because of guilt for impure thoughts that they had privately entertained.
perhaps the psychological strain of imprisonment coupled with intense social scrutiny convinced them they might have unwittingly entered into a contract with the devil.
regardless the stories they told undoubtedly mortified those who heard them and fueled the growing frenzy.
imagine the reaction to ann fosters july 18 confession ann foster.
confessed that the devill in the shape of a black man appeared to her with martha carrier about six yeare since when they made her a witch and that she promised to serve the devill two years upon which the devill promised her prosperity and many things but never performed it that she and martha carrier did both ride on a stick or pole when they went to the witch meeting at salem village and that the stick broak as they were carried in the air above the tops of the trees and they fell but she did hang fast about the neck of martha carrier and were presently at the village.
she further saith that she heard some of the witches say that there was three hundred and five in the whole country and that they would ruin that place the village.
most of the accused did not confess however forcing the judges to produce tangible evidence of witchcraft.
the charge was difficult because the crime of bewitchment was by nature an invisible act.
earthly laws and magistrates had difficulty dealing with crimes that occurred in the spiritual world.
in this situation the beleaguered judges used a few customary tests.
all witches supposedly had a witchs teat usually a flap of skin located anywhere on the body from which they gave suck to the devil.
the judges subjected almost every defendant to a humiliating physical examination in order to find such biological abnormalities.
witches could also be discovered by having them touch a girl in the midst of her torments.
if the girls fits ceased then the person who touched her was assumed responsible for her agony.
since this form of evidence was immediately observable judges relied on it heavily oftentimes parading accused witches before the possessed girls waiting to see whose touch would calm them.
had the terrible ordeal turned solely on unsightly warts the trials might have ended without further note.
but that did not happen.
the judges allowed the jury to entertain a different sort of evidence spectral evidence and it was this material that hanged people at salem village.
new englanders believed that witches worked by dispatching a specter a phantom spirit to torment their victims.
this meant that witches had power over great distances they were invisible.
they entered peoples dreams and dozens of good new englanders complained of having been bitten pinched or even choked by specters that looked a lot like their neighbors.
the judges regularly accepted spectral testimony of the sort offered by 18 year old john cook.
one morning about sun rising as i was in bed.
i saw bridget bishop.
standing in the chamber by the window and she looked on me.
presently struck me on the side of the head wch did very much hurt me then i saw her goe out under the end window at a little creviss about so bigg as i could thrust my hand into.
i saw her again the same day.
walke cross the roome having at the time an apple in my hand it flew out of my hand into my mothers lapp who stood six or eight foot distance from me then she disappeared though my mother severall others were in the same room yet they affirmed they saw her not.
as far as the witch hunters were concerned bridget bishop had been caught in the act.
to the modern observer however the problems with this kind of evidence seem obvious.
first how could one tell whether cook was lying.
the power of his story lay in its inability to be corroborated for one could never check the authenticity of an intensely private dream or vision.
the second problem was that persons accused of being witches had no defense against spectral testimony.
when captain john aldin stood before his accusers for example they immediately fell to the ground writhing in pain.
when asked why he tormented the girls aldin firmly denied any wrongdoing inquiring why the judges suppose d he had no better things to do than to come to salem to afflict these persons that i never knew or saw before aldins defense did not carry much weight when set against the testimony of the suffering girls and rather than conclude the accusers manifested a lying spirit the judges admitted all spectral evidence as incontestable proof of witchcraft.
very early in the trials a few people expressed doubts about the reliability of this particular form of evidence.
cotton mather and other ministers for example issued a statement urging the judges to use spectral evidence with a very critical and exquisite caution some feared the devil could assume the shape of innocent people.
if this was the case then the visions of the afflicted proved nothing but the devils ability to deceive humans.
in the absence of spectral evidence the cases against most of the witches boiled down to little more than longstanding complaints against obnoxious neighbors.
the fury of prosecution silenced the skeptical voices however and chief judge william stoughton continued to accept dreams and visions as proof of witchcraft.
fantastic testimony about flying witches and pinching specters lent an almost circuslike air to the proceedings at salem.
before the judges and the members of the jury the afflicted girls would fall to the ground convulsing and screaming claiming to see witches that remained invisible to the court.
hundreds of spectators sat horrified as satan caused suffering before their own eyes.
for seventeenth century new englanders who felt the presence of the spiritual world in their everyday lives the courtroom at salem offered the opportunity to witness the struggle between the forces of darkness and light.
because of the gravity of the situation no one expected the judges to deal lightly with those who had sworn allegiance to the devil.
indeed in the interest of obtaining a confession the judges conducted harsh interrogations usually assuming the guilt of the defendant.
the intense psychological pressure inflicted on the defendants is revealed in the questioning of sarah good a woman subsequently hanged as a witch judge sarah good what evil spirit have you familiarity with.
judge why do you hurt these children.
good i do not hurt them.
i scorn it.
judge who do you employ then to do it.
good i employ nobody.
judge have you made a contract with the devil.
judge sarah good.
why do you not tell us the truth.
why do you thus torment these poor children.
good i do not torment them.
even the ministers who advised caution applauded the judges assiduous endeavors and encouraged the vigorous prosecution of the witches.
as the witch hysteria gained momentum few people dared to defend the witches for fear of being accused themselves.
the humble pleas of those who genuinely thought themselves innocent fell on the deaf ears of a community convinced of its own righteousness.
by late september with twenty people already executed the emotional intensity that had sustained the witch hunt in its early stages began to ebb.
for one thing the accusations spun wildly out of control as the afflicted girls began naming unlikely candidates as witches prominent ministers a judges mother in law and even the governors wife.
such accusations discredited the entire procedure by which the witches had been discovered.
also although the jails could barely hold the 150 people still awaiting trial the accusations kept coming.
the terror was feeding on itself.
in mid october governor phips dismissed the original court and appointed a new one this time barring spectral evidence.
all remaining defendants were quickly acquitted although curiously enough three women still confessed to having practiced witchcraft.
in a letter to the king phips explained his decision to end the trials claiming that the people had become dissatisfied and disturbed men and women who had been so eager to purify the community of evil to murder neighbors in the name of a higher good now spoke of their fear of divine retribution.
perhaps the dying words of sarah good uttered in response to the assistant minister of salem town echoed in their ears i am no more a witch than you are a wizard and if you take away my life god will give you blood to drink soon after the trials ended the witch hunters quickly turned confessors.
in 1706 ann putnam one of the most prolific accusers publicly asked for forgiveness i desire to be humbled before god.
it was a great delusion of satan that deceived me in that time nine years earlier the salem jurors had issued a similar statement asking the community to understand the particular pressures that compelled them to convict so many people we confess that we.
were not capable to understand nor able to withstand the mysterious delusions of the powers of darkness.
but were for want of knowledge in our selves and better information from others prevailed with to take up with such evidence against the accused as on further consideration and better information we justly fear was insufficient for the touching the lives of any.
whereby we fear we have been instrumental with others tho ignorantly and unwittingly to bring upon our selves and this people of the lord the guilt of innocent blood.
the state never again executed citizens for witchcraft.
the experience at salem had taught new englanders that although witches may have existed no human court could identify a witch beyond a reasonable doubt.
the reverend increase mather summed up the attitude of a post salem new england it were better that ten suspected witches should escape than that one innocent person should be condemned what triggered the tragic events of 1692 remains a mystery.
some historians view the witch hunt as a manifestation of salem villages socioeconomic troubles.
this interpretation helps explain why the primary accusers came from the agrarian village while the alleged witches either resided in or were somehow connected to the market oriented town.
perhaps the charge of witchcraft masked a deep resentment for their neighbors monetary success and the new set of values that accompanied the market economy.
other historians believe the witch hunt reflected a deep ambivalence about gender roles in new england society.
young girls lashed out at older nonconforming women because they symbolized a freedom that was achievable within new england society yet vehemently criticized.
facing the choice between becoming their husbands servants or being free the accusers may have expressed this cultural frustration in lethal ways.
terror of indian attack may have exacerbated community fear.
some accusers described the devil as a tawney man a clear reference to native americans.
these and many other factors contributed to the witch phenomenon.
regardless of which interpretation one favors one must acknowledge that salem village had indeed been possessed.
the blame rests on the community as a whole not just on a few vindictive judges.
in 1697 another repentant witch hunter the reverend john hale tried to explain how well meaning people had caused such harm i am abundantly satisfyed that those who were most concerned to act and judge in those matters did not willingly depart from the rules of righteousness.
but such was the darkness of that day.
that we walked in the clouds and could not see our way.
hales words ring hollow.
they came too late to do much good.
as other communities have learned throughout the long history of this nation it is easier to apologize after the fact than to stand up courageously against the first injustice.
questions for discussion 1.
do historians interpretations of the salem witch hunt seem adequate to explain the events of 1692.
why or why not.
how does your judgment of the ministers and magistrates in charge change if you judge them by modern standards versus the scientific and theological standards of their own time.
should the magistrates who sat in judgment at salem have been tried later for incompetence or malfeasance.
what can modern americans learn from the events of 1692.
chapt er 3 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 3 putting down roots on myhistorylab time line 1619 first blacks arrive in virginia 1660 charles ii is restored to the english throne first navigation act passed by parliament second navigation staple act passed plantation duty imposed to close loopholes in commercial regulations king philips metacomets war devastates new england bacons rebellion threatens governor berkeleys government in virginia william penn receives charter for pennsylvania charter of the massachusetts bay company revoked duke of york becomes james ii dominion of new england established james ii driven into exile during glorious revolution rebellions break out in massachusetts new york and maryland jacob leisler executed salem village wracked by witch trials parliament establishes board of trade stono uprising of south carolina slaves terrifies white planters chapter review sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century what factors explain the remarkable social stability achieved in early new england.
seventeenth century new englanders migrated to america in family groups ensuring that the ratio of men to women remained roughly even making it easier for young people to marry and start families.
stable marriage together with new englands healthy climate led to rapid population growth.
while many young new englanders served as servants most seventeenth century colonists eventually acquired property.
p 56 they established enduring kinship networks that helped mitigate the hardships of slavery.
enslaved africans also developed new forms of music and folk art that drew upon african roots and adapted the christianity taught them by their masters to include african religious elements.
p 61 rise of a commercial empire n y hogs beef cattle sheep conn r i skins n j pa b n why did england discourage free and open trade in colonial america.
new york during the seventeenth century parliament passed mercantilist laws declaring that colonial raw materials and commerce would benefit only the mother country and not a european rival.
these commercial regulations represented englands new blueprint for the empire.
p 66 lumber md.
philadelphia wheat del.
atl oc corn a the challenge of the chesapeake environment beef cattle lumber md.
philade wheat del.
what factors contributed to political unrest in the chesapeake region during this period.
corn skins colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 hemp most immigrants to the early chesapeake colonies were single young male indentured servants.
disease killed many of them shortly after arriving.
men outnumbered women making it difficult for freemen to marry.
because of the short life expectancy marriages did not last long.
economic inequality and family instability contributed to political unrest.
p 59 va hemp hogs wheat beef cattle naval stores norfolk race and freedom in british america how did african american slaves preserve an independent cultural identity in the new world.
42 west indies 6 spanish south america 6 guianas slaves especially those in the south developed new creole languages that blended english with african languages.
how did colonial revolts affect the political culture of virginia and new england.
during bacons rebellion landless freemen rose up against the governor and demanded indian lands.
although the rebellion failed it unified virginias ruling elite.
in 1684 james ii restructured the northern colonies to increase crown authority.
new englanders threw off the dominion of new england in 1689 and negotiated for government charters that allowed significant local autonomy.
p 68 study resources key terms and definitions indentured servant persons who agreed to serve a master for a set number of years in exchange for the cost of transport to america.
indentured servitude was the dominant form of labor in the chesapeake colonies before slavery.
p 55 yeomen southern small landholders who owned no slaves and who lived primarily in the foothills of the appalachian and ozark mountains.
p 59 royal african company slaving company created to meet colonial planters demands for black laborers.
p 61 mercantilism mercantilism assumed that the supply of wealth was fixed.
to increase its wealth a nation needed to export more goods than it imported.
favorable trade and protective economic policies and colonial possessions rich in raw materials were important in achieving this balance.
p 67 enumerated goods raw materials such as tobacco sugar and rice that were produced in the british colonies and under the navigation acts had to be shipped only to england or its colonies.
p 67 navigation acts commercial restrictions that regulated colonial commerce to favor englands accumulation of wealth.
p 67 bacons rebellion an armed rebellion in virginia 1675 1676 led by nathaniel bacon against the colonys royal governor sir william berkeley.
p 69 dominion of new england incorporation of the new england colonies under a single appointed royal governor that lasted from 1686 1689.
p 70 glorious revolution replacement of james ii by william iii and mary ii as english monarchs in 1688 marking the beginning of constitutional monarchy in britain.
p 70 spectral evidence in the salem witch trials the court allowed reports of dreams and visions in which the accused appeared as the devils agent to be introduced as testimony.
the accused had no defense against this kind of evidence when the judges later disallowed this testimony the executions for witchcraft ended.
p 70 critical thinking questions 1.
what factors would have drawn ambitious young english people in the first half of the seventeenth century to the chesapeake region rather than to new england.
since living with large numbers of unfree africans frightened whites 3.
did the mercantilist system best serve the interests of the english or of the american colonists.
why did colonial rebellions of the seventeenth century not lead to demands for political independence.
why did colonists continue to import so many slaves.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 3 on myhistorylab social stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century read the document james oglethorpe the stono rebellion 1739 p 66 read the document prenuptial agreement 1653 p 57 rise of a commercial empire read the document anne bradstreet before the birth of one of her children p 58 view the map colonial products p 67 race and freedom in british america colonial factions spark political revolt view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 p 62 read the document nathaniel bacons declaration july 30 1676 p 69 view the closer look plan and sections of a slave ship and an illustration of a slave camp p 63 complete the assignment anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek p 64 read the document passage 1788 p 66 olaudah equiano the middle read the document cotton mather memorable providences relating to witchcraft p 71 complete the assignment witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 p 72 indicates study plan media assignment experience of empire eighteenth century america contents and learning objectives growth and diversity pg.
80 what difficulties did native americans face in maintaining their cultural independence on the frontier.
spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century pg.
83 religious revivals in provincial societies pg.
90 how did the great awakening transform the religious culture of colonial america.
clash of political cultures pg.
92 why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
why were eighteenth century colonial assemblies not fully democratic.
the impact of european ideas on american culture pg.
87 century of imperial war pg.
95 why did colonial americans support great britains wars against france.
how did european ideas affect eighteenth century american life.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase.
