chapter 6 life in colonial america 63 new england triangular trade mid atlantic colonies southern colonies magna carta pill of rights of 16s9 house of purgesses mayflower compact fundamental orders of connecticut john peter zenger pilgrims puritans creat awakening mercantilism atlantic slave trade cotton mather phillis wheatley questions what differences existed between the main regions of the thirteen colonies.
what was life like in colonial america.
what factors contributed to religious freedom in the thirteen colonies.
how did the economic system of mercantilism affect the thirteen colonies.
different patterns of life developed in three regions of the colonies based on differences in geography climate settler origins and economic activities.
in new england a short growing season cooler climates rocky soil and an influx of puritan settlers encouraged the development of small farms and the growth of fishing shipping and handicraft trades.
c in the southern colonies a long growing season and warmer climate as well as the arrival of mainly anglican settlers seeking to make their fortune encouraged the development of larger farms that often grew cash crops for sale to england.
along main water routes large plantations developed.
d part of the southern colonies economy was based on slave labor.
slaves grew cotton tobacco rice and indigo.
they were taken by force from africa and faced a horrific middle passage journey across the atlantic.
most southerners however did not own slaves.
e the middle atlantic colonies had greater ethnic and religious diversity than either new england or the southern colonies.
some of these colonies had once been under dutch rule and were conquered by the english in 1664.
the middle atlantic colonies had fertile soil and grew food crops.
name chapter 6 life in colonial america 65 new england the colonies of new england massachusetts new hampshire connecticut and rhode island had rocky soil and less fertile land.
since the new england colonies were the farthest north they had longer winters and a colder climate than the other colonies.
many new englanders had small farms where they grew crops for their own use.
others used the forests in the region for lumber and building ships.
these colonies were located near the ocean where there was an abundance of whales and fish.
large numbers of new englanders became sailors fishermen and merchants.
the practice of religion especially puritanism also remained important in new england.
new englanders frequently owned and manned ships.
they carried sugar from the west indies to new england where it was turned into rum.
the rum was carried to africa where it was traded for slaves.
new england merchants also carried sugar from the west indies to england.
their ships were then loaded with manufactured goods and sailed back to new england.
you will learn more about these triangular trades later in this chapter.
the 13 english colonies 1750 atiamic q new england middle colonies i i southern colonies 500 c a p if milps j uic vj i ivi 11j the middle atlantic colonies the middle atlantic colonies new york new jersey delaware and pennsylvania were located between new england and the southern colonies.
winters were not as harsh as in new england and summers were longer.
uncleared forests and fertile soils attracted many colonists to this area.
most of the settlers came from the netherlands holland germany swe den france and scotland.
settlers first the first job of the colonial farmer was to clear the land.
focused on cutting down the trees and removing stones and stumps from the soil so that it could be prepared for planting.
the forests of the middle atlantic colonies gave birth to an active lumbering and shipbuilding industry.
name chapter 6 life in colonial america 67 the main crops planted on a plantation were very labor intensive.
a successful harvest depended on slaves working from sunrise to sunset.
women usually worked the same hours as the men.
women were expected to return to the fields not long after giving birth to children.
the mortality death rate among slaves was high.
slave women were encouraged to have large numbers of children to replace slave losses.
the great majority of whites did not live on plantations.
they often farmed their land on a smaller scale.
applying what you have learned fa how did settlers to the thirteen colonies adapt to their physical environment.
fa how did the southern plantation system make that region unique.
a acting as an amateur historian a historical map shows the way an area was in the past.
the map below provides an outline of the thirteen english colonies.
using z the internet or your local or school library research the following fa identify each of the thirteen brit ish colonies by name.
j fa use different colors to show the three regions of colonial amer ica new england the middle i atlantic colonies and the south em colonies.
fa add other colors to show the j territories claimed by spain and france.
fa identify the appalachian moun j tains st lawrence river mis sissippi river lake erie lake ontario and long island.
j fa identify these ports and towns savannah georgia charleston s c raleigh n c james town va williamsburg va baltimore md philadelphia pa new york ny boston and plymouth ma.
9 9 name chapter 6 life in colonial america 69 the colonists enjoyed several institutions of representative government based on both english political traditions and new practices that emerged in the colonies.
during the middle ages england had developed traditions of liberty and limited self government that were unique in europe.
magna carta in 1215 the english king was forced by his barons to promise not to take away any free mans property or to imprison any free man without following procedures established by the laws of the land.
the great charter guaranteed individuals the right to a fair trial by their peers and forced the king to obtain the consent of a council of nobles before imposing any new taxes.
acting as an amateur.
historian t clause 29.
no freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or have his freehold or liberties taken away or be outlawed or sent away or any other wise destroyed nor will we pass upon him nor condemn him but by lawful judgment of his peers equals or by the law of the land.
we will sell to no man we will not deny or defer to any man either justice or right how did clause 29 of the magna carta help to guarantee the rights of individuals living in england.
why did this become an important feature of political life in the colonies.
the british parliament in the middle ages the english king summoned his nobles and representatives from counties and towns to show support for the crown.
parliament developed into a national legislature consisting of nobles and elected representatives.
new taxes had to be approved by parliament.
after two revolutions in the 1600s parliament achieved supremacy over the king.
bill of rights of 1689 after the glorious revolution of 1688 the rights of english subjects were confirmed by the bill of rights of 1689.
englands rulers agreed not to have a standing army or to impose new taxes without the permission of parliament.
the english bill of rights also guaranteed trial by jury the right to petition parliament and other personal freedoms as well as freedom of speech and debate in parliament.
chapter 6 life in colonial america 71 new yorks governor put zenger on trial.
zenger won his case when his lawyer andrew hamilton showed that his statements were true.
the case established the right of the press to criticize those in power so long as the writer told the truth.
what important individual rights and beliefs about government did the colonists bring from england.
what additional representative institutions did the american colonists create.
acting as an amateur historian select one of the thirteen colonies and conduct research on the internet or at school or your local library on how that colonys government operated.
include information on who ran the colony how laws were made and if the colony had its own court system.
the colonies also saw the growth of religious freedom.
the first two english colonies had people of very different religious backgrounds.
virginia was mainly founded by anglicans those who belonged to the church of england.
massachusetts was founded by pilgrims and puritans members of protestant groups who came to the americas to worship god in their own way.
in massachusetts bay colony puritans originally set high standards for church membership.
they wanted to promote virtue goodness.
puritans thought the members of their church were chosen by god and that only those elected would go to heaven.
each sunday was a day of rest in which the whole community went to church.
the minister often gave a sermon threatening sinners with the punishment of damnation after death.
puritans wore simple plain clothing.
observe the woman carrying a bible.
the puritans believed that a state endorsed religion would insure a bond between members of society helping to maintain order and stability.
they felt that having more than one religion might threaten social stability.
although they came to america to worship god in their own way they did not support religious toleration for others.
name chapter 6 life in colonial america 73 the importance of religion to the colonists was illustrated by the great awakening of the 1740s.
ministers emphasized the importance of religious feelings.
during the great awakening preachers like jonathan edwards and george whitefield often addressed large crowds in open fields.
they told listeners that god was merciful and that people could save themselves from damnation by repenting for their sins.
colonists were told to study the bible for themselves and many became more emotionally engaged in religion.
the great awakening emphasized peoples equality in the eyes of god.
the preachers of the great awakening were also strong supporters of religious free dom and toleration.
they wanted their listeners to accept christianity as an act of free will.
whitefield preaching.
imagine you are a reporter at the salem witchcraft trials or at a gathering during the first great awakening.
write a report about what you witness.
conduct research on the internet or in your local library about the development of religious toleration in the american colonies.
select one colony and summarize how it treated religious differences and beliefs in a written report.
mercantilism the economy of the british colonies was based on mercantilism.
under this economic system parliament passed laws controlling the trade of the colonies in order to benefit the mother country the aim was to get more gold and silver.
under mercantilism colonists were expected to sell their raw materials such as tobacco rice fur and fish at low prices to britain.
in exchange the colonists were supposed to buy british manufactured products such as glass paper and tea which were more expensive.
mercantilists believed this unequal trade would increase the wealth of the mother country european trade with theircolonies i gold silver cfur lumber foodstuffs i mother country low prices colonies 1 t high manufactured j prices manufactured goods chapter 6 life in colonial america 75 colonial society colonial society was divided into several social groups.
a handful of wealthy landowners and merchants stood at the top of colonial society then came independent farmers who worked their own land tradesmen shopkeepers and craftsmen working in towns and villages came next apprentices or servants were below them and at the very bottom of the colonial social ladder were unskilled laborers and slaves.
slavery and the slave trade one of the areas of greatest hardship and profit in colonial society was the slave trade.
no concern was given to the feelings or comfort of the victims of this trade.
slavers usually bought captured africans on the west coast of africa and put them on slave ships for the voyage to the americas.
enslaved africans were treated so harshly that many failed to survive the voyage.
traders were so greedy they sought to carry as many slaves as possible on their ships.
slaves were chained and crammed together below the deck where sitting or standing room was limited.
the air below deck was so stifling that some suffocated.
others tried to starve themselves or to jump over board.
when the slaves reached the americas they were sold off in auctions.
families were broken up.
captured africans experienced horrific conditions on the middle passage enslaved people made up a significant part of the population of colonial america.
the number of africans in new england grew from under 1 000 in 1700 to about 16 000 in the 1770s.
the number of slaves in the south was far greater reaching 125 000 by 1740.
enslaved men and women were owned by plantation owners farmers ministers doctors and merchants.
they were used to perform household chores and skilled jobs as well as field labor.
estimated african american population in the thirteen british colonies 1690 1740 year new england colonies middle atlantic colonies southern colonies 1690 905 2 472 13 307 1700 1 680 5 361 22 476 1710 2 585 6 218 36 063 1720 3 956 10 825 54 058 1730 6 118 11 683 73 220 1740 8 541 16 452 125 031 source historical statistics of the united states name chapter 6 life in colonial america 77 acting as an amateur historian t cotton mather was instrumental in influencing american religion and in starting the first great awakening.
his writings gave advice to young ministers on a wide range of topics such as performing virtuous acts poetry music and writing style.
this passage deals with educating young people where godly schools are not vigorously encouraged whole colonies will sink into a degenerate and contemptible condition and become horribly barbarous.
you will therefore pardon my freedom with you if i address you in the words of luther if ever there be any considerable blow given to the devils kingdom it must be by youth excellently educated.
it is a serious thing a weighty thing and a thing that hath much of the interest of christianity in it that youth be well trained and that schools and school masters be maintained.
learning is an unwelcome guest to the devil and therefore he would fain starve it out what did mather think might happen if colonists failed to educate their youth.
why did mather choose to quote the words of martin luther.
some of the earliest colonial writers were women like anne bradstreet 1612 1672 who wrote poems.
her poetry eloquently expressed the concerns of a puritan wife and mother.
she is considered by many to be the first american poet.
her collection of poems was the first book written by a woman to be published in the united states.
she helped lay the groundwork for other female writers in an era when most women tended to family and domestic matters.
benjamin franklin 1706 1790 was a printer publisher and scientist who became popular with the stories and sayings in poor richards almanac begun in 1733 and in his autobiography 1777.
franklin openly admitted that many of the sayings in poor richard were borrowed rather than coined by himself.
franklin once stated why give my readers bad lines of my own when good ones of other peoples are so plentiful nevertheless these sayings taken from many ages and nations became one of the bases for franklins international fame.
phillis wheatley 1753 1784 was an african who was kidnapped and brought to the colonies as a slave at the age of seven.
she soon learned to speak and write english taught by the daughter of her owner within 16 months she could read difficult passages in the bible.
she became a sensation in the 1760s when her poem on the death of the preacher george whitefield made her famous.
a constant theme running through her poetry was that of christian salvation.
chapter 6 life in colonial america 79 acting as an amateur historian investigating colonial america in this chapter you have learned about life in colonial america.
now you will have an opportunity to study one of the english colonies in greater depth.
your teacher will divide your class into thirteen small groups.
each group will be assigned one colony to research using classroom resources the school library or the internet.
for your colony your group should complete the checklist below.
after your checklist is completed share your results with the other groups for a final overview of colonial america.
it colony name year it was founded it reasons the colony was founded it its climate major landforms and bodies of water it population of the colony in 1700 1750 1775 it number of enslaved people in the colony at these select dates it major ethnic groups living in the colony it main religious groups in the colony it major economic activities it how the colony was governed it important events in the history of the colony chapter 6 life in colonial america 81 thirteen colonies economic and social life in colonies there were 13 colonies along the atlantic coast consisting of three distinct regions new england.
small farms merchants.
colder climates and rocky soil middle atlantic colonies.
fertile soils and uncleared forests people of many ethnic and religious backgrounds southern colonies.
warmer climates grew cash crops included larger plantations with slaves economy based on mercantilism.
colonists sold raw materials to britain.
britain sold finished goods to the colonies.
this brought wealth to britain.
colonial occupations.
most colonists were farmers.
many were also craftsmen.
colonial society.
wealthy landowners and merchants stood at the top independent farmers were next followed by craftsmen.
at the bottom were unskilled laborers and slaves.
colonial government freedom of religion english political traditions.
magna carta 1215.
guaranteed right of trial by jury king could not impose new taxes without consent.
parliament.
included lords and elected representatives in the commons.
english civil war.
parliament established supremacy over the king.
english bill of rights 1689.
guaranteed that englishmen had certain rights.
colonial self government.
house of burgesses 1619 mayflower compact 1620 massachusetts.
served as a haven to certain english religious groups pilgrims.
rhode island.
established religious toleration.
roger williams.
anne hutchinson.
first great awakening.
emphasized the power of religion in people s lives.
jonathan edwards.
george whitefield.
main features of the british colonies directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
use the diagram and your knowledge of social studies to answer questions 1 3.
1 which region of the thirteen colonies is represented by cluster a.
a frontier region b middle atlantic colonies c new england colonies d southern colonies triangular trade mostly small i farms shipbuilding short growing rocky soil season r lacked plentiful harsh winters fishing fertile soil trade large i farms moderate growing season navigable rivers fertile soil allowed grain exports few cities large plantations main crops mt tobacco indigo rice long growing tidewater season area name chapter 6 life in colonial america 83 6 with which statement would a puritan minister in the colony of massachusetts in 1660 have most likely agreed.
f all men and women are created equal hist 3 c j g no man should be required to worship against his will h differences of opinion are essential for a society to improve j both the government and church have a common purpose of promoting virtue 7 how was the virginia house of burgesses important to the development of democracy in the thirteen colonies.
a it was the first representative assembly in the colonies.
f hist 3 b b it created the first written constitution in america c it included a bill of rights to protect individual rights.
d it introduced the principle of electing judges.
8 in which colonial region did good harbors abundant forests rocky soil and a short growing season most influence the economy.
f southern colonies geog 11 a j g northwest territory h middle atlantic colonies j new england colonies use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
t he word of god requires that to maintain the peace and union of a people there should be an orderly and decent government established according to god to order and dispose of the affairs of the people at all seasons as occasion shall require.
we do associate ourselves to be as one public state or commonwealth.
this case houses the original fundamental orders of connecticut.
it is ordered that there shall be yearly two general assemblies or courts one in april the other in september following the first shall be called the court of election it shall be yearly chosen from time to time magistrates and other public officers as needed whereof one is to be chosen governor for the year 9 this passage from the fundamental orders of connecticut was important to the concept of a democratic society because it represented a an effort by the colonists to use force to resist the king ihst 3 b b a step toward self government in colonial america c an early attempt to institute voting rights for all colonists d an effort by the colonists to establish freedom of religion name chapter 6 life in colonial america 85 17 which of these events is in the correct order in which they occurred.
hist 3jalj a start of the virginia house of burgesses magna carta great awakening fundamental orders of connecticut b magna carta fundamental orders of connecticut the great awakening start of the virginia house of burgesses c fundamental orders of connecticut great awakening magna carta start of the virginia house of burgesses d magna carta start of the virginia house of burgesses fundamental orders of connecticut great awakening 18 which statement most accurately describes the people who were allowed to vote in elections of representatives to colonial assemblies in british america.
f they were colonists of means bom in america.
hist 3 a j g they were men who owned property.
h they were women who were able to read and write.
j they were colonists bom in england.
19 which geographic conditions discouraged the development of a plantation economy in the new england colonies.
a a wide coastal plain and an absence of good harbors b rocky soil and a short growing season c numerous rivers and a humid climate d flatlands and a lack of forests use the painting and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
20 the painting to the right by john singleton copley 1765 shows dr joseph warren.
this painting by copley is typical of paintings in colonial america in that it f shows someone in the professions uitwjj g is religious in nature h is a portrait j depicts a government official 21 which city in the thirteen colonies is correctly paired with a geographic feature that contributed to its growth.
a new orleans great lakes geog io b j b new york city atlantic ocean c charleston mississippi river d boston appalachian mountains 22 which best explains why colonial farmers settled near oceans or coastal waterways.
f it was safer since fewer native american indians lived there.
geog ii a j g colonial governments often paid farmers to settle there.
h the land was easier to clear since it had fewer trees and rocks.
j transportation by water of goods and crops was easier.
name the american revolution the road to independence ck of teks.
