chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 plymouth plantation carefully restored the modest village at plymouth looks today much as it did nearly four hundred years ago.
self government for soon the adult male settlers were assembling to make their own laws in open discussion town meetings a vital laboratory of liberty.
the pilgrims rst winter of 1620 1621 took a grisly toll.
only 44 out of the 102 survived.
at one time only 7 were well enough to lay the dead in their frosty graves.
yet when the mayower sailed back to eng land in the spring not a single one of the courageous band of separatists left.
as one of them wrote it is not with us as with other men whom small things can discourage god made his children prosperous so the pilgrims believed.
the next autumn that of 1621 brought bountiful harvests and with them the rst thanksgiving day in new eng land.
in time the frail colony found sound economic legs in fur sh and lumber.
the beaver and the bible were the early mainstays the one for the sustenance of the body the other for the sustenance of the soul.
plymouth proved that the eng lish could maintain themselves in this uninviting region.
the pilgrims were extremely fortunate in their leaders.
prominent among them was the cultured william bradford a self taught scholar who read hebrew greek latin french and dutch.
he was chosen governor thirty times in the annual elections.
among his major worries was his fear that independent nonpuritan settlers on their particular might corrupt his godly experiment in the wilderness.
bustling shing villages and other settlements did sprout to the north of plymouth on the storm lashed shores of massachusetts bay where many people were as much interested in cod as god.
quiet and quaint the little colony of plymouth was never important economically or numerically.
its population numbered only seven thousand by 1691 when still charterless it merged with its giant neighbor the massachusetts bay colony.
but the tiny settlement of pilgrims was big both morally and spiritually.
william bradford 1590 1657 wrote in of plymouth plantation thus out of small beginnings greater things have been produced by his hand that made all things of nothing and gives being to all things that are and as one small candle may light a thousand so the light here kindled hath shone unto many yea in some sort to our whole nation.
religion in the bay colony the bay colony bible commonwealth the separatist pilgrims were dedicated extremists the purest puritans.
more moderate puritans sought to reform the church of eng land from within.
though resented by bishops and monarchs they slowly gathered support especially in parliament.
but when charles i dismissed parliament in 1629 and sanctioned the antipuritan persecutions of the reactionary archbishop william laud many puritans saw catastrophe in the making.
in 1629 an energetic group of non separatist puritans fearing for their faith and for eng lands future secured a royal charter to form the massachusetts bay company.
they proposed to establish a sizable settlement in the infertile massachusetts area with boston soon becoming its hub.
stealing a march on both king and church the newcomers brought their charter with them.
for many years they used it as a kind of constitu map 3 1a sources of the puritan great migration to new england 1620 1650 the shaded areas indicate the main sources of the migration.
56n scotland tion out of easy reach of royal authority.
they steadfastly denied that they wanted to separate from the church of eng land only from its impurities.
but back in eng land the highly orthodox archbishop laud snorted that the bay colony puritans were swine which rooted in gods vineyard the massachusetts bay colony was singularly blessed.
the well equipped expedition of 1630 with eleven vessels carrying nearly a thousand immigrants started the colony off on a larger scale than any of the other eng lish settlements.
continuing turmoil in eng land tossed up additional enriching waves of puritans on the shores of massachusetts in the following decade.
during the great migration of the 1630s about seventy thousand refugees left eng land see map 3 1.
but not all of them were puritans and only about twenty thousand came to massachusetts.
many were attracted to the warm and fertile west indies especially the sugar rich island of barbados.
more puritans came to this caribbean islet than to all of massachusetts.
map 3 1b the great english migration ca.
1630 1642 much of the early history of the united states was written by new englanders who were not disposed to emphasize the larger exodus of english migrants to the caribbean islands.
when the mainland colonists declared independence in 1776 they hoped that these island outposts would join them but the existence of the british navy had a dissuading effect.
interactive map 54n irish sea ireland north sea en g l an d 2000 km.
england 2000 mi.
ea n st 50 mi.
devon to ches kent han english c 50n ne car l france 2w 0 50 00 apeake in st we o t 4w main sources of migration ngland 25 000 m fro land eng 000 000 uda 4 to berm districts dorset woolen districts 6w to new e n orth ameri ca hertfordshire essex woolen london bristol wiltshire somerset 50 km.
a norfolk n gl ia suffolk wales 52n 30w 60w 2e ibbe 0 0 s die 30n tropic of cancer africa an sea sou th ameri ca europe n atlantic ocean chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 many fairly prosperous educated persons immigrated to the bay colony including john winthrop a well to do pillar of eng lish society who became the colonys rst governor.
a successful attorney and manor lord in eng land winthrop eagerly accepted the offer to become governor of the massachusetts bay colony believing that he had a calling from god to lead the new religious experiment.
he served as governor or deputy governor for nineteen years.
the resources and skills of talented settlers like winthrop helped massachusetts prosper as fur trading shing and shipbuilding blossomed into important industries especially sh and ships.
the massachusetts bay colony rapidly shot to the fore as both the biggest and the most inuential of the new eng land outposts.
massachusetts also beneted from a shared sense of purpose among most of the rst settlers.
we shall be as a city upon a hill a beacon to humanity declared governor winthrop.
the puritan bay colonists believed that they had a covenant with god an agreement to build a holy society that would be a model for humankind.
building the bay colony these common convictions deeply shaped the infant colonys life.
soon after the colonists arrival the franchise was extended to all freemen adult males who belonged to the puritan congregations which in time came to be called collectively the congregational church.
unchurched men remained voteless in provincial elections as did women.
on this basis about two fths of adult males enjoyed the franchise in provincial affairs a far larger proportion than in contemporary eng land.
town governments which conducted much important business were even more inclusive.
there all male property holders and in some cases other residents as well enjoyed the priceless boon of publicly discussing local issues often with much heat and of voting on them by a majority rule show of hands.
yet the provincial government liberal by the standards of the time was not a democracy.
the able governor winthrop feared and distrusted the commons as the meaner sort and thought that democracy was the meanest and worst of all forms of government.
if the people be governors asked one puritan clergyman who shall be governed true the freemen annually elected the governor and his assistants as well as a representative assembly called the general court.
but only puritans the visible saints who alone were eligible for church membership could be freemen.
and according to the doctrine of the covenant the whole purpose of government was to enforce gods laws which applied to believers and nonbelievers alike.
moreover nonbelievers as well as believers paid taxes for the government supported church.
religious leaders thus wielded enormous inuence in the massachusetts bible commonwealth they powerfully inuenced admission to church membership by conducting public interrogations of persons claiming to have experienced conversion.
prominent among the early clergy was ery john cotton.
educated at eng lands cambridge university a puritan citadel he emigrated to massachusetts to avoid persecution for his criticism of the church of eng land.
in the bay colony he devoted his considerable learning to defending the governments duty to enforce religious rules.
profoundly pious he sometimes preached and prayed up to six hours in a single day.
but the power of the preachers was not absolute.
a congregation had the right to hire and re its minister and to set his salary.
clergymen were also barred from holding formal political ofce.
puritans in eng land had suffered too much at the hands of a political anglican clergy to permit in the new world another unholy union of religious and government power.
in a limited way the bay colonists thus endorsed the idea of the separation of church and state.
the puritans were a worldly lot despite or even because of their spiritual intensity.
like john winthrop they believed in the doctrine of a calling to do gods work on earth.
they shared in what was later called the protestant ethic which involved serious commitment to work and to engagement in worldly pursuits.
legend to the contrary they also enjoyed simple pleasures they ate plentifully drank heartily sang songs occasionally and made love mostly monogamously.
like other peoples of their time in both america and europe they passed laws aimed at making sure these plea sures stayed simple by repressing certain human instincts.
in new haven for example a young married couple was ned twenty shillings for the crime of kissing in public and in later years connecticut came to be dubbed the blue law state it was so named for the blue paper on which the repressive laws also known as sumptuary laws were printed.
yet to the puritans life was serious business and hell re was real a hell where sinners shriveled and shrieked in vain for divine mercy.
an immensely popular poem in new eng land selling one copy for every twenty people was clergyman michael wigglesworths puritans and dissenters day of doom 1662.
especially horrifying were his descriptions of the fate of the damned they cry they roar for anguish sore and gnaw their tongues for horrour.
but get away without delay christ pitties not your cry depart to hell there may you yell and roar eternally.
trouble in the bible commonwealth the bay colony enjoyed a high degree of social harmony stemming from common beliefs in its early years.
but even in this tightly knit community dissension soon appeared.
quakers who outed the authority of the puritan clergy were persecuted with nes oggings and banishment.
in one extreme case four quakers who deed expulsion one of them a woman were hanged on the boston common.
a sharp challenge to puritan orthodoxy came from anne hutchinson.
she was an exceptionally intelligent strong willed and talkative woman ultimately the mother of fourteen children.
swift and sharp in theological argument she carried to logical extremes the puritan doctrine of predestination.
she claimed that a holy life was no sure sign of salvation and that the truly saved need not bother to obey the law of either god or man.
this assertion known as antinomianism from the greek against the law was high heresy.
brought to trial in 1638 the quick witted hutchinson bamboozled her clerical inquisitors for days until she eventually boasted that she had come by her beliefs through a direct revelation from god.
this was even higher heresy.
the puritan magistrates had little choice but to banish her lest she pollute the entire puritan experiment.
with her family she set out on foot for rhode island though pregnant.
she nally moved to new york where she and all but one of her household were killed by indians.
back in the bay colony the pious john winthrop saw gods hand in her fate.
more threatening to the puritan leaders was a personable and popular salem minister roger williams.
williams was a young man with radical ideas and an unrestrained tongue.
an extreme separatist he hounded his fellow clergymen to make a clean break with the corrupt church of eng land.
he also challenged the legality of the bay colonys charter which he condemned for expropriating the land from the indians without anne hutchinson dissenter mistress hutchinson 1591 1643 held unorthodox views that challenged the authority of the clergy and the very integrity of the puritan experiment in the massachusetts bay colony.
an outcast in her day she has been judged a heroine in the eye of history.
this statue in her honor erected in the nineteenth century now graces the front of the boston massachusetts statehouse.
fair compensation.
as if all this were not enough he went on to deny the authority of civil government to regulate religious behavior a seditious blow at the puritan idea of governments very purpose.
their patience exhausted by 1635 the bay colony authorities found williams guilty of disseminating newe dangerous opinions and ordered him banished.
he was permitted to remain several months longer because of illness but he kept up his criticisms.
the outraged magistrates fearing that he might organize a rival colony of malcontents made plans to exile him to eng land.
but williams foiled them.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 the rhode island sewer 72w 70w 44n maine the smiling valley of the connecticut river one of the few highly fertile expanses of any size in all new england had meanwhile attracted a sprinkling of dutch and eng lish settlers.
hartford was founded in 1635 see 100 km.
new hampshire portsmouth n r connecticut 100 mi.
salem massachusetts cambridge bay boston hudson r springfield hartford connecticut 1635 1636 long island 42n plymouth providence rhode island new new haven haven plymouth pilgrims new england spreads out aided by friendly indians roger williams ed to the rhode island area in 1636 in the midst of a bitter winter.
at providence the courageous and far visioned williams built a baptist church probably the rst in america.
he established complete freedom of religion even for jews and catholics.
he demanded no oaths regarding religious beliefs no compulsory attendance at worship no taxes to support a state church.
he even sheltered the abused quakers although disagreeing sharply with their views.
williamss endorsement of religious tolerance made rhode island more liberal than any of the other eng lish settlements in the new world and more advanced than most old world communities as well.
those outcasts who clustered about roger williams enjoyed additional blessings.
they exercised simple manhood suffrage from the start though this broadminded practice was later narrowed by a property qualication.
opposed to special privilege of any sort the intrepid rhode islanders managed to achieve remarkable freedom of opportunity.
other scattered settlements soon dotted rhode island.
they consisted largely of malcontents and exiles some of whom could not bear the sti ing theological atmosphere of the bay colony.
many of these restless souls in rogues island including anne hutchinson had little in common with roger williams except being unwelcome anywhere else.
the puritan clergy back in boston sneered at rhode island as that sewer in which the lords debris had collected and rotted.
planted by dissenters and exiles rhode island became strongly individualistic and stubbornly independent.
with good reason little rhody was later known as the traditional home of the otherwise minded begun as a squatter colony in 1636 without legal standing it nally established rights to the soil when it secured a charter from parliament in 1644.
a huge bronze statue of the independent man appropriately stands today on the dome of the statehouse in providence.
portsmouth atlantic ocean colonies absorbed by massachusetts bay colony colonies founded by migrants from massachusetts bay colony map 3 2 seventeenth century new england settlements the massachusetts bay colony was the hub of new england.
all earlier colonies grew into it all later colonies grew out of it.
interactive map map 3 2.
the next year witnessed a spectacular beginning of the centuries long westward movement across the continent.
an energetic group of boston puritans led by the reverend thomas hooker swarmed as a body into the hartford area with the ailing mrs hooker carried on a horse litter.
three years later in 1639 the settlers of the new connecticut river colony drafted in open meeting a trailblazing document known as the fundamental orders.
it was in effect a modern constitution which established a regime democratically controlled by the substantial citizens.
essential features of the fundamental orders were later borrowed by connecticut for its colonial charter and ultimately for its state constitution.
another ourishing connecticut settlement began to spring up at new haven in 1638.
it was a prosperous community founded by puritans who contrived to set up an even closer church government alliance than the expansion of new england in massachusetts.
although only squatters without a charter the colonists dreamed of making new haven a bustling seaport.
but they fell into disfavor with charles ii as a result of having sheltered two of the judges who had condemned his father charles i to death.
in 1662 to the acute distress of the new havenites the crown granted a charter to connecticut that merged new haven with the more democratic settlements in the connecticut valley.
far to the north enterprising shermen and furtraders had been active on the coast of maine for a dozen or so years before the founding of plymouth.
after disheartening attempts at colonization in 1623 by sir ferdinando gorges this land of lakes and forests was absorbed by massachusetts bay after a formal purchase in 1677 from the gorges heirs.
it remained a part of massachusetts for nearly a century and a half before becoming a separate state.
granite ribbed new hampshire also sprang from the shing and trading activities along its narrow coast.
it was absorbed in 1641 by the grasping bay colony under a strained interpretation of the massachusetts charter.
the king annoyed by this display of greed arbitrarily separated new hampshire from massachusetts in 1679 and made it a royal colony.
puritans versus indians the spread of eng lish settlements inevitably led to clashes with the indians who were particularly weak in new eng land.
shortly before the pilgrims had arrived at plymouth in 1620 an epidemic probably triggered by contact with eng lish shermen had swept through the coastal tribes and killed more than threequarters of the native people.
deserted indian elds ready for tillage greeted the plymouth settlers and scattered skulls and bones provided grim evidence of the impact of the disease.
in no position to resist the eng lish incursion the local wampanoag indians at rst befriended the settlers.
cultural accommodation was facilitated by squanto a wampanoag who had learned eng lish from a ships captain who had kidnapped him some years earlier.
the wampanoag chieftain massasoit signed a treaty with the plymouth pilgrims in 1621 and helped them celebrate the rst thanksgiving after the autumn harvests that same year.
as more eng lish settlers arrived and pushed inland into the connecticut river valley confrontations between indians and whites ruptured these peaceful relations.
hostilities exploded in 1637 between the attack on a pequot fort during the pequot war of 1637 engraving by j w barber 1830 this was the rst war between natives and europeans in british north america.
it culminated in the puritan militias vicious burning out and slaughtering of nearly three hundred pequot men women and children.
the defeat of the pequots eliminated armed resistance to the new settlements of new haven and guildford.
the connecticut valley would not see signicant indian troubles again for forty years when the indians of new england united in their nal stand against the encroachments of english settlers king philips war.
king philip also known as metacom is shown on the right.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 eng lish settlers and the powerful pequot tribe.
besieging a pequot village on connecticuts mystic river english militiamen and their narragansett indian allies set re to the indian wigwams and shot the eeing survivors.
the slaughter wrote a brutal nish to the pequot war virtually annihilated the pequot tribe and inaugurated four decades of uneasy peace between puritans and indians.
lashed by critics in eng land the puritans made some feeble efforts at converting the remaining indians to christianity although puritan missionary zeal never equaled that of the catholic spanish and french.
a mere handful of indians were gathered into puritan praying towns to make the acquaintance of the english god and to learn the ways of eng lish culture.
the indians only hope for resisting eng lish encroachment lay in intertribal unity a pan indian alliance against the swiftly spreading eng lish settlements.
in 1675 massasoits son metacom called king philip by the eng lish forged such an alliance and mounted a series of coordinated assaults on eng lish villages throughout new eng land.
frontier settlements were especially hard hit and refugees fell back toward the relative safety of boston.
when the war ended in 1676 fty two puritan towns had been attacked and twelve destroyed entirely.
hundreds of colonists and many more indians lay dead.
metacoms wife and son were sold into slavery he himself was captured beheaded and drawn and quartered.
his head was carried on a pike back to plymouth where it was mounted on grisly display for years.
king philips war slowed the westward march of eng lish settlement in new eng land for several decades.
but the war in icted a lasting defeat on new eng lands indians.
drastically reduced in numbers dispirited and disbanded they thereafter posed only sporadic threats to the new eng land colonists.
seeds of colonial unity and independence a path breaking experiment in union was launched in 1643 when four colonies banded together to form the new eng land confederation.
the eng lish civil war was then deeply distracting old eng land throwing the colonists upon their own resources.
the primary purpose of the confederation was defense against foes or potential foes notably the indians the french and the dutch.
purely intercolonial problems such as run away servants and criminals who had ed from one colony to another also came within the jurisdiction of the confederation.
each member colony regardless of size wielded two votes an arrangement highly displeasing to the most populous colony massachusetts bay.
the confederation was essentially an exclusive puritan club.
it consisted of the two massachusetts colonies the bay colony and bantam sized plymouth and the two connecticut colonies new haven and the scattered valley settlements.
the puritan leaders blackballed rhode island as well as the maine outposts.
these places it was charged harbored too many heretical or otherwise undesirable characters.
shockingly one of the maine towns had made a tailor its mayor and had even sheltered an excommunicated minister of the gospel.
weak though it was the confederation was the rst notable milestone on the long and rocky road toward colonial unity.
the delegates took tottering but longoverdue steps toward acting together on matters of intercolonial importance.
rank and le colonists for their part received valuable experience in delegating their votes to properly chosen representatives.
back in eng land the king had paid little attention to the american colonies during the early years of their planting.
they were allowed in effect to become semiautonomous commonwealths.
this era of benign neglect was prolonged when the crown struggling to retain its power became enmeshed during the 1640s in civil wars with the parliamentarians.
but when charles ii was restored to the eng lish throne in 1660 see table 3 1 the royalists and their church of eng land allies were once more rmly in the saddle.
puritan hopes of eventually purifying the old eng lish church withered.
worse charles ii was determined to take an active aggressive hand in the management of the colonies.
his plans ran headlong against the habits that decades of relative independence had bred in the colonists.
deepening colonial deance was nowhere more glaringly revealed than in massachusetts.
one of the kings agents in boston was mortied to nd that royal orders had no more effect than old issues of the london gazette.
punishment was soon forthcoming.
as a slap at massachusetts charles ii gave rival connecticut in 1662 a sea to sea charter grant which legalized the squatter settlements.
the very next year the outcasts in rhode island received a new charter which gave kingly sanction to the most religiously tolerant confederation and dominion in new england table 3 1 the stuart dynasty in eng land name reign relation to america james i 1603 1625 charles i 1625 1649 interregnum 1649 1660 charles ii 1660 1685 james ii 1685 1688 william mary 1689 1702 mary died 1694 va plymouth founded separatists persecuted civil wars 1642 1649 mass md.
founded commonwealth protectorate oliver cromwell the restoration carolinas pa n y founded conn chartered catholic trend glorious revolution 1688 king williams war 1689 1697 see p 29 for predecessors p 113 for successors.
government yet devised in america.
a nal and crushing blow fell on the stiff necked bay colony in 1684 when its precious charter was revoked by the london authorities.
andros promotes the first american revolution massachusetts suffered further humiliation in 1686 when the dominion of new eng land was created by royal authority see map 3 3.
unlike the homegrown new eng land confederation it was imposed from london.
embracing at rst all of new eng land it was expanded two years later to include new york and east and west jersey.
the dominion also aimed at bolstering colonial defense in the event of war with the indians and hence from the imperial viewpoint of parliament was a statesmanlike move.
more importantly the dominion of new eng land was designed to promote urgently needed efciency in the administration of the eng lish navigation laws.
those laws reected the intensifying colonial rivalries of the seventeenth century.
they sought to stitch englands overseas possessions more tightly to the motherland by throttling american trade with countries not ruled by the eng lish crown.
like colonial peoples everywhere the americans chafed at such con nements and smuggling became an increasingly common and honorable occupation.
at the head of the new dominion stood autocratic sir edmund andros an able eng lish military man conscientious but tactless.
establishing headquarters in puritanical boston he generated much hostility by his open af liation with the despised church of eng land.
the colonists were also outraged by his noisy and sabbath profaning soldiers who were accused of teaching the people to drink blaspheme curse and damn andros was prompt to use the mailed st.
he ruthlessly curbed the cherished town meetings laid heavy restrictions on the courts the press and the schools and revoked all land titles.
dispensing with the popular assemblies he taxed the people without the consent of their duly elected representatives.
he also strove to enforce the unpopular navigation laws and suppress smuggling.
liberty loving colonists accustomed to unusual privileges during long decades of neglect were goaded to the verge of revolt.
the people of old eng land soon taught the people of new eng land a few lessons in resisting oppression.
in 1688 1689 they engineered the memorable glorious or bloodless revolution.
dethroning the despotic and unpopular catholic james ii they enthroned the protestant rulers of the netherlands the dutch born william iii and his eng lish wife mary ii daughter of james ii.
when the news of the glorious revolution reached america the ramshackle dominion of new eng land collapsed like a house of cards.
a boston mob catching the fever rose against the existing regime.
sir edmund andros attempted to ee in womens clothing but was betrayed by boots protruding beneath his dress.
he was hastily shipped off to eng land.
massachusetts though rid of the despotic andros did not gain as much from the upheaval as it had hoped.
in 1691 it was arbitrarily made a royal colony with a new charter and a new royal governor.
the permanent loss of the ancient charter was a staggering blow to the proud puritans who never fully recovered.
worst of all the privilege of voting once a monopoly of church chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 andross dominion of new england 70w 200 km.
maine mass.
new hampshire five nations iroquois atlantic ocean massachusetts bay plymouth n y conn r i pa 40n md.
sir edmund andros 1637 1714 a boston broadside urging him to surrender 1689 after being expelled from new england andros eventually returned to the new world as governor of virginia 1692 1697.
members was now to be enjoyed by all qualied male property holders.
eng lands glorious revolution reverberated throughout the colonies from new eng land to the chesapeake.
inspired by the challenge to the crown in old eng land many colonists seized the occasion to strike against royal authority in america.
unrest rocked both new york and maryland from 1689 to 1691 until newly appointed royal governors restored a semblance of order.
most importantly the new monarchs relaxed the royal grip on colonial trade inaugurating a period of salutary neglect when the much resented navigation laws were only weakly enforced.
yet residues remained of charles iis effort to assert tighter administrative control over his empire.
more eng lish ofcials judges clerks customs ofcials east jersey west jersey n map 3 3 andross dominion of new england interactive map now staffed the courts and strolled the wharves of english america.
many were incompetent corrupt hacks who knew little and cared less about american affairs.
appointed by inuential patrons in far off eng land they blocked the rise of local leaders to positions of political power by their very presence.
aggrieved americans viewed them with mounting contempt and resentment as the eighteenth century wore on.
old netherlanders at new netherland late in the sixteenth century the oppressed people of the netherlands unfurled the standard of rebellion against catholic spain.
after bloody and protracted dutch explorers ocratic practices and the governors appointed by the company as directors general were usually harsh and despotic.
religious dissenters who opposed the ofcial dutch reformed church were regarded with suspicion and for a while quakers were savagely abused.
in response to repeated protests by the aggravated colonists tadoussac 1600 50 100 km.
w trois rivires 1634 n in qu e a ta is moh uo on aw q o eid k se sq ca d su ne r l an a no o ir cayu ndag ga a d an rensselaerwyck 1630 fort orange 1614 p ok ew on n l i ak 45n esopus 1653 hudson a n g r he mo salem 1630 boston 1630 plymouth 1620 an o k plymouth et rhode island connecticut new haven 40n yonkers 1646 new amsterdam 1626 ue h a delaware nn r pe a na le new sweden massachusetts bay gl n connecticut r an mahic st ro en l aw lake champlain rio hu n be r re ce c fort richelieu 1642 n g o montral 1642 n al ma fr beauport qubec 1608 an ce mic th e n ew n e n tinicum 1643 fort christina 1638 fort casimir 1651 fort nya elfsborg 1643 na nt o ic maryland k e swaanendael 1631 destroyed 1632 st marys 1634 pow hata n p esa ch virginia 70w area of english settlement y jamestown at l a n t i c ocean area of dutch settlement a eake b ghting they nally succeeded with the aid of protestant eng land in winning their independence.
the seventeenth century the era of rembrandt and other famous artists was a golden age in dutch history.
this vigorous little lowland nation nally emerged as a major commercial and naval power and then it ungratefully challenged the supremacy of its former benefactor eng land.
three great anglo dutch naval wars were fought in the seventeenth century with as many as a hundred ships on each side.
the sturdy dutch dealt blows about as heavy as they received.
the dutch republic also became a leading colonial power with by far its greatest activity in the east indies.
there it maintained an enormous and protable empire for over three hundred years.
the dutch east india company was virtually a state within a state and at one time supported an army of 10 000 men and a eet of 190 ships 40 of them men of war.
seeking greater riches this enterprising company employed an eng lish explorer henry hudson.
disregarding orders to sail northeast he ventured into delaware bay and new york bay in 1609 and then ascended the hudson river hoping that at last he had chanced upon the coveted shortcut through the continent.
but as the event proved he merely led a dutch claim to a magnicently wooded and watered area.
much less powerful than the mighty dutch east india company was the dutch west india company which maintained protable enterprises in the caribbean.
at times it was less interested in trading than in raiding and at one fell swoop in 1628 captured a eet of spanish trea sure ships laden with loot worth 15 million.
the company also established outposts in africa and a thriving sugar industry in brazil which for several decades was its principal center of activity in the new world.
new netherland in the beautiful hudson river area was planted in 1623 1624 on a permanent basis see map 3 4.
established by the dutch west india company for its quick prot fur trade it was never more than a secondary interest of the founders.
the companys most brilliant stroke was to buy manhattan island from the indians who did not actually own it for virtually worthless trinkets twenty two thousand acres of what is now perhaps the most valuable real estate in the world for pennies per acre.
new amsterdam later new york city was a company town.
it was run by and for the dutch company in the interests of the stockholders.
the investors had no enthusiasm for religious toleration free speech or dem area of french settlement 75w area of swedish settlement map 3 4 early settlements in the middle colonies with founding dates interactive map chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 new york aristocrats this prosperous family exemplied the comfortable lives and aristocratic pretensions of the hudson river lords in colonial new york.
a local body with limited lawmaking power was nally established.
this picturesque dutch colony took on a strongly aristocratic tint and retained it for generations.
vast feudal estates fronting the hudson river known as patroonships were granted to promoters who agreed to settle fty people on them.
one patroonship in the albany area was slightly larger than the later state of rhode island.
colorful little new amsterdam attracted a cosmopolitan population as is common in seaport towns.
twenty three jews arrived in 1654 refugees from religious persecution in catholic brazil a harbinger of the citys later reputation as a haven for the homeless and the harried.
a french jesuit missionary visiting in the 1640s noted that eighteen different languages were being spoken in the streets.
new yorks later babel of immigrant tongues was thus foreshadowed.
friction with english and swedish neighbors vexations beset the dutch company colony from the beginning.
the directors general were largely incompetent.
company shareholders demanded their dividends even at the expense of the colonys welfare.
the indians infuriated by dutch cruelties retaliated with horrible massacres.
as a defense mea sure the hardpressed settlers on manhattan island erected a stout wall from which wall street derives its name.
new eng land was hostile to the growth of its dutch neighbor and the people of connecticut nally ejected intruding hollanders from their verdant valley.
the swedes also trespassed on dutch preserves from 1638 to 1655 by planting the anemic colony of new sweden on the delaware river see map 3 4.
this was the golden age of sweden during and following the thirty years war of 1618 1648 in which its brilliant king gustavus adolphus had carried the torch for protestantism.
this outburst of energy in sweden caused it to enter the costly colonial game in america though on something of a shoestring.
resenting the swedish intrusion on the delaware the dutch dispatched a small military expedition in 1655.
it was led by the ablest of the directors general peter stuyvesant who had lost a leg while soldiering in the west indies and was dubbed father wooden leg by the indians.
the main fort fell after a bloodless siege whereupon swedish rule came to an abrupt end.
the colonists were absorbed by new netherland.
new sweden never important soon faded away leaving behind in later delaware a sprinkling of swedish place names and swedish log cabins the rst in america as well as an admixture of swedish blood.
the dutch plant new york new amsterdam 1664 the future metropolis already a bustling port is shown here as it was in the year that the english took over new netherland and renamed it new york.
dutch residues in new york lacking vitality and representing only a secondary commercial interest of the dutch new netherland lay under the menacing shadow of the vigorous english colonies to the north.
in addition it was honeycombed with new eng land immigrants.
numbering about one half of new netherlands ten thousand souls in 1664 they might in time have seized control from within.
the days of the dutch on the hudson were numbered for the eng lish regarded them as intruders.
in 1664 after the imperially ambitious charles ii had granted the area to his brother the duke of york a strong eng lish squadron appeared off the decrepit defenses of new amsterdam.
a fuming peter stuyvesant short of all munitions except courage was forced to surrender without ring a shot.
new amsterdam was thereupon renamed new york in honor of the duke of york.
eng land won a splendid harbor strategically located in the middle of the mainland colonies and the stately hudson river penetrating the interior.
with the removal of this foreign wedge the eng lish banner now waved triumphantly over a solid stretch of territory from maine to the carolinas.
the conquered dutch province tenaciously retained many of the illiberal features of earlier days.
an autocratic spirit survived and the aristocratic element gained strength when certain corrupt eng lish governors granted immense acreage to their favorites.
inuential landowning families such as the livingstons and the de lanceys wielded disproportionate power in the affairs of colonial new york.
these monopolistic land policies combined with the lordly at mosphere discouraged many european immigrants from coming.
the physical growth of new york was correspondingly retarded.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 quakers in the colonial era quakers or friends were renowned for their simplicity of architecture dress manner and speech.
they also distinguished themselves from most other protestant denominations by allowing women to speak in quaker meetings and to share in making decisions for the church and the family.
the dutch peppered place names over the land including harlem haarlem brooklyn breuckelen and hell gate hellegat.
they likewise left their imprint on the gambrel roofed architecture.
as for social customs and folkways no other foreign group of comparable size has made so colorful a contribution.
noteworthy are easter eggs santa claus wafes sauerkraut bowling sleighing skating and kolf golf a dangerous game played with heavy clubs and forbidden in settled areas.
penns holy experiment in pennsylvania a remarkable group of dissenters commonly known as quakers arose in eng land during the mid 1600s.
their name derived from the report that they quaked when under deep religious emotion.
ofcially they were known as the religious society of friends.
quakers were especially offensive to the authorities both religious and civil.
they refused to support the established church of eng land with taxes.
they built simple meetinghouses congregated without a paid clergy and spoke up themselves in meetings when moved.
believing that they were all children in the sight of god they kept their broad brimmed hats on in the presence of their betters and addressed others with simple thee s and thou s rather than with conventional titles.
they would take no oaths because jesus had commanded swear not at all this pecu liarity often embroiled them with government ofcials for test oaths were still required to establish the fact that a person was not a roman catholic.
the quakers beyond a doubt were a people of deep conviction.
they abhorred strife and warfare and refused military ser vice.
as advocates of passive resistance they would turn the other cheek and rebuild their meetinghouse on the site where their enemies had torn it down.
their courage and devotion to principle nally triumphed.
although at times they seemed stubborn and unreasonable they were a simple devoted democratic people contending in their own high minded way for religious and civic freedom.
william penn a wellborn and athletic young englishman was attracted to the quaker faith in 1660 when only sixteen years old.
his father disapproving administered a sound ogging.
after various adventures in the army the best portrait of the peaceful quaker has him in armor the youth rmly embraced the despised faith and suffered much persecution.
the courts branded him a saucy and impertinent fellow.
several hundred of his less fortunate fellow quakers died of cruel treatment and thousands more were ned ogged or cast into dank prisons.
the quakers in pennsylvania penns thoughts naturally turned to the new world where a sprinkling of quakers had already ed notably to rhode island north carolina and new jersey.
eager to establish an asylum for his people he also hoped to experiment with liberal ideas in government and at the same time make a prot.
finally in 1681 he managed to secure from the king an immense grant of fertile land in consideration of a monetary debt owed to his deceased father by the crown.
the king called the area pennsylvania penns woodland in honor of the sire.
the modest son fearing that critics would accuse him of naming it after himself sought unsuccessfully to change the name.
pennsylvania was by far the best advertised of all the colonies.
its founder the rst american advertising man sent out paid agents and distributed countless pamphlets printed in eng lish dutch french and german.
unlike the lures of many other american real estate promoters then and later penns inducements were generally truthful.
he especially welcomed forward looking spirits and substantial citizens including industrious carpenters masons shoemakers and other manual workers.
his liberal land policy which encouraged substantial holdings was instrumental in attracting a heavy inow of immigrants.
quaker pennsylvania and its neighbors penn formally launched his colony in 1681.
his task was simplied by the presence of several thousand squatters dutch swedish eng lish welsh who were already scattered along the banks of the delaware river.
philadelphia meaning brotherly love in greek was more carefully planned than most colonial cities and consequently enjoyed wide and attractive streets.
penn farsightedly bought land from the indians including chief tammany later patron saint of new yorks political tammany hall.
his treatment of the native peoples was so fair that the quaker broad brims went among them unarmed and even employed them as baby sitters.
for a brief period pennsylvania seemed the promised land of amicable indian white relations.
some southern tribes even migrated to pennsylvania seeking the quaker haven.
but ironically quaker tolerance proved the undoing of quaker indian policy.
as non quaker european immigrants ooded into the province they undermined the quakers own benevolent policy toward the indians.
the feisty scots irish were particularly unpersuaded by quaker idealism.
penns treaty by edward hicks the peace loving quaker founder of pennsylvania made a serious effort to live in harmony with the indians as this treaty signing scene illustrates.
but the westward thrust of white settlement eventually caused friction between the two groups as in other colonies.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 in a boston lecture in 1869 ralph waldo emerson 1803 1882 declared the sect of the quakers in their best representatives appear to me to have come nearer to the sublime history and genius of christ than any other of the sects.
penns new proprietary regime was unusually liberal and included a representative assembly elected by the landowners.
no tax supported state church drained coffers or demanded allegiance.
freedom of worship was guaranteed to all residents although penn under pressure from london was forced to deny catholics and jews the privilege of voting or holding ofce.
the death penalty was imposed only for treason and murder as compared with some two hundred capital crimes in eng land.
among other noteworthy features no provision was made by the peace loving quakers of pennsylvania for a military defense.
no restrictions were placed on immigration and naturalization was made easy.
the humane quakers early developed a strong dislike of black slavery and in the genial glow of pennsylvania some progress was made toward social reform.
with its many liberal features pennsylvania attracted a rich mix of ethnic groups.
they included numerous religious mists who were repelled by the harsh practices of neighboring colonies.
this quaker refuge boasted a surprisingly modern at mosphere in an unmodern age and to an unusual degree afforded economic opportunity civil liberty and religious freedom.
even so blue laws prohibited ungodly revelers stage plays playing cards dice games and excessive hilarity.
under such generally happy auspices penns brainchild grew lustily.
the quakers were shrewd businesspeople and in a short time the settlers were exporting grain and other foodstuffs.
within two years philadelphia claimed three hundred houses and twenty ve hundred people.
within nineteen years by 1700 the colony was surpassed in population and wealth only by long established virginia and massachusetts.
william penn who altogether spent about four years in pennsylvania was never fully appreciated by his colonists.
his governors some of them incompetent and tactless quarreled bitterly with the people who were constantly demanding greater political control.
penn himself became too friendly with james ii the deposed catholic king.
thrice arrested for treason thrust for a time into a debtors prison and af icted by a paralytic stroke he died full of sorrows.
his enduring monument was not only a noble experiment in government but also a new commonwealth.
based on civil and religious liberty and dedicated to freedom of conscience and worship it held aloft a hopeful torch in a world of semidarkness.
small quaker settlements ourished next door to pennsylvania.
new jersey was started in 1664 when two noble proprietors received the area from the duke of york.
a substantial number of new eng landers including many whose weary soil had petered out ocked to the new colony.
one of the proprietors sold west new jersey in 1674 to a group of quakers who here set up a sanctuary even before pennsylvania was launched.
east new jersey was also acquired in later years by the quakers whose wings were clipped in 1702 when the crown combined the two jerseys in a royal colony.
swedish tinged delaware consisted of only three counties two at high tide the witticism goes and was named after lord de la warr the harsh military governor who had arrived in virginia in 1610.
harboring some quakers and closely associated with penns prosperous colony delaware was granted its own assembly in 1703.
but until the american revolution it remained under the governor of pennsylvania.
the middle way in the middle colonies the middle colonies new york new jersey delaware and pennsylvania enjoyed certain features in common.
in general the soil was fertile and the expanse of land was broad unlike rock bestrewn new eng land.
pennsylvania new york and new jersey came to be known as the bread colonies by virtue of their heavy exports of grain.
rivers also played a vital role.
broad languid streams notably the susquehanna the delaware and the hudson tapped the fur trade of the interior and beckoned adventuresome spirits into the backcountry.
the rivers had few cascading waterfalls unlike new eng lands and hence presented little inducement to milling or manufacturing with water wheel power.
a surprising amount of industry nonetheless hummed in the middle colonies.
virginal forests abounded for lumbering and shipbuilding.
the presence of deep river estuaries and landlocked harbors a seventeenth century valuables cabinet n 1999 a boatyard worker on cape cod and his sister a new hampshire teacher inherited a small 20 pound 16 inch high chest that had always stood on their grandmothers hall table known in the family as the franklin chest eager to learn more about it they set out to discover the original owner tracing their family genealogy and consulting with furniture experts.
in january 2000 this rare seventeenth century cabinet its full provenance now known appeared on the auction block and sold for a record 2 4 million to the peabody essex museum in salem massachusetts.
no less extraordinary than the price was the history of its creator and its owners embodied in the piece.
salem cabinetmaker james symonds 1636 1726 had made the chest for his relatives joseph pope 1650 1712 and bathsheba folger 1652 1726 to commemorate their 1679 marriage.
symonds carved the popes initials and the date i on the door of the cabinet.
he also put elaborate s curves on the sides remarkably similar to the mannerist carved oak paneling produced in norfolk england from which his own cabinetmaker father had emigrated.
behind the chests door are ten drawers where the popes would have kept jewelry money deeds and writing materials.
surely they prized the chest as a sign of re nement to be shown off in their best room a sentiment passed down through the next thirteen generations even as the popes identities were lost.
the chest may have become known as the franklin chest because bathsheba was benjamin franklins aunt but also because that identication appealed more to descendants ashamed that the quaker popes whose own parents had been persecuted for their faith were virulent accusers during the salem witch trials of 1692.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 stimulated both commerce and the growth of seaports such as new york and philadelphia.
even albany more than a hundred miles up the hudson was a port of some consequence in colonial days.
the middle colonies were in many respects midway between new eng land and the southern plantation group.
except in aristocratic new york the landholdings were generally intermediate in size smaller than in the plantation south but larger than in small farm new eng land.
local government lay somewhere between the personalized town meeting of new eng land and the diffused county government of the south.
there were fewer industries in the middle colonies than in new eng land more than in the south.
yet the middle colonies which in some ways were the most american part of america could claim certain distinctions in their own right.
generally speaking the population was more ethnically mixed than that of other settlements.
the people were blessed with an unusual degree of religious toleration and democratic control.
earnest and devout quakers in particular made a compassionate contribution to human freedom out of all proportion to their numbers.
desirable land was more easily acquired in the middle colonies than in new eng land or in the tidewater south.
one result was that a considerable amount of economic and social democracy prevailed though less so in aristocratic new york.
modern minded benjamin franklin often regarded as the most representative american personality of his era was a child of the middle colonies.
although it is true that franklin was born a yankee in puritanical boston he entered philadelphia as a seventeen yearold in 1720 with a loaf of bread under each arm and immediately found a congenial home in the urbane open at mosphere of what was then north americas biggest city.
one pennsylvanian later boasted that franklin came to life at seventeen in philadelphia by the time franklin arrived in the city of brotherly love the american colonies were themselves coming to life population was growing robustly.
transportation and communication were gradually improving.
the british for the most part continued their handsoff policies leaving the colonists to fashion their own local governments run their own churches and develop networks of intercolonial trade.
as people and products crisscrossed the colonies with increasing frequency and in increasing volume americans began to realize that far removed from mother eng land they were not merely surviving but truly thriving.
chronology martin luther begins protestant reformation 1642 eng lish civil war john calvin of geneva publishes institutes of the christian religion new eng land confederation formed pilgrims sail on the mayower to plymouth bay william bradford completes of plymouth plantation dutch found new netherland new netherland conquers new sweden charles i dismisses parliament and persecutes puritans eng land seizes new netherland from dutch east and west jersey colonies founded puritans found massachusetts bay colony roger williams convicted of heresy and founds rhode island colony 1675 king philips war 1635 william penn founds pennsylvania colony 1635 connecticut and new haven colonies founded royal authority creates dominion of new eng land pequot war anne hutchinson banished from massachusetts colony 1688 glorious revolution overthrows stuarts and dominion of new eng land connecticuts fundamental orders drafted varying viewpoints key terms people to know calvinism 46 predestination 47 conversion 47 puritans 47 separatists 47 mayower compact 47 massachusetts bay colony 49 great migration 49 antinomianism 51 fundamental orders 52 pequot war 54 king philips war 54 eng lish civil war 54 dominion of new eng land 55 navigation laws 55 glorious or bloodless revolution 55 salutary neglect 56 patroonships 58 blue laws 62 martin luther john calvin william bradford john winthrop anne hutchinson roger williams massasoit metacom king philip charles ii sir edmund andros william iii mary ii henry hudson peter stuyvesant duke of york william penn europeanizing america or americanizing europe.
t he history of discovery and colonization raises perhaps the most fundamental question about all american history.
should it be understood as the extension of european civilization into the two continents of the new world or as the gradual development of uniquely american cultures.
an older school of thought tended to emphasize the europeanization of america.
historians of that persuasion paid close attention to the situation in europe particularly eng land and spain in the fteenth and sixteenth centuries.
they also focused on the exportation of the values and institutions of the mother countries to the new lands in the western sea.
although some historians also examined the transforming effect of america on europe this approach too remained essentially eurocentric.
more recently historians have concentrated on the distinctiveness of america.
the concern with european origins has evolved into a comparative treatment of european settlements in the new world.
eng land spain holland and france now attract more attention for the divergent kinds of societies they fostered in america than for the way they commonly pursued old world ambitions in the new.
the newest trend to emerge is a transatlantic history that views european empires and their american colonies as part of a process of cultural cross fertilization affecting not only the colonies but europe and africa as well.
this less eurocentric approach has also changed the way historians explain the colonial development of america.
rather than telling the story of colonization as the imposition of european ways of life through discovery and conquest historians increasingly view the colonial period as one of contact and adaptation between european african and native american ways of life.
scholars including richard white alfred crosby william cronon karen kupperman and timothy silver have enhanced understanding of the cultural as well as the physical transformations that resulted from contact.
an environment of forests and meadows for example gave way to a landscape of elds and fences as europeans sought to replicate the agricultural villages they had known in europe.
aggressive deforestation even produced climatic changes as treeless tracts made for colder winters hotter summers and earth gouging oods.
ramon gutierrezs when jesus came the corn mothers went away 1991 has expanded the colonial stage to include interactions between spanish settlers and native americans in the southwest.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 j h elliotts magisterial work empires of the atlantic world 2006 makes brilliant use of the comparative approach to illuminate the worlds of the british and spanish empires.
spain had a grand imperial plan that it pursued with notable consistency exclude jews and moors muslims from its domains convert the native peoples to catholicism follow military conquest with military rule and eventually defer to colonial elites for the orderly administration of its possessions.
britain had no comparably systematic plan.
it showed relatively little interest in converting the indians tolerated all kinds of immigrants to its colonies long left them alone to cultivate institutions of self government and representative democracy and when it eventually tried to tighten its imperial grip pressured local elites into open revolt.
the two empires left consequential and contrasting legacies of political stability in the united states and chronic political turmoil in latin america.
as one reviewer summarized the argument george washington could draw on an inherited political culture whereas the great latin american liberator simn bolvar had to invent one the variety of american societies that emerged out of the interaction of europeans and native americans is now well appreciated.
early histories by esteemed historians like perry miller exaggerated the extent to which the new eng land puritan experience de ned the essence of america.
not only did these historians overlook non eng lish experiences but they failed to recognize the diversity in motives methods and consequences that existed even within eng lish colonization.
the numbers alone tell an interesting story.
by 1700 about 220 000 eng lish colonists had immigrated to the caribbean about 120 000 to the southern mainland colonies and only about 40 000 to the middle atlantic and new eng land colonies although by the mid eighteenth century those headed for the latter destination would account for more than half of the total.
studies such as richard s dunns sugar and slaves 1972 emphasize the importance of the caribbean in early eng lish colonization efforts and make clear that the desire for economic gain more than the quest for religious freedom fueled the migration to the caribbean islands.
similarly edmund s morgans american slavery american freedom 1975 stresses the role of economic ambition in explaining the eng lish peopling of the chesapeake and the eventual importation of african slaves to that region.
studies by bernard bailyn and david hackett fischer demonstrate that there was scarcely a typical eng lish migrant to the new world.
eng lish colonists migrated both singly and in families and for economic social political and religious reasons.
recent studies have also paid more attention to the con icts that emerged out of this diversity in settler populations and colonial societies.
this perspective emphasizes the contests for economic and political supremacy within the colonies such as the efforts of the massachusetts bay elite to ward off the challenges of religious heretics and the pressures that an increasingly restless lower class put on wealthy merchants and large landowners.
nowhere was internal con ict so prevalent as in the ethnically diverse middle colonies where factional antagonisms became the de ning feature of public life.
the picture of british colonial north america that is emerging from all this new scholarship is of a society unique and diverse from inception.
no longer simply europe transplanted british america by 1700 is now viewed as an outgrowth of many intertwining roots of different european and african heritages of varied encounters with native peoples and a wilderness environment and of complicated mixtures of settler populations each with its own distinctive set of ambitions.
to learn more to learn more patricia bonomi a factious people politics and society in colonial new york 1971 timothy h breen puritans and adventurers 1980 jon butler awash in a sea of faith christianizing the american people 1990 john demos the unredeemed captive a family story from early america 1994.
david hall worlds of wonder days of judgment popular religious belief in early new england 1989 donna merwick the shame and the sorrow dutchamerindian encounters in new netherland 2006 edmund s morgan roger williams the church and state 1967 jenny hale pulsipher subjects unto the same king indians english and the contest for authority in colonial new england 2005 oliver a rink holland on the hudson an economic and social history of dutch new york 1986 harry stout the new england soul preaching and culture in colonial new england 1986 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 being thus passed the vast ocean and a sea of troubles before in their preparation.
they had now no friends to wellcome them nor inns to entertaine or refresh their weatherbeaten bodys no houses or much less towns to repaire too to seeke for succore.
a s the seventeenth century unfolded the crude encampments of the rst colonists slowly gave way to permanent settlements.
durable and distinctive ways of life emerged as europeans and africans adapted to the new world and as native americans adapted to the newcomers.
even the rigid doctrines of puritanism softened somewhat in response to the circumstances of life in america.
and though all the colonies remained tied to eng land and all were stitched tightly into the fabric of an atlantic economy regional differences continued to crystallize notably the increasing importance of slave labor to the southern way of life.
the unhealthy chesapeake life in the american wilderness was nasty brutish and short for the earliest chesapeake settlers.
malaria dysentery and typhoid took a cruel toll cutting ten years off the life expectancy of newcomers from eng land.
half the people born in early virginia and maryland did not survive to celebrate their twentieth birthdays.
few of the remaining half lived to see their ftieth or even their fortieth if they were women.
the disease ravaged settlements of the chesapeake grew only slowly in the seventeenth century mostly through fresh immigration from eng land.
the great majority of immigrants were single men in their late teens and early twenties and most perished soon after arrival.
surviving males competed for the affections of the extremely scarce women whom they outnumbered nearly six to one in 1650 and still outnumbered by three to two at the end of the century.
eligible women did not remain single for long.
families were both few and fragile in this ferocious environment.
most men could not nd mates.
most marriages were destroyed by the death of a partner within seven years.
scarcely any children reached this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the importance of tobacco adulthood under the care of two parents and almost no one knew a grandparent.
weak family ties were reected in the many pregnancies among unmarried young girls.
in one maryland county more than a third of all brides were already pregnant when they wed.
yet despite these hardships the chesapeake colonies struggled on.
the native born inhabitants eventually acquired immunity to the killer diseases that had ravaged the original immigrants.
the presence of more women allowed more families to form and by the end of the seventeenth century the white population of the chesapeake was growing on the basis of its own birthrate.
as the eighteenth century opened virginia with some fty nine thousand people was the most populous colony.
maryland with about thirty thousand was the third largest after massachusetts.
the tobacco economy although unhealthy for human life the chesapeake was immensely hospitable to tobacco cultivation.
prot hungry settlers often planted tobacco to sell before they planted corn to eat.
but intense tobacco cultivation quickly exhausted the soil creating a nearly insatiable demand for new land.
relentlessly seeking fresh elds to plant in tobacco commercial growers plunged ever farther up the river valleys provoking ever more indian attacks.
leaf laden ships annually hauled some 1 5 million pounds of tobacco out of chesapeake bay by the 1630s and almost 40 million pounds a year by the end of the century.
this enormous production depressed prices but colonial chesapeake tobacco growers responded to falling prices in the familiar way of farmers by planting still more acres to tobacco and bringing still more product to market.
an agent for the virginia company in london submitted the following description of the virginia colony in 1622 i found the plantations generally seated upon mere salt marshes full of infectious bogs and muddy creeks and lakes and thereby subjected to all those inconveniences and diseases which are so commonly found in the most unsound and most unhealthy parts of england.
early tobacco advertising crude woodcuts like this one were used to identify various brands of tobacco one of the rst products to be sold by brandname advertising.
more tobacco meant more labor but where was it to come from.
families procreated too slowly to provide it by natural population increase.
indians died too quickly on contact with whites to be a reliable labor force.
african slaves cost too much money.
but eng land still had a surplus of displaced workers and farmers desperate for employment.
many of them were young men who had ed the disastrous slump in the cloth trades that hit eng land in the early seventeenth century.
others were tenants who had been forced from their modest farms when landlords enclosed ever more acreage for sheep grazing.
making their way from town to town in search of wages they eventually drifted into port cities like bristol and london.
there they boarded ship for america as indentured servants voluntarily mortgaging the sweat of their bodies for several years usually four to seven to chesapeake masters.
in exchange they received transatlantic passage and eventual freedom dues including an ax and.
chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 ministers and mistresses.
fatefully for north america louis xiv also took a deep interest in overseas colonies.
after rocky beginnings success nally rewarded the exertions of france in the new world.
in 1608 the year after the founding of jamestown the permanent beginnings of a vast empire see map 6 1 were established at qubec a granite sentinel commanding the st lawrence river.
the leading gure was samuel de champlain an intrepid soldier and explorer whose energy and leadership fairly earned him the title father of new france champlain entered into friendly relations a fateful friendship with the nearby huron indian tribes.
at their request he joined them in battle against their foes the federated iroquois tribes of the upper new york area.
two volleys from the lightning sticks of the whites routed the terried iroquois who left behind three dead and one wounded.
france to its sorrow 180 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w n 140w 120w 160w thus earned the lasting enmity of the iroquois tribes.
they thereafter hampered french penetration of the ohio valley sometimes ravaging french settlements and frequently serving as allies of the british in the prolonged struggle for supremacy on the continent.
the government of new france canada nally fell under the direct control of the king after various commercial companies had faltered or failed.
this royal regime was almost completely autocratic.
the people elected no representative assemblies nor did they enjoy the right to trial by jury as in the eng lish colonies.
the population of catholic new france grew at a listless pace.
as late as 1750 only sixty thousand or so whites inhabited new france.
landowning french peasants unlike the dispossessed eng lish tenant farmers who embarked for the british colonies had little economic motive to move.
protestant huguenots who might have had a religious motive to migrate were denied a refuge in this raw colony.
the french government in any case favored its caribbean island colonies rich in sugar and rum over the snow cloaked wilderness of canada.
newfoundland hudson bay n qubec montral missouri r.
m ip iss iss r do ora.
pacific ocean pi r c ol detroit illinois country nova scotia port 0n royal 4 r io oh la salle murdered saintdomingue g ul f of m exi co mexico city territorial claims atlantic ocean fr.
n 20 car i bbe an sea british french spanish 500 1000 km.
map 6 1 frances american empire at its greatest extent 1700 interactive map qubec scene by jean baptiste louis franquelin ca.
1699 detail the metal cooking pot and the indians clothing and blankets show the native americans growing reliance on european trade goods.
130w 110w 120w 100w 80w 90w 70w 60w hudson bay n wr en e s upe rior la l eri 40n e ean lak e mi c hi gan.
ario io r an r r n mis r ed r a ea tl ip pi oc as siss ka ns n ti oh c r oc r ar ic do ir nt l o ron pacif ra tte ipp hu i r pla c ol o ss k e s our er.
mi miss sn ak si la lak lumbia r st co ce r 50 30n o ri gr an de french trading post 1604 1760 gulf of mexico hudsons bay company 1670 1869 montral based fur trade 1763 1784 north west company 1784 1821 spain and new mexico 1598 1821 400 km.
map 6 2 fur trading posts to serve the needs of european fashion fur traders pursued the beaver for more than two centuries over the entire continent of north america.
they brought many indians for the rst time into contact with white culture.
new france fans out new france did contain one valuable resource the beaver.
european fashion setters valued beaver pelt hats for their warmth and opulent appearance.
to adorn the heads of europeans french fur trappers ranged over the woods and waterways of north america in pursuit of beaver.
these colorful coureurs de bois runners of the woods were also runners of risks two sted drinkers free spenders free livers and lovers.
they littered the land with scores of place names including baton rouge red stick terre haute high land des moines some monks and grand teton big breast.
singing paddle swinging french voyageurs also recruited indians into the fur business.
the indian fur interactive map otilla arriving in montral in 1693 numbered four hundred canoes.
but the fur trade had some disastrous drawbacks.
indians recruited into the fur business were decimated by the white mans diseases and debauched by his alcohol.
slaughtering beaver by the boatload also violated many indians religious beliefs and sadly demonstrated the shattering effect that contact with europeans wreaked on traditional indian ways of life.
pursuing the sharp toothed beaver ever deeper into the heart of the continent the french trappers and their indian partners hiked rode snowshoed sailed and paddled across amazing distances.
they trekked in a huge arc across the great lakes into present day saskatchewan and manitoba along the valleys of the platte the arkansas and the missouri west to the rockies and south to the border of spanish texas see map 6 2.
chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 in the process they all but extinguished the beaver population in many areas in icting incalculable ecological damage.
french catholic missionaries notably the jesuits labored zealously to save the indians for christ and from the fur trappers.
some of the jesuit missionaries their efforts scorned suffered unspeakable tortures at the hands of the indians.
but though they made few permanent converts the jesuits played a vital role as explorers and geographers.
other explorers sought neither souls nor fur but empire.
to thwart eng lish settlers pushing into the ohio valley antoine cadillac founded detroit the city of straits in 1701.
to check spanish penetration into the region of the gulf of mexico ambitious robert de la salle oated down the mississippi in 1682 to the point where it mingles with the gulf.
he named the great interior basin louisiana in honor of his sovereign louis xiv.
dreaming of empire he returned to the gulf three years later with a colonizing expedition of four ships.
but he failed to nd the mississippi delta landed in spanish texas and in 1687 was murdered by his mutinous men.
undismayed french ofcials persisted in their efforts to block spain on the gulf of mexico.
they planted several fortied posts in what is now mississippi and louisiana the most important of which was new orleans 1718.
commanding the mouth of the mississippi river this strategic semitropical outpost also tapped the fur trade of the huge interior valley.
the fertile illinois country where the french established forts and trading posts at kaskaskia cahokia and vincennes became the garden of frances north american empire.
surprising amounts of grain were oated down the mississippi for transshipment to the west indies and to europe.
the clash of empires the earliest contests among the european powers for control of north america known to the british colonists as king williams war 1689 1697 and queen annes war 1702 1713 see table 6 1 mostly pitted british colonists against the french coureurs de bois with both sides recruiting whatever indian allies they chief of the taensa indians receiving la salle march 20 1682 by george catlin 1847 1848 detail driven by the dream of a vast north american empire for france la salle spent years exploring the great lakes region and the valleys of the illinois and mississippi rivers.
this scene of his encounter with an indian chieftain was imaginatively re created by the nineteenth century artist george catlin.
world wars rock america table 6 1 later english monarchs name reign relation to america william iii 1689 1702 anne 1702 1714 george i 1714 1727 george ii 1727 1760 george iii 1760 1820 collapse of dominion of new eng land king williams war queen annes war 1702 1713 navigation laws laxly enforced salutary neglect ga founded king georges war seven years war american revolution 1775 1783 see pp.
000 and 000 for earlier monarchs.
neither france nor britain at this stage considered america worth the commitment of large detachments of regular troops so the combatants waged a kind of primitive guerrilla warfare.
indian allies of the french ravaged with torch and tomahawk the british colonial frontiers visiting especially bloody violence on the villages of schenectady new york and deereld massachusetts see map 6 3.
spain eventually allied with france probed from its florida base at outlying south carolina settlements.
for their part the british colonists failed miserably in sallies against qubec and montral but scored a signal victory when they temporarily seized the stronghold of port royal in acadia present day nova scotia.
peace terms signed at utrecht in 1713 revealed how badly france and its spanish ally had been beaten see map 6 4.
britain was rewarded with french populated map 6 3 scenes of the french wars the arrows indicate french indian attacks.
schenectady was burned to the ground in the raid of 1690.
at deereld site of one of the new england frontiers bloodiest confrontations invaders killed fty inhabitants and sent more than a hundred others eeing for their lives into the winter wilderness.
the indian attackers also took over one hundred deereld residents captive including the child titus king.
he later wrote captivity is an awful school for children when we see how quick they will fall in with the indian ways.
nothing seems to be more taking appealing.
in six months time they forsake father and mother forget their own land refuse to speak their own tongue and seemingly be wholly swallowed up with the indians interactive map 75w 70w 65w 60w gulf of st lawrence cape breton island qubec.
ce r nova scotia montral port royal ut r.
st la en wr n hudson r schenectady albany atlantic ocean conne ctic l ontario deerfield 45n louisbourg captured boston french indian attacks town destroyed french claims ca.
1700 new york 40n 75 150 km.
british claims ca.
1700 british gains 1713 chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 180 160w 140w 120w 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w newfoundland hudson bay n nova scotia port 0n royal 4 qubec montral missouri r.
m ip iss iss pi r.
acadia which the british renamed nova scotia or new scotland and the wintry wastes of newfoundland and hudson bay.
these immense tracts pinched the st lawrence settlements of france foreshadowing their ultimate doom.
a generation of peace ensued during which britain provided its american colonies with decades of salutary neglect fertile soil for the roots of independence.
by the treaty of 1713 the british also won limited trading rights in spanish america but these later involved much friction over smuggling.
ill feeling ared up when the british captain robert jenkins encountering spanish revenue authorities had one ear sliced off by a sword.
the spanish commander reportedly sneered carry this home to the king your master whom if he were present i would serve in like fashion the victim with a tale of woe on his tongue and a shriveled ear in his hand aroused furious resentment when he returned home to britain.
the war of jenkinss ear curiously but aptly named broke out in 1739 between the british and the spaniards.
it was con ned to the caribbean sea and to the much buffeted buffer colony of georgia where philanthropist soldier james oglethorpe fought his spanish foe to a standstill.
this small scale scufe with spain in america soon merged with the large scale war of austrian succession in europe see table 6 2 and came to be called king georges war in america.
once again france allied itself with spain.
and once again a rustic force of new eng landers invaded new france.
with help from a british eet and with a great deal of good luck the raw and sometimes drunken recruits captured the reputedly impregnable french fortress of louisbourg which was on cape breton island and commanded the approaches to the st lawrence river see map 6 3 on p 113.
when the peace treaty of 1748 handed louisbourg back to their french foe the victorious new eng landers n r io oh atlantic ocean pacific ocean g ul f of me x i co n 20 jamaica territorial claims gr.
c a rib b e a n sea british french spanish 500 1000 km.
map 6 4 north america after two wars 1713 interactive map were outraged.
the glory of their arms never terribly lustrous in any event seemed tarnished by the wiles of old world diplomats.
worse louisbourg was still a cocked pistol pointed at the heart of the american continent.
france powerful and unappeased still clung to its vast holdings in north america.
table 6 2 the nine world wars dates in europe in america 1688 1697 1701 1713 1740 1748 1756 1763 1778 1783 1793 1802 1803 1815 1914 1918 1939 1945 war of the league of augsburg war of spanish succession war of austrian succession seven years war war of the american revolution wars of the french revolution napoleonic wars world war i world war ii king williams war 1689 1697 queen annes war 1702 1713 king georges war 1744 1748 french and indian war 1754 1763 american revolution 1775 1783 undeclared french war 1798 1800 war of 1812 1812 1814 world war i 1917 1918 world war ii 1941 1945 the french indian showdown new englanders capture louisbourg 1745 when the nal peace settlement of 1748 returned this fortress to france the american colonists felt betrayed by their british masters.
george washington inaugurates war with france as the dogght intensied in the new world the ohio valley became the chief bone of contention between the french and british.
the ohio country was the critical area into which the westward pushing british colonists would inevitably penetrate.
for france it was also the key to the continent that the french had to retain particularly if they were going to link their canadian holdings with those of the lower mississippi valley.
by the mid 1700s the british colonists painfully aware of these basic truths were no longer so reluctant to bear the burdens of empire.
alarmed by french landgrabbing and cutthroat fur trade competition in the ohio valley they were determined to ght for their economic security and for the supremacy of their way of life in north america.
rivalry for the lush lands of the upper ohio valley brought tensions to the snapping point.
in 1749 a group of british colonial speculators chiey inuential virginians including the washington family had secured shaky legal rights to some 500 000 acres in this region.
in the same disputed wilderness the french were in the process of erecting a chain of forts commanding the strategic ohio river.
especially formidable was fort duquesne at the pivotal point where the monongahela and allegheny rivers join to form the ohio the later site of pittsburgh.
in 1754 the governor of virginia ushered george washington a twenty one year old surveyor and fellow virginian onto the stage of history.
to secure the virginians claims washington was sent to the ohio country as a lieutenant colonel in command of about 150 virginia militiamen.
encountering a small detachment of french troops in the forest about forty miles from fort duquesne see map 6 5 the virginians red the rst shots of the globe girdling new war.
the french leader was killed and his men retreated.
an exultant washington wrote i heard the bullets whistle and believe me there is something charming in the sound it soon lost its charm.
chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 the french promptly returned with reinforcements who surrounded washington in his hastily constructed breastworks fort necessity.
after a ten hour siege he was forced to surrender his entire command in july 1754 ironically the fourth of july.
but he was permitted to march his men away with the full honors of war.
with the shooting already started and in danger of spreading the british authorities in nova scotia took vigorous action.
understandably fearing a stab in the back from the french acadians whom britain had conquered in 1713 the british brutally uprooted some four thousand of them in 1755.
these unhappy french deportees were scattered as far south as louisiana where the descendants of the french speaking aca dians are now called cajuns and number nearly a million.
global war and colonial disunity the rst three anglo french colonial wars had all started in europe but the tables were now reversed.
the fourth struggle sometimes known as the french and indian war began in america.
touched off by george washington in the wilds of the ohio valley in 1754 it rocked along on an undeclared basis for two years and then widened into the most far ung con ict the world had yet seen the seven years war.
it was fought not map 6 5 the french and indian war in north america 1754 1760 interactive map 80w 70w n 200 mi.
e n w f r new frances boundary with maine new hampshire and new york was uncertain.
a n c qubec e gulf of st lawrence ac ad ia maine ke an ge rs la montral mass.
fort niagara fort ticonderoga fort oswego l iroquois fort presque isle fort le boeuf conn fort machault boston r i allegheny r british territory pennsylvania n j new york braddock defeated british forces french forces md.
washington 1753 1754 fort necessity washington defeated july 1754 monongahela r virginia french territory disputed territory philadelphia oh io r fort duquesne mass.
hudso new york erie ake fort beausejour ia ot sc halifax british deport a v 6 000 acadians o summer of 1755.
n fort crown point fort william henry n h lake george n r on mo nt ca lm rogers r hur lake ontario louisbourg fort gaspereau st franois st lawrence r 40n 60w 200 km.
at l a n t i c o c e a n british fort french fort british victory french victory the french and indian war only in america but in europe in the west indies in the philippines in africa and on the ocean.
the seven years war was a seven seas war see map 6 6.
in europe the principal adversaries were britain and prussia on one side arrayed against france spain austria and russia on the other.
the bloodiest theater was in germany where frederick the great deservedly won the title of great by repelling french austrian and russian armies often with the opposing forces outnumbering his own three to one.
the london government unable to send him effective troop reinforcements liberally subsidized him with gold.
luckily for the british colonists the french wasted so much strength in this european bloodbath that they were unable to throw an adequate force into the new world.
america was conquered in germany declared britains great statesman william pitt.
in previous colonial clashes the americans had revealed an astonishing lack of unity.
colonists who were nearest the shooting had responded much more generously with volunteers and money than those enjoying the safety of remoteness.
even the indians had laughed at the inability of the colonists to pull together.
now with musketballs already splitting the air in ohio the crisis demanded concerted action.
in 1754 the british government summoned an intercolonial congress to albany new york near the iroquois indian country.
travel weary delegates from only seven of the thirteen colonies showed up.
the immediate purpose was to keep the scalping knives of the iroquois tribes loyal to the british in the spreading war.
the chiefs were harangued at length and then presented with thirty wagonloads of gifts including guns.
the longer range purpose at albany was to achieve greater colonial unity and thus bolster the common defense against france.
a month before the congress assembled ingenious benjamin franklin published in his pennsylvania gazette the most famous cartoon of the colonial era.
showing the separate colonies as parts of a disjointed snake it broadcast the slogan join or die franklin himself a wise and witty counselor was the leading spirit of the albany congress.
his outstanding contribution was a well devised but premature scheme for colonial home rule.
the albany delegates unanimously adopted the plan but the individual colonies spurned it as did the london regime.
to the colonists it did not seem to give enough independence to the british ofcials it seemed to give too much.
the disappointing result con rmed one of franklins sage observations all people agreed on the need for union famous cartoon by benjamin franklin delaware and georgia were omitted.
but their weak noddles were perfectly distracted when they attempted to agree on details.
braddocks blundering and its aftermath the opening clashes of the french and indian war went badly for the british colonists.
haughty and bullheaded general edward braddock a sixty year old ofcer experienced in european warfare was sent to virginia with a strong detachment of british regulars.
after foraging scanty supplies from the reluctant colonists he set out in 1755 with some two thousand men to capture fort duquesne.
a considerable part of his force consisted of ill disciplined colonial militiamen buckskins whose behind the tree methods of ghting indians won bulldog braddocks professional contempt.
braddocks expedition dragging heavy artillery moved slowly.
axmen laboriously hacked a path through the dense forest thus opening a road that was later to be an important artery to the west.
a few miles from fort duquesne braddock encountered a much smaller french and indian army.
at rst the enemy force was repulsed but it quickly melted into the thickets and poured a murderous re into the ranks of the redcoats.
in the ensuing battle george washington an energetic and fearless aide to braddock had two horses shot from under him and four bullets pierced his coat.
braddock himself was mortally wounded.
the entire british force was routed after appalling losses.
inamed by this easy victory the indians took to a wider warpath.
the whole frontier from pennsylvania events of the seven years war 120e philippine is.
territorial claims ca.
virginia pennsylvania ohio 1753 1764 2.
nova scotia 1754 3.
hudson river lake champlain 1755 1760 4.
minorca 1756 5.
central europe 1756 1762 6.
bengal 1757 7.
louisbourg 1758 8.
west africa 1758 9.
madras 1758 1759 10.
qubec and upper st lawrence 1759 1760 11.
eastern caribbean 1759 1762 12.
iberian coast 1759 13.
french coast 1759 1761 14.
upper great lakes 1759 1764 15.
pondicherry 1760 1762 16.
spain 1762 17.
newfoundland 1762 18.
havana 1762 19.
manila 1762 20.
pontiacs rebellion 1763 1764 french netherlands china portuguese spanish 150e 90e 6.
indian ocean a s i a india 9.
arctic ocean pacific ocean 15.
arabian sea 60e 120w north america arabia ruperts land france n l o u is i an a 3 10.
gulf of m exic o new france 13.
portugal 7.
2 ea me rr a 16.
florida te di spain 17.
thirteen colonies n netherlands great britain e u r o p e 60n n new s p a in se a 5.
africa atlantic ocean 18.
30e cuba ca 90w rib be an 8.
se a senegambia 11.
60w 30w map 6 6 global scale of the seven years war among the rst of the truly world wars of the modern era the seven years war sucked in several nations who did battle around the globe.
0 interactive map a world at war to north carolina left virtually naked by braddocks bloody defeat felt their fury.
scalping forays occurred within eighty miles of philadelphia and in desperation the local authorities offered bounties for indian scalps 50 for a womans and 130 for a warriors.
george washington with only three hundred men tried desperately to defend the scorched frontier.
the british launched a full scale invasion of canada in 1756 now that the undeclared war in america had at last merged into a world con ict.
but they unwisely tried to attack a number of exposed wilderness posts simultaneously instead of throwing all their strength at qubec and montral.
if these strongholds had fallen all the smaller outposts to the west would have withered for lack of riverborne supplies.
but the british ignored such sound strategy and defeat after defeat tarnished their arms both in america and in europe.
pitts palms of victory in the hour of crisis britain brought forth as it repeatedly has a superlative leader william pitt.
a tall and imposing gure whose ashing eyes were set in a hawklike face he was popularly known as the great commoner pitt drew much of his strength from the common people who admired him so greatly that on occasion they kissed his horses.
a splendid orator endowed with a majestic voice he believed passionately in his cause in his country and in himself.
in 1757 pitt became a foremost leader in the london government.
throwing himself headlong into his task he soon earned the title organizer of victory he wisely decided to soft pedal assaults on the french west indies which had been bleeding away much british strength and to concentrate on the vitals of canada the qubec montral area.
he also picked young and energetic leaders thus bypassing incompetent and cautious old generals.
pitt rst dispatched a powerful expedition in 1758 against louisbourg.
the frowning fortress though it had been greatly strengthened fell after a blistering siege.
wild rejoicing swept britain for this was the rst signicant british victory of the entire war.
qubec was next on pitts list.
for this crucial expedition he chose the thirty two year old james wolfe who had been an ofcer since the age of fourteen.
view of the taking of qubec 1759 on the night of september 13 british forces scaled the rocky cliffs of qubec and defeated the french army defending the city.
the following year montral frances last bastion in north america surrendered.
fighting continued in the caribbean europe and the philippines for two more years until the treaty of paris was signed in 1763 eliminating france as a colonial power in north america.
chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 though slight and sickly wolfe combined a mixture of dash with painstaking attention to detail.
the british attackers were making woeful progress when wolfe in a daring night move sent a detachment up a poorly guarded part of the rocky eminence protecting qubec.
this vanguard scaled the cliff pulling itself upward by the bushes and showing the way for the others.
in the morning the two armies faced each other on the plains of abraham on the outskirts of qubec the british under wolfe and the french under the marquis de montcalm.
both commanders fell fatally wounded but the french were defeated and the city surrendered.
the battle of qubec in 1759 ranks as one of the most signicant engagements in british and american history.
when montral fell in 1760 the french ag had uttered in canada for the last time.
by the peace settlement at paris 1763 french power was thrown completely off the continent of north america leaving behind a fertile french population that is to this day a strong minority in canada.
this bitter pill was sweet ened somewhat when the french were allowed to retain several small but valuable sugar islands in the west indies and two never to be fortied islets in the gulf of st lawrence for shing stations.
a nal blow came when the french to compensate their luckless spanish ally for its losses ceded to spain all transmississippi louisiana plus the outlet of new orleans.
spain for its part turned florida over to britain in return for cuba where havana had fallen to british arms see map 6 7.
great britain thus emerged as the dominant power in north america while taking its place as the leading naval power of the world.
restless colonists britains colonists baptized by re emerged with increased condence in their military strength.
they had borne the brunt of battle at rst they had fought bravely 180 20w 160w 140w 120w n 140w 120w 100w 40w 60w 80w 160w 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w n 180 hudson bay hudson bay n r n m pi r do o ra col.
r io oh atlantic ocean territorial claims n 20 new york philadelphia richmond territorial claims at l a n t i c ocean savannah san new orleans antonio g ul f of me x i co saintdomingue n 20 car i bbe an sea french mexico city br.
c a rib b e a n honduras sea spanish french russian io oh r british br.
honduras british st louis santa f e nd nd e gul f of mexi co spanish pac i f ic ocean r rio gra ra ri o g pacific ocean r n boston.
pi r ip iss iss c ol do ora qubec montral missouri r.
n ip iss is s m a missouri r.
columbi 500 1000 km.
map 6 7 north america before 1754 russian proclamation line of 1763 500 1000 km.
north america after 1763 after french losses interactive map impact of the global struggle alongside the crack british regulars and they had gained valuable experience ofcers and men alike.
in the closing days of the con ict some twenty thousand american recruits were under arms.
the french and indian war while bolstering colonial self esteem simultaneously shattered the myth of british invincibility.
on braddocks bloody eld the buckskin militia had seen the demoralized regulars huddling helplessly together or eeing their unseen enemy.
ominously friction had developed during the war between arrogant british ofcers and the raw colonial boors displaying the contempt of the professional soldier for amateurs the british refused to recognize any american militia commission above the rank of captain a demotion humiliating to colonel george washington.
they also showed the usual condescension of snobs from the civilized old country toward the scum who had confessed failure by eeing to the outhouses of civilization general wolfe referred to the colonial militia with exaggeration as in general the dirtiest most contemptible cowardly dogs that you can conceive energetic and hard working american settlers in contrast believed themselves to be the cutting edge of british civilization.
they felt that they deserved credit rather than contempt for risking their lives to secure a new world empire.
british ofcials were further distressed by the reluctance of the colonists to support the common cause wholeheartedly.
american shippers using fraudulent papers developed a golden trafc with the enemy ports of the spanish and french west indies.
this treason the reverend andrew burnaby an observant church of england clergyman who visited the colonies in the closing months of the seven years war scoffed at any possibility of unication 1760.
for re and water are not more heterogeneous than the different colonies in north america.
nothing can exceed the jealousy and emulation which they possess in regard to each other.
were they left to themselves there would soon be a civil war from one end of the continent to the other while the indians and negros would.
impatiently watch the opportunity of exterminating them all together.
able trade in foodstuffs actually kept some of the hostile islands from starving at the very time when the british navy was trying to subdue them.
in the nal year of the war the british authorities forced to resort to drastic mea sures forbade the export of all supplies from new eng land and the middle colonies.
other colonists self centered and alienated by distance from the war refused to provide troops and money for the con ict.
they demanded the rights and privileges of eng lishmen without the duties and responsibilities of eng lishmen.
not until pitt had offered to reimburse the colonies for a substantial part of their expenditures some 900 000 did they move with some enthusiasm.
if the americans had to be bribed to defend themselves against a relentless and savage foe would they ever unite to strike the mother country.
the curse of intercolonial disunity present from early days had continued throughout the recent hostilities.
it had been caused mainly by enormous distances by geographical barriers like rivers by con icting religions from catholic to quaker by varied nationalities from german to irish by differing types of colonial governments by many boundary disputes and by the resentment of the crude backcountry settlers against the aristocratic bigwigs.
yet unity received some encouragement during the french and indian war.
when soldiers and statesmen from widely separated colonies met around common camp res and council tables they were often agreeably surprised by what they found.
despite deep seated jealousy and suspicion they discovered that they were all fellow americans who generally spoke the same language and shared common ideals.
barriers of disunity began to melt although a long and rugged road lay ahead before a coherent nation would emerge.
wars fateful aftermath the removal of the french menace in canada profoundly affected american attitudes.
while the french hawk had been hovering in the north and west the colonial chicks had been forced to cling close to the wings of their british mother hen.
now that the hawk was killed they could range far aeld with a new spirit of independence.
the french humiliated by the british and saddened by the fate of canada consoled themselves with one wishful thought.
perhaps the loss of their american empire would one day result in britains loss of its american empire.
in a sense the history of the united chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 states began with the fall of qubec and montral the infant republic was cradled on the plains of abraham.
the spanish and indian menaces were also now substantially reduced.
spain was temporarily eliminated from florida although entrenched in louisiana and new orleans and was still securely in possession of much of western north america including the vast territory from present day texas to cal i fornia.
as for the indians the treaty of paris that ended the seven years war dealt a harsh blow to the iroquois creeks and other interior tribes.
the spanish removal from florida and the french removal from canada deprived the indians of their most powerful diplomatic weapon the ability to play off the rival european powers against one another.
in the future the indians would have to negotiate exclusively with the british.
sensing the newly precarious position of the indian peoples the ottawa chief pontiac in 1763 led several tribes aided by a handful of french traders who remained in the region in a violent campaign to drive the british out of the ohio country.
pontiacs uprising laid siege to detroit in the spring of 1763 and eventually overran all but three british posts west of the appalachians kill ing some two thousand soldiers and settlers.
the british retaliated swiftly and cruelly.
waging a primitive version of biological warfare one british commander ordered blankets infected with smallpox to be distributed among the indians.
such tactics crushed the uprising and brought an uneasy truce to the frontier.
his bold plan frustrated pontiac himself perished in 1769 at the hands of a rival chieftain.
as for the british the bloody episode convinced them of the need to stabilize relations with the western indians and to keep regular troops stationed along the restless frontier a mea sure for which they soon asked the colonists to foot the bill.
land hungry american colonists were now free to burst over the dam of the appalachian mountains and ood out over the verdant western lands.
a tiny rivulet of pioneers had already trickled into tennessee and kentucky other courageous settlers made their preparations for the long dangerous trek over the mountains.
then out of a clear sky the london government issued its proclamation of 1763.
it atly prohibited settlement in the area beyond the appalachians pending further adjustments see map 6 8.
the truth is that this hastily drawn document was not designed to oppress the colonists at all but to work out the indian problem detroit 1794 a key french outpost from 1701 to 1760 detroit fell to britain during the seven years war.
the british remained at detroit even after the american war of independence exciting bitter resentment in the infant american republic see pp.
qubec european settlement before 1700 maine european settlement 1700 1763 mass.
frontier 1763 lake superior proclamation line of 1763 montral pontiacs uprising 1763.
r fort michilimackinac 200 mi.
lake huron ie susqueh a lake michiga a nn r portsmouth boston hartford newport new haven rhode island conn 40n n j new york penn.
perth amboy burlington philadelphia new castle fort pitt 70w po baltimore delaware to m annapolis ac r io r r oh a.
illi no is r er hudson r.
ir pp ab e n h mass.
n y are r law ssi w sh k la albany de missi fort detroit ce en rio onta ke l a fort niagara n wr connecticut r 200 km.
la st maryland st marys virginia james r jamestown.
ohio r r roano ke a a t l an tic o ce an new bern siss mis tenness ee r.
sa va n a alt na h south carolina r n charleston georgia ha ma r territory claimed by spain and britain wilmington r tee san ippi r erl cumb r north carolina nd spanish louisiana.
williamsburg savannah 30n st augustine new orleans gulf of mexico 90w 80w map 6 8 british colonies at end of the seven years war 1763 this map showing the colonies thirteen years before the declaration of independence helps to explain why the british would be unable to conquer their offspring.
the colonists were spreading rapidly into the backcountry where the powerful british navy could not ush them out.
during the revolutionary war the british at one time or another captured the leading colonial cities boston new york philadelphia and charleston but the more remote interior remained a sanctuary for rebels.
interactive map chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 fairly and prevent another bloody eruption like pontiacs uprising.
but countless americans especially land speculators were dismayed and angered.
was not the land beyond the mountains their birthright.
had they not in addition purchased it with their blood in the recent war.
in complete deance of the proclamation they clogged the westward trails.
in 1765 an estimated one thousand wagons rolled through the town of salisbury north carolina on their way up west this wholesale outing of royal authority boded ill for the longevity of british rule in america.
the seven years war also caused the colonists to develop a new vision of their destiny.
with the path cleared for the conquest of a continent with their birthrate high and their energy boundless they sensed that they were a potent people on the march.
and they were in no mood to be restrained.
lordly britons whose suddenly swollen empire had tended to produce swollen heads were in no mood for back talk.
puffed up over their recent victories they were already annoyed with their unruly colonial subjects.
the stage was set for a violent family quarrel.
chronology edict of nantes repealed in 1685 champlain colonizes qubec for france louis xiv becomes king of france 1744 king georges war war of austrian succession washington battles french on frontier albany congress la salle explores mississippi river to the gulf of mexico 1756 seven years war french and indian war 1689 king williams war war of the league of augsburg braddocks defeat 1702 pitt emerges as leader of british government queen annes war war of spanish succession battle of qubec french found new orleans war of jenkinss ear peace of paris pontiacs uprising proclamation of 1763 key terms huguenots 109 edict of nantes 109 coureurs de bois 111 voyageurs 111 king williams war 112 queen annes war 112 war of jenkinss ear 114 king georges war 114 acadians 116 people to know french and indian war seven years war 116 albany congress 117 regulars 117 qubec battle of 120 pontiacs uprising 122 proclamation of 1763 122 louis xiv samuel de champlain edward braddock william pitt james wolfe pontiac to learn more to learn more fred anderson crucible of war the seven years war and the fate of empire in british north america 1754 1766 2001 david armitage ed the british atlantic world 1500 1800 2002 colin g calloway the scratch of a pen 1763 and the transformation of america 2006 david dixon never come to peace again pontiacs uprising and the fate of the british empire in north america 2005 francis jennings empire of fortune crowns colonies and tribes in the seven years war in america 1988 elizabeth mancke and carole shammas eds the creation of the british atlantic world 2005 paul david nelson william tryon and the course of empire a life in british imperial service 1990 carolyn podruchny making the voyageur world travelers and traders in the north american fur trade 2006 james pritchard in search of empire the french in the americas 1670 1730 2004 armstrong starkey european and native american warfare 1615 1815 1998 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the road to revolution 1763 1775 the revolution was effected before the war commenced.
the revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people.
john adams 1818 v ictory in the seven years war made britain the master of a vastly enlarged imperial domain in north america.
but victory including the subsequent need to garrison ten thousand troops along the sprawling american frontier was painfully costly.
the london government therefore struggled after 1763 to compel the american colonists to shoulder some of the nancial costs of empire.
this change in british colonial policy reinforced an emerging sense of american political identity and helped to precipitate the american revolution.
the eventual con ict was by no means inevitable.
indeed given the tightening commercial military and cultural bonds between colonies and mother country since the rst crude settlements a century and a half earlier it might be considered remarkable that the revolution happened at all.
the truth is that americans were reluctant revolutionaries.
until late in the day they sought only to claim the rights of eng lishmen not to separate from the mother country.
but what began as a squabble about economic policies soon exposed irreconcilable differences between americans and britons over cherished political principles.
the ensuing clash gave birth to a new nation.
the deep roots of revolution in a broad sense america was a revolutionary force from the day of its discovery by europeans.
the new world nurtured new ideas about the nature of society citizen and government.
in the old world many humble folk had long lived in the shadow of graveyards that contained the bones of their ancestors for a thousand years past.
few people born into such changeless surroundings dared to question their social status.
but european immigrants in the new world were not so easily subdued by the scowl of their superiors.
in the american wilderness they encountered a world that was theirs to make afresh.
two ideas in particular had taken root in the minds of the american colonists by the mid eighteenth century one was what historians call republicanism.
looking to the models of the ancient greek and roman this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website new ideas in the new world republics exponents of republicanism de ned a just society as one in which all citizens willingly subordinated their private selsh interests to the common good.
both the stability of society and the authority of government thus depended on the virtue of the citizenry its capacity for selessness self sufciency and courage and especially its appetite for civic involvement.
by its very nature republicanism was opposed to hierarchical and authoritarian institutions such as aristocracy and monarchy.
a second idea that fundamentally shaped american political thought derived from a group of british political commentators known as radical whigs.
widely read by the colonists the whigs feared the threat to liberty posed by the arbitrary power of the monarch and his ministers relative to elected representatives in parliament.
the whigs mounted withering attacks on the use of patronage and bribes by the kings ministers symptoms of a wider moral failure in society that they called corruption in the sense of rot or decay.
the whigs warned citizens to be on guard against corruption and to be eternally vigilant against possible conspiracies to denude them of their hardwon liberties.
together republican and whig ideas predisposed the american colonists to be on hairtrigger alert against any threat to their rights.
the circumstances of colonial life had done much to bolster those attitudes.
dukes and princes barons and bishops were unknown in the colonies while property ownership and political participation were relatively accessible.
the americans had also grown accustomed to running their own affairs largely unmolested by remote ofcials in london.
distance weakens authority great distance weakens authority greatly.
so it came as an especially jolting shock when britain after 1763 tried to enclose its american colonists more snugly in its grip.
mercantilism and colonial grievances britains empire was acquired in a t of absentmindedness an old saying goes and there is much truth in the jest.
not one of the original thirteen colonies except georgia was formally planted by the british government.
all the others were haphazardly founded by trading companies religious groups or land speculators.
the british authorities nevertheless embraced a theory called mercantilism that justied their control over the colonies.
mercantilists believed that wealth the female combatants 1776 britain is symbolized as a lady of fashion her rebellious daughter america as an indian princess.
their shields of obedience and liberty seem mutually exclusive standards.
compare this cartoon with the one on p 168 was power and that a countrys economic wealth and hence its military and political power could be mea sured by the amount of gold or silver in its treasury.
to amass gold or silver a country needed to export more than it imported.
possessing colonies thus conferred distinct advantages since the colonies could both supply raw materials to the mother country thereby reducing the need for foreign imports and provide a guaranteed market for exports.
the london government looked on the american colonists more or less as tenants.
they were expected to furnish products needed in the mother country such as tobacco sugar and ships masts to refrain from making for export certain products such as woolen cloth or beaver hats to buy imported manufactured goods exclusively from britain and not to indulge in bothersome dreams of economic self sufciency or worse self government.
from time to time parliament passed laws to regulate the mercantilist system.
the rst of these the navigation law of 1650 was aimed at rival dutch shippers.
