The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	436	9.1 Early Reconstruction
©
Interactive Gallery
» President Johnson's plan for Reconstruction did not place restrictions on southern candidates who could be elected to state legislatures or Congress. Infer Why might some Republicans reject this policy?
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	437	9.1 Early Reconstruction
» Members of the House celebrated the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment, which permanently freed slaves and outlawed slavery. However, southern states still prohibited African Americans from voting.
former vice president of the Confederacy, was elected senator from Georgia.
Republicans in Congress were outraged. The men who had led the South out of the Union were being elected to the House and Senate. Also, no southern state allowed African Americans to vote.
When the new Congress met, Republicans refused to let southern representatives take their seats. Instead, they set up a Joint Committee on Reconstruction to form a new plan for the South. The stage was set for a showdown between Congress and the President.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Which key difference between Lincoln’s and Johnson’s Reconstruction plans caused problems in 1865?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Central Issues What problems did the South face that the North did not after the Civil War?
2.	Summarize what the Freedmen’s Bureau accomplished.
3.	Describe President Lincoln’s Ten Percent Plan for Reconstruction.
4.	Compare the Wade-Davis Bill to the Ten Percent Plan.
5.	Check Understanding Why did Republicans in Congress refuse to let newly-elected southern representatives take their seats?
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	438	9.1 Early Reconstruction
v-z Under Johnson’s Reconstruction plan, most southern states promptly ratified the Thirteenth Amendment.
However, southern legislatures also passed black codes, laws that severely limited the rights of freedmen.
Interactive Flipped Video
Radical
Reconstruction
9.A, 16.B
Reconstruction Difficulties Persist
Rights and Restrictions in the South The black codes did grant some rights. For example, African Americans could marry legally and own some kinds of property. Still, the codes were clearly meant to keep freedmen from gaining political or economic power.
Black codes forbade freedmen to vote, own guns, or serve on juries. In some states, African Americans were permitted to work only as servants or farm laborers. In others, they had to sign contracts for a year’s work. Those without contracts could be arrested and sentenced to work on a plantation.
Reconstruction Turns Radical Republicans charged that, by Placing too few restrictions on the South, Johnson’s Reconstruction Plan had encouraged southern legislatures to pass the black codes. Republicans were also outraged by reports of violence against feedmen. In 1866, white police officers in Memphis, Tennessee, attacked African American Union soldiers, who fired back at the officers. A protest against the police ended in violence, and rioting broke out. Angry whites burned homes and schools in a black section
» Objectives
Describe how Congress reacted to the passage of black codes in the South.
Explain how Radical Republicans gained power in Congress.
Identify why President Johnson was impeached.
» Key Terms
black codes Radical Republican Fourteenth
Amendment
Radical
Reconstruction Reconstruction Act impeach Fifteenth
Amendment

www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
439
of the city. Similar riots broke out in New Orleans when freedmen met to support the right to vote.
A report by the Joint Committee on Reconstruction accused the South of trying to “preserve slavery . . . as long as possible.” When President Johnson ignored the report, members of Congress called Radical Republicans vowed to take control of Reconstruction.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why were Radical Republicans outraged at President Johnson’s approach to Reconstruction?
Reforms of the Radical Reconstruction Congress
The Radicals were led by Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania in the House and Charles Sumner of Massachusetts in the Senate. Radical Republicans had two main goals. First, they wanted to break the power of wealthy planters who had long ruled the South. Second, they wanted to ensure that freedmen received the right to vote. They used legislative reforms, or changes in laws, to achieve their goals.
» African Americans such as this laborer were granted citizenship with the Fourteenth Amendment. Yet during Reconstruction, African Americans still struggled to achieve basic rights, such as the right to vote.
Legislative Reform Radicals needed the support of moderate Republicans, the largest group in Congress. Moderates and Radicals disagreed on many issues, but they shared a strong political motive. Most southerners were Democrats. With southerners barred from Congress, Republicans could control both houses.
To combat the black codes, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act in April 1866. It gave citizenship to African Americans. When Johnson vetoed the bill, Congress overrode the veto.
The Impact of the Fourteenth Amendment
Republicans feared that the Supreme Court might use its power of judicial review to declare the Civil Rights Act unconstitutional. In the Dred Scott decision of 1857, the Court had ruled that African Americans were not citizens. To avoid a similar ruling, Republicans proposed the Fourteenth Amendment. It defined citizens as “all persons born or naturalized in the United States.” (The amendment did not apply to most Native Americans.) It guaranteed citizens “equal protection of the laws” and forbade states to “deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law.” Thus, states could not legally discriminate against a citizen on unreasonable grounds, such as race.
The Fourteenth Amendment was proposed in 1866. As you will read, it was not ratified for another two years.
Under the Fourteenth Amendment, any state that denied any male citizen age 21 or older the right to vote would have its representation in Congress reduced. Republicans believed that freedmen would be able to defend their rights if they could vote.
Republicans hoped the impact of the amendment on life in the United States would be to secure basic political rights for African Americans in the South. That goal would take a century to achieve. In the 1950s, the Fourteenth Amendment became a powerful tool in the struggle for citizenship rights.
fei EXPLAIN why Republicans believed the Fourteenth
Amendment was necessary.
Political and Social
Problems During Reconstruction
President Johnson encouraged former Confederate states to reject the Fourteenth Amendment. He also decided to make the amendment an issue in the 1866 congressional elections.
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	440	9.2 Radical Reconstruction
A
Republican Majority Across the North, Johnson urged voters to reject the Radicals. When a heckler yelled for Johnson to hang Jefferson Davis, Johnson shouted, “Why not hang Thad Stevens?” Many northerners criticized the President for losing his temper. In July, riots in New Orleans killed 34 African Americans who had gathered in support of a convention backing voting rights. White mobs attacked the crowd and fired into the convention. The violence convinced many northerners that stronger measures were needed. In the end, the elections were a disaster for Johnson. Republicans won majorities in both houses of Congress.
Radical Reforms Impact the South In 1867, Republicans in Congress prepared to take charge of Reconstruction. With huge majorities in both houses, Congress could easily override vetoes. The period that followed is often called Radical Reconstruction.
Congress passed the first Reconstruction Act in March 1867. It threw out the state governments that had refused to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment— all the former Confederate states except Tennessee. The Military Reconstruction Acts of 1867 divided the southern states into five military districts, each governed by a military general. Army commanders were given broad permission to enforce Reconstruction.
Military rulers in these military districts had nearly unlimited power. They sometimes conducted trials without juries in the South. Many southerners bitterly resented the imposition of military rule. They argued that the military occupation violated their rights because it was done without their consent or representation.
Congress, however, continued to impose new rules. To rejoin the Union, former Confederate states had to write new constitutions and ratify the Fourteenth Amendment. The Reconstruction Act also required that southern states allow African Americans to vote.
With the new constitutions in place, reconstructed states held elections to set up new state governments. The Fourteenth Amendment barred former Confederate officials from voting. Many other white southerners stayed away from the polls in protest. Protected by the army, freedmen proudly exercised their new right to vote. Most favored the Republican party, since it had supported their rights. As a result, Republicans gained control of all of the new southern state governments.
GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
On what basis did the southern states argue against the Military Reconstruction Acts?
» This cartoon shows the terror of the New Orleans riots of 1866. Analyze Political Cartoons What meaning can you infer from the way President Johnson is portrayed in this cartoon?
©
Interactive Cartoon
Political Problems and a New President
Congress passed other Reconstruction acts over Johnson’s veto. As President, Johnson had a duty to execute the new laws. However, Johnson did what he could to limit their effect. He fired several military commanders who supported Radical Reconstruction. Republicans in Congress decided to try to remove Johnson from office.
The President on Trial On February 24, 1868, the House of Representatives voted to impeach, or bring formal charges against, Johnson. According to the Constitution, the House may impeach a President for “treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.” The President is removed from office if found guilty by two thirds of the Senate.
During Johnson’s trial, it became clear that he was not guilty of high crimes and misdemeanors. Even Charles Sumner, Johnson’s bitter foe, admitted that the charges were “political in character.” Despite intense pressure, seven Republican senators refused to vote for conviction. The Constitution, they said, did not allow Congress to remove a President just because they
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	441
9.2 Radical Reconstruction
disagreed with him. In the end, the vote was 35 to 19— one vote shy of the two thirds needed to convict.
Grant Wins the Election of 1868 Johnson served out the few remaining months of his term. In May 1868, Republicans nominated the Union’s greatest war hero, Ulysses S. Grant, for President.
In July 1868, the Fourteenth Amendment finally passed, granting citizenship to African Americans. Former Confederate states had to ratify the amendment as if they were in the Union—even though they had not yet been readmitted. On the other hand, states that had been loyal to the Union during the war felt that the Confederate states had lost their constitutional rights by rebelling. This rule did not affect Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, or Missouri, slave states that did not secede.
By election day, most southern states had ratified the amendment and rejoined the Union. As Congress demanded, the southern states allowed African American men to vote. About 500,000 blacks voted— nearly all of them for Grant. With support from most northerners as well, he easily won the election.
The Impact of the Fifteenth Amendment In 1869, Congress proposed the Fifteenth Amendment. It forbade any state to deny any citizen the right to vote because of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude.”
Republicans had moral and political reasons for supporting the Fifteenth Amendment. They remembered the great sacrifices made by African American soldiers in the Civil War. They also felt it was wrong to let African Americans vote in the South but not in the North. In addition, Republicans knew that if African Americans could vote in the North, they would help Republicans win elections there.
The Fifteenth Amendment was ratified in 1870. At last, all African American men over age 21 had the right to vote.
The Fifteenth Amendment was a difficult amendment to enforce. The South soon found ways around it, as you will read. It was only in the mid-1900s that new legislation protected voting rights and the full impact of the amendment was felt.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did some Republican senators refuse to vote to convict Johnson after his impeachment?
RECONSTRUCTION POLITICS
» Analyze Tables How would you describe congressional support for the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments?
|The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	442	9.2 Radical Reconstruction
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the rights allowed to freedmen by the black codes.
2.	Generate Explanations Why were the black codes so restrictive?
3.	Draw Conclusions With which political party did Andrew Johnson’s sympathies seem to lie?
4.	Draw Conclusions Why was the Republican plan for Reconstruction called “Radical Reconstruction”?
5.	Generate Explanations Why did it take nearly a century for the full effect of the Fifteenth Amendment to be felt?
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	443
9.2 Radical Reconstruction
(i)
» Objectives
Identify new forces in southern politics. Describe how southern conservatives resisted Reconstruction.
Analyze the economic, political, and social challenges facing Reconstruction governments.
Explain why sharecropping led to a cycle of poverty.
» Key Terms
scalawag carpetbagger Ku Klux Kian sharecropper Hiram Rhodes Revels
Before the Civil War, a small group of rich planters had dominated southern politics. During Reconstruction, however, new groups tried to reshape southern politics. The state governments created during Radical Reconstruction were different from any governments the South had known before. The old leaders had lost much of their influence. Three groups stepped in to replace them.
Reconstruction and Southern Society
New Political Groups in the South
White Southern Republicans One group to emerge consisted of white southerners who supported the new Republican governments. Many were businesspeople who had opposed secession in 1860. They wanted to forget the war and get on with rebuilding the South.
Many whites in the South felt that any southerner who helped the Republicans was a traitor. They called the white southern Republicans scalawags, a word used for small, scruffy horses.
Northerners in the South Northerners who came to the South after the war were another important force. White southerners accused the new arrivals of hoping to get rich from the South’s misery. Southerners jested that these northerners were in such a hurry to move south that they had time only to fling a few clothes into cheap suitcases, or carpetbags. As a result, they became known as carpetbaggers.
In fact, northerners went south for various reasons. A few did hope to profit as the South was being rebuilt. Many more, however, were Union soldiers who had grown to love the South’s rich land. Others,
both white and black, were teachers, ministers, and reformers who sincerely wanted to help the freedmen
African Americans African Americans were the third major new group in southern politics. Before the war, they had no voice in southern government. During Reconstruction, they not only voted in large numbers but they also ran for and were elected to public office in the South. African Americans became sheriffs, mayors and legislators in the new state and local governments. Sixteen African Americans were elected to Congress between 1869 and 1880.
Two African Americans, both representing Mississippi, served in the Senate. Hiram Rhodes Revels, a clergyman and teacher, became the nation’s first black senator in 1870. He completed the unfinished term of former Confederate president Jefferson Davis. In 1874, Blanche K. Bruce became the first African American to serve a full term in the Senate.
Revels’s election had a powerful impact. It was an important victory for African American politicians. He served on the Committee on Education and Labor, where he opposed legislation that would segregate, or separate, schools for African Americans and whites. He also promoted opportunities for African American workers.
Freedmen had less political influence than many whites claimed, however. Only in South Carolina did African Americans win a majority in one house of the state legislature. No state elected a black governor.
0 DESCRIBE how politics in the South changed
during Reconstruction.
ELPS SPEAKING 3.C.3
Practice speaking with a partner about scalawags. Use one interrogative sentence (to ask a question) and have your partner respond with a declarative sentence (to state information) that answers the question. Conservatives Resist
Reform
Most white southerners who had held power before the Civil War resisted Reconstruction. These Conservatives ^sented the changes imposed by Congress and enforced by the military. They wanted the South to change as little as possible. Conservatives were willing to let African Americans vote and hold a few offices. Still, they were determined that real power would remain in the hands of whites. This tension caused social problems in the South during Reconstruction that impacted free African Americans and Conservatives.
A few wealthy planters tried to force African Americans back onto plantations. Many small farmers and laborers wanted the government to take action against freedmen, who now competed with them for land and power.
Most of these white southerners were Democrats. They declared war on anyone who cooperated with the Republicans. “This is a white man's country,” declared one southern senator, “and white men must govern it.”
The Problem of the Ku Klux Kian Some white southerners formed secret societies to help them regain power. The most dangerous was the Ku Klux Kian, or KKK. The Kian worked to keep African Americans and white Republicans out of office.
Dressed in white robes and hoods to hide their identities, Klansmen rode at night to the homes of African American voters, shouting threats and burning wooden crosses. When threats did not work, the Kian turned to violence. Kian members murdered hundreds of African Americans and their white allies.
The Social and Political Impact of the Kian Many moderate southerners condemned the violence of the Kian. Yet, they could do little to stop the Kian’s reign
» Hiram R. Revels became the first African American to serve in Congress in 1870. Predict Consequences How did gaining political representation affect most African Americans?
©
Interactive Gallery

r^| PEARSON 1
91 realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
I
Access your Digital Lesson. 444
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	445	9-3 Reconstruction and Southern Society
of terror. Freedmen turned to the federal government for help. In Kentucky, African American voters wrote to Congress:
“We believe you are not familiar with the Ku Klux Kian’s riding nightly over the country spreading terror wherever they go by robbing, whipping, and killing our people without provocation.”
—Records of the U.S. Senate, April 11, 1871
In 1870, Congress made it a crime to use force to keep people from voting. Although Kian activities decreased, the threat of violence remained. Some African Americans continued to vote and hold office, but others were frightened away from the ballot box.
fid EXPLAIN the social and political impact of southern
conservatives during Reconstruction.
ELPS SPEAKING 3.C.3
With a partner, practice speaking with a variety of sentence types. Use declarative,
At elps
» Both the KKK and White League used violence to try to prevent freedmen from voting. Analyze Political Cartoons What does the phrase “worse than slavery” suggest about the effect of this violence on African American families?
exclamatory, interrogative, and imperative sentences as you discuss the Ku Klux Kian.
Political Problems and Legislative Reform
Reconstruction governments tried to rebuild the South. They built public schools for both black and white children. Many states gave women the right to own property. In addition, Reconstruction governments rebuilt railroads, telegraph lines, bridges, and roads. Between 1865 and 1879, the South laid 7,000 miles of railroad track. However, political problems due to controversial government policies and political corruption impacted southerners and hindered progress.
Taxation Without Representation Rebuilding cost money. Before the war, southerners paid low taxes. Reconstruction governments raised taxes sharply. This created discontent among many southern whites. Many former Confederate officers and officials were denied voting rights during Reconstruction and thus were being taxed without representation. The tax increases also caused some landowners to lose their land.
Corruption Plagues Reconstruction Southerners were further angered by widespread corruption in the Reconstruction governments. One state legislature, for example, voted $1,000 to cover a member’s bet on a horse race. Other items billed to the state included hams, perfume, and a coffin. Corruption was not limited to the South. After the Civil War, dishonesty plagued northern governments, as well. Most southern officeholders, however, served their states honestly.
Attempts at Legislative Reform State legislative reform programs in the South met with mixed success. New state constitutions allowed all adult men to vote, removed restrictions for holding office, and made public officials elected rather than appointed. Executive branches were also given increased power to provide government services.
However, legislation to enroll voters was hindered by new voting restrictions that kept many African Americans from making use of their new voting rights. Many of the laws preventing former Confederates from
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	446	9.3 Reconstruction and Southern Society
voting and holding office did not last. In Georgia, African Americans were forced from the state legislature.
0 SUMMARIZE the problems that faced
Reconstruction governments trying to rebuild the South.
Economic Problems
During Reconstruction
In the first months after the war, freedmen left the plantations on which they had lived and worked. They found few opportunities, however.
Limited Opportunities for Freedmen Some Radical Republicans talked about giving each freedman “40 acres and a mule” as a fresh start. This idea stemmed from a field order given by General William Tecumseh Sherman in 1865. Thaddeus Stevens suggested breaking up big plantations and distributing the land. Most Americans opposed the plan, however. In the end, former slaves received—in the words of a freedman— "nothing but freedom.”
Through hard work or good luck, some freedmen were able to become landowners. Most, however, had little choice but to return to where they had lived in slavery. At the same time, some large planters found themselves with land but nobody to work it.
Economic Problems Confront the South Before the Civil War, Southern planters enjoyed prosperity because of strong demand for cotton, tobacco, and other farm products in the North and in Britain. During the war, a Union blockade had prevented the South from selling most of its products in those markets. As a result, prices for those products rose, and suppliers in Latin America, India, and other parts of the world began producing more tobacco, cotton, sugarcane, and rice. When the war ended and southern farmers returned to the market, they faced much greater competition from foreign producers, resulting in lower prices according to the laws of supply and demand.
Meanwhile, the war had destroyed many of the South’s cities and factories. Southern planters had lost their enslaved workers, who were often planters’ main investment. The South had little money to invest in industry. As a result, it remained dependent on farming st a time when farming brought less income.
» A visiting pastor joins an African American family for dinner in the South during Reconstruction.
» Sharecropping was a system in which poor African Americans and whites rented land from mostly white landowners in exchange for a portion of the harvest. Predict Consequences What impact did sharecropping have on African Americans’ economic status?
Poverty in the South During Reconstruction, many freedmen and poor whites went to work on the large Plantations. These sharecroppers rented and farmed a Plot of land. Planters provided seed, fertilizer, and
Interactive Chart
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	447
9.3 Reconstruction and Southern Society
tools in return for a share of the crop at harvest time. To many freedmen, sharecropping offered a measure of independence. Many hoped to own their own land one day.
In fact, this arrangement had a damaging impact on these groups. Most sharecroppers and small landowners became locked in a cycle of poverty. Each spring, they received supplies on credit. In the fall, they had to repay what they had borrowed. As you have read, southern farm products were worth less after the Civil War. If the harvest did not cover what they owed, they sank deeper into debt. Many farmers lost their land and became sharecroppers themselves.
B EXPRESS PROBLEMS CLEARLY
What was the biggest problem with sharecropping?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Explain why white southern conservatives resisted Reconstruction.
2.	Draw Conclusions Why didn’t any southern state elect an African American as governor?
3.	Summarize the purpose and activities of the Ku Klux Kian.
4.	Identify Central Issues What was the central challenge to rebuilding the South and how did the southern states meet this challenge?
5.	Explain Why did freedmen have such difficulty finding work in the South after the war, and why did so many of them turn to sharecropping?
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)
448	9.3 Reconstruction and Southern Society
O'
By the 1870s, Radical Republicans were losing power. Many northerners grew weary of trying to reform the South. It was time to let southerners run their own governments, they said—even if it meant that African Americans in the South might lose their rights.
fill Interactive Flipped Video
The Aftermath of Reconstruction
1.A, 4.E, 15.A, 15.C, 15.D, 17.A
» Objectives
Reconstruction Ends
Political Changes Impact the South Disclosure of widespread corruption also hurt Republicans. President Grant appointed many friends to government offices. Some used their position to steal large sums of money from the government. Grant won reelection in 1872, but many northerners lost faith in Republicans and their policies.
Summarize the events that led to the end of Reconstruction.
Explain how the rights of African Americans were restricted in the South after Reconstruction.
Identify industries that flourished in the “New South.”
» Key Terms
Congress passed the Amnesty Act in 1872. It restored the right to vote to nearly all white southerners, including former Confederate officials who had lost voting rights due to the Fourteenth Amendment. White southerners voted solidly Democratic. At the same time, threats of violence kept many African Americans from voting. By 1876, only three southern states—South Carolina, Florida, and Tennessee remained under Republican control.
Reconstruction Ends After Disputed Election of 1876 The end
°f Reconstruction came with the election of 1876. The Democrats nominated Samuel Tilden, governor of New York, for President. The Republicans chose Ohio governor Rutherford B. Hayes. Both
poll tax literacy test grandfather clause segregation Jim Crow laws “New South” Plessy v. Ferguson Compromise of
1877
candidates vowed to fight corruption.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
449
Tilden won the popular vote. However, he had only 184 electoral votes, one short of the number needed to win. The outcome of the election hung on 20 votes from states where the election was disputed. All but one came from the three southern states still controlled by Republicans. The exception was Oregon, where a Democratic governor replaced a Republican elector with a Democratic one, even though his state had voted heavily Republican. In the three southern states, Republican election officials were accused of throwing out Democratic votes.
As inauguration day drew near, the nation still had no one to swear in as President. Congress set up a special commission to settle the crisis. The commission, made up mostly of Republicans, decided to give all the disputed electoral votes to Hayes.
Southern Democrats could have fought the decision. However, they agreed to support the commission’s decision in return for a promise by Hayes to end Reconstruction. This agreement is known as the Compromise of 1877. Once in office, Hayes removed all remaining federal troops from Louisiana, South Carolina, and Florida. Reconstruction was over.
The Political Impact of Reconstruction
Reconstruction had a deep and lasting impact on southern politics. White southerners had bitter memories of Radical Republican policies and military
Ar elps
rule. For the next hundred years, the South remained a stronghold of the Democratic party. At the same time, black southerners steadily lost most of their political rights.
Id EXPLAIN why southern Democrats did not fight
the decision by the special commission to give the presidential election of 1876 to Rutherford B. Hayes?
ELPS SPEAKING 3.C.4
With a partner, discuss how the end of Reconstruction came about. As you speak, use the connecting words but, however, and at the same time to connect your ideas between sentences.
New Legislation Restricts African American Rights
As federal troops withdrew from southern states, Conservative Democrats tightened their grip on southern governments. These Conservatives found new ways to keep African Americans from exercising their rights. Many of these were laws that restricted the right to vote.
Voting Restrictions Limit Political Participation Over time, many southern states passed poll taxes, requiring voters to pay a fee each time they voted. As a result, poor freedmen could rarely afford to vote.
Election of 1876
» Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, why might Hayes’j victory in the 1876 election have come as a surprise to some?
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	450	9.4 The Aftermath of Reconstruction
States also imposed literacy tests that required voters to read and explain a section of the Constitution. Since most freedmen had little education, such tests kept them away from the polls. Election officials also applied different standards to black and white voters. Blacks who were able to read often had to answer much more difficult questions than whites on literacy tests.
Still, many poor whites could not pass the literacy test. To increase the number of white voters, states passed grandfather clauses. These laws stated that if a voter’s father or grandfather had been eligible to vote on January 1,1867, the voter did not have to take a literacy test. No African Americans in the South could vote before 1868, so grandfather clauses ensured that white men could vote.
Conservatives Implement Jim Crow Laws After 1877, segregation, or legal separation of races, became the law of the South. Jim Crow laws, as they were known, separated blacks and whites in schools, restaurants, theaters, trains, streetcars, playgrounds, hospitals, and even cemeteries. Louisiana novelist George Washington Cable described segregation as:
“A system of oppression so rank
that nothing could make it seem
small except the fact that [African
Americans] had already been ground
under it for a century and a half.”
-Gcoige Washington Cabin, “The lb eedman’s Case in E<{uit y"
African Americans brought lawsuits to challenge segregation. In 1896, in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson, the Supreme Court ruled that segregation was legal so long as facilities for blacks and whites were equal. In fact, facilities were rarely equal. For example, southern states spent much less on schools for blacks than for whites.
Despite such setbacks, the Constitution now recognized African Americans as citizens. Laws passed during Reconstruction—especially the Fourteenth Amendment—would become the basis of the civil rights movement almost 100 years later.
0 SUMMARIZE the ways in which southern
governments restricted the rights of freedmen.
» As southerners rebuilt their economy, they built manufacturing plants to process raw cotton into finished textiles, such as this mill in North Carolina.

Interactive Timeline
The ‘‘New South” Moves Toward Industry
During Reconstruction, the South made some progress toward rebuilding its economy. Cotton production, long the basis of the South’s economy, slowly recovered. By 1880, planters were growing as much cotton as they had in 1860.
After Reconstruction, a new generation of southern leaders worked to expand the economy. In stirring speeches, Atlanta journalist Henry Grady described a “New South” that used its vast natural resources to build up its own industry instead of depending on the North.
Agriculture Leads to New Industries in the South
In 1880, the entire South still produced fewer finished textiles than Massachusetts. In the next decade, more and more communities started building textile mills to turn cotton into cloth.
The tobacco industry also grew. In North Carolina, James Duke used new machinery to revolutionize the manufacture of tobacco products. Duke’s American Tobacco Company eventually controlled 90 percent of the nation’s tobacco industry.
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)
451	9.4 The Aftermath of Reconstruction
INDUSTRIAL GROWTHNEW SOUTH
COTTON MILLS
IN THE SOUTH
COAL
PRODUCTION
LUMBER PRODUCTION
1850
165 151 161
III
B THE SOUTH

239
400
I860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910
9,000 8,000 7,000 6,000 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 1,000
0 ! 1860
1880
1900
1860
1870
1880 *
1890
1900
M
» Analyze Charts Cite evidence from the charts that the southern economy diversified following the Civil War.
[®]IUSS2B5SES3
Developing the Environment to Shape New Industries The physical characteristics of the environment influenced many of the economic activities of the South. In addition to farming, abundant natural resources provided opportunities for new industries to emerge. In particular, the South tapped its mineral resources. With its large deposits of iron ore and coal, Alabama became a center of the steel industry. Oil refineries sprang up in Louisiana and Texas. Other states produced copper, granite, and marble.
By the 1890s, many northern forests had been cut down. The southern yellow pine competed with the northwestern white pine as a lumber source. Southern factories turned out cypress shingles and hardwood furniture.
Factories, farming, and mining modified the physical environment of the South. The work clearing land and making use of natural resources provided jobs and opportunities for southerners who had been struggling economically after the Civil War. Its wood, steel, and other products were used in industry around the country.
The South had developed a more balanced economy by 1900. “We find a South wide awake with business,”
wrote a visitor, “eagerly laying lines of communication, rapidly opening mines, building furnaces, foundries, and all sorts of shops.” Still, the South could not keep up with even more rapid growth in the North and the West.
& COMPARE the post-Reconstruction economy of
the South with its pre-Civil War economy.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Infer What was life like for African Americans in the South after Reconstruction ended?
2.	Draw Conclusions Why did the South become a Democratic stronghold?
3.	Summarize the effect of Jim Crow laws.
4.	Analyze Information How was the decision in Plessy v. Ferguson inconsistent with reality?
5.	Identify Central Ideas How did the South change to improve its economic situation?
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	452	9.4 The Aftermath of Reconstruction
While Reconstruction shaped the South following the Civil War, other events were occurring throughout the American West. In the 1860s, cattle ranching grew rapidly on the Great Plains.
Cattle graze in a field in the West. What clues in the painting suggest how the geography of the West contributed to the growth of ranching there?

Western Agriculture
El Interactive Flipped Video
A
Cattle Kingdom on the Plains Before this time, the Spanish, and then the Mexicans, had set up cattle ranches in the Southwest. Over the years, strays from these ranches, along with American breeds, grew into large herds of wild cattle. These wild cattle were known as longhorns. They roamed freely across the grassy plains of Texas.
After the Civil War, the demand for beef increased. People in the Towing cities in the East were eating more meat. Miners, railroad crews, farmers, and growing communities in the West added to the demand. The Texas longhorns were perfect for the commercial market. They could travel far on little water, and they required no winter feeding.
In response, Texas ranchers began rounding up herds of longhorns. They drove the animals hundreds of miles north to railroad lines in Kansas and Missouri on trips called cattle drives.
Jesse Chisholm blazed one of the most famous cattle trails. Jhisholm was half Scottish and half Cherokee. In the late 1860s, he Began hauling goods by wagon between Texas and the Kansas Pacific Railroad. His route crossed rivers at the best places and passed by weter holes. Ranchers began using the Chisholm Trail in 1867. Within five years, more than one million cattle had walked the road.
» Objectives
Identify the Cattle Kingdom.
Describe cowhands and cow towns during the cattle boom.
Summarize the massive westward migration following the Homestead Act.
Identify challenges western farmers faced and the alliances created to improve conditions.
Explain why the Populist Party was formed.
» Key Terms
cattle drive cow town sod house sodbuster cooperative wholesale inflation Morrill Acts vaquero
c
PEARSON 1
Bl| realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
453
Tending Cattle in the West Ranchers employed cowhands to tend their cattle and drive herds to market. These hard workers rode alongside the huge herds in good and bad weather. They kept the cattle moving and rounded up strays. After the Civil War, veterans of the Confederate Army made up the majority of the cowhands who worked in Texas. However, it is estimated that nearly one in three cowhands was either Mexican American or African American. Some cowhands dreamed of setting aside enough money to start a herd of their own. Most, in the end, just worked to earn wages.
Spanish Influences American cowhands learned much about riding, roping, and branding from Spanish and Mexican vaqueros (vah KEHR ohs). Vaqueros were skilled riders who herded cattle on ranches in Mexico, California, and the Southwest.
The gear used by American cowhands was modeled on the tools of the vaquero. Cowhands used the leather lariat to catch cattle and horses. Lariat comes from the Spanish word for rope. Cowhands wore wide-brimmed hats like the Spanish sombrero.
Their leather leggings, called chaps, were modeled on Spanish chaparreras (chah pah REH rahs). Chaps protected a rider’s legs from the thorny plants that grow in the Southwest.
The Physical Environment Shaped a Cowhand’s Work A cattle drive was hot, dirty, tiring, and often boring work. A cowboy’s days could last for nearly 18 hours.
The work was so strenuous that cowhands usually brought a number of horses so that each day a fresh one would be available. Cowhands worked in all kinds of weather and faced many dangers, including prairie dog holes, rattlesnakes, and fierce thunderstorms. They had to prevent nervous cattle from drowning while crossing fast-flowing rivers. They had to fight raging grass fires. They also faced attacks from cattle thieves who roamed the countryside.
One of the cowhand’s worst fears on a cattle drive was a stampede. A clap of thunder or a gunshot could set thousands of longhorns off at a run. Cowhands had to avoid the crush of hoofs and horns while attempting to turn the stampeding herd in a wide circle.
Most cowhands did not work for themselves. Instead, they were hired hands for the owners of large ranches. For all their hard work, cowhands were fed, housed, and lucky to earn $1 per day. Even in the 1870s, this was low pay.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What influences did the vaqueros have on cowhand culture in the United States?
The Changing West: Cattle Trails
0	200 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
KEY
----Railroads
— Cattle trails X Mining centers
» After the end of the Civil War, cattle ranching boomed in the West. Cattle trails stretched from Wyoming and Nebraska in the North to beyond Houston, Texas, in
Gulf of Mexico
the South.
Interactive Map

The Reconstruction Era (1865—1877)	454	9.5 Western Agriculture
Ranching Impacts
Settlement Patterns
Before long, cattle drives began to influence the settlement of western towns. As more cattle were driven through these areas, businesses offering services to the cowhands began to form in towns. As a result, cattle drives ended in cow towns that had sprung up along the railroad lines. The Chisholm Trail, for example, ended in Abilene, Kansas. Other cow towns in Kansas were Wichita, Caldwell, and Dodge City. In cow towns, cattle were held in great pens until they could be loaded into railroad cars and shipped to markets in the East.
In Abilene and other busy cow towns, dance halls, saloons, hotels, and restaurants catered to the cowhands. Sheriffs often had a hard time keeping the peace. Some cowhands spent wild nights drinking, dancing, and gambling.
The mam street of a town was where people conducted business. Almost every town had a general store that sold groceries, tools, clothing, and all sorts of other goods. The general store also served as a social center where people could talk and exchange the latest news. As a town grew, drugstores, hardware stores, and even ice cream parlors lined its main street.
Religion also played an important role for the townspeople. Throughout the West, places of worship grew in number and membership. They served as spiritual and social centers and as symbols of progress and stability. "A church does as much to build up a town as a school, a railroad, or a fair,” noted one New Mexico newspaper.
DESCRIBE
How would you describe the settlement pattern of cow towns in the West?
The Spread of Farming
In the 1870s, ranching spread north from Texas and across the grassy Plains. Soon, cattle grazed from Kansas to present-day Montana. Ranchers had built a Cattle Kingdom in the West. They came to expect high profits. Millions of dollars poured into the West from people in the East and in foreign countries who wanted to earn money from the cattle boom. However, the boom did not last.
Conflicts Over Land Ranchers let their cattle run wild on the open range. To identify cattle, each ranch had its own brand that was burned into a cow s hide.
Sometimes, there were conflicts on the range. When sheepherders moved onto the Plains, ranchers tried to
» Workers load cattle into a railway car in Kansas during the 1870s. Identify Cause and Effect What factors allowed cow towns to spread across the West?
©
Interactive Gallery
drive them out. The ranchers complained the sheep nibbled the grass so low that the cattle could not eat it. To protect the range, which they saw as their own, ranchers sometimes attacked sheepherders and their flocks.
New Settlements Encroach on Cattle Land In
the 1870s, farmers began moving onto the range. They fenced their fields with barbed wire, which kept cattle and sheep from pushing over fences and trampling plowed fields. As more farmers bought land, the open range began to disappear. Large grants of land to the railroads also limited it. As a result, a more organized system began to develop in which ranchers bought and maintained private property. This protection of property rights further boosted settlement in the West.
Nature, however, imposed limits on the cattle boom. After a time, there just was not enough grass to feed all the cattle that lived on the plains. The need to buy feed and land pushed up the costs. Diseases such as "Texas fever” sometimes destroyed entire herds. Then, the bitterly cold winters of 1886 and 1887 killed entire herds of cattle. In the summer, severe heat and drought dried up water holes and scorched the grasslands.
Cattle owners began to buy land and fence it in. Soon, farmers and ranchers divided the open range into
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	455	9.5 Western Agriculture
a patchwork of large fenced plots. The days of the Cattle Kingdom were over.
RECALL
What effect did the arrival of growing numbers of farmers have on the open range system?
Effects of the Homestead Act
Congress passed the Homestead Act in 1862. It was the centerpiece of the government’s land policy. The law promised 160 acres of free land to anyone who was head of a household, who had not fought for the Confederacy, and who paid a small filing fee and improved the land over five years.
The Environment Impacts Western Settlement
The main effect of the Homestead Act was a stream of immigrants and easterners took up the offer of free land. Many planted their 160 acres with wheat and corn. By 1900, half a million Americans had set up farms under the Homestead Act. Under the Homestead Act the land was free, but setting up a farm required money and hard work. Many people did not have the

» In exchange for farming the land for five years, this pioneer family gained ownership of their homestead in Cluster County, Nebraska. Summarize What were settlers required to do in exchange for the free land on which they settled?


money to move west and start a farm. Also, only about 20 percent of the homestead land went directly to small farmers. Land-owning companies took large areas of land illegally and resold it to farmers at a high price. As a result, many settlers struggled to make ends meet.
African Americans Settle in Kansas African Americans joined the rush for land in the West. Some were able to take advantage of the Homestead Act. The largest group of black settlers moved west at the end of Reconstruction, when the freedoms African Americans had gained after the Civil War were slipping away.
In 1879, a group of African Americans moved to Kansas. They called themselves Exodusters, after Exodus, the book of the Bible that tells about the Jews escaping from slavery in Egypt. The Exodusters paid for their land rather than claim it under the Homestead Act. Between 40,000 and 70,000 African Americans had moved to Kansas by 1881, though only some of these were Exodusters.
Settlement Patterns of Anglos and Mexicanos
Easterners who moved to the Southwest found a large established Spanish-speaking population there. As you recall, the United States had gained much of the Southwest through the Mexican War. Many of its inhabitants were people of Spanish or Mexican origin who lived in the region before it became part of the United States.
Spanish-speaking southwesterners called themselves Mexicanos. White Americans who lived in the region were known as Anglos. Most Mexicanos lived in small villages, where they farmed and raised sheep. A few wealthy Mexicanos were large landowners and merchants.
As more Anglos settled in the Southwest, they acquired the best jobs and land. Often, Mexicanos found themselves working as low-paid laborers on Anglo farms. In New Mexico, in the 1880s, angry farmers known as Las Gorras Blancas, or “White Caps,” demanded fair treatment. Other Mexicanos in Arizona founded the Hispanic-American Alliance in 1894 to protect and fight for their rights.
Settlements on Oklahoma Farmland As settlers spread across the West, free land began to disappear. The last major land rush took place in Oklahoma. Several Native American nations lived there, but the government forced them to sell their land. The government then announced that farmers could claim free homesteads in Oklahoma. They could not stake their claims, however, until noon on April 22,1889.
On the appointed day, as many as 100,000 land seekers lined up at the Oklahoma border. At noon,
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)
456	9.5 Western Agriculture
a gunshot rang out. The “boomers” charged into Oklahoma, but they found that others were already there. ‘ Sooners had sneaked into Oklahoma before the official opening and had staked out much of the best land. The physical characteristics of the Oklahoma environment meant that farmers needed good land in order to succeed. Those who settled on fertile farmland had better chances than those who ended up with less fertile land.
ANALYZE INFORMATION
Who worked to get around the rules of the Homestead Act in order to profit from the land, and how did they profit?
Effects of the Morrill Acts
Agriculture was becoming more of a business as farmers increasingly grew food for the market at the same time as industry was growing. To train professionals for both agriculture and industry, there was a growing call for publicly supported agricultural and mechanical colleges. The Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act of 1862, put forth during the Civil War by Justin Smith Morrill of Vermont, offered states a federal land grant to build schools that would teach and promote scientific farming and engineering.
States received 30,000 acres of public land per congressional representative, a policy that gave more land to more populous states. Colleges founded on this land had to teach science, classics, agriculture, mechanics, and military tactics.
In 1890, a second Morrill Act was passed to extend the benefits of land-grant funding to African American students. It required states either to admit students of all races to their land-grant colleges or to set up separate land-grant colleges for African Americans. Upholding segregation, the South created separate colleges for African American and white students. Many of these agricultural colleges grew into historically black colleges and universities serving African Americans in the South.
Both of the Morrill Acts had important effects on the country. Private colleges were expensive. The new public schools were more affordable. They made college more available to Americans and affirmed that the government would play a role in supporting higher education.
Private colleges also did not teach the practical skills that many Americans needed to find jobs. Land-Jrant colleges emphasized the training and skills needed in an agricultural and industrial society. The first land-grant college to open was the University of
» Farmers like these in the Oklahoma Territory needed schooling and training. The Morrill Acts created colleges to support a scientific approach to agriculture.
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	457
9.5 Western Agriculture
Massachusetts. Large universities also formed in the West and Midwest.
B DRAW CONCLUSIONS
Why were the Morrill Acts important for the average American student? Life on the Plains
Farmers on the western plains faced many hardships. The first problem was shelter. Because wood was scarce on the Great Plains, many farmers built houses of sod—soil held together by grass roots. Rain was a serious problem for sod houses. One pioneer woman complained that her sod roof “leaked two days before a rain and for three days after.”
Sodbusting The fertile soil of the Great Plains was covered with a layer of thick sod that could crack wood or iron plows. A new sodbusting plow made of steel reached the market by 1877. It enabled sodbusters, as Plains farmers were called, to cut through the sod to the soil below.
Technology helped farmers in other ways. On the Great Plains, water often lay hundreds of feet underground. Farmers built windmills to pump the
» Settlers built the roofs of sod houses using grass roots. Predict Consequences How would rain affect people living in sod houses?
Interactive 3-D Model
water to the surface. New reapers, threshing machines, and binders helped farmers to harvest crops.
Environmental Challenges The dry climate was a constant threat. When too little rain fell, the crops shriveled and died. Dry weather also brought the threat of fire. A grass fire traveled “as fast as a horse could run.” The summers often brought swarms of grasshoppers that ate everything in their path—crops, food, tree bark, even clothing. Pioneers dreaded the winters most. With few trees or hills to block the wind, icy gusts built huge snowdrifts. The deep snow buried farm animals and trapped families inside their homes.
Women’s Roles on the Plains Women had to be strong to survive the hardships of life on the Great Plains. Since there were few stores, women made clothing, soap, candles, and other goods by hand. They also cooked and preserved food needed for the long winter.
Women served their communities in many ways. Most schoolteachers were women. When there were no doctors nearby women treated the sick and injured.
Pioneer families usually lived miles apart. They relaxed by visiting with neighbors and gathering for church services. Picnics, dances, and weddings were eagerly awaited events.
Dependence on the Physical Environment
Homesteaders depended on the environment for their livelihood. They needed the right amounts of water, sunlight, rain, and soil for their crops. This made homesteading risky; there were many difficult harvests and lean years.
It also meant that homesteaders put a great deal of care into the land. Those who owned their farms worked hard to keep the land productive. They wanted to ensure that their property would continue to supply the resources they needed to survive.
Reliance on the land and distance from more populous eastern cities meant that homesteaders were extremely self-sufficient. They used resources from the environment to meet their needs. If something was broken, they fixed it themselves.
Economic Challenges Despite the harsh conditions, farmers began to thrive in the West. Before long, they were selling huge amounts of wheat and corn in the nation’s growing cities and even in Europe. Then, farmers faced an unexpected problem. The more they harvested, the less they earned. In 1881, a bushel of wheat sold for $1.19. By 1894, the price had plunged to 49 cents. Western farmers were hurt most by low grain prices. They had borrowed money during good times to
The Reconstruction Era (1865—1877)	458	9.5 Western Agriculture
FARMERS UNITE FREIGHT PRICES
FREIGHT COSTS
grange membership w a*ir«;vr y r y y<y I Vt tV	yyyyy?y <y ■
FROM CHICAGO TO NEW YORK
» Analyze Graphs Based on the information in charts, why did farmers form Granges?
buy land and machinery. When wheat prices fell, they could not repay their debts.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What effects did the isolation of western farms have on the women of the Plains?
Farming and the Economy
As early as the 1860s, farmers began to work together. They learned that they could improve their condition through economic cooperation and political action.
The National Grange Supports Cooperation In
1867, farmers formed the National Grange. Grangers wanted to boost farm profits and reduce the rates that railroads charged for shipping grain.
Grangers helped farmers set up cooperatives. In a cooperative a group of farmers pooled their money to buy seeds and tools wholesale. Wholesale means buying or selling something in large quantities at lower prices. Grangers built cooperative warehouses so that fanners could store grain cheaply while waiting for Tetter selling prices.
Leaders of the Grange urged farmers to use their vote. In 1873, western and southern Grangers pledged to vote only for candidates who supported their aims.
They elected officials who understood the farmers’ problems.
As a result, several states passed laws limiting what could be charged for grain shipment and storage. Nevertheless, crop prices continued to drop. Farmers sank deeper into debt.
The Farmers’ Alliance Spreads Another group, the Farmers’ Alliance, joined the struggle in the 1870s. Like the Grange, the Alliance set up cooperatives and warehouses. The Farmers’ Alliance spread from Texas through the South and into the Plains states. Alliance leaders also tried to join with factory workers and miners who were angry about their treatment by employers.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What was the principle upon which the National Grange and the Farmers’ Alliance were formed?
ELPS SPEAKING 3.D.1
With a partner, discuss the following questions: How does a cooperative work? What might have happened to a farmer who did not join a cooperative? Use the content area vocabulary words cooperative and wholesale in your answers.
-Jfc ELPS
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	459	9.5 Western Agriculture
» Analyze Political Cartoons What does the object on which William McKinley is standing in this image suggest about his political views in the election of 1896?
The Rise of the People’s Party in the West
In 1892, farmers and labor unions joined together to form the People’s Party, also known as the Populists. At their first national convention, the Populists demanded that the government help to raise farm prices and to regulate railroad rates. They also called for an income tax, an eight-hour workday, and limits on immigration.
The key Populist party demand was “free silver.” Populists wanted all silver mined in the West to be coined into money. They said that farm prices dropped because there was not enough money in circulation. Free silver would increase the money supply and make it easier for farmers to repay their debts.
Eastern bankers and factory owners opposed this. They argued that increasing the money supply would cause inflation, or increased prices. Business people feared that inflation would wreck the economy. They favored the gold standard with which the government backs every dollar with a certain amount of gold. Since the supply of gold is limited, there would be less money in circulation. Prices would drop.
Bryan Versus McKinley The Populist candidate for President in 1892 won one million votes. The next year, a severe depression brought the Populists new support. In 1894, they elected six senators and seven representatives to Congress.
The Populists looked toward the election of 1896 with high hopes. Their program had been endorsed by one of the great orators of the age: Democrat William Jennings Bryan.
A young Democratic congressman from Nebraska, Bryan was called the “Great Commoner” because he championed the cause of common people. Like the Populists, he believed that the nation needed to increase the supply of money. At the Democratic convention in 1896, Bryan made a powerful speech against the rich and for free silver. At the end of his speech, referring to the rich, Bryan proclaimed, “You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.”
Both Democrats and Populists supported Bryan for President. However, bankers and business people feared that Bryan would ruin the economy. They supported William McKinley, the Republican candidate. McKinley and the Republican party called for keeping the dollar tied to the gold standard.
Bryan narrowly lost the election of 1896. He carried the South and the West, but McKinley won the heavily populated states of the North and East.
The Populist Movement Ends With the Election of 1896 The People’s Party broke up after 1896. One reason was that, with Bryan as a candidate, the Democrats adopted several Populist causes. Also, prosperity returned in the late 1890s. People worried less about railroad rates and the gold standard.
Id DESCRIBE Why were eastern bankers opposed to
the Populists’ “free silver” demand?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Check Understanding What were the benefits of driving cattle along a known trail, such as the Chisholm Trail?
2.	Draw Conclusions Why did sheriffs often have a hard time keeping the peace in a cow town?
3.	Explain why the second Morrill Act was passed.
4.	Summarize What made farming on the western plains so difficult?
5.	Analyze Information Why was the National Grange successful in meeting some of its goals?
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	460	9.5 Western Agriculture
Native Americans had been living for centuries on the Great Plains, the vast, gently sloping region west of the Mississippi River and east of the Rocky Mountains. Many different Native American nations lived on the Great Plains. A number of them, such as the Arikaras, had lived on the Plains for hundreds of years. Others, like the Lakotas, did not move to the Plains until the early 1700s.
These Crow Indians once roamed the Yellowstone River Valley. Like other Plains Indians, the Crow resisted pioneers’ attempts to settle their ancestral lands.
Interactive Flipped Video
Hardship for Native Americans
The Plains Indians
Farming and Hunting Plains Indians had rich and varied cultures. They were skilled artists. They also had well-organized religions and warrior societies. Each nation had its own language. People from different nations used sign language to communicate with one another.
At one time, most Plains Indians were farmers who lived in semipermanent villages. From there, they sent out hunting parties that pursued on foot herds of buffalo and other animals. Agriculture, however, was their main source of food.
The Introduction of Horses Proved Useful During the 1600s, the Plains Indians’ way of life changed as they learned about horses from neighboring tribes.
Christopher Columbus had brought horses to the Americas in the late 1400s, and the Spanish brought them to the North American mainland in the 1500s. At first, Native Americans were not allowed to own horses, but they did learn how to care for them and ride them. After the Pueblo Indians revolted against the Spaniards in 1680, the
» Objectives
Describe the life of the Plains Indians and their uses of buffalo.
Summarize promises made to Native Americans.
Explain why the Plains Indian way of life ended.
Identify why reforms in favor of Native Americans failed.
» Key Terms
tepee
travois
corral
jerky
reservation

PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
461
Pueblos were left with thousands of horses. They started trading these horses to neighboring tribes. Eventually, the horses reached the tribes of the northern plains.
Plains Indians used horses while hunting. They also used horses when moving their villages and going on raids.
B DESCRIBE
How did the practices of Plains Indians change after the Pueblo revolt of 1680?
Life on the Plains
The buffalo served as a living grocery store for Plains Indians. After acquiring horses, they followed the huge buffalo herds that had roamed their homeland for centuries. Plains Indians began to live in tepees (tee pees), or tents made by stretching buffalo skins on tall poles. The tepees could easily be carried on a travois (truh VOl)—a sled pulled by a dog or a horse.
The migration of the Plains Indians mirrored the movement of the buffalo. In winter, small groups of buffalo moved to protected valleys and forests. In summer, huge buffalo herds gathered on the Plains where the grass was plentiful. In the same way, Plains Indians spent the winter in small bands and gathered in large groups during the summers.
» Plains Indians developed a culture based on following and hunting buffalo. The introduction of the horse made this possible.
Hunting the Buffalo There were different ways to hunt buffalo. Before horses came to the Plains, a group of hunters would shout and wave colored robes at the buffalo. The hunters would gradually drive a herd of buffalo into a corral, or enclosure.
There they killed the trapped buffalo. When the hunt was over, the women and children joined the hunters in cutting up the buffalo and taking it back to camp. Once they had horses, hunters would ride the horses right into the herd and kill the buffalo with bows and arrows.
The Buffalo Sustained a Way of Life Although the Plains Indians also hunted deer and elk, they depended on the buffalo for food, clothing, and shelter. Buffalo meat, rich in protein, was a main item of the Plains Indians' diet. Women cut up and dried the meat on racks. The dried meat was called jerky.
Women also tanned buffalo hides to make sleeping robes and tepee covers. They wove buffalo fur into coarse, warm cloth. The cloth was used as an outer covering for a tepee.
Councils and Ceremonies Many Native American groups met on the Plains. They hunted together and attended special events. Summer gatherings were the time for councils. At the councils, the elders were consulted about the problems that affected an entire Plains Indian nation.
The most important religious ceremony was the Sun Dance. Hundreds of people attended the four-day ceremony to thank the Great Spirit for blessings, good hunts, and help in times of trouble. Sun Dancers also asked the Great Spirit for good fortune in the coming year.
H RECALL
How was the buffalo useful to the Plains Indians?
Gender Roles in Plains Indian Society
Women and men usually had specific roles in Plains Indian society. In some tribes, women helped men with the hunting and governing. A Blackfoot woman, Running Eagle, led many hunting parties herself.
Responsibilities at Home Women oversaw life in the home. They gathered food and prepared meals for their families. The women not only made the tepees, but they were also responsible for raising and taking down tepees. Women cared for the children and, along with the men, passed along the traditions of their people.
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	462
9.6 Hardship for Native Americans
Women also engaged in many crafts. They made the baskets and blankets. Their work often showed great artistic skill and design. In fact, a woman’s ability in crafts helped establish her rank in society.
Community Leadership The men of the Plains Indians had important responsibilities, too. They hunted to provide food and other materials they needed. They also protected the women, children, and the elders. They passed on their valuable skills and knowledge to the boys. They supervised the spiritual life of the community by leading religious ceremonies.
Another important responsibility of the men was to provide military leadership. They waged war to defend or extend territory, to gain horses and other riches, or to seek revenge. More than anything else, however, men waged war to protect their people and to prove their bravery and ability. The most successful warriors gained great respect from the members of their nation. 0 DESCRIBE the role women played in the household.
Broken Promises
Before Europeans and Americans began to settle on the Plains, the Plains Indians often fought with one another over territory or other resources. But as American settlers began to encroach on Plains Indians’ lands, their attention turned toward this new threat. Conflict on the Plains began as early as the 1840s, when settlers and miners began to cross Plains Indian hunting grounds. The settlers and miners asked for government protection from the Native Americans.
A
Treaty Quickly Forgotten The U S. government built a string of forts to protect settlers and miners. In 1851, federal government officials met with Plains Indian nations near Fort Laramie in Wyoming. The officials asked each nation to keep to a limited area. In return, they promised money, domestic animals, agricultural tools, and other goods. Officials told the Native Americans that the lands that were reserved for them would be theirs forever. Native American leaders agreed to the terms of the Fort Laramie Treaty. However, in 1858, gold was discovered at Pikes Peak in Colorado. A wave of miners rushed to land that the government had promised to the Cheyenne and Arapaho peoples. Federal officials forced Native American leaders to sign a new treaty giving up the land around Pikes Peak. Some Native Americans refused to accept the agreement. They attacked white settlers.
» In Plains Indian societies, women were responsible for child rearing and also held many other roles. In some tribes, they took part in hunting and governing.
» Native American leaders met with government officials at Fort Laramie. The treaty they signed was part of a broader federal effort to create peace between native groups and western settlers.
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	463
9.6 Hardship for Native Americans
» Soldiers of the U.S. Cavalry attack a Cheyenne Village at Sand Creek. More than 150 Native American men, women, and children lost their lives in the massacre.
» Buffalo run as passengers and crew aboard this train shoot at them for sport. This contributed to the rapid decline of the buffalo population in the mid to late 1800s.
The Sand Creek Massacre The settlers struck back. In 1864, Colonel John Chivington led his militia against a Cheyenne village whose leaders had come to a fort asking for protection. When Chivington attacked, the Native Americans raised both a white flag of surrender and the flag of the United States. Chivington had thought the Native Americans were hostile. He either ignored or did not see the flags. He ordered his men to destroy the village and take no prisoners. In what would become the Sand Creek Massacre, the militia slaughtered more than 150 men, women, and children.
After the massacre, soldiers said they found scalps of whites in the camp, indicating that there had been some hostile Native Americans there. A congressional committee that investigated the massacre condemned Chivington’s actions, but Chivington had already left the army. As a result of the massacre, Plains Indians went to war. They attacked white settlers and U.S. troops. U.S. troops responded by attacking Indians.
Changing Traditional Ways of Life In 1867, federal officials established a peace commission to end the wars on the Plains so that settlers would be safe. The commission urged Native Americans to settle down and live as white farmers did. It also urged them to send their children to white schools to learn "American'' ways.
Agreeing to Resettle In 1867, the Kiowas, Comanches, and other southern Plains Indians signed a new treaty with the government. They promised to move to Indian Territory in present-day Oklahoma. The soil there was poor. Also, most Plains Indians were hunters, not farmers. The Native Americans did not like the treaty but knew they had no choice.
The Lakotas and Arapahos of the northern Plains also signed a second Fort Laramie Treaty in 1868. They agreed to live on reservations in present-day South Dakota. A reservation is a limited area set aside for Native Americans.
Buffalo Populations Fall Dramatically The Plains Indians suffered from lost battles and broken treaties. Even worse for them, however, was the destruction of the buffalo.
The decline of the buffalo began before the arrival of white settlers. Herds of buffalo lived in areas west of the Mississippi and east of the Rockies. However, with disease, drought, and destruction of the areas in which they lived, the herds were slowly growing smaller. As the market demand for buffalo robes increased during the 1830s and 1840s, professional buffalo hunters killed more buffalo. In addition, buffalo hunting became a pleasure sport when railroads cut through the areas
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	464	9.6 Hardship for Native Americans
in which buffalo lived. Native Americans themselves learned to hunt more efficiently. Some Plains Indian tribes, such as the Pawnees, continued to hunt buffalo even though they recognized that the number of buffalo was decreasing.
The buffalo hunt was a part of their culture that they did not want to give up. As the buffalo disappeared, so did the Plains Indians’ way of life.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why were the terms of the Fort Laramie treaty broken? Conflict in the West
Continues
Settlers and miners continued to move into the West. They wanted more and more land for themselves. Even on reservations, Native Americans were not left in peace.
The Battle of Little Bighorn In 1874, prospectors found gold in the Black Hills region of the Lakota, or Sioux, reservation. Thousands of miners rushed to the area.
In June 1876, Colonel George A. Custer led a column of soldiers into the Little Bighorn Valley. They were sent by the federal government to protect the miners, even though miners were violating the 1868 U.S. treaty with the Lakotas. A group of 600 men under Custer’s command prepared to attack a Lakota hunting party, although the!868 treaty gave the Lakota the right to hunt in the area. Indian scouts warned Custer that there were many Lakotas and Cheyennes camped ahead. Nearly 2,000 warriors awaited Custer and his men. Custer divided his troops and attacked with approximately 225 men.
Custer and all these men died in the Battle of Little Bighorn. This was the first battle of the Sioux War of 1876, in which the Lakotas, led by Sitting Bull, Crazy Horse, and other chiefs, fought U.S. forces.
The Native American victory at the Little Bighorn was short-lived. The army soon defeated the Lakotas and Cheyennes. Then, Congress ordered that no food rations be distributed to the Native Americans until they agreed to the government’s demands. To avoid starvation, the Lakotas gave up most claims to the Black Hills and other territory. In this way, they surrendered about one third of the lands that the United States government had guaranteed them with the Fort Laramie Treaty of 1868.
Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse had taken their few remaining followers to Canada. Eventually, both men returned.
» General George A. Custer (front, on horse) and his soldiers attacked a Lakota and Cheyenne camp at Little Bighorn. Far outnumbered, the U.S. soldiers were all killed, including Custer.
r®
Interactive Map
Chief Joseph Resists Further Settlement The Nez
Perce people lived in the Snake River valley, at the place where today Oregon, Washington, and Idaho meet. In 1855, some Nez Perce signed a treaty with the United States government in which they relinquished part of their land.
In the 1860s, gold discoveries brought miners onto Nez Perce land. The government ordered the Nez Perces to move to a reservation in Idaho. Those who had not signed the treaty refused. Led by Chief Joseph, about 700 Nez Perces fled north toward Canada. Army troops followed close behind.
In the months that followed, the Nez Perces fought off or eluded pursuing army units. Finally, after a tragic journey of more than 1,000 miles, Chief Joseph decided that he must surrender. Of the approximately 700 Nez Perces who had set out with him, fewer than 450 remained.
Geronimo Surrenders in the Southwest In the arid lands of the Southwest, the Apaches fiercely resisted the loss of their lands. One leader, Geronimo, continued fighting the longest. In 1876, he assumed leadership of a band of Apache warriors when the government tried to force his people onto a reservation.
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	465	9-6 Hardship for Native Americans
» Geronimo was an Apache chief who fought U.S. expansion into Apache territory and resisted government attempts to force his people onto reservations.
» The Sioux Ghost Dance reflected Plains Indians’ desires to return to their old way of life. Participants danced and sang until it was believed that they would have powerful visions.
Geronimo waged war off and on for the next 10 years. From Mexico, he led frequent raids into Arizona and New Mexico. His surrender in 1886 marked the end of formal warfare between Native Americans and whites.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why did the Sioux War of 1876 begin? Remembering a Lost Way of Life
Many Native Americans longed for their lost way of life. On the reservations, the Lakotas and other Plains Indians turned to a religious ceremony called the Ghost Dance. It celebrated the time when Native Americans lived freely on the Plains.
The Ghost Dance In 1889, word spread that a prophet named Wovoka (woh VOH kuh) had appeared among the Paiute people of the southern Plains. Wovoka said that the Great Spirit would make a new world for his people, free from whites and filled with plenty. To bring about this new world, all the Native Americans had to do was dance to the Ghost Dance.
In their ceremonies, Ghost Dancers joined hands in a large circle in which they danced, chanted, and prayed. As they danced, some felt a “growing happiness.” Others saw a glowing vision of a new world.
Settlers Misinterpreted the Ghost Dance Many settlers grew alarmed. The Ghost Dancers, they said, were preparing for war. The settlers persuaded the government to outlaw the Ghost Dance.
In December 1890, police officers entered a Lakota reservation to arrest Sitting Bull, who had returned from Canada and was living on the reservation. They claimed that he was spreading the Ghost Dance among the Lakotas. In the struggle that followed, Sitting Bull was accidentally shot and killed.
Tragedy at Wounded Knee Upset by Sitting Bull s death, groups of Lakotas fled the reservations. Army troops pursued them to Wounded Knee Creek, in present-day South Dakota. On December 29, the Native Americans were preparing to surrender. As nervous troops watched, the Indians began to give up their guns.
Suddenly, a shot rang out. One account says a rifle went off by accident. The army opened fire. By the time the shooting stopped, nearly 300 Native American men, women, and children lay dead. About 25 soldiers
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)
466	9.6 Hardship for Native Americans
had also died. The massacre at Wounded Knee marked the end of the Ghost Dance religion.
IDENTIFY
What was the purpose of the Ghost Dance?
Calls to Reform Native American Policies
The Native Americans were no longer able to resist the government. During the late 1800s, more Native Americans were forced onto reservations.
Publicizing Native American Tragedies Many people, Native American and white, spoke out against the tragedy that was occurring. One reformer, Susette La Flesche, was the daughter of an Omaha chief. She wrote and lectured about the destruction of the Native American way of life.
Another reformer, Helen Hunt Jackson, published A Century of Dishonor in 1881. The book recounts the long history of broken treaties between the United States and the Native Americans.
The Dawes Act Calls for reform led Congress to pass the Dawes Act in 1887. The act encouraged Native Americans to become farmers. Some reservations were divided up and given to individual Native American families.
The Dawes Act was a major change in the government’s policy toward Native Americans. Before the Act, Native Americans had been removed from their land and placed on reservations. There, they were poorly provided for by the government. With the Dawes Act, the government hoped that Native Americans would adopt white ways and become farmers.
The Dawes Act did not have the desired effect, however. To Native Americans, land was an open space for riding and hunting. Moreover, much of the land they were given was not suitable for farming. As a result, Native Americans often sold their shares of land to whites for low prices.
Life on the reservations changed Native American culture. The federal government took away the power of Native American leaders. In their place, it appointed government agents to make most decisions.
IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
What was the purpose and effects of the Dawes Act?
E33323 ELPS SPEAKING 3.D.2
With a partner, discuss these questions: How did Helen Hunt Jackson and Susette La Flesche help Native Americans? Use the content » Lakotas perform a traditional dance on the Rosebud Reservation in South Dakota. The reservation was created under the terms of the Fort Laramie Treaty of 1868.
area vocabulary words lectured, published, and policy in your discussion.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Explain the Plains Indians’ dependence on the buffalo.
2.	Summarize the roles men played in the Plains Indians’ daily life.
3.	Analyze Information Why couldn’t the settlers and miners live in peace with the Plains Indians?
4.	Draw Conclusions Given what you have learned about the treatment of Native Americans at the hands of the U.S. government, what best explains the reaction of Chief Joseph and some Nez Perce Indians when they were ordered to move to a reservation in Idaho after gold was discovered on their land?
5.	Support Ideas With Evidence Using the Ghost Dance as an example, what evidence can you provide to support the idea that misunderstanding and fear can lead to tragedy?
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	467
9.6 Hardship for Native Americans
The western mining boom had begun with the California gold rush of 1849. When the gold rush ended, miners looked for new opportunities. A mere rumor sent them racing east in search of new strikes.
Railroads allowed for rapid movement
of people and goods into and out of the West, making settlement there easier.
Interactive Flipped Video
» Objectives
Describe how the boom in gold and silver changed the West.
Identify problems that arose on the mining frontier.
Explain how railroads helped the West develop.
Analyze how railroad services became more efficient over time.
Describe how railroads encouraged economic growth.
» Key Terms
lode
vigilante
transcontinental
railroad
subsidy
gauge
network
consolidate
rebate
pool
Mining, Railroads, and the Economy
Silver and Gold Mining
The Comstock Lode Two prospectors struck gold in Nevada in 1859. Then, another miner, Henry Comstock, appeared. "The land is mine,” he cried, demanding to be made a partner. From then on, Comstock boasted about “his” mine. The strike became known as the Comstock Lode. A lode is a rich vein of gold or silver.
Comstock and his partners often complained about the heavy blue sand that was mixed in with the gold. It clogged the devices used for separating out the gold and made the gold hard to reach. When Mexican miners took the “danged blue stuff” to an expert in California, tests showed that it was loaded with silver. Comstock had stumbled onto one of the richest silver mines in the world.
Miners moved into many other areas of the West. Some found valuable ore in Montana and Idaho. Others struck it rich in Colorado. In the 1870s, miners discovered gold in the Black Hills of South Dakota. In the late 1890s, thousands rushed north to Alaska after major gold strikes were made there.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
468
Boomtowns and Ghost Towns Gold and silver strikes attracted thousands of prospectors. Towns sprang up almost overnight near all the major mining sites.
First, miners built a tent city near the diggings. Then, people came to supply the miners’ needs. Traders brought mule teams loaded with tools, food, and clothing. Merchants hauled in wagon-loads of supplies and set up stores.
Soon, wood-frame houses, hotels, restaurants, and stores replaced the tents. For example, it took less than a year for the mining camp at the Comstock Lode to become the boomtown of Virginia City, Nevada.
Most settlers in the boomtowns of the mining frontier were men. However, enterprising women also found ways to profit. Some women ran boardinghouses and laundries. Others opened restaurants, where miners gladly paid high prices for home-cooked meals.
Many boomtowns lasted for only a few years. When the gold or silver ore was gone, the miners moved away. Without the miners for customers, businesses often had to close. In this way, a boomtown could quickly go bust and turn into a ghost town.
Still, some boomtowns survived and prospered even after the mines shut down. In these towns, miners stayed and found new ways to make a living.
» The Comstock Lode Mine in Nevada was originally a gold mine. Then, during the mid-1800s, prospectors discovered a large deposit of silver there as well, which fueled a silver rush to the West.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why did boomtowns spring up throughout the West?
The Costs of Mining
The surge of miners in the West created problems, as did the arrival of cattle ranchers and homesteaders. Mines and towns polluted clear mountain streams. Miners cut down forests to get wood for buildings. They also forced Native Americans from the land.
Foreign miners were often treated unfairly. In many camps, mobs drove Mexicans from their claims. Chinese miners were heavily taxed or forced to work claims abandoned by others.
Few miners ever got rich. Much of the gold and silver lay deep underground. It could be reached only with costly machinery. Eventually, most mining in the West was taken over by large companies that could afford to buy this equipment. Furthermore, independent Prospectors like Henry Comstock largely disappeared. They were replaced by paid laborers who worked for toe large companies.
Keeping the Law in Small Towns Lawlessness disorder often accompanied the rapid growth to a town. Stories have exaggerated the number of
> Virginia City, Nevada, became a boomtown due to nining activities from the Comstock Lode. Identify Zause and Effect How did silver and gold rushes affect ettlement of the West?
Interactive Gallery

The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	469
9.7 Mining, Railroads, and the Economy
fights and killings that took place in these towns, but some towns actually were violent places. In response, miners sometimes resorted to organizing groups of vigilantes, or self-appointed law enforcers. Vigilantes tracked down outlaws and punished them, usually without trials. A common punishment was lynching.
Occasionally, vigilante groups did not form to fight crime. At least one San Francisco group organized to take political control of the city.
Informal methods of governing gradually gave way to more formal arrangements. In 1861, Colorado, Dakota, and Nevada were organized into territories. Idaho and Arizona followed in 1863 and Montana in 1864. The process of permanent settlement and government had begun.
H RECALL
How did informal methods of governance gradually become more formal?
The Railroad Encourages Economic Growth
To many Native Americans, the railroad was a terrifying monster, an "iron horse” belching black smoke and moving at stunning speeds. However, for the people of
» Prospectors, shown here with their equipment, prepare to head out for the gold and silver fields in hopes of striking it rich.
mining towns, railroads meant supplies, new townsfolk, and a rapid means of transporting their gold and silver. The West needed a transportation system that could carry heavy loads over great distances at a cost low enough to guarantee a profit. It is no wonder, then, that railroad companies raced to lay track to the mines and boomtowns. In time, the technological innovations that made the expansion of railroads possible opened the West and fostered economic growth for the nation.
The Transcontinental Railroad In 1863, two companies began a race to build the first transcontinental railroad. A transcontinental railroad is one that stretches across a continent from coast to coast. The Union Pacific Railroad started building a rail line westward from Omaha, Nebraska. The Central Pacific Railroad began in Sacramento, California, and built eastward. A local paper reported:
“With rites appropriate to the occasion . . . ground was formally broken at noon for the commencement of the Central Pacific Railroad—the California link of the continental chain that is to unite American communities now divided by thousands of miles of trackless wilderness.”
—Sacramento Union, January 8, 1863
The federal government helped the railroad companies because it felt that rail lines in the West would benefit the entire nation. The government's aid came in the form of subsidies.
A subsidy is financial aid or a land grant from the government. Congress lent money to the railroad companies and gave them land. For every mile of track completed, the railroad companies received twenty sections of land in the states along the route and forty sections per mile in the territories. By the time the Central Pacific and Union Pacific railroads were completed, they had received about 45 million acres of land. Often, both business and government ignored the fact that Native Americans lived on the land.
Building the Transcontinental Railroad Both companies had trouble getting workers. Labor was scarce during the Civil War. Also, the work was backbreaking and dangerous, and the pay was low.
The railroad companies hired immigrant workers, who accepted low wages. The Central Pacific brought in thousands of workers from China. The Union Pacific

The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	470	9.7 Mining, Railroads, and the Economy
New States in the West
MEXICO
Gulf of Mexico
0	200 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
KEY
MB
States admitted between 1867 and 1912 (1889) Date when state was admitted to the U.S.
» Based on the information in the map, what effect did migration to the West have by the end of 1912?
PACIFIC
OCEAN
hired newcomers from Ireland. African Americans and Mexican Americans also worked for each line.
The railroad workers faced a daunting task. The Central Pacific had to carve a path across the rugged Sierra Nevada.
The Union Pacific had to cut through the towering Rocky Mountains. Snowstorms and avalanches killed workers and slowed progress. At times, crews cutting tunnels through rock advanced only a few inches a day.
Building the railroad forced workers to adapt to or modify environments as varied as forests, deserts, and mountains. In some places, the railroad was built around mountains. In other places, however, workers blasted tunnels through mountains with technological innovations such as specialized tools and explosives to achieve their goals.
Railroads Encourage Urban and Rural Growth
The Central Pacific and Union Pacific met at Promontory, Utah, on May 10, 1869. Leland Stanford, president of the Central Pacific, dropped a solid-gold spike into a pm-drilled hole in the rail. In doing so, he joined the two tracks and united the country. The nations first transcontinental railroad was complete.
With the Civil War fresh in their minds, people cheered this new symbol of unity. The words that were engraved on the golden spike expressed their feelings:
“May God continue the unity of our
Country as the Railroad unites the two great Oceans of the world.”
—Engraved on the Golden Spike
Before long, other major rail lines linked the West and the East. The railroads brought economic growth and new settlement all across the West. They enabled people, supplies, and mail to move quickly and cheaply across the plains and mountains. Wherever rail lines went, settlements—“railroad towns”—sprang up along the tracks. The largest towns and cities developed where major railroad lines met. Cities where sea and land transportation met, such as Seattle, San Francisco, and Los Angeles, experienced huge population growth with the coming of the railroads. Western cities, such as Denver, Cheyenne, and Wichita, grew when railroads were joined to the great cattle trails. Thus the railroad—the most advanced transportation system of its day—had a major impact on the urbanization of the United States.
Because of their rapid growth, western territories began to apply for statehood. Nevada became a state in 1864; Colorado, in 1876; North Dakota, South
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	471
9.7 Mining, Railroads, and the Economy
Dakota, Montana, and Washington, in 1889; Idaho and Wyoming, in 1890.
U SUMMARIZE
Why was immigrant labor brought in to help build the railroads?
ELPS
ELPS SPEAKING 3.E.1
In a small group, discuss why the transcontinental railroad was important to the United States. Share what you know from the text about how it changed the country’s economy, communication, and mood.
Building a National
Network of Rails
The Civil War showed the importance of railroads. Railroads carried troops and supplies to the battlefields. They also moved raw materials to factories. After the war, railroad companies began to build new lines all over the country.
A
Race to Construct New Lines Railroad builders raced to create thousands of miles of new tracks. In the years after completion of the first transcontinental rail line in 1869, Americans built three more. James Hill, a Canadian-born owner, finished the last major cross- » Workers constructed what would become part of the Great Northern Railway in the 1880s. During this time, use of a standard line gauge helped link railroad lines.
Interactive Map
country line in 1893. His Great Northern Railway wound from Duluth, Minnesota, to Everett, Washington.
Unlike other rail lines, the Great Northern was built without financial aid from Congress. To make his railroad succeed, Hill had to turn a profit from the start. He encouraged farmers and ranchers to move to the Northwest and settle near his railroad. He gave seed to farmers and helped them buy equipment. He imported special bulls in order to breed hardier cattle. Not only was Hill’s policy generous, it also made good business sense. In the end, Hill’s railroad proved very successful even without government assistance, and it was a key to the development of the Northwest.
A
National Transportation System Early railroads were short lines that served local communities. Many lines ran for no more than 50 miles. When passengers and freight reached the end of one line, they had to move to a train on a different line to continue their journey. Even if the lines had been connected, the problem would not have been eliminated. Different lines used tracks of different gauges, or widths. As a result, the trains from one line could not run on the tracks of another line. In general, the tracks of northern lines used different gauges from those of southern lines.
In 1886, railroads in the South decided to adopt the northern gauge. On May 30, southern railroads stopped running so that work could begin. Using crowbars and sledgehammers, crews worked from dawn to dusk to move the rails a few inches farther apart. When they had finished, some 13,000 miles of track had been changed.
Once the track was standardized, American railroads formed a network, or system of connected lines. The creation of a rail network brought benefits to shippers. Often, rail companies arranged for freight cars on one line to use the tracks of another. For example, goods loaded in Chicago could stay on the same car all the way to New York, instead of being transferred from one car to another. As a result, the shipper had to pay only one fare for the whole distance.
New rails knit the sprawling nation together. By 1900, there were more miles of tracks in the United States than in Europe and Russia combined.
Westinghouse Brakes and Pullman Cars New
inventions helped make railway travel safer and faster. On early trains, each railroad car had its own brakes and its own brake operator.
If different cars stopped at different times, serious accidents could result. In 1869, George Westinghouse began selling his new air brake. Westinghouse’s air brake allowed a locomotive engineer to stop all the
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	472	9.7 Mining, Railroads, and the Economy
railroad cars at once. The air brake increased safety and allowed for longer, faster trains.
Long distance travel also became more comfortable. In 1864, George Pullman designed a railroad sleeping car. Pullman cars had convertible berths for sleeping as well as lavatories. Rail lines also added dining cars. Porters (who carried baggage), conductors, and waiters attended to the needs of passengers.
The Railroads and Economic Growth The growth of the railroads in the 1800s shows the benefits of the U.S. free-enterprise system. As William Vanderbilt pointed out, the railroads “are built for men who invest their money.” That is, the railroads were built to make money for the people who invested in them. Yet the railroads benefited many other people: the workers who laid the tracks, the employees who ran the trains, the passengers who rode the rails, and the businesses that filled cars with cargo. People who lived in the towns that sprouted up along the rail lines also benefited. Ultimately, the railroads benefited the country as a whole.
The expansion of the railroads brought significant changes in ways of producing, distributing, and consuming goods. Businesses brought raw materials on railroads to factories. Finished goods from those factories could be shipped far and wide for a reasonable price. Consumers—especially those far from cities— could now have access to more goods than ever before. The same held true for farm goods: farmers had wider markets, and consumers had more food choices.
Consolidation Brings Efficiency As railroads grew, they looked for ways to operate more efficiently. Small lines were often costly to run, so many companies began to consolidate, or combine. Larger companies bought up smaller ones or forced them out of business. The Pennsylvania Railroad, for example, consolidated 73 companies into its system.
Tough-minded business people led the drive for consolidation. Cornelius Vanderbilt was among the most powerful of these leaders. The son of a poor farmer, Vanderbilt earned one fortune in steamship lines. He then began to buy up railroad lines in New York State.
Vanderbilt sometimes used ruthless tactics to force smaller owners to sell to him. In the early 1860s, he decided to buy the New York Central Railroad. The owners refused to sell. Vanderbilt then announced that New York Central passengers would not be allowed to transfer to his trains. With their passengers stranded and business dropping sharply, the New York Central owners gave in and sold their line to Vanderbilt.
Vanderbilt then bought up most of the lines between Chicago and Buffalo. By the time of his death in 1877,
» After making a fortune in the steamship business, Cornelius Vanderbilt turned his attention to railroads. He bought up most of the rail lines between Buffalo, New York, and Chicago, Illinois.
his companies controlled 4,500 miles of track and linked New York City to the Great Lakes region.
Other consolidations were soon underway. Before long, the major railroads of the United States were organized into a number of systems directed by a handful of wealthy and powerful men.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What was significant about the way in which the Great Northern line was financed?
Railroads and Competition
With builders rushing to share in the profits of the railroad boom, overbuilding occurred. Soon, there were too many rail lines in some parts of the country. Between Atlanta and St. Louis, for example, 20 different lines competed for business. There was not nearly enough rail traffic to keep all these lines busy.
Owners Look for New Ways to Make Profits
Especially in the West, there were too few people— and therefore not enough paying customers for the railroads to make a profit. Competition was fierce. Rate wars broke out as rival railroads slashed their fares to
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	473	9-7 Mining, Railroads, and the Economy
win customers. Usually, all the companies lost money as a result.
Often, railroads were forced to grant secret rebates, or discounts, to their biggest customers. The railroads preferred big customers for two reasons. First, big customers were more likely to pay their bills and keep being customers in the future. Second, it was less expensive to deal with a few big customers than many small customers.
Fewer customers meant less paperwork and simpler loading and unloading. Unfortunately, the practice of giving rebates hurt small shippers, such as farmers, who still had to pay the full price. It even drove many small companies out of business.
Railroad owners soon realized that cutthroat competition was hurting even their large lines. They looked for ways to end the competition. One method was pooling. In a pool, several railroad companies agreed to divide up the business in an area. They then fixed their prices at a high level.
Farmers React to High Railroad Prices Railroad rebates and pools angered small farmers in the South and the West. Both practices kept shipping prices high for them. Indeed, rates were so high that at times
» This cartoon shows congressmen looking like train engines. Analyze Political Cartoons What does this image suggest about the influence of the railroad industry in Congress?
farmers burned their crops for fuel rather than ship them to market.
Many farmers joined the Populist movement. Populists called for government regulation of rail rates. Some Populists even called for a government takeover of the railroads. Congress and several states passed laws regulating railroad companies. However, the laws did not end abuses. Railroad owners sometimes bribed officials to keep the laws from being enforced.
The Panic of 1893 In 1893, an economic panic hit the United States. The economy went through a drastic downsizing. About 15,000 businesses and 500 banks closed, leaving many American workers unemployed.
The railroads were both a cause and a victim of the economic downturn. Overbuilding in the 1860s meant that many railroad companies’ finances were fragile—they were barely making money. In 1893, the Philadelphia and Reading Railroad went bankrupt, helping to start the panic. Many other leading railroads followed, including the Erie, the Northern Pacific, the Union Pacific, the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe. Industries, like steel, and a wide variety of businesses that had come to depend on the railroad were hurt, as were businesses that depended on those businesses. Through a ripple effect, the whole economy suffered.
The economy would not recover for about four years. When it did, it was the railroad that once again provided the transportation the economy needed.
fcl DESCRIBE How did railroad owners try to make
profits in a competitive business environment?
Railroads Build a Nation
Although railroads caused certain problems, they also made possible the rapid growth of industry after 1865. Building rail lines created thousands of jobs. Steelworkers turned millions of tons of iron into steel for tracks and engines. Lumberjacks cut down whole forests to supply wood for railroad ties. Miners sweated in dusty mine shafts digging coal to fuel railroad engines. The railroad companies themselves employed thousands of workers. They laid tracks, built trestles across rivers, carved tunnels through mountains, and built countless railroad stations.
The large railroads also pioneered new ways of managing business. Rail companies created special departments for shipping and accounting and for servicing equipment. Expert managers headed each department, while chains of command ensured that the organization ran smoothly. Other big businesses soon copied these management techniques.
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)
474	9.7 Mining, Railroads, and the Economy
RAILROADS DRIVE INDUSTRIAL GROWTH
INDUSTRIAL JOB GROWTH
OF EMPLOYEES, THOUSANDS)
1870
1890
Sources: National Bureau of Economic Research; U.S. Census Bureau
in 1870
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
ACCOUNTED FOR
43%
OF ECONOMIC
GROWTH
■>
1900
s» K ft ft ■ ■ < V ■ ■
RAILROAD-RELATED JOB GROWTH
OF EMPLOYEES, THOUSANDS)
—	MACHINISTS
—	BLACKSMITHS
—	BOILERMAKERS
i
BY 1900
INDUSTRY'S SHARE (
INCREASED TO
^65%
1	1870	1880
Source: Facts on File (2013)	Source: U.S. Census Bureau
» Analyze Graphs What effect did the growth of the railroad industry have on the U.S. economy in the late 1800s?
Railroads opened every corner of the country to settlement and growth. They brought people together, especially in the West. New businesses sprang up, and towns sprouted where rail lines crossed. With rail lines in place, the United States was ready to become the greatest industrial nation the world had ever seen.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
How did the growth of railroad companies change the management techniques of other large businesses?
ASSESSMENT
1. Draw Conclusions Why might a sudden surge of miners, ranchers, and farmers into an area cause problems other than environmental ones?
2.	Generate Explanations Why were so many of the workers who built the first transcontinental railroad immigrants, African Americans, and Mexican Americans?
3.	Identify Central Issues How did the development of the railroads affect business and travel in the United States?
4.	Express Problems Clearly What problems did an excess of competition cause for the railroad companies and some of their customers?
5.	Summarize how railroads helped the United States grow and prosper.
9.7 Mining, Railroads, and the Economy
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)
Analyze the Causes and Effects of Economic Differences Between the North and South Following the Civil War Analyze the causes and effects of economic differences between the North and South following the Civil War. Write a paragraph analyzing the differences between the economies of the North and South after the Civil War and how these differences affected the two regions. Consider why the economies of the North and the South were different after the Civil War and analyze what happened to the two regions as a result of the economic differences. 12.D
Identify the Era Following the U.S. Civil War Identify the major eras in U.S. history through 1877, including Reconstruction. Write a paragraph identifying what the era following the Civil War was known as and describing what happened during that era. Explain what the era after the Civil War was called and why. Describe the main goal of that era and why this era was important to the United States. 1.A
Explain Significant Events of the Civil War Explain significant events of the Civil War, including the assassination of Abraham Lincoln. Write a paragraph about the assassination of President Lincoln. Identify who was involved in the assassination of President Lincoln, explain the motive for the assassination, and describe the nation’s reaction to the assassination. 8.B
Describe the Effects of Reconstruction Describe the effects of Reconstruction by explaining the political, economic, and social problems during Reconstruction and evaluating their impact on different groups.
Write a paragraph explaining the problems freedmen faced in the South as a result of laws passed during Reconstruction and the reaction of the Radical Republicans to the actions of the southern legislatures. Describe the black codes and explain why southern lawmakers passed these laws; evaluate the political, economic, and social impacts of the black codes on freedmen in the South; and explain how these laws affected the Radical Republicans’ reaction to President Johnson’s Reconstruction plan. 1.A, 9.C
5.	Describe the Causes and Effects of
Reconstruction Describe the causes and effects of Reconstruction, and analyze the leadership qualities of President Abraham Lincoln. Use the information from the quotation below and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing how President Lincoln used his leadership role to develop a plan for Reconstruction. Explain why President Lincoln wanted to make it easy for the South to rejoin the Union, describe Lincoln’s plan for Reconstruction, and analyze Lincoln’s leadership qualities in addressing the issues of Reconstruction. 1.A, 22.A
We all agree that the seceded States, so called, are out of their proper relation with the Union; and that the sole object of the government, civil and military, in regard to those States is to again get them into that proper practical relation. I believe it is not only possible, but in fact, easier to do this, without deciding, or even considering, whether these States have ever been out of the Union, than with it. Finding themselves safely at home, it would be utterly immaterial whether they had ever been abroad. Let us all join in doing the acts necessary to restoring the proper practical relations between these States and the Union; and each forever after, innocently indulge his own opinion whether, in doing the acts, he brought the States from without, into the Union, or only gave them proper assistance, they never having been out of it.
— Abraham Lincoln, April 11, 1865
The Reconstruction Era 476
6.	Describe the Impact of the Fourteenth Amendment Describe the impact of nineteenth century amendments, including the Fourteenth Amendment, on life in the United States. Write a paragraph describing the impact the Fourteenth Amendment had on African Americans and on the ongoing struggle for civil rights. Explain why Republicans proposed the Fourteenth Amendment and what guarantees the amendment granted, and describe the impact of the Fourteenth Amendment on southern states, African Americans, and on the movement for citizenship rights. 16.B
7.	Identify Political Groups That Formed During Reconstruction Identify the new political groups that formed in the South during Reconstruction, including Southern Republicans, northerners who came South, African Americans newly elected to public office,
and conservative southern Democrats; identify their points of view; and describe the effects each group had on the South. Write a paragraph that identifies new political groups that emerged in the South during Reconstruction, describes the changes in the South during this time, and explains the various points of view that Southerners held about Reconstruction.
Identify the three groups that replaced the pre-Civil War governments in the South, describe the points of view of these three new groups, and explain the point of view of conservative southern Democrats and how it differed from the new groups that emerged during Reconstruction. 1.A, 21.A
8.	Identify the Impact of African Americans Elected to Public Office Evaluate the impact of the election of Hiram Rhodes Revels on freedmen during Reconstruction. Use information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to write a paragraph that evaluates the impact of the election of Hiram Rhodes Revels on freedmen during Reconstruction. Identify the role of African Americans in southern politics before the Civil War and during Reconstruction; identify Hiram Rhodes Revels, the office he held, and the positions he held on issues during Reconstruction; and evaluate the impact that Revels’ election had on freedmen at that time. 9.B
9.	Identify the Effects of the Dawes Act Identify the effects of legislative acts, such as the Dawes Act. Write a paragraph identifying the Dawes Act and describing
its effects. Identify what the Dawes Act was, explain why it was enacted, describe what it was supposed to do, and describe its actual effects. 9.D
10.	Evaluate the End of Reconstruction Evaluate how legislative reforms in the reconstructed state governments eventually led to political problems that contributed to the disputed election of 1876, effectively ending Reconstruction. Write a paragraph evaluating the events that led to the end of Reconstruction.
Explain how white southerners earned the right to vote, evaluate how this led to the disputed election of 1876, and explain how the election led to the end of Reconstruction. 1.A, 9.A, 9.C
11.	Analyze Settlement of the Great Plains Analyze how the physical characteristics of the environment of the Great Plains influenced economic activities, such as ranching, and population distribution and settlement patterns during the nineteenth century.
Write a paragraph analyzing how the environment influenced ranching and settlement patterns during the nineteenth century. Analyze how cattle drives influenced the settlement of western town, explain how new farm settlements affected the cattle boom, and analyze how nature affected the cattle boom. 11.A
Describe the Great Plains Describe the location of the Great Plains and analyze how the physical characteristics of the Great Plains influenced life on the plains, including population distribution, dependence on the physical environment, and economic challenges. Write a paragraph describing how the physical characteristics of the Great Plains influenced life on the plains. Identify how sod influenced life in the Great Plains, analyze environmental challenges and how settlers depended on the environment for their livelihood, and describe the economic challenges settlers on the Great Plains faced. 10.A, 11.A
The Reconstruction Era 477
Major Western Rail Lines of the Late 1800s
San Francisco'
Los Angeles
PACIFIC '
OCEAN
0	200 mi
0 "200 km
Albers Conic Equal*Area Projection
MEXICO
Guff of Mexico
13.	Pose and Answer Questions about Geographic Distributions and Patterns Shown on a Model Use
a map as a model of the impact of transportation systems on the growth and development of the United States to pose and answer questions about geographic distribution and patterns. Using the map as a model as well as other sources, write a paragraph posing and answering three questions about how the national system of railroads affected population distribution and settlement patterns in the western United States. Study the railroad lines, map relief, state names, railroad names, and city names and locations on the map below and pose and answer questions based on the map and what you have read to determine what kinds of economic activities were most likely to go on in individual cities and why the railroad lines have these particular routes. (See map above.) 27.B, 29.J
14.	Describe Modification of the Environment in the South Describe how modification of the South’s physical environment during the years after Reconstruction had a positive impact on the region’s economy. Write a paragraph analyzing how changes to the environment in the South benefited the economy after Reconstruction. Describe how new industry changed the physical characteristics of the South
and analyze how the environment and new industries affected the economy in the South. 11 .B
15.	Evaluate Jim Crow Laws Evaluate the impact of Jim Crow Laws on African Americans in the South after the end of Reconstruction, explain the social problems these laws caused, and identify ways these laws sought to resolve conflicts among people of different racial groups. Write a paragraph evaluating the effects of Jim Grow laws. Describe the Jim Crow laws and their impact, explain what George Washington Cable meant in the quotation below, and evaluate what effect these laws had on African Americans. 9.C, 23.C
A system of oppression so rank that nothing could make it seem small except the fact that [African Americans] had already been ground under it for a century and a half.
— George Washington Cable, "The Freedman's Case in Equity'1
16.	Analyze How Physical Geographic Features Influenced Economic Activities Analyze how physical geographic features such as rich mineral deposits in the western mountains of the United States caused gold and silver rushes and influenced economic activities during the nineteenth century. Write a paragraph that describes how physical features in the western mountains of the United States influenced economic activities in the U.S. during the 1800s. Describe how physical features affected the outcome of the Comstock Lode, analyze how gold and silver strikes affected development of the West, and explain how entire towns could develop quickly on the mining frontier. 10.C, 11 .A
The Reconstruction Era 478
17.	Analyze How the Railroad Brought Economic Growth to the United States Explain how a technological innovation such as the railroad brought about economic growth throughout the United States in the nineteenth century. Use information from the graph and other sources to write a paragraph that explains how the railroad brought about economic growth throughout the United States. Explain the impact of railroads on industry after 1865, describe how large railroads effected ways of managing business, and analyze what the graph shows about the effect of the railroad industry on the United States economy.
(See graph below.) 27.D
INDUSTRIAL JOB GROWTH
OF EMPLOYEES. THOUSANDS)
1870	1880	1890	1900
Sources National Bureau o- Econciw Research.
U S.
Census Bureau 18.	Analyze the Effectiveness and Impact of Improved Railroad Technology Compare the effectiveness of early railroad technology with technological improvements made in the last half of the nineteenth century and explain the effects of these improvements on the growing national railroad system. Write a paragraph that analyzes the advantages of improvements in railroad technology in the late nineteenth century and explains the effects of these innovations on the growing national railroad system. Discuss the need for a uniform track gauge, the innovations in braking systems, and the improvements in long-distance train travel, such as the Pullman sleeping car. 28.A
19.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: How should we handle conflict? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
The Reconstruction Era
479
Which statement best describes the effect of the Civil War depicted in this photograph?
A
Transportation systems in most northern cities had been deserted and left in disarray. B
The structures and businesses destroyed by the war in the South required total rebuilding. C
Punishments inflicted upon southern cities after the end of the war created unnecessary devastation. D
The end of the industrial boom that the war had created suddenly left northern businesses abandoned. In 1869, Congress proposed the Fifteenth Amendment. It forbade any state to deny any citizen the right to vote because of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude. ”
How did the passage of this amendment affect life in the United States?
F
African Americans 21 years old and older gained the right to vote, providing full representation. G
Although the right to vote was granted to African American men 21 years old and older, enforcement often failed. H
Radical Republicans started a campaign in Congress to oppose the amendment and limit voting in southern states. J
Because the amendment granted citizenship to African Americans, a move to impeach President Andrew Johnson began. The Reconstruction Era 480
i mucccc auumonai practice questions
Which statement best describes the economic issue for southern planters due to this series of events?
A
Southern planters faced world markets where competition had increased as prices declined. B
Southern planters had to increase production of goods rapidly to meet increased worldwide demand. C
Southern planters returned to an industry that had expanded its sales to include a greater variety of goods. D
Southern planters had to develop new ways of producing goods to make them equal in value to foreign goods. 4	Which statement explains how physical characteristics of the southern environment influenced economic development after the Civil War?
F
The discovery that the soil and climate suited the growth of cotton resulted in production of cotton for export. G
The existence of already large plantations provided ample farmland for a newly emerging agricultural economy. H
The lack of building materials and raw materials for industry led to a dependence upon imports from other countries. J
The abundance of natural resources such as iron ore, coal, and timber promoted the development of new industries. If vou have trouble with...										
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	9.1	9.2	9.3	9.4
		[ „ „ 				—	9.C	11. A	2
teks	1.A	16.B		
The Reconstruction Era 481
5	Which option below describes a main effect of the Homestead Act?
A
Land-owning companies lost control of much of their illegally held land. B
The Exodusters established a community in Kansas for African American farmers. C
Immigrants and easterners obtained acres of free land to use in any way they chose. D
About a half million citizens established farms on free land and planted wheat and corn. What historical cycle of events caused by the discovery of silver, gold, and other valuable minerals in the mountains of the West is represented by this photograph?
F
Business owners established a town to attract miners to their area and then moved to the next location. G
Miners set up tent-towns, lived in them while prospecting, and then moved on leaving no traces of settlement. H
People came to supply miners’ needs, established boomtowns, and these towns died out once the ores were depleted. J
Miners and prospectors searched for valuable minerals, ores ran out, and miners moved back to where they had come from. The Reconstruction Era 482
«««« vv.r cai sun ICZACO.IzUII1
Access additional practice questions
7	Which of the following statements best summarizes the impact of Dred Scott v. Sandford?
A
Slavery became legal in all the U.S. territories, which increased antislavery sentiment and abolitionist efforts in the North. B
Dred Scott was awarded freedom and full citizenship, which outraged the southern states and increased their calls for secession. C
Slavery was abolished in all states and territories west of the Mississippi River, which encouraged abolitionists to petition the Supreme Court for a nationwide ban on slavery. D
The Missouri Compromise line was extended to the Pacific Ocean, which displeased both the North and the South because neither side won a significant advantage over the other. This image portrays the Battle of Antietam. How did the outcome of this battle benefit the Union? F It cut the Confederacy in two.
G
It boosted morale in the Union states. H
It ended the Civil War with a Union victory. J
It proved the effectiveness of the Confederate blockade. If you have trouble with... Question	5
1	History. The student understands the principles included in the Celebrate Freedom Week program. The student is expected to:
1.A analyze and evaluate the text, intent, meaning, and importance of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights, and identify the full text of the first three paragraphs of the Declaration of Independence;
1 .B analyze and evaluate the application of these founding principles to historical events in U.S. history; and
1.C explain the contributions of the Founding Fathers such as Benjamin Rush, John Hancock, John Jay, John Witherspoon, John Peter Muhlenberg, Charles Carroll, and Jonathan Trumbull Sr.
2	History. The student understands traditional historical points of reference in U.S. history from 1877 to the present. The student is expected to:
2.A identify the major characteristics that define an historical era;
2.B identify the major eras in U.S. history from 1877 to the present and describe their defining characteristics;
2.C apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals, events, and time periods; and
2.D explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1898 Spanish-American War, 1914-1918 World War I, 1929 the Great Depression begins, 1939-1945 World War II, 1957 Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race, 1968-1969 Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon, 1991 Cold War ends, 2001 terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and 2008 election of first black president, Barack Obama.
3	History. The student understands the political, economic, and social
changes in the United States from 1877 to 1898. The student is expected to:
3.A analyze political issues such as Indian policies, the growth of political machines, civil service reform, and the beginnings of Populism;
3.B analyze economic issues such as industrialization, the growth of railroads, the growth of labor unions, farm issues, the cattle industry boom, the rise of entrepreneurship, free enterprise, and the pros and cons of big business;
3.C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the
Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists; and	________________
3.D describe the optimism of the many immigrants who sought a better life in America.
xxvii ;
TEKS at a Glance
4	History. The student understands the emergence of the United States as a world power between 1898 and 1920. The student is expected to:
4.A explain why significant events, policies, and individuals such as the Spanish-American War, U.S. expansionism, Henry Cabot Lodge, Alfred Thayer Mahan, Theodore Roosevelt, Sanford B. Dole, and missionaries moved the United States into the position of a world power;
4.B evaluate American expansionism, including acquisitions such as Guam, Hawaii, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico;
4.C identify the causes of World War I and reasons for U.S. entry;
4.D understand the contributions of the American Expeditionary Forces AEF led by General John J. Pershing;
4.E analyze the impact of significant technological innovations in World War I such as machine guns, airplanes, tanks, poison gas, and trench warfare that resulted in the stalemate on the Western Front;
4.F analyze major issues such as isolationism and neutrality raised by U.S. involvement in World War I, Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points, and the Treaty of Versailles; and 4.G analyze significant events such as the Battle of Argonne Forest.
5	History. The student understands the effects of reform and third-party movements in the early 20th century. The student is expected to:
5.A evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including initiative, referendum, recall, and the passage of the 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th amendments;
5.B evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as Upton Sinclair, Susan B.
Anthony, Ida B. Wells, and W. E. B. DuBois on American society; and
5.C evaluate the impact of third parties, including the Populist and Progressive parties.
History. The student understands significant events, social issues, and individuals of the 1920s. The student is expected to:
6.A analyze causes and effects of events and social issues such as immigration, Social Darwinism, eugenics, race relations, nativism, the Red Scare, Prohibition, and the changing role of women; and
6.B analyze the impact of significant individuals such as Clarence Darrow, William Jennings Bryan, Henry Ford, Glenn Curtiss, Marcus Garvey, and Charles A. Lindbergh.
7	History. The student understands the domestic and international impact of U.S. participation in World War II. The student is expected to:
7.A identify reasons for U.S. involvement in World War II, including Italian, German, and Japanese dictatorships and their aggression, especially the attack on Pearl Harbor;
7.B evaluate the domestic and international leadership of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Truman during World War II, including the U.S. relationship with its allies and domestic industry’s rapid mobilization for the war effort;
7.C analyze the function of the U.S. Office of War Information;
7.D analyze major issues of World War II, including the Holocaust; the internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066; and the development of conventional and atomic weapons;
7.E analyze major military events of World War II, including the Battle of Midway, the U.S. military advancement through the Pacific Islands, the Bataan Death March, the invasion of Normandy, fighting the war on multiple fronts, and the liberation of concentration camps;
7.F evaluate the military contributions of leaders during World War II, including Omar Bradley, Dwight Eisenhower, Douglas MacArthur, Chester A. Nimitz, George Marshall, and George Patton; and
7.G explain the home front and how American patriotism inspired exceptional actions by citizens and military personnel, including high levels of military enlistment; volunteerism; the purchase of war bonds; Victory Gardens; the bravery and contributions of the Tuskegee Airmen, the Flying Tigers, and the Navajo Code Talkers; and opportunities and obstacles for women and ethnic minorities.
8	History. The student understands the impact of significant national and international decisions and conflicts in the Cold War on the United States. The student is expected to:
8.A describe U.S. responses to Soviet aggression after World War II, including the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Berlin airlift, and John F. Kennedy’s role in the Cuban Missile Crisis;
8.B describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the arms race, the space race, McCarthyism, and the House Un-American Activities Committee HUAC, the findings of which were confirmed by the Venona Papers;
8.C explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in the Korean War and its relationship to the containment policy;
8.D explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory, including the Vietnam War;
8.E analyze the major issues and events of the Vietnam War such as the Tet Offensive, the escalation of forces, Vietnamization, and the fall of Saigon; and
8.F describe the responses to the Vietnam War such as the draft, the 26th Amendment, the role of the media, the credibility gap, the silent majority, and the anti-war movement.
xxix
"V TEKS at a Glance
9	History. The student understands the impact of the American civil rights movement. The student is expected to:
9.A trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21 st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments;
9.B describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American, Chicano, American Indian, women’s, and other civil rights movements;
9.C identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements, including Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, Rosa Parks, Hector P. Garcia, and Betty Friedan;
9.D compare and contrast the approach taken by some civil rights groups such as the Black Panthers with the nonviolent approach of Martin Luther King Jr.;
9.E discuss the impact of the writings of Martin Luther King Jr. such as his “I Have a Dream” speech and “Letter from Birmingham Jail” on the civil rights movement;
9.F describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the United States, including desegregation of the armed forces, the Civil Rights acts of 1957 and 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965;
9.G describe the role of individuals such as governors George Wallace, Orval Faubus, and Lester Maddox and groups, including the Congressional bloc of southern Democrats, that sought to maintain the status quo;
9.H evaluate changes and events in the United States that have resulted from the civil rights movement, including increased participation of minorities in the political process; and
9.1 describe how litigation such as the landmark cases of Brown v. Board of Education, Mendez v. Westminster, Hernandez v. Texas, Delgado v. Bastrop I.S.D., Edgewood I.S.D. v. Kirby, and Sweatt v. Painter played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement.
W
History. The student understands the impact of political, economic, and social factors in the U.S. role in the world from the 1970s through 1990. The student is expected to:
10.A describe Richard M. Nixon’s leadership in the normalization of relations with China and the policy of detente;
10.B describe Ronald Reagan’s leadership in domestic and international policies, including Reaganomics and Peace Through Strength;
10.C compare the impact of energy on the American way of life over time;
10.D describe U.S. involvement in the Middle East such as support for Israel, the Camp David Accords, the Iran-Contra Affair, Marines in Lebanon, and the Iran Hostage Crisis;
10.E describe the causes and key organizations and individuals of the conservative resurgence of the 1980s and 1990s, including Phyllis Schlafly, the Contract with America, the Heritage Foundation, the Moral Majority, and the National Rifle Association; and
10.F describe significant societal issues of this time period.
XXX
4	4 History. The student understands the emerging political, economic, and I I social issues of the United States from the 1990s into the 21 st century.
The student is expected to:
11.A describe U.S. involvement in world affairs, including the end of the Cold War, the Persian Gulf War, the Balkans Crisis, 9/11, and the global War on Terror;
11.B identify significant social and political advocacy organizations, leaders, and issues across the political spectrum;
11.C evaluate efforts by global organizations to undermine U.S. sovereignty through the use of treaties;
11.D analyze the impact of third parties on presidential elections;
11.E discuss the historical significance of the 2008 presidential election; and
11.F discuss the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare.
Geography. The student understands the impact of geographic factors on major events. The student is expected to:
12.A analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the settlement of the Great Plains, the Klondike Gold Rush, the Panama Canal, the Dust Bowl, and the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina; and
12.B identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood and international conflicts.
Geography. The student understands the causes and effects of migration and immigration on American society. The student is expected to:
13.A analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including western expansion, rural to urban, the Great Migration, and the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt; and
13.B analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the United States.
Geography. The student understands the relationship between population growth and modernization on the physical environment. The student is expected to:
14.A identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment;
14.B identify the roles of governmental entities and private citizens in managing the environment such as the establishment of the National Park System, the Environmental Protection Agency EPA, and the Endangered Species Act; and
14.C understand the effects of governmental actions on individuals, industries, and communities, including the impact on Fifth Amendment property rights.
xxxi
TEKS at a Glance
T
Economics. The student understands domestic and foreign issues related to U.S. economic growth from the 1870s to 1920. The student is expected to:
15.A describe how the economic impact of the Transcontinental Railroad and the Homestead Act contributed to the close of the frontier in the late 19th century;
15.B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act;
15.C explain how foreign policies affected economic issues such as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, the Open Door Policy, Dollar Diplomacy, and immigration quotas;
15.D describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including the Spanish-American War and World War I, on the United States; and
15.E describe the emergence of monetary policy in the United States, including the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money.
Economics. The student understands significant economic developments between World War I and World War II. The student is expected to:
16.A analyze causes of economic growth and prosperity in the 1920s, including Warren Harding’s Return to Normalcy, reduced taxes, and increased production efficiencies;
16.B identify the causes of the Great Depression, including the impact of tariffs on world trade, stock market speculation, bank failures, and the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve System;
16.C analyze the effects of the Great Depression on the U.S. economy and society such as widespread unemployment and deportation and repatriation of people of European and Mexican heritage and others;
16.D compare the New Deal policies and its opponents’ approaches to resolving the economic effects of the Great Depression; and
16.E describe how various New Deal agencies and programs, including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Social Security Administration, continue to affect the lives of U.S. citizens.
xxxii
Economics. The student understands the economic effects of World War II and the Cold War. The student is expected to:
17.A describe the economic effects of World War II on the home front such as the end of the Great Depression, rationing, and increased opportunity for women and minority employment;
17.B identify the causes of prosperity in the 1950s, including the Baby Boom and the impact of the Gl Bill Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, and the effects of prosperity in the 1950s such as increased consumption and the growth of agriculture and business;
17.C describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s;
17.D identify actions of government and the private sector such as the Great Society, affirmative action, and Title IX to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences of each; and
17.E describe the dynamic relationship between U.S. international trade policies and the U.S. free enterprise system such as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries OPEC oil embargo, the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade GATT, and the North American Free Trade Agreement NAFTA.
Economics. The student understands the economic effects of increased worldwide interdependence as the United States enters the 21 st century. The student is expected to:
18.A discuss the role of American entrepreneurs such as Bill Gates, Sam Walton, Estee Lauder, Robert Johnson, Lionel Sosa, and millions of small business entrepreneurs who achieved the American dream; and
18.B identify the impact of international events, multinational corporations, government policies, and individuals on the 21st century economy.
Government. The student understands changes over time in the role of government. The student is expected to:
19.A evaluate the impact of New Deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government;
19.B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11;
19.C describe the effects of political scandals, including Teapot Dome, Watergate, and Bill Clinton’s impeachment, on the views of U.S. citizens concerning trust in the federal government and its leaders;
19.D discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009; and
19.E evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international organizations and treaties.
xxxiii
TEKS at a Glance
Government. The student understands the changing relationships among the three branches of the federal government. The student is expected to:
20.A describe the impact of events such as the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and the War Powers Act on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government; and
20.B evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government, including Franklin D. Roosevelt’s attempt to increase the number of U.S. Supreme Court justices and the presidential election of 2000.
Government. The student understands the impact of constitutional issues £ I on American society. The student is expected to:
21 .A analyze the effects of landmark U.S. Supreme Court decisions, including Brown v. Board of Education, and other U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Plessy v. Ferguson, Hernandez v. Texas, Tinker v. Des Moines, Wisconsin v. Yoder, and White v. Regester;
21.B discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended; and
21 .C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation.
Citizenship. The student understands the concept of American exceptionalism. The student is expected to:
22.A discuss Alexis de Tocqueville’s five values crucial to America’s success as a constitutional republic: liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, populism, and laissez-faire;
22.B describe how the American values identified by Alexis de Tocqueville are different and unique from those of other nations; and
22.C describe U.S. citizens as people from numerous places throughout the world who hold a common bond in standing for certain self-evident truths.
Citizenship. The student understands efforts to expand the democratic process. The student is expected to:
23.A identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including lobbying, non-violent protesting, litigation, and amendments to the U.S. Constitution;
23.B evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights, including the 19th, 24th, and 26th amendments and congressional acts such as the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924;and
23.C explain how participation in the democratic process reflects our national ethos, patriotism, and civic responsibility as well as our progress to build a “more perfect union.”
Citizenship. The student understands the importance of effective leadership in a constitutional republic. The student is expected to:
24.A describe qualities of effective leadership; and
24.B evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the United States such as Andrew Carnegie, Thurgood Marshall, Billy Graham, Barry Goldwater Sandra Dav O Connor, and Hillary Clinton.
Culture. The student understands the relationship between the arts and the times during which they were created. The student is expected to:
25.A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature;
25.B describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art, music, and literature such as Tin Pan Alley, the Harlem Renaissance, the Beat Generation, rock and roll, the Chicano Mural Movement, and country and western music on American society;
25.C identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest of the world over time; and
25.D analyze the global diffusion of American culture through the entertainment industry via various media.
Culture. The student understands how people from various groups contribute to our national identity. The student is expected to:
26.A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society;
26.B discuss the Americanization movement to assimilate immigrants and American Indians into American culture;
26.C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture;
26.D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society;
26.E discuss the meaning and historical significance of the mottos “E Pluribus Unum” and “In God We Trust”; and
26.F discuss the importance of congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders such as Vernon J. Baker, Alvin York, and Roy Benavidez.
Science, technology, and society. The student understands the impact of science, technology, and the free enterprise system on the economic development of the United States. The student is expected to:
27.A explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as electric power, telephone and satellite communications, petroleum-based products, steel production, and computers on the economic development of the United States;
27.B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines; and
27.C understand the impact of technological and management innovations and their applications in the workplace and the resulting productivity enhancements for business and labor such as assembly line manufacturing, time-study analysis, robotics, computer management, and just-in-time inventory management.
XXXV
* TEKS at a Glance
Science, technology, and society. The student understands the influence of scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the free enterprise system on the standard of living in the United States. The student is expectedto:____
28.A analyze how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the application of these by the free enterprise system, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States;
28.B explain how space technology and exploration improve the quality of life; and
28.C understand how the free enterprise system drives technological innovation and its application in the marketplace such as cell phones, inexpensive personal computers, and global positioning products.
Social studies skills. The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired from a variety of valid sources, including electronic technology. The student is expected to:
29.A use a variety of both primary and secondary valid sources to acquire information and to analyze and answer historical questions;
29.B analyze information by sequencing, categorizing, identifying cause-and-effect relationships, comparing and contrasting, finding the main idea, summarizing, making generalizations, making predictions, drawing inferences, and drawing conclusions;
29.C understand how historians interpret the past historiography and how their interpretations of history may change over time;
29.D use the process of historical inquiry to research, interpret, and use multiple types of sources of evidence;
29.E evaluate the validity of a source based on language, corroboration with other sources, and information about the author, including points of view, frames of reference, and historical context;
29.F identify bias in written, oral, and visual material;
29.G identify and support with historical evidence a point of view on a social studies issue or event; and
29.H use appropriate skills to analyze and interpret social studies information such as maps, graphs, presentations, speeches, lectures, and political cartoons.
Social studies skills. The student communicates in written, oral, and visual forms. The student is expected to:
30.A create written, oral, and visual presentations of social studies information;
30.B use correct social studies terminology to explain historical concepts; and
30.C use different forms of media to convey information, including written to visual and statistical to written or visual, using available computer software as appropriate.
xxxvi
04 Social studies skills. The student uses geographic tools to collect, analyze, W I and interpret data. The student is expected to:
31 .A create thematic maps, graphs, and charts representing various aspects of the United States; and
31.B pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, and available databases.
Social studies skills. The student uses problem-solving and decisionmaking skills, working independently and with others, in a variety of settings. The student is expected to:
32.A use a problem-solving process to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution; and
32.B use a decision-making process to identify a situation that requires a decision, gather information, identify options, predict consequences, and take action to implement a decision.
xxxvii
Celebrate Freedom
T
We hold these Truths to be self-evident, that all Men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness - That to secure these Rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just Powers from the Consent of the Governed."
— Declaration of Independence
Declaration of
Independence
When the Continental Congress issued the Declaration of Independence in 1776, they did more than announce their separation from Great Britain. They also summed up the most basic principles that came to underlie American government. The first section is sometimes called the “social contract” section. You can read the words at left.
These ideas have had significant effect on later developments in American history. You will notice the relationship of the ideas behind the Declaration of Independence to the American Revolution, the writing of the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights, and the movements to end slavery and to give women the right to vote. You’ll see how the United States became a nation of immigrants, with its rich diversity of people, and the ways this development relates to the ideas of the Declaration of Independence.
Read the first three paragraphs of the Declaration of Independence. Then recite words from the Declaration of Independence quoted at left. Consider their meaning and then answer these questions.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Central Idea This part of the Declaration is sometimes called the “social contract” section. Based on these statements, what is a social contract? Who benefits from it?
2.	Contrast How does the idea of government based on a “social contract" differ from the idea behind a monarchy? A dictatorship?
3.	Apply Information Identify two ways that your federal, state, or local government protects the rights to life, liberty, or the pursuit of happiness.
Constitution Day
Assembly
During Celebrate Freedom Week, Texas students remember not only the Declaration of Independence. They also honor the United States Constitution. September 17 is Constitution Day, and your school may hold an assembly or other celebration in honor of the day. As part of this celebration, your teacher may ask you to participate in planning and holding a Constitution Day assembly.
Organize As a class, create the basic plan for your assembly. Discuss the following:
1.	When and where should the assembly take place?
2.	How long should it take? Should you plan on a short program taking a single class period, or a longer program?
3.	Who should be involved? Will other classes or other grades take part? Will you invite outsiders, such as parents or people from the community?
4.	What activities might be included?
Plan After your discussion, divide the class into committees to complete jobs such as getting permission from the school administration, preparing a program, inviting any guests, advertising the plan beforehand, and blogging about it afterward.
Give thought to the types of activities that might be included in the assembly. You might invite a guest speaker from your community. You might run an essay contest among students and have the winners read their essays during the assembly. Some students might prepare a video presentation about the Bill of Rights. Others might write and perform a skit about what the Declaration of Independence or U.S. Constitution mean to them.
You might start your assembly by asking everyone to rise to say the Pledge of Allegiance to the United States flag and the Pledge of Allegiance to the Texas state flag. One student might give a brief speech about how the pledges reflect the ideas of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constituion.
» Your school may hold a Constitution Day assembly like the one shown here.
Communicate Present your Constitution Day assembly. After the assembly is over, discuss the event with the class. Ask yourselves questions such as these:
1.	How well was the assembly planned and organized? What improvements could we have made?
2.	How would you rate each of the presentations or other activities of the assembly?
3.	Was the audience engaged?
4.	How effectively did the class work together?
( 1
Celebrate Freedom
» the Constitution of the United States
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
Enduring Understandings
•	Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the Western Hemisphere launched European colonization of the Americas.
•	Colonization brought conflict between Europeans and indigenous peoples and the transportation of enslaved Africans to the Americas.
•	In North America, 13 colonies established the United States before winning independence from Great Britain.
•	Conflict over slavery led to a civil war in which the Confederacy of the southern states was defeated.
•	After the Civil War came a period of Reconstruction, followed by a loss of rights for African Americans.
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
How much does geography affect people’s lives? In 1492, the European explorer Christopher Columbus landed on the island of Hispaniola in the Caribbean Sea. Columbus called the Native Americans he met there “Indians,” thinking he had landed in the Indies. Following Columbus’s landing, Europeans began to slowly make contact with the many peoples already living in North and South America. The arrival of the Europeans dramatically affected these native peoples. One consequence was the rapid spread of diseases among the Indian population that not only claimed lives but demoralized survivors.
» Objectives
Describe the early European settlement of North America.
Identify the factors that influenced the development of colonial democratic ideals. Explain the colonists’ reaction to new taxes.
Assess why Congress declared independence and the ideas underlying the Declaration of Independence.
» Key Terms
George Washington Mayflower Compact Magna Carta English Bill of Rights Enlightenment Great Awakening Thomas Jefferson John Locke John Hancock House of Burgesses
Colonies and
Revolution
European Colonies in the
Americas
Over the next two centuries European nations explored the Americas and began establishing colonies, often taking control of land from Native Americans in the process. Spain, which had sponsored Columbus’s voyage, rapidly conquered a vast empire around the Caribbean and in Central and South America, with a few holdings in North America. France established smaller colonies in what is now Canada. England established 13 colonies along the mid-Atlantic coast of North America. Eventually, these colonies would declare their independence from England and become a new nation: the United States of America.
Wealth flowed into Spain from its colonies in Mexico, Central America, and South America. The population was thin and life was hard in the borderland regions in the present-day Southwest and in Florida. To encourage settlements and protect these outposts, Spain established presidios, or forts. Priests and nuns established dozens of missions to convert Native Americans to Christianity.
American Indians were eager to exchange beaver pelts for European-made metal axes, knives, and kettles. During the 1690s, the
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
6
French founded Louisiana, along the Mississippi River valley and the Gulf Coast.
The French established colonies in Canada along the coast of Nova Scotia and the St. Lawrence River. Besides exploiting rich fishing off the coast, they found a fortune in furs.
The Virginia Colonies In 1607, the English established their first enduring settlement, Jamestown, in Virginia. Despite enormous losses from disease, starvation, and war with Native Americans who lived in the area, the English expanded around the Chesapeake Bay. The colonists prospered by raising tobacco for export. Claiming the political rights of Englishmen, the Virginia planters elected a legislature, known as the House of Burgesses. It governed the colony in partnership with a royal governor appointed by the king of England.
New England To the north, the English established more colonies, which they called New England. The first colonists were devout Protestants called “Puritans,” who hoped to create model moral communities. They settled first in 1620 at Plymouth, where they adopted the Mayflower Compact. The Mayflower Compact provided a framework for self-government. By 1700,
New England had four colonies: Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and New Hampshire.
Adapting to the cold climate and short growing season, the New Englanders supplemented farming with lumber harvested from the forests and fish from the sea. By building ships, they were able to trade with the other colonies and with Europe.
The Middle and Southern Colonies The English developed a third cluster of colonies between Maryland and New England. They conquered Dutch New Netherland and renamed it New York, then added New Jersey and Pennsylvania, a haven for Quaker immigrants. The Middle Colonies offered religious toleration and a prospering economy based on exporting wheat.
South of Virginia, the English developed a fourth cluster of colonies. The Southern Colonies consisted of North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia in addition to Virginia. The colonists raised rice on coastal plantations and cattle on farms in the backcountry. The plantations relied on the labor of enslaved Africans.
H IDENTIFY
Where and when did the English establish their first colonial settlement?
r
w^E
Great
Lakes
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
KEY
English settlements Dutch settlements French settlements Spanish settlements
0	200 mi
0	200 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area
Projection
» By 1660 several European nations had established colonies scattered along the mid-Atlantic coast of North America. Analyze Maps Why were the first settlements founded near bodies of water?
Kll Interactive Map
Connecting with Past Learnings ;	7	;	0.1 Colonies and Revolution
Democratic Ideals in the American Colonies
The English colonists brought ideas about democracy and republican government with them to America. Some of these ideas came from ancient Greece and Rome, others from Judeo-Christian roots, and still others came from traditions and thinkers from Europe’s relatively recent past.
Political Traditions From England As English citizens, the colonists believed that they were entitled to the same rights as English citizens in Britain. Many of these rights were contained in two important documents: the Magna Carta and the English Bill of Rights. The Magna Carta, signed by King John in 1215, limited the power of the English monarch. It protected the right of people to own private property and guaranteed the right to trial by jury. The English Bill of Rights, signed by King William and Queen Mary in 1688, was a written list of freedoms that the government promised to protect.
The English Bill of Rights required Parliament, England’s lawmaking body, to meet regularly. It also stated that the monarch could not raise taxes or build an army without Parliament’s consent.
The Influence of the Enlightenment and the Great Awakening During the 1700s, ideas based on the Enlightenment circulated among well-educated American colonists. The Enlightenment was a European intellectual movement. Enlightenment philosophers believed that all problems could be solved by human reason. Frenchman Baron de Montesquieu
and Englishman John Locke were two thinkers who applied reason to government and politics.
Enlightenment philosophy affected religious beliefs in the colonies. Colonists who admired these ideas wanted a religion that was less emotional and more rational. At the same time, attendance at church services was in decline.
During the 1740s, concern about these trends led to a religious movement called the Great Awakening.
Evangelical preachers such as Jonathan Edwards and George Whitefield toured the colonies promoting revivals where people felt a direct and transforming contact with an overwhelming Holy Spirit. The Great Awakening led to the birth of new churches. This eventually increased tolerance of religious differences. Many colonists also came to believe that if they could decide how to worship God, they could also decide how to govern themselves.
The Enlightenment and the Great Awakening would later combine to influence the American Revolution. The Enlightenment informed the writings of political leaders, while the Great Awakening inspired and united many of the common people.
IDENTIFY
The followers of which intellectual movement believed all problems could be solved with reason?
THE FOUNDATIONS OF AMERICAN DEMOCRACY
Founding Documents		Fundamental Principles		State constitutions, the United States Constitution and Bill of Rights •	Guarantee due process •	Establish rule of law •	Guarantee free elections and free speech •	Establish checks on governmental authority
•	Magna Carta •	English Bill of Rights •	Commentaries on the Laws of England		•	Government authority comes from the consent of the governed •	The power of government should be limited •	Government exists to protect individual rights and freedoms		
» Colonial government in the English colonies was influenced by European thought. Analyze Charts Which of these principles is protected by the Bill of Rights?
Connecting with Past Learnings 8	0.1 Colonies and Revolution
North America in 1763
» Analyze Maps Which European power had lost almost all its colonial territory by 1763?
Causes of the American Revolution
The tradition of a limited English monarchy, experience with self-government, and exposure to Enlightenment ideas influenced the leading American colonists. A European war and a spirit of independence in the colonies prompted the colonists to take action that would change the course of world history.
Between 1689 and 1763, the British and French fought a series of wars in Europe. (In 1707, a treaty joined England and Scotland to form Great Britain.) These conflicts spread to North America and involved the French and British colonists and their Native American allies.
The last of these wars, called the French and Indian War, erupted in 1754 and ended in 1763 with a British victory. The peace treaty gave Canada, Florida, and a portion of French Louisiana to Britain. British colonists were eager to move into Louisiana, but Britain wished to keep peace with the Indians who lived on this territory British limits on westward expansion angered the colonists.
Violation of the Rights of Englishmen The British victory was expensive, nearly doubling Britain s national debt. During the 1760s, the British Parliament asserted that the colonists should pay new taxes
to help the empire. The proposed taxes and tighter trade regulations shocked the colonists. Certain parliamentary acts in the 1760s and 1770s violated other rights enjoyed by men in Britain, including the principles of no standing army in peacetime without consent and trial by jury.
Many colonists believed that since they were not directly represented in Parliament, new taxes and trade regulations denied them their rights as Englishmen. They cited the Magna Carta and the English Bill of Rights, which blocked the king from levying taxes without the permission of Parliament. During the 1760s, their problem was with Parliament, rather than with King George III. Professing loyalty to the king, the colonists hoped to be free from Parliament’s efforts to tax them. They would pay taxes levied only by their own elected assemblies in the colonies.
Pressuring Parliament Valuing the prosperity and protection of the empire, the colonists did not immediately seek independence. Instead, they wanted to remain part of the empire that for so long had produced so many benefits at so little cost to them. They also wanted to enjoy the traditional rights of Englishmen.
To pressure Parliament, colonists boycotted British goods. Local committees enforced this boycott, which threatened the British economy. Angry crowds
Connecting with Past Learnings
0.1 Colonies and Revolution
» In this political cartoon, some angry colonists protest the unpopular taxes required by the Stamp Act by tarring and feathering tax collectors and pouring hot tea down their throats.
» The Declaration of Independence, signed by the delegates to the Second Continental Congress, served notice to King George III that the 13 colonies had separated from Great Britain.
Interactive Gallery

harassed colonists who helped to collect the new taxes. Colonists who refused to honor the boycotts or who spoke out in favor of the taxes were considered Loyalists. Representing a large minority, the Loyalists preferred to pay the taxes and honor Parliament and the king. They also feared that the resistance would lead to a war that Britain seemed certain to win.
H EXPLAIN
Why did many American colonists oppose an increase in taxes?
The American Revolution
In 1774, leading colonists held a convention, called the First Continental Congress. Delegates from 12 of the colonies (all except Georgia) met in Philadelphia to discuss what to do next. The delegates sent a list of complaints to the British government. The letter was ignored.
Americans Declare Their Independence In 1775, war began when British troops tried to seize arms and ammunition stored at Concord, Massachusetts. New Englanders quickly organized an army, which the Continental Congress adopted as the army for all the colonies.
That year, the Second Continental Congress assembled. Another letter of complaint was sent to the British government. When this letter was also ignored, Congress decided to declare the colonies’ independence from Britain. A committee made up of Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, Roger Sherman, Robert Livingston, and Thomas Jefferson was given the task of drafting an official declaration.
The Declaration of Independence was mainly written by Thomas Jefferson with help from Adams and Franklin. After it was approved by the delegates at the Continental Congress, the first person to sign the document was John Hancock, a wealthy merchant and leader of the Patriots in Massachusetts who later served nine terms as governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Other signers included the well-known doctor Benjamin Rush, of Philadelphia, who later served as treasurer of the U.S. Mint.
The Intent and Meaning of the Declaration The
intent of the Declaration of Independence was to state that the 13 American colonies were now independent from Britain and to give reasons why the Patriots felt this step was necessary. But it had more meaning than a statement of independence. It expressed Enlightenment ideas about the natural rights of people and the purposes of government.
0.1 Colonies and Revolution
Connecting with Past Learnings
Continental vs. British Forces
CONTINENTAL
BRITISH
TOTAL FORCES
COMPOSITION OF FORCES
ALLIES
QUALITY OF FORCES
» Analyze Maps Compare the advantages and disadvantages of the Continental forces versus the British forces.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
—Declaration of Independence, July 4, 1776
Jefferson made the argument that the purpose of the government is “to secure these rights,” a position influenced by Enlightenment thinkers. He asserted that when a government fails to respect or protect the rights of its people, the people have the right to replace that government with a new government of their own making.
The importance of the Declaration of Independence lay in both how it captured the ideals of the revolution, inspiring the struggle, and how it laid the groundwork for the creation of the United States Constitution. In addition, revolutionary movements in other countries drew inspiration from the document and its enduring ideals.
The Declaration went on to list the reasons why the colonists felt that they had no other choice but rebellion. The colonists had not come to the decision to rebel lightly. Once they did, they fought hard for victory.
Patriot Leaders During the war, the British made many military mistakes because they underestimated the Patriots, who were highly motivated by their cause. Colonists of all kinds gave up their lives to fight for the cause of independence. John Peter Muhlenberg, a Virginia minister, gave up preaching to recruit and lead a troop of 300 men. He proclaimed, "There is a time to pray and a time to fight, and that time has now come!” Another minister, John Witherspoon of New Jersey, was elected to the Continental Congress and was the only clergyman to sign the Declaration of Independence.
The Patriots greatly benefited from the leadership of George Washington, who had gained valuable military experience during the French and Indian War. They also owed much to the resourcefulness of leaders such as Jonathan Trumbull, Sr., who was a close friend and advisor to Washington. Trumbull, a former merchant, was the colonial governor of Connecticut. He made a key contribution to the revolution's success by helping to organize the supply of food, clothing, shoes, guns, and ammunition for the Continental Army.
French Assistance In 1776, the colonists sent a small delegation led by Maryland planter Charles Carroll to seek the assistance of French Canadians in the fight against the British. Carroll was the only Catholic signer of the Declaration of Independence and was the last survivor of the 56 signers, dying in 1832. The mission failed, but by 1778, the Patriots began receiving military assistance from France itself. In 1781, a French
0.1 Colonies and Revolution
Connecting with Past Learnings
Key Battles of the Revolutionary War
Lexington and Concord, April 1775
Camden, August 1780 ^Charleston, May 1780 Savannah, December 1778
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
» Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, is it surprising that the Americans were able to defeat the British and gain independence?
Long Island, August 1776 .	,	.^Trenton, December 1776
;•July Lzzz^j-
7 VDE
UfiYorktown, October 1781
fleet trapped the British army at Yorktown in Virginia, where Washington’s army completed the victory.
The Treaty of Paris The treaty of Paris, signed in 1783, gave the new nation very favorable boundaries: Florida in the south; the Great Lakes to the north; and the Mississippi River to the west. The British retreated to Canada, while the Spanish claimed Florida and everything west of the Mississippi.
EXPLAIN
How did Thomas Jefferson justify writing the Declaration of Independence? ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how the arrival of European colonists affected Native Americans.
2.	Integrate Information Explain how the philosophies of the Enlightenment affected American colonists.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain why many colonists opposed Britain’s proposition to introduce new taxes.
4.	Summarize the main principles of the Declaration of Independence.
5.	Describe the contributions of leaders such as George Washington and Jonathan Trumbull, Sr., during the Revolutionary War.
Connecting with Past Learnings 12	0.1 Colonies and Revolution
Dissatisfied with living under colonial rule, the American colonists rebelled and declared independence from Britain. In addition to fighting a war to win their independence, the leaders of the new nation faced the task of creating a system of government for themselves.
Interactive Flipped Video
Founding a New
Nation
A
Confederation of States States Establish Republican Governments By declaring their independence, the former colonies became states. Each of the 13 new states wrote a constitution that created a republican government, or a government in which officials are representatives elected by the people. Most state constitutions also included a bill of rights, a list of freedoms guaranteed by the state government. Many of them guaranteed freedom of religion, freedom of the press, and the right to trial by jury.
At the time, voting rights were very limited. Only white male property owners could vote, except in New Jersey, where women had the right to vote until 1807. African Americans—whether free or enslaved—and Native Americans were not permitted to vote.
The First Plan of Government American political leaders did not wait until the Revolutionary War had been won to set up a new national government. In November 1777, the Continental Congress adopted the first national constitution, the Articles of Confederation. The Articles officially created the United States of America. Ratification by
1.A, 1.C, 26.E
» Objectives
Describe the weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation.
Describe the compromises made in order to reach agreement on the Constitution.
Summarize the arguments for and against ratification of the Constitution.
Explain the principles of the Constitution.
» Key Terms
bill of rights Shays’ Rebellion James Madison ratify
federalism separation of
powers checks and
balances
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
13
©
all 13 states did not occur until March 1781, six months before the British surrender at Yorktown that ended the war.
Under the Articles of Confederation, most power remained with the states. The Articles created a national government without a President or a judicial branch. The legislative branch had only very limited powers. Congress could declare and conduct war. It could also regulate trade with foreign countries and with Indian nations. But it could not raise troops or levy taxes, and there was no way to enforce trade regulations. The United States government could only collect money and muster an army with voluntary contributions from the states.
Weaknesses of the Articles Under the Articles, the national government had no say over the rules of interstate commerce. Each state set its own trade policy. Most states tried to protect their industries and agriculture from competition by taxing goods imported from other states. This practice discouraged trade among the states and led to competition that had the potential to become destructive.
The national debt was also a problem. Because the Continental Congress had borrowed money and issued paper currency during the Revolutionary War, the new government was deeply in debt. However, it
had no way to raise the money to pay off this debt. The states were all paying off their own war debts and were largely unwilling or unable to contribute money to the national government.
The national government also suffered from structural weaknesses. There was no President. Each state, no matter how large or small, had a single vote in a unicameral, or one-house, Congress. On the major issues, including declaring war and making treaties, two thirds of the states (9 out of 13) had to approve. Amending the Articles was almost impossible, because every single one of the states had to endorse any change.
Managing the Northwest Territory Despite its weaknesses under the Articles of Confederation, the national government took up the task of fulfilling its duties as best it could. The Articles gave Congress authority over the vast Northwest Territory, which lay north of the Ohio River and stretched west from Pennsylvania to the Mississippi River. In 1785 and 1787, Congress passed two laws to manage this land. The first, the Land Ordinance, created a system for surveying and selling the land to settlers. The second, the Northwest Ordinance, described how territories should be governed and how they could become full-fledged states. This law also banned slavery in the territory and provided for public education.
NORTHWEST ORDINANCE AND
SETTLING THE UPPER MIDWEST
THE LAND SURVEY
5,000
4.500 4,000
3.500 3,000
2.500
36 square miles 1 square mile
Acre 1/640th of a square mile; average size of farm was 40 acres
1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900
With 5,000 free white male residents, territories could elect a state assembly and send nonvoting representatives to Congress.
With 60,000, residents could write a state constitution and apply for statehood.
» Analyze Information How did the Northwest Ordinance ensure the orderly incorporation of new territory into the United States?
E
T3
C
H3
O
Connecting with Past Learnings 14	0.2 Founding a New Nation
Increasing Troubles Lacking an army, the weak confederation could not defend American interests on the frontier. The Spanish in Louisiana tried to constrain western American settlements by closing the port of New Orleans. Along the Great Lakes, the British refused to abandon frontier forts on the American side of the boundary set by the terms of the peace treaty that ended the American Revolution.
Domestic troubles also began plaguing the young republic. During the mid-1780s, an economic depression reduced the prices paid to farmers for their produce. Unable to pay their debts, farmers faced losing their crops, livestock, and even their homes. In Massachusetts, matters worsened when the courts seized farms from farmers who did not pay taxes to the state or their loans. In rural Massachusetts in 1786, armed farmers led by Daniel Shays shut down the courts, blocking foreclosures. The state of Massachusetts sent troops to suppress this revolt, known as Shays’ Rebellion. The rebellion highlighted the weaknesses of the national government set up by the Articles of Confederation.
B RECALL
What were the main weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation?
The Constitutional
Convention
By 1787, many Americans agreed that the Articles of Confederation were flawed. In May 1787, the states sent delegates to a special convention in Philadelphia to draft proposed amendments to the Articles. However, once there, the delegates decided not to revise the Articles of Confederation. Instead, they agreed to undertake a complete restructuring of the national government. The convention came to be known as the Constitutional Convention. The Convention would go on to produce a completely new, much stronger plan of government. That plan, the United States Constitution, has endured to this day with relatively few significant changes.
Two Opposing Plans While the delegates agreed that the Articles of Confederation were deeply flawed, it was much harder for them to reach an agreement on the best solution.
The first proposal put forth was the Virginia Plan, designed by James Madison. The Virginia Plan advocated a national union that was both strong and republican. Madison insisted that a large republic could be more stable than a small one, because in a large republic, the diverse interests would provide checks
» Shays’ Rebellion resulted in bloodshed when state militia attacked angry rioters led by Daniel Shays. Describe How did Shays’ Rebellion test the strength of the new national government?
and balances to preserve the common good. In addition to securing the power to tax and to regulate commerce, this plan proposed major structural changes. The nation would have a bicameral legislature: a House of Representatives and a Senate. In both houses, the states with larger populations would have more members. The Virginia Plan also featured a President to command the armed forces and to manage foreign relations.
William Paterson offered a counterproposal called the New Jersey Plan. This plan, favored by the small states, would give Congress the power to regulate commerce and to tax while keeping the basic structure of the Confederation. The plan retained a unicameral legislature representing the states as equals—no matter how large or small. The states remained sovereign except for those few powers specifically granted to the national government. Under the New Jersey Plan, the United States would stay a loose confederation of states, rather than become a unified nation.
The Great Compromise The delegates worked throughout the hot Philadelphia summer to resolve their differences. Roger Sherman proposed what has come to be called the Great Compromise. It settled the differences between the Virginia and the New
0.2 Founding a New Nation
Connecting with Past Learnings
» Despite the fact that some delegates from northern states urged that slavery be banned throughout the nation, the Constitutional Convention did not succeed in ending slavery or the slave trade.
Jersey plans by creating a bicameral, or two-house, legislature. In a concession to the smaller states, the Senate would equally represent every state by allowing just two senators per state.
In keeping with the Virginia Plan, the House of Representatives, in which representation was based on population, granted more power to the larger states.
The Slavery Issue Another major compromise appeased the southern states. Their delegates feared domination by the northern states, which had a larger white population. To reassure the South, the delegates adopted the three-fifths clause. It counted each enslaved person as three fifths of a person, to be added to a state’s free population, which boosted the number of the Souths seats in Congress. The three-fifths clause, however, gave no rights to enslaved African Americans.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What was the basic principle of the Great Compromise?
T H B
FEDERALIST:
A COLLECTION
o r
ESSAYS,
WUTTBK IN FAVOUR OF THE
REW CONSTITUTION,
AS AGREED UPON PY THE FEDERAL CONVENTION, SEPTEMBER
N TWO VOLUMES*
V O L. I.
The Struggle Over
Ratification
The Constitution was now written, but it was not yet the law of the land. Before it could go into effect, 9 of the 13 states had to ratify, or officially approve, it.
Federalists Argue for Ratification Supporters of the Constitution were called Federalists. They wanted the United States to have a strong central government. Three leading Federalists—James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay—wrote a series of letters to newspapers in support of the Constitution. These letters, collectively called The Federalist Papers, explained why they believed the Constitution was vital to the survival of the new nation. They also explained how the new system of government would work. Today, the Federalist essays are recognized as perhaps the most sophisticated explanation of the new American political system ever written.
N F W.Y ORK:
VR’NTtD AX!) SCID BY ). AND A. M‘LIA\
H AN C V E R-5 C U A K
BVC, 1XSX V
i 11, » Both the Federalists and Antifederalists circulated essays explaining their positions. Federalists supported ratification and Antifederalists opposed it.
Interactive Gallery
Antifederalists Argue Against Ratification
Opponents of the proposed Constitution were called Antifederalists. They included some leading Americans, such as Patrick Henry and Samuel Adams. The Antifederalists objected to the Constitution because they thought it gave the national government far too much power at the expense of the states. They believed that the President had too much power, that Congress was too small and could not represent voters,
Connecting with Past Learnings
16	0.2 Founding a New Nation
and that a federal court system interfered with local courts.
A
Bill of Rights Leads to Ratification One of the most powerful arguments of the Antifederalists was that the proposed Constitution lacked a bill of rights. Most of the states already had bills of rights protecting individual liberty. The Antifederalists were concerned that the federal government would become a threat to Americans’ prized freedoms without a similar set of protections. To help secure ratification, the Federalists promised to add a bill of rights once the new government was established. By June 1788, the nine states required to ratify the Constitution had voted to make it the law of the land, with two other important states—Virginia and New York—quickly following.
In 1789, Congress approved the 10 constitutional amendments that became the federal Bill of Rights. The states ratified these amendments in 1791.
Importance of the Bill of Rights The Bill of Rights protects a wide range of personal freedoms, including freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom of the press and of assembly, the right to bear arms as part of “a well-regulated militia,” and protections against arbitrary intrusions and arrests, unfair trials, and “cruel and unusual” punishments. The personal freedoms established by the Bill of Rights have been cherished by Americans ever since. The protection they provide against abuses of power by the government are as important today as they were when they were originally written, perhaps even more so.
El CHECK UNDERSTANDING Why was the Bill of
Rights added to the Constitution?
Principles of the
Constitution
The intent of the Constitution was to create the framework for a republican form of government that strengthened the federal government from what it had been under the Articles of Confederation while balancing the interests of the large and small states.
The Meaning of the Constitution The authors of the Constitution established a representative government based on these basic principles: popular sovereignty, separation of powers, limited government, federalism, checks and balances, and representative government.
Popular Sovereignty The government derives its political authority from the people. This sentiment is
The Ninth PIL L ^4 R erected f “ The Ratification of the Conventions of nine States* fhall be fufficient for the eftablif
ment of this Conftitution, between the States fo ratifying the fame.” Art- va. INCIPIENT MdGNI PROCEDERE MENSES.
From the Independent Chronicle and Universal Advertiser, Boston, Thursday June 26, 1788.
» In this cartoon about ratification, states are
represented by pillars; some are standing and others
are not. Analyze Political Cartoons What does the
cartoon suggest about ratification?
Interactive Chart
reflected in the Constitution’s opening words, “We the People of the United States . . .”
Separation of Powers The Constitution defined distinct legislative, executive, and judicial branches with different powers and responsibilities to prevent misuses of power by any of the three branches.
Limited Government Popular sovereignty ensures that a government's power is restricted, or limited. The Constitution specifically defined and limited the powers of government. Government leaders are not above the law.
Federalism To create a national government stronger than the one under the Articles of Confederation, the framers created a new form of federalism to share power between the national and state governments. The states could no longer issue their own paper money or regulate trade with other states. These powers, known as the delegated powers, now belonged only to the federal government. Certain reserved powers continued to belong to the states alone, including the power to regulate and conduct elections. The federal and state governments also held some overlapping, or
Connecting with Past Learnings 17	0.2 Founding a New Nation
» On average, almost 55 percent of registered voters have participated in recent presidential elections.
The Importance of the Constitution The Republic established by the Constitution of the United States became a symbol of freedom not only to Americans but to countries in Europe and republics in Latin America as well. The 13 colonies were now forged together into a single nation with a strong central government to bind it together.
E pluribus unum This unity had already been suggested by the phrase “E pluribus unum,” which is Latin for “Out of many, one.” This phrase was first suggested as a motto for the young nation by the committee appointed in 1776 to design an official seal for what political leaders were beginning to call “the United States of America.” As the United States grew and developed into a more diverse nation, it began to take on a second meaning. ““Out of many, one” is now commonly taken to signify that a single, unified people has grown out of people with many different backgrounds, ethnicities, and beliefs.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What is the division of government between the states and the national government?
concurrent, powers, among them parallel court systems and the right to collect taxes.
Checks and Balances The three branches were given separate and sometimes overlapping responsibilities, along with specific ways to override, or check and balance, the decisions of the other branches. This distribution of power was intended to prevent the emergence of a single center of power and to provide remedies for abuses of power by the members of any one branch.
Representative Government The writers created an indirect democracy in which voters elect representatives to be their voice in government. The state legislatures rather than the voters would choose the members of the Senate, and the electoral college would indirectly elect the President.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Explain why the national government was weaker than individual states under the Articles of Confederation.
2.	Support a Point of View With Evidence Explain why the Antifederalists opposed the Constitution.
3.	Compare and Contrast Describe the similarities and differences between the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution.
4.	Analyze Context Explain the significance of the phrase “E pluribus unum” and account for changes in its meaning over time.
5.	Discuss the idea of the separation of powers and explain how the Constitution enacted this principle.
Connecting with Past Learnings
18	0.2 Founding a New Nation
As the new federal government gathered in New York City for the first time in 1789, the nation faced a number of pressing problems. The unity of the Revolutionary era was being replaced by differences of opinion about the direction the new nation should take.
'[©JUSBOBIB
America in the Early 1800s
The New Republic and the War of 1812
Political Parties Develop Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton wanted the United States to develop a commercial and industrial economy. In order to promote economic development, Hamilton proposed issuing government bonds, creating new taxes, and creating a Bank of the United States. Hamilton’s proposals were embraced by the newly formed Federalist Party but opposed by leaders such as Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, who wanted a limited government and an agrarian society. Jefferson and Madison and their mostly southern supporters formed the Democratic Republican Party to oppose Hamilton’s agenda.
The Struggle Over Foreign Policy The two parties differed on foreign policy issues as well. The Federalists supported strong trade ties with Great Britain, while the Democratic Republicans wanted close ties with Britain’s enemy, France.
President Washington wanted the United States to continue to trade with both Britain and France. In 1793, the British navy tested
22.A, 22.B
» Objectives
Describe the early years of the federal government, including the development of the two-party system and the importance of the Louisiana Purchase and War of 1812.
Summarize the key issues and events of the presidency of Andrew Jackson.
» Key Terms
Federalist Party Democratic
Republican Party John Marshall judicial review Louisiana Purchase embargo Monroe Doctrine Andrew Jackson Jacksonian
democracy protective tariffs nullification Indian Removal Act Trail of Tears Whig Party Panic of 1837 Alexis de Tocqueville
egalitarianism populism laissez-faire Industrial Revolution cotton gin
underground railroad abolitionists Frederick Douglass Second Great
Awakening Lucretia Mott Elizabeth Cady
Stanton Seneca Falls
Convention women’s rights
movement
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
19
American neutrality by seizing U.S. merchant ships trading with French colonies. This added to U.S. outrage at the continued presence of British forts on the American side of the Great Lakes. To avoid war, Washington sent Chief Justice John Jay to London to negotiate with the British. In the Jay Treaty of 1794, the British gave up the forts but kept most of their restrictions on U.S. shipping.
New Powers and New Territory As the nation was struggling to find its footing in foreign affairs, the federal government took steps that expanded the government’s powers and enlarged the nation’s territory.
In 1803, Chief Justice John Marshall used a partisan dispute in the case of Marburyv. Madison. to assert that the Supreme Court had the power of judicial review. That meant that the judicial branch could now decide the constitutionality of congressional actions.
That same year, France’s new ruler, Napoleon Bonaparte, agreed to sell the vast Louisiana Territory west of the Mississippi to the United States. The Louisiana Purchase nearly doubled the size of the United States and cost the country only $15 million. In 1804, President Jefferson sent Meriwether Lewis and William Clark to explore the new territory, in what became known as the Lewis and Clark expedition.
The War of 1812 By the early 1800s, the British navy had resumed seizing American merchant ships trading with France. In order to pressure the British to stop, the United States declared an embargo on British goods, but the embargo ended up hurting Americans more than it hurt the British. Congress lifted the embargo in 1809. The next President, James Madison, was unable to end the problems with Britain, and in 1812, Congress declared war. Some Americans hoped for a quick victory and the capture of British Canada.
During the two-and-a-half years of war, little progress was made by either side. In 1815, both sides agreed to end the fighting and sign a peace treaty. Although the treaty did not change any boundaries, the war was hailed as a victory by many Americans. They felt that the war proved the strength of their young nation. Twice in two generations, a young, upstart nation had fought successfully against one of the world’s greatest powers. Some called it “The Second American Revolution” because it proved the stability of the country’s republican form of government.
In 1817, James Monroe of Virginia succeeded Madison as President. Monroe and his Secretary of State John Quincy Adams made another foreign policy statement by issuing the Monroe Doctrine. In this declaration, the United States asserted that the monarchies of Europe had no business meddling with
KEY
Continental Divide Pike's route, 1805-1806 Pike's route, 1806-1807 — Modern borders Bb Campsite
» The Lewis and Clark expedition helped Americans learn more about the West. Make Predictions How might westward expansion lead to conflict with other nations?
400 km Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
7 ~
Connecting with Past Learnings 20 I 0.3 America in the Early 1800s
The War of 1812
200 mi
200 km Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
» Both sides won victories in the War of 1812, with no clear overall winner. Analyze Maps Where did Andrew Jackson’s forces win victories on their route to New Orleans?
American republics, including those in Latin America. In turn, the United States promised to stay out of European affairs.
B DEFINE
What is the principle of judicial review? The Age of Jackson
The rise of war hero General Andrew Jackson in the 1820s shifted the politics of the nation. While the age of Jacksonian democracy expanded the concept of democracy, some policies of the Jackson era resulted in long-term political strife.
The End of an Era The conclusion of the War of 1812 brought on a period of relative political unity in the United States. Some historians call this the “Era of Good Feeling.” However, during the early 1820s, internal differences among Democratic Republicans began emerging. These differences resulted in a fourway presidential race in 1824.
Jackson was the clear winner of the popular vote, but in a four-way race, no candidate was able to win a majority of electoral votes. Therefore, under the Constitution, the election was decided by the House of Representatives. Fourth-place finisher Henry Clay
threw his support to John Quincy Adams, who became President.
Aided by his party’s organization, Jackson triumphed over Adams in 1828. Jackson’s victory split the Democratic Party when Democrats who opposed Jackson founded a new political party known as the Whigs. The Era of Good Feelings was at an end.
Jacksonian Democracy Jackson rose to prominence at a time when national politics was becoming increasingly democratic. More states chose presidential electors by popular vote, rather than by state legislatures, and many states abolished property requirements for voting. Participation in elections grew from less than 30 percent of white men in the early 1800s to almost 80 percent in 1840.
Jacksonian democracy had serious limits. Most state constitutions took the vote away from free blacks, even those with property. Native Americans, who were not citizens, and women could not vote in any state.
The Nullification Crisis Jackson was at the center of conflicts over economic policy that shaped the tone of American politics for decades. The federal government’s use of protective tariffs had long been a source of sectional debate. The industrial North favored tariffs while the agrarian South opposed them.
Connecting with Past Learnings
0.3 America in the Early 1800s
In 1828, Congress adopted an especially high tariff, which southerners called “The Tariff of Abominations.” South Carolina, relying on the doctrine of nullification, claimed that it could void, or nullify, unconstitutional laws within its borders.
Jackson signed into law a new tariff that was not as harsh as the 1828 tariff, but it was still unacceptable to many southerners. The South Carolina state government voted to nullify the tariff law and threatened to secede from the Union. Jackson threatened to use troops to enforce federal law in South Carolina. Although South Carolina eventually backed down after Congress passed a compromise tariff, this showdown between proponents of the states’ rights view and the federal government hinted at thorny future conflicts.
Jackson Pushes Indian Removal Despite his stand against nullification, Jackson’s political base was in the South, and those voters expected him to help them remove the 60,000 Native Americans living in the region. In 1830 Congress passed the Indian Removal Act. This law sought to negotiate the peaceful exchange of Indian lands in the South for new lands in Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma).
Most Choctaws and Chickasaws did agree to accept lands in the West. But other groups resisted removal. In 1836, after several violent conflicts, the U.S. military
forcibly removed the Creeks from their southern lands. In Florida, the Seminoles fought the Second Seminole War between 1835 and 1842. In the end, U.S. troops forced most Seminoles from Florida.
In 1838, federal troops compelled more than 15,000 Cherokees to travel from the Southeast to Oklahoma. At least 4,000 Cherokees died of disease, exposure, and hunger along what came to be called the Trail of Tears
Bank Politics and Economic Woes Jackson also sided with the interests of southern farmers in his opposition to the second Bank of the United States, which Congress had chartered in 1816. Business leaders argued that the Bank fostered economic growth and confidence, but Jacksonian Democrats felt that it favored a small number of rich investors. In 1832, Jackson vetoed the renewal of the Bank’s charter.
Supporters of the Bank formed the Whig Party to oppose Jackson’s policies. After Jackson won re-election in 1832, he took steps to finish off the Bank. Relieved from federal regulation, state and private banks flooded the nation with paper money of uncertain value. Jackson’s decision to stop accepting paper money for the purchase of federal land eventually let to the Panic of 1837, the nation’s worst economic depression to that date.
The Trail of Tears
» This map shows the Trail of Tears and its outcome. Interpret Using the scale bar, find the distance the Cherokee walked. How might this explain why so many died on the journey?
Connecting with Past Learnings 22	0.3 America in the Early 1800s
FUNCTIONS or the SECOND BANK
OF THE UNITED STATES
BANK OF THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT
. • r • Holds the government's money
• Pays the government's bills
MONEY
CREATOR
Issues paper money that people can use throughout the United States, unlike state money
REGULATOR
•	Issues or redeems national money to keep economy stable
•	Monitors amount of money from state banks
•	Accepts deposits and makes loans
•	Provides access to businesses and individuals at branches across the country

» The second National Bank was founded to help the federal government manage its income and expenses. Analyze Charts How was the Bank involved in the nation’s economy?
The Young Republic The United States in the early 1800s had its share of political disputes and economic hiccups, but these problems only served to prove the stability and strength of the United States. Once a young nation engaged in an experiment with the republican form of government, by the 1830s, the United States was a rising economic power and a model of democratic stability. Beginning in 1831, French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville undertook a study of American society and politics. His findings were published in a now-classic work of political science, Democracy in America. Tocqueville was impressed with the young nation’s commitment to the ideals of liberty and individualism expressed in the Declaration of Independence and Constitution.
According to Tocqueville, there were five crucial ingredients to the success of representative democracy in the United States: liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, populism, and laissez-faire.
Liberty and egalitarianism, or the view that people are equal and should be treated equally, were rallying cries of the many revolutions that followed the American Revolution, including the one in France. But in the 1830s, these values had little or no reality for most people living outside the United States. In the United States, individual rights were explicitly protected in the federal Constitution and in many of its state
counterparts, if only for white men. The Declaration of Independence stated that “all men are created equal.”
Tocqueville was particularly astonished by American individualism and populism, or the widespread participation of regular citizens in the political process. These traits were largely absent in the older social systems of Europe, where class systems determined an individual’s place in society and the upper classes dominated politics to the exclusion of nearly everyone else. In some ways, Jackson was the symbol of both individualism and populism. His successes, driven by determination and talent rather than an elite background and connections, inspired many other common Americans.
The American government also had a “hands off” or laissez-faire approach to the national economy. Many citizens agreed with the maxim that government is best which governs least, especially when it came to the economy In the early 1800s, American industry budded and thrived and cotton exploded as a new cash crop in the South, with the federal government taking a light hand in guiding the economy. While none of the ingredients Tocqueville noticed were completely unique to the United States, no other nation exhibited all five to the same degree as the United States.
U DEFINE
What event did the federal government’s use of a strong protective tariff lead to?
Connecting with Past Learnings 23 ;	0.3 America in the Early 1800s
Growing Differences
Between North and South
In the United States, the Industrial Revolution took hold first in the Northeast, which had more water power than any other region. As factories cropped up, cities grew and attracted European immigrants seeking work. With more labor power available, more factories were built.
While the Northeast industrialized, the southern states became more reliant on an agricultural economy fueled by slave labor. The invention of the cotton gin in 1793 made cotton the South’s leading crop and increased the need for, and the profitability of, slaves.
Growing Demand for Cotton The growth of the textile industry in the North spurred further increases in cotton production in the South. Because of demand for cotton from textile mills in both Europe and the North, cotton prices increased. This encouraged southern planters to expand their fields and increase the number of enslaved African Americans they owned.
As the northern and southern economies developed different specializations, their political differences increased as well. Many northerners objected to slavery on moral grounds, and by 1804, every state north of Maryland had passed laws to end slavery gradually. Because of the importance of slavery to the southern
economy, southerners grew stronger in their defense of slavery.
Resistance to Slavery Many enslaved people did whatever they could to fight back against their oppressors. Resistance often took the form of sabotage, such as breaking tools or outwitting overseers.
Sometimes, resistance became violent. Historians estimate that nearly 200 significant slave revolts took place in the first half of the 1800s. Terrified by the idea of a successful slave revolt, southerners passed harsher laws and controls regarding slavery. Enslaved people were forbidden to gather in groups unless an overseer was present. In addition, it became illegal to teach enslaved people to read.
The increasingly harsh conditions faced by slaves inspired some people in the North to work against slavery. Some northern abolitionists and free blacks organized a network known as the underground railroad to help slaves escape from the South. A secret network of “conductors” hid runaway slaves in farm wagons and on riverboats and then moved them to destinations in the North or in Canada. Using complex signals and hiding places, the underground railroad carried its passengers over hundreds of miles of dangerous terrain.
SOUTHERN DEPENDENCE
on AGRICULTURE WCOTTON PRODUCTION
SOUTHERN STATES’
SHARE of COTTON PRODUCTION
GROWTH of the SOUTHERN
ENSLAVED POPULATION
BALES OF COTTON PRODUCED
0.1 0.2
1810	1820	1830	1840	18S0	1860
1826
1859
■I
N CAROLINA
a.; 1820 1860
ALABAMA
ARKANSAS
FLORIDA
GEORGIA
LOUISIANA
MISSISSIPPI
N. CAROLINA S. CAROLINA TENNESSEE
TEXAS
VIRGINIA
» Analyze Charts Which state experienced the largest growth in cotton production between 1826 and 1859?
[®]|BSSS!EHSSS1
Connecting with Past Learnings 24	0.3 America in the Early 1800s
The Voices of Abolitionism By the early 1800s, a growing number of abolitionists began to speak out against slavery. One of the most influential abolitionists was Frederick Douglass. As a former slave with direct experience of the harsh conditions the enslaved endured in the South, Douglass became a powerful speaker at abolitionist meetings. In 1852, Douglass was invited to speak at an Independence Day celebration.
Fellow citizens, pardon me, and allow me to ask, why am I called upon to speak here today? What have I or those I represent to do with your national independence? Are the great principles of political freedom and of natural justice, embodied in that Declaration of Independence, extended to us? . . . What, to the American slave, is your Fourth of July? I answer: a day that reveals to him, more than all other days in the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to which he is the constant victim.
—Frederick Douglass, speech at Rochester, 1852
Slavery Divides the Nation In cities across the Northeast and the Midwest, abolitionist societies sprang up, yet most Americans did not support the abolition of slavery. White workers in the North feared that free African Americans would take their jobs, and wealthy industrialists worried that the end of slavery would cut off the supply of southern cotton and reduce the demand for ships and shipyards.
Defenders of slavery maintained that slave labor was superior to the wage labor of the North. They argued that northern employers and laborers were inevitably at odds, since employers wanted workers to work more for less money while workers wanted to work less for more money.
Despite the interdependence of the northern and southern economies, the issue of slavery above all others increasingly divided Americans.
H DEFINE
What is an abolitionist? » With the top of this cotton gin folded down, workers would feed cotton balls through the gin’s teeth and the barbed roller. These metal parts separated the fibers from the seeds in a cotton ball and straightened the cotton fibers. With the gin, workers could produce much more cotton in a day. Predict Consequences How would this invention affect the demand for slaves?
» African American abolitionist Frederick Douglass, who escaped from slavery, gave speeches across the United States about the hardships of slavery.
Connecting with Past Learnings 25 .	0.3 America in the Early 1800s
Reform in the Early 1800s
Abolitionism was part of a drive to reform American society in the early 1800s. This reform movement was partly created by the Second Great Awakening, a revival of religious feeling that led to an increase in participation in evangelical Protestant movements. This reform movement provided new opportunities for women. In the early 1800s, American women lacked many basic legal and economic rights. Education beyond grade school was almost unheard-of, and they rarely took part in public life.
Women Lead Reform Efforts Women, however, were welcomed by the emerging reform movements. They worked in the temperance movement, the abolition movement, and other reform movements. Sisters Angelina and Sarah Grimke spoke and wrote against slavery. Dorothea Dix campaigned to win better, more humane treatment for people with mental illness. Emma Willard established schools for women in Connecticut, Ohio, and New York. Soon, some of these reformers began to work to gain equality for women as well. Their efforts would lay the groundwork for women’s struggle for equal rights—especially the right to vote—over the next hundred years.
A
Women’s Rights Movement Emerges The industrialization of the 1820s and 1830s provided the first real economic opportunity for women outside the home in the nation’s history. Thousands of young
women who would have stayed in the family home instead went to work in mills and factories. This gave them a small degree of economic independence and a larger degree of social independence.
Although many women became leading reformers and many others entered the workforce, there had still been virtually no progress in women’s rights. As more women became involved in the abolitionist movement, they began to see their own social restrictions as being comparable to slavery. They began to call for increased rights of their own. Women's rights reformers began to publish their ideas in pamphlets and books.
The Seneca Falls Convention In 1848, Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, two prominent abolitionists, helped organize the Seneca Falls Convention. This meeting, the first of the women’s rights movement in the United States, attracted hundreds of men and women. One of the most illustrious attendees was Frederick Douglass.
The delegates to the convention adopted a Declaration of Sentiments, modeled after the language of the Declaration of Independence.
We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal. . . . The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of
» Analyze Charts Based on the information in the chart, how were the reform movements of the nineteenth century rooted in American cultural and political ideals?
Connecting with Past Learnings 26	0.3 America in the Early 1800s
Roots of Manifest Destiny
SOCIAL
POLITICAL
ECONOMIC
•	Belief in America as an exceptional nation
•	Desire to spread American democracy and ideals
•	Belief that it was God’s will for America to expand
•	View that white Americans were superior to Native Americans
•	Monroe Doctrine warning against European colonization in the Western hemisphere
•	Desire to acquire Oregon from Britain
•	Desire to acquire Texas from
•	Success of Democrats, who supported expansion, over Whigs, who did not
•	Farmland for settlers
•	Access to rich resources
•	Land for Southern crops such as cotton
» People had different reasons for supporting the idea of Manifest Destiny. Analyze Charts How might people’s values lead them to support Manifest Destiny?

Interactive Map
man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her.
—Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Declaration of Sentiments
The Declaration called for greater educational opportunities for women, as well as for the right of women to control their own wages and property.
The convention inspired a generation of leaders who carried on the struggle. Among them was Susan B. Anthony, whose involvement in the temperance and abolition movements inspired her to work for greater rights for women as well. By the mid-1800s, women reformers had laid the foundation for a future in which equality seemed a real possibility. However, the most coveted goal of the women’s rights movement— suffrage—was not achieved until 1920.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What was the outcome of the Seneca Fall Convention?
The Nation Expands
By 1830, the United States had grown beyond its original territory along the Atlantic Coast to include the Louisiana Purchase and Florida. American expansionists coveted the Oregon Territory in the Northwest and the Mexican provinces of New Mexico, Texas, and California.
Manifest Destiny In an influential editorial, journalist John L. O’Sullivan expressed the ideals that motivated many American expansionists.
Connecting with Past Learnings
The American claim is by the right of our manifest destiny to overspread and possess the whole of the continent which Providence has given us for the development of the great experiment of liberty and . . . self-government entrusted to us.
L.
O’Sullivan, New York Morning News,December 27, 1845
The phrase Manifest Destiny soon became a rallying cry for expansionists. During the 1840s alone, nearly 20,000 Americans migrated to California, Oregon, and Utah along the major overland trails. The trails also became trade routes, carrying merchants and goods in both directions.
The Texas Revolution During the 1820s, farmers from the South had begun to settle in Texas, becoming Mexican citizens. By 1835, Texas was home to about 30,000 colonists from the United States known as Anglo-Texans. In 1835, Anglo-Texans rebelled against the Mexican government, and in 1836, Texas declared its independence and adopted a republican constitution. In response, Mexican forces attacked the Texans. Led by Sam Houston, Texan forces crushed the Mexican army at the Battle of San Jacinto, forcing the Mexican general to sign a treaty recognizing Texan independence and conceding generous boundaries that stretched south and west to the Rio Grande. The government in Mexico City refused to honor the terms of the treaty, and a border war persisted between Texas and Mexico.
0.3 America in the Early 1800s
After achieving independence, Texas quickly asked to be annexed by the United States. President Jackson favored annexation, as did American expansionists from the South. However, northern representatives in Congress balked at adding another slave state, especially one so large and potentially powerful. Texas was not annexed until 1845.
War With Mexico In 1844, James K. Polk, a slaveholder and expansionist, was elected President. Polk favored the annexation of Texas, and he vowed to fight Britain if it did not give up its claims to the Oregon Territory. Despite his strong words, Polk compromised with the British, agreeing to split the Oregon Territory at the 49th parallel of latitude.
Polk took a harder line on the Texas question. He endorsed a Texan border claim that was still disputed by Mexico and sent troops to occupy the contested territory. After a Mexican patrol clashed with U.S. soldiers in May 1846, Polk asked for and received a declaration of war against Mexico.
Democrats, especially those from the South, were enthusiastically in favor of the war. Whigs suspected Polk of deliberately provoking the conflict in order to
annex New Mexico and California, which might then enter the Union as slave states.
A
Decisive Victory Expands U.S. Territory The war with Mexico was extremely one-sided. During the next year and a half, the United States won every major battle, and by September 1847, U.S. forces had captured the Mexican capital of Mexico City, forcing the Mexicans to sign the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo This treaty gave the United States possession of New Mexico and California for the price of $18 million and secured the Rio Grande as the southern boundary of Texas. The Mexican-American War, together with the annexation of Texas, increased the size of U.S. territory by a third.
The slavery debate was rekindled when California applied for statehood a year later. In 1849, the nation had an equal number of free and slave states—15 each— maintaining the sectional balance in the Senate. The admission of California would tip that balance in favor of the free states. Thus, the U.S. victory over Mexico ultimately contributed to the growing conflict between North and South.
DEFINE
What was Manifest Destiny? » After a brief yet bloody war, the Republic of Texas won its independence from Mexico. Analyze Maps Describe the movement of Mexican and Texan forces after the battle at the Alamo.
Connecting with Past Learnings 28	0.3 America in the Early 1800s
» Analyze Maps What region on the map was the subject of the land dispute that sparked the war? Describe the U.S. troop movements in the final month of the war.

ASSESSMENT
1.	Describe the positive and negative aspects of Jacksonian democracy.
2.	Identify Central Issues Explain how President Jackson’s administration dealt with the Native Americans in the South.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain how the United States government differed from foreign
governments at the time of Alexis de Tocqueville’s visit.
4.	Make Generalizations How did the women’s rights movement begin in the United States?
5.	Generate Explanations Explain how the Texas Revolution and the Mexican-American War expanded the territory of the United States.
Connecting
with Past Learnings f 29 j 0.3 America in the Early 1800s
0.4
John Brown led fellow antislavery settlers on a murderous raid in Kansas against proslavery settlers in 1856.	What
conditions led Brown to take this action?
Regional differences between the North and the South had existed since colonial times. These differences widened in the 1800s as the North developed an industrial economy while the South continued to depend on plantation agriculture and slavery. In time, conflict over the issue of slavery led to an armed struggle that would forever change the nation: the Civil War.
Interactive Flipped Video
The Union in Crisis
» Objectives
Analyze why slavery in the territories was a divisive issue between North and South and how Congress tried to settle the issue in 1850.
Assess how the Kansas-Nebraska Act and John Brown’s raid affected the tensions between North and South.
Compare the candidates in the election of 1860, and analyze the results.
Analyze why southern states seceded from the Union.
» Key Terms
Wilmot Proviso Free-Soil Party Compromise of
1850
popular sovereignty Fugitive Slave Act Harriet Beecher
Stowe
Kansas-Nebraska Act
John Brown Dred Scott v.
Sandford Roger Taney Abraham Lincoln John C.
Breckinridge Confederate States
of America Jefferson Davis Crittenden
Compromise
Slavery and Western Expansion
During the Mexican-American War, the question of slavery in the West emerged as a major issue. To prevent the South from extending slavery into the western territories, in 1846 Pennsylvania congressman David Wilmot proposed an amendment, or proviso, to an appropriations bill. The Wilmot Proviso called for a ban on slavery in any territory that the United States gained from Mexico as a result of the war.
Southern leaders angrily denounced the proposal.
The amendment passed the northern-dominated House of
Representatives, but it was defeated in the Senate. Although it never became law, the Wilmot Proviso contributed to the increasing tension between the North and South over the slavery issue.
The Formation of the Free-Soil Party The Wilmot Proviso helped spur the rise of antislavery political parties. In 1848, northern opponents of slavery formed the Free-Soil Party. The Free-Soil Party wanted to prevent the expansion of slavery into the western territories. The party nominated former President Martin Van Buren as their presidential candidate in the election of 1848. Van Buren did not win, but he and other Free-Soil candidates garnered enough votes to show that the party s motto of “Free soil, Free speech, Free labor, and Free men” would not be silenced.
PEARSONl
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
30
Another Compromise In 1850, California applied to enter the Union as a free state, threatening the balance of power between slave and free states in the Senate. To ease southern concerns, Congress debated and then passed the Compromise of 1850.
According to this measure, California was admitted as a free state, but in the other territory acquired from Mexico, voters would decide the slavery issue for themselves. This approach became known as popular sovereignty, an application of that founding principle enshrined in the Constitution. But by permitting slavery north of 36°30’N latitude, the Compromise of 1850 undid the Missouri Compromise.
The Compromise of 1850 included a Fugitive Slave Act. This law allowed officials to arrest any person accused of being a runaway slave, denied fugitives the right to a jury trial, and required all citizens to help capture runaway slaves. The Fugitive Slave Act outraged many northerners, who resented being legally forced to support the slave system.
Some northern states fought back by passing personal liberty laws. These laws nullified the Fugitive Slave Act, allowing the states to arrest slave catchers for kidnapping. Northern opponents of the law also mounted an intense resistance. In 1851, at Christiana, Pennsylvania, a small band of African Americans gathered to protect several runaways from southern slave catchers. Local white bystanders refused to help the slave-hunting party. Then, after the slave owner died in the scuffle, a white jury refused to convict the killers.
RECALL
Which piece of legislation kept the balance between free states and slave states? The Road to Disunion
Resentment against the Fugitive Slave Act spurred Harriet Beecher Stowe to write the novel Uncle Tom’s Cabin, a powerful condemnation of slavery. Stowe’s sympathetic main character, Uncle Tom, put a human face on slavery for readers who had never witnessed slavery firsthand. Uncle Tom’s Cabin sold 300,000 copies in its first year, increasing antislavery sentiment in the North. But it angered southerners, who argued that Stowe's book presented a false picture of slavery and the South.
Published in 1852, Uncle Tom’s Cabin was so influential that years later, when Stowe visited President Lincoln at the White House during the Civil War, Lincoln reportedly greeted the author by saying, “So you are the little woman who wrote the book that made this great war.”
» As Americans debated the issue of slavery, slave auctions continued in the South. Members of families like this one on auction in Virginia had to endure the possibility of never seeing one another again.
» Harriet Tubman (far left) poses with a group of enslaved people she helped escape to the North along the underground railroad—a loosely organized network of hiding places created by northern abolitionists and free blacks.
Connecting with Past Learnings 31	0.4 The Union in Crisis
Popular Sovereignty in Kansas and Nebraska In
1854, Congress again tried to settle the issue of slavery in the West. When Senator Stephen Douglas introduced a bill to establish a government for the Nebraska Territory, his proposal was defeated by southern senators who objected to allowing Nebraska to enter the Union as a free state. To accommodate southerners, Douglas rewrote the bill. After much debate, Congress passed the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which divided the Nebraska Territory into Kansas and Nebraska. Voters in each territory would decide the issue of slavery by popular sovereignty. Many northerners complained that this plan allowed slavery in areas where it had been banned by the Missouri Compromise.
Soon, both proslavery and antislavery settlers were flocking to Kansas, each hoping to outnumber the other when the time came to vote on slavery. In 1855, proslavery supporters set up a territorial government at Shawnee Mission. Free-state settlers responded by establishing an antislavery government in Topeka. Kansas now had two governments—a formula for disaster.
“Bleeding Kansas” On May 21, 1856, southern proslavery forces attacked the free-state town of Lawrence, Kansas. They looted homes, burned down the hotel, and destroyed the presses of The Kansas
» Dred Scott, having once lived in a free state, sued for his freedom after his owner died.
Free State newspaper. Swift retaliation came from New York abolitionist John Brown, who had moved his family to Kansas in pursuit of an opportunity to confront the slavery issue. A few days after the sack of Lawrence, Brown, along with his sons and a few friends, conducted a midnight raid on the proslavery settlement at nearby Pottawatomie Creek. During the raid, they brutally murdered five proslavery settlers. These killings led to even more violence. Throughout the fall of 1856, there was so much violence perpetrated by both sides that the territory became known as “Bleeding Kansas.” Finally, in 1861, Kansas entered the Union as a free state.
The Formation of the Republican Party Opposition to slavery led to the creation of the new Republican Party in 1854. Republicans included abolitionists, antislavery business leaders, and northerners who argued that the Fugitive Slave Act intruded into state politics. The Republican Party quickly became a powerful political force, winning 105 seats in the House of Representatives in the 1854 congressional elections.
The presidential election of 1856 pitted Democrat James Buchanan against John C. Fremont, the candidate of the new Republican Party. Buchanan, who promised that as President he would stop “the agitation of the slavery issue,” was supported by a large majority of southerners. He won the election, but Fremont, who opposed the spread of slavery, made a strong showing. Fremont won one third of the popular vote and 11 northern states.
A
Controversial Supreme Court Ruling In 1857, a controversial Supreme Court ruling widened the growing divisions over slavery. The ruling concerned the case of Dred Scott, an enslaved African American from Missouri who had sued for his freedom in 1846. Scott’s lawyers argued that he should be considered free because he had lived with his master in the free state of Illinois between 1834 and 1838. After a series of appeals, Scott’s case reached the Supreme Court. In Dred Scott v. Sandford, the Court ruled against Scott. But the Court’s sweeping ruling went far beyond the particulars of Scott’s case. The Court declared that African Americans were not citizens and, therefore, were not entitled to sue in the courts.
Chief Justice Roger Taney stated that since African Americans had not been part of the political community when the Constitution was adopted, they did not have the same rights as groups that were included in that community. He wrote that slaves “are not included, and were not intended to be included, under the word ‘citizens' in the Constitution, and can therefore claim none of the rights and privileges which
Connecting with Past Learnings 32	0.4 The Union in Crisis
that instrument provides for and secures to citizens of the United States.”
The Court went beyond the question of slaves’ citizenship and stated that Congress did not have the power to ban slavery in any territory. Taney pointed out that such a ban deprived citizens of their property without due process of law, a violation of the Fifth Amendment. This meant that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional, as would be any future attempt by Congress to decide the slavery status of a new state.
Reaction to the Dred Scott Decision The
language of the Court’s ruling seemed to indicate that the Constitution itself settled the issue: slaves were not citizens, and states had the right to decide on the issue of slavery themselves. However, the Dred Scott decision only intensified the slavery debate rather than helping settle it, and public reactions drove the North and the South further apart than ever. Southerners were delighted with the Court's ruling while northerners viewed it with alarm. Some abolitionists, however, felt that such an unfair decision would bring the crisis to a head more quickly, actually hastening the end of slavery. As leading black abolitionist Frederick Douglass said, “This very attempt to blot out forever the hopes of an enslaved people may be one necessary link in the chain of events preparatory to the complete overthrow of the whole slave system.”
B APPLY CONCEPTS
What was the result of the Dred Scott decision?
The Lincoln-Douglas
Debates
The 1858 Senate race in Illinois crystallized the slavery issue for many Americans. Republican Abraham Lincoln challenged Senator Stephen Douglas, a Democrat and the architect of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, to a series of debates.
The Lincoln-Douglas Debates Both Lincoln and Douglas were excellent speakers whose political differences were underscored by their contrasting physical appearances. Lincoln, tall and thin, had a reputation for integrity that had earned him the nickname “Honest Abe.” Senator Douglas, short and stout, with a deep voice, was known as the Little Giant.”
Lincoln, a self-educated lawyer, had begun his political career as a representative to the Illinois state legislature. From 1847 to 1849, Lincoln served one term
» In 1858, Abraham Lincoln and Stephen Douglas debated over the spread of slavery. While both men disliked slavery, Lincoln opposed its spread and Douglas favored settling the issue by popular sovereignty.
» An eloquent speaker, former slave Frederick Douglass became a powerful spokesperson for the abolition of slavery. He also published an autobiography in which he described the brutality of slavery.
Connecting with Past Learnings 33
0.4 The Union in Crisis
in the House of Representatives and then returned to his law practice in Springfield. His opposition to the Kansas-Nebraska Act and popular sovereignty inspired Lincoln to resume his political career.
The politically ambitious Douglas believed that popular sovereignty was the implied intent of the Constitution. But many questioned his motives, saying that Douglas favored popular sovereignty in order to gain southern support for a future presidential run. Others claimed that Douglas was eager for Kansas and Nebraska to achieve statehood, because railroad lines built through the new states would benefit Chicago, the largest city in Douglas’s state, by making it a hub for economic development of the West.
Thousands of Americans attended the Lincoln-Douglas debates and listened intently as the candidates presented opposing views of slavery and its role in America. Lincoln did not call for the immediate abolition of slavery or for political equality for African Americans. Still, he argued:
There is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, . < . In the right to eat the
bread, without leave of anybody else, which his own hand earns, he is my equal and the equal of Judge Douglas, and the equal of every living man.
--Abraham Lincoln, debate at Ottawa, Illinois, 1858
Douglas, meanwhile, promoted popular sovereignty as the solution to regional tensions. “This Union was established on the right of each State to do as it pleased on the question of slavery, and every other question,” he insisted. Douglas won the Senate race, but the debates, covered by newspapers throughout the country, brought Lincoln national attention.
Trying to Spark a Slave Rebellion While Lincoln and Douglas used the political process to address the slavery issue, radical abolitionist John Brown concluded that using violence was the best way to defeat slavery. In the fall of 1859, Brown and a small band of followers seized the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Virginia (now West Virginia). He hoped to inspire and arm local slaves for an uprising that would spread into a general slave rebellion, eventually ending slavery. But no slaves joined Brown’s revolt. Instead, troops under the command of Colonel Robert E. Lee retook the arsenal, wounding Brown and killing or capturing most of his men.
THE CHANGING PERCEPTION
of SLAVERY SUPPORT FOR THE
KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT
KANSAS ELECTION FOR
TERRITORIAL LEGISLATURE
ILLINOIS SENATE ELECTION
	2,905	.
	LEGALLY-	
113	REGISTERED	■!
	VOTERS	, bB
FOR		■ ■1
ACTUAL VOTES CAST H
37		
AMpl! >
791
» Analyze Data Why did Abraham Lincoln lose the 1858 senatorial election even though he won the popular vote?
Connecting with Past Learnings 34	0.4 The Union in Crisis
Put on trial for treason and murder, Brown proclaimed his willingness to “mingle my blood with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel, and unjust enactments.” After a brief trial, the court found him guilty and sentenced him to death by hanging.
Brown’s defense of his actions and the dignified calm with which he faced execution made him a heroic martyr to the antislavery cause. Although most northerners had condemned the raid, Brown’s death touched many, increasing northern opposition to slavery. But northern sympathy for a man who had tried to lead a slave revolt further inflamed southern anger and suspicion.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did John Brown seize the arsenal at Harpers Ferry?
The Union Collapses
Despite repeated attempts at compromise, disagreement between the North and the South over the issue of slavery continued to deepen. With ill will running so deep, the upcoming elections posed a serious dilemma. It was hard to imagine that either northerners or southerners would accept a President from the other region. Could the Union survive?
A
Divide Among Democrats The Democrats held their nominating convention in Charleston, South Carolina. The southern Democrats called for a platform supporting federal protection of slavery in the territories. The northern Democrats supported the doctrine of popular sovereignty. When the northern forces prevailed, the delegates from eight southern states walked out and formed a separate convention.
The Democrats were now split into two parties. The northern Democrats nominated Stephen A. Douglas. The southern Democrats nominated the Vice President, John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky. Breckinridge was committed to expanding slavery into the territories.
In the meantime, the few remaining Whigs teamed up with the Know-Nothings to create the Constitutional Union Party. They nominated John Bell of Tennessee, and their platform condemned sectional parties and promised to uphold "the Constitution of the country, the Union of the States and the enforcement of the laws.”
Lincoln’s Nomination The Republican platform called for the end of slavery in the territories. At the same time, the Republicans defended the constitutional
» Disagreement over slavery turned into violence on the Senate floor in 1856. Abolitionist Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts was beaten by Congressman Preston Brooks of South Carolina in retaliation for an anti-slavery speech Sumner gave in which he criticized Brooks’s uncle, a senator from South Carolina.
» In this abolitionist painting, John Brown pauses on his way to his execution to kiss an enslaved woman’s baby.
Connecting with Past Learnings
35	0.4 The Union in Crisis
principle of federalism. They asserted the right of each state to control its own institutions and stipulated that there should be no interference with slavery in the states where it already existed. At their convention held in Chicago, Abraham Lincoln—with his great debating skills, his moderate views, and his reputation for integrity—was chosen as the candidate to carry the Republican party to victory.
Lincoln’s Victory Benefiting from the fracturing among the other political parties, Lincoln won the election handily but did not receive a single southern electoral vote. In fact, he was not even on the ballot in most southern states.
Southerners were outraged at Lincoln’s election. As they had during the Nullification Crisis of Andrew Jackson’s presidency, many believed that the Constitution gave the states sovereign power over their own affairs, including the decision to leave the Union if the federal government wasn’t protecting their rights. Lincoln and most northerners disagreed.
The First Wave of Secession As soon as Lincoln’s election was confirmed, the South Carolina legislature summoned a state convention.
Meeting in Charleston on December 20, 1860, the convention declared that “the union now subsisting between South Carolina and the other States, under
the name of the ‘United States of America,’ is hereby dissolved.’’ They cited as their reason for seceding the election of a President “whose opinions and purposes are hostile to slavery.”
The Southern States Band Together In the next few weeks, six other states of the Deep South seceded from the Union. In February 1861, the seven seceding states established the Confederate States of America
They then proceeded to frame a constitution for the new government. The Confederate constitution closely resembled the U.S. Constitution. However, it stressed the independence of each state and implied that states had the right to secede. It also guaranteed the protection of slavery.
Not all southerners backed the Confederacy. Some large planters with economic ties to the North still hoped for a compromise. So, too, did many small farmers with no vested interest in slavery. To gain the loyalty of such citizens, the Confederacy chose former Mississippi senator Jefferson Davis as their president. Davis had supported the Compromise of 1850, but he had also insisted that the South should be left alone to manage its own culture and institutions— including slavery.
Last Chance to Compromise Some politicians sought a final compromise. Kentucky senator John
Election of 1860
new
Hampshire Massachusetts Rhode Island
Connecticut ^New Jersey Delaware Maryland
400 km Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
>> Analyze Maps Would the results of the election have been any different if the Democratic Party had not split into three factions?
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
KEY
Lincoln, Republican Douglas, Northern Democrat I 1 Bell, Constitutional Union M Breckinridge,
Southern Democrat
Interactive Chart

Connecting with Past Learnings 36	0.4 The Union in Crisis
Crittenden proposed a constitutional amendment allowing slavery in western territories south of the Missouri Compromise line.
He also called for federal funds to reimburse slaveholders for unreturned fugitives. A narrow margin of senators voted down the Crittenden Compromise.
President Buchanan, in his last few weeks in office, told Congress that he had no authority to prevent secession. Other pacifying attempts also failed. A secret peace convention held in Washington, which drew delegates from the border states as well as the North and South, failed to reach a compromise that could save the Union.
H APPLY CONCEPTS
Why did the slave states secede from the Union after Lincoln was elected?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare and Contrast the positions of Abraham Lincoln and Stephen Douglas during the 1858 Senate race.
2.	Describe the American public’s reaction to the Died Scott v. Sandford Supreme Court case.
3.	Compare Points of View Explain how John Brown’s approach to abolitionism differed from the approaches of other abolitionists at the time.
4.	Generate Explanations Explain why the Democratic Party separated into two different groups, and analyze the effect of this split.
» Jefferson Davis was a veteran of the Mexican-American War and former Secretary of War under Franklin Pierce. In 1861 he would become president of the Confederate States of America.
5. Compare and Contrast the main ideas of the Confederate constitution with those of the U.S. Constitution.
I
Connecting with Past Learnings
37	0.4 The Union in Crisis
» Objectives
Assess the events that led to the outbreak of war.
Compare and contrast the resources and strategies of the North and South.
Analyze why Lincoln decided to issue the Emancipation Proclamation and what it achieved.
Analyze how the war changed the economy and society in the North and South.
» Key Terms
Fort Sumter	Amendment
Robert E. Lee	freedmen
Anaconda Plan
Emancipation
Proclamation
draft law
habeas corpus
inflation
Ulysses S. Grant
Battle of Gettysburg
Gettysburg Address
William T. Sherman
total war
Thirteenth
The Civil War Begins
Lincoln Challenges Secession Lincoln was sworn in as President on March 4,1861. In his inaugural address, he took a firm but conciliatory tone toward the South. “I have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the institution of slavery in the states where it exists,” he began. But he didintend to preserve the Union. “No state, upon its own mere action, can lawfully get out of the Union,” he said. Still, he would avoid violence. There would be no war, he pledged, unless the South started it. He concluded with an appeal to the South to live in peace.
We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battle-field, and patriot grave, to every living heart and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
38
touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature.
—Abraham Lincoln, March 4, 1861
Lincoln Makes the First of Many Difficult Decisions When the southern states seceded, they seized the federal forts and arsenals within their borders. Only four forts remained in Union hands. The most important of these was Fort Sumter, which guarded the harbor at Charleston, South Carolina. In Januaryl861, President Buchanan tried to send troops and supplies to the fort, but the unarmed supply ship sailed away when Confederate guns fired on it. Upon taking office, Lincoln had to decide whether to take the risk required to hold on to these forts or yield to Confederate demands that they be surrendered.
By April, the troops at the fort desperately needed food and supplies. Lincoln, who still hoped to bring back the South without bloodshed, faced a dilemma. Should he try to resupply the fort? Or should he let the Confederates take it? Lincoln struggled to make a decision. During his inaugural address, he had promised southerners that “the government will not assail you.” But as President, he was sworn to defend the property of the United States. A wrong move could touch off a war. At last, trying to steer a middle course, Lincoln notified South Carolina that he was sending supplies—food only, no arms—to the fort.
The Surrender of Fort Sumter South Carolinians were suspicious of Lincoln's motives and ordered the Fort Sumter garrison to surrender to the Confederacy. When the Union troops refused, the Confederates fired on the fort. The Union troops eventually ran out of ammunition, forcing the commander to surrender.
President Lincoln called for 75,000 volunteers to fight against the Confederacy. The South responded just as strongly. As in the North, the South raised troops quickly and struggled to equip and train them before sending them into battle. Both sides predicted a short skirmish, with victory only a few days or months away. These predictions were unfounded. Americans faced years of terrible suffering before the fighting that had begun at Fort Sumter would finally end.
Northerners responded to the attack on Fort Sumter with shock and anger. A few days later, on April 15, President Lincoln declared that “insurrection existed. The Civil War had officially begun. The slave states that had remained in the Union now had to choose sides. Within two months of the surrender at Fort Sumter, Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina
joined the Confederacy. Delaware, Kentucky, Maryland, and Missouri remained in the Union.
E3 SEQUENCE EVENTS
What event marked the beginning of the Civil War?
Resources, Strategies, and Early Battles
With the election of Lincoln, the slavery issue that had long divided North from South finally split the nation in two. From April 1861 to April 1865, the United States of America and the Confederate States of America faced each other in the bloody Civil War. At stake was the future not only of slavery but of the Union itself.
As the Civil War began, each side had a clear goal. The North was determined to preserve the Union, arguing that no state had the right to secede. The southern states that formed the Confederacy aimed to gain their independence from a Union that they felt had become hostile to their interests.
Advantages Enjoyed by the North Although each side faced challenges, a variety of factors favored the Union. In the Northeast, growing urban populations
» When Confederate troops fired across the Charleston Harbor at Fort Sumter, one of only three remaining federal forts in the South, it sparked the beginning of the American Civil War.
Interactive Chart
Connecting with Past Learnings 39
0.5 The Civil War
supported a wide range of manufacturing. Replenished by a continuing influx of immigrant workers from Europe, northern factories were able to increase production of the supplies needed to wage war: ammunition, arms, uniforms, medical supplies, food, ships, and railroad cars.
Across the North, the railroad network was well developed, as were systems for farming, mining, and processing raw materials. Banking, insurance, and financing industries were also clustered in the urbanized North. The federal government had a well-organized navy. By the end of 1861, the Union navy had outfitted and launched more than 250 warships and was constructing dozens more. Naval superiority allowed the Union to blockade the South’s few vital ports.
Advantages Enjoyed by the South Given such advantages, Northerners anticipated a quick victory. But the South had distinct disadvantages as well. When the war began, the Union army consisted of only about 16,000 men. Although the South had an even smaller army, its troops at the outset of the war were more highly motivated, and they were led by some of the nation’s finest and most experienced officers. The experienced and inspiring Robert E. Lee had originally been
» General Robert E. Lee of Virginia rejected Lincoln’s offer to command the Union army. The decision would prove costly for the Union due to Lee’s exceptional military skills.
offered command of Union forces but chose instead to remain loyal to his native Virginia. Throughout the war, General Lee provided the Confederacy with expert military leadership. The North struggled for much of the war to find a commander of comparable skill and daring.
Perhaps the biggest advantage the Confederates enjoyed was the fact that they were fighting a defensive war on their own territory. All they had to do was outlast the Union to achieve victory. The Union had the much more difficult task of conquering the South. They had to do this fighting in unfamiliar territory against an enemy that had a lot more at stake.
Early Strategies Each side had a clear military goal. The Confederacy simply had to survive, keeping their armies in the field until northerners became tired of fighting. The Union, however, had to crush and conquer the Confederacy.
The North adopted a strategy designed to starve the South into submission. It was called the Anaconda Plan after the snake that slowly squeezes its prey to death. The plan involved seizing the Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico so that the South could not send or receive shipments. By the middle of 1862, with victories in Mississippi and New Orleans, the North had captured the Mississippi Valley. Union soldiers also seized the strategic railroad juncture at Chattanooga, Tennessee, and scored victories in battles as far west as New Mexico.
Stalemate On the East Coast, though both sides won battles, neither side could gain a clear and decisive victory in the early part of the war. Union armies hoped to capture the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia. But troops outside Washington, D.C., could not seem to make progress toward that goal. Confederate troops were equally unsuccessful in pushing the war north toward Washington, D.C.
Thanks to efficient new weapons—especially more accurate rifles and deadlier bullets—a single day’s battle might produce more than 10,000 casualties. This new lethal warfare stung the public consciousness. Battle sites such as Bull Run (July 1861), Shiloh (April 1862), Antietam (September 1862), and Fredericksburg (December 1862) are still remembered as the scenes of some of the deadliest encounters in American history. Limited medical care ensured that many of the wounded died of infection rather than of the wounds themselves.
fcl DESCRIBE Which side had more advantages when the war began?
Connecting with Past Learnings 40	0.5 The Civil War
The Emancipation
Proclamation
Early in the war, President Lincoln insisted that he did not have the authority to end slavery. In his public statements, he emphasized the fact that his chief goal was to preserve the Union, not end slavery. Although Lincoln personally opposed slavery, he did not want to lose the support of the four slave states—Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky, and Missouri—that had remained loyal to the Union.
However, by the autumn of 1862, with the military situation beginning to look better for the Union, Lincoln decided to take a first step toward the end of slavery. In January 1863, he issued the Emancipation Proclamation. This presidential decree declared that ‘‘all persons held as slaves within any State or designated part of a State, the people whereof shall then be in rebellion against the United States, shall be then, thenceforward, and forever free.”
The Emancipation Proclamation did not apply to the loyal slave states or to those areas of the South already under Union control. As a result, it did not immediately free a single slave. Nevertheless, it was an important turning point because it encouraged enslaved African Americans in the South to run away to Union army encampments and to aid the Union cause. It also symbolically redefined the war as being ‘‘about slavery.”
African Americans had always believed that the war should be about slavery, and they had volunteered to fight as soon as the war began. But at first they were turned away and told "this is a white man’s war.” After the Emancipation Proclamation, however, the Union began to actively recruit both free blacks from the North and newly freed African Americans from the South. Eventually, some 180,000 African American men served in the Union Army.
H DESCRIBE
What were the effects of the Emancipation Proclamation?
War Affects Daily Life
The Civil War not only engaged the nation in a prolonged and violent conflict, it also transformed the nation’s civilian life. In the North, mines and factories stepped up production to supply military needs such as ships, railroads, weapons, uniforms, provisions, and fuel. To pay for the war, the federal government raised tariffs, imposed income taxes, and printed money. Congress also encouraged western settlement and offered free land to soldiers who would give two years of military service. Such land grants sparked agricultural growth, which helped feed Union troops.
» The South had claimed that the war was being fought over states’ rights. The Emancipation Proclamation focused the war on the ending of slavery.
» African Americans celebrated the Emancipation Proclamation. However, freedom for African Americans in the South would only become a reality if the Union defeated the Confederacy.

Connecting with Past Learnings
. 41
0.5 The Civil War
» Rioters in New York City clashed with Provost Guards (military police) of the Union army in July 1863. More than 100 people were killed and more than 2,000 were wounded.
» During the Civil War, women helped by caring for the sick and wounded. They were so successful that nursing became an accepted profession for women following the war.
The Union Takes Extraordinary Measures As
the war dragged on, the Union army experienced a shortage of volunteers. When Congress passed a draft law in 1863, requiring all able-bodied men between the ages of 20 and 45 to serve in the military if called, riots broke out in several northern cities. The most severe rioting took place in New York City in July 1863. White workers attacked free African Americans as well as wealthy New Yorkers who were able to pay a fee to avoid military service.
Some Northerners opposed Lincoln’s conduct of the war and demanded immediate peace. To deal with dissent, Lincoln suspended the Constitutional right of habeas corpus which guarantees that no one can be held in prison without specific charges being filed. Union troops arrested many people suspected of disloyalty. Although Lincoln felt such measures were necessary to preserve the Union, others criticized his actions as unconstitutional.
Hardships in the South Almost all of the battles took place on southern soil. The fighting destroyed some of the South’s traditional strengths, such as large-scale agriculture, and stripped the Confederacy of the resources it might have used to rebuild. By 1863, the Union plan to starve the South into submission seemed to be on the verge of succeeding.
The South seized every opportunity to ease its economic problems. As Lincoln had done, Confederate President Jefferson Davis authorized the Confederacy to issue paper money, backed only by the government’s promise to pay.
Doubts about the true value of Confederate money led to severe inflation, or price increases. The combination of rising prices and food shortages sparked food riots in some parts of the South.
A
Time of Social Change On both sides, the war gave women new tasks. Women set up field hospitals and nursed wounded soldiers. Many Confederate women took to the fields to harvest crops. White and black teachers from the North went south to become teachers of newly freed slaves. Churches in both the North and South supported the war effort. Confederate soldiers often held revival meetings near the field of battle. One Virginia chaplain claimed that many southern men “have come out of this war Christian soldiers.”
Id ANALYZE INFORMATION How did the Civil War
affect the northern and southern economies?
Connecting with Past Learnings 42	0.5 The Civil War
The Union Prevails
In the summer of 1863, the Union succeeded in capturing Vicksburg, Mississippi. Advancing from the Louisiana side of the Mississippi River, Union General Ulysses S. Grant scored five victories in three weeks, ending with the surrender of 30,000 Confederate troops. The Anaconda Plan had achieved one of its major goals: Confederate territory was split apart.
The Battle of Gettysburg Meanwhile, in the East, General Lee marched into Pennsylvania. He hoped to win a surprise victory, then swing south to Washington, D.C. But in July 1863, Union troops defeated Lee at the town of Gettysburg. The Battle of Gettysburg destroyed one third of Lee’s forces and marked the last major Confederate attempt to invade the North.
A few months later, the President went to Gettysburg to help dedicate a battle cemetery by giving a speech that would come to be known as the Gettysburg Address. In the speech, Lincoln referred to the Declaration of Independence and its founding principles of liberty and equality. He applied these principles to the current struggle and asked that the Union remember the men who died at Gettysburg as they fought for a “new birth of freedom.”
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
—Abraham Lincoln, Gettysburg Address, November 19,
1863
The Confederacy Surrenders In the fall of 1864, Union General William T. Sherman led more than 60,000 troops on a 400-mile march of destruction through Georgia and South Carolina. The march was part of a strategy of total war, which targeted not only troops but all of the resources needed to feed, clothe, and support an army. Sherman’s troops burned crops in fields, tore up railroad tracks, and destroyed homes, plantations, and public buildings.
By spring 1865, the Confederacy was exhausted. Union troops captured the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia. On April 9, in the small Virginia town of Appomattox Court House, Lee surrendered to Grant.
The Lasting Impact of the War The Civil War ushered in the harsh reality of modern warfare. More
» The Union army was able to secure the high ground on the first day of the Battle of Gettysburg. After three days of Confederate attacks, the Union army forced their retreat.

Interactive Map
than one third of northern and southern soldiers were killed or disabled.
The southern landscape and economy were in shambles. Millions of dislocated southerners drifted north in search of new lives in Illinois, Indiana, Missouri, or other points north. Others joined the increasing migration to the West, becoming cowboys or farmers. The war ended an era in American political life. Although debates about states’ rights and federal authority continue to this day, never again would states attempt to secede. More and more, Americans would see themselves not just as citizens of a state, but of a united nation.
Full Emancipation The Emancipation Proclamation had only applied to the states that left the Union, and it only freed slaves in Confederate territory that the Union was able to control. With the final Union victory, Congress and the President were ready to abolish slavery throughout the nation. Even before the Civil War ended, Congress passed the Thirteenth Amendment, making slavery unconstitutional. However, this amendment had to be ratified by three fourths of the states to go into effect. This process took until December 1865, over six months after the fighting ended. The southern states that had seceded were now
Connecting with Past Learnings 43
0.5 The Civil War
occupied by the Union army. They now had to accept the Thirteenth Amendment even though they had fought the war to preserve slavery.
For African Americans in the South, emancipation promised them new opportunities, including a chance to work for wages and to control their own lives. Some joined the migration to the North and West while others remained in the South, hoping to work as freedmen the land they had worked as slaves. The Thirteenth Amendment was a victory for the abolitionist movement and a milestone in the development of the civil rights movement in the nineteenth century. It further applied the founding principles of equality and liberty underlying our nation. But the freedmen and other African Americans had a long struggle ahead of them for full equality.
El DESCRIBE What was the effect of the Thirteenth
Amendment?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Determine Point of View Explain how the outcome of the Civil War differed from many initial predictions.
2.	Compare and Contrast the advantages of both the North and the South during the Civil War.
3.	Describe the literal and symbolic significance of the Emancipation Proclamation.
4.	Generate Explanations Explain how the war affected women in both the North and South.
5.	Draw Conclusions Discuss African American contributions to the war effort.
Connecting with Past Learnings 44
0.5 The Civil War
The Civil War ended in April 1865 with the Union victory, but this was only the beginning of healing the rift between the North and South. Both regions faced the challenges of reuniting and rebuilding. The political decisions made in the decades that followed the Civil War helped shape the modern South. Constitutional amendments passed during this period redefined American ideas of citizenship and civil rights.
In addition to her writings, Ida B. Wells toured Europe and helped organize women’s clubs to fight for African American rights.
Interactive Flipped Video
The Reconstruction Era
The Nation Moves Toward
Reunion
Conflict Over Reconstruction Policy Even before the war ended, Union politicians began debating the policies that would guide Reconstruction. For President Lincoln, the major goal of Reconstruction was reunifying the nation and healing the wounds of the war. As he said in his Second Inaugural Address, “Let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan.”
Although Lincoln was seen by many Republicans as a heroic leader who had prevented the Union from coming apart, not all Republicans had the same ideas about Reconstruction as the President. Some congressional leaders wanted to punish the South. They favored a harsh Reconstruction plan designed to make the South pay for the devastation of the war. The next several years would bring sharp differences between congressional leaders bent on imposing their will on the South and two Presidents who wanted to make Reconstruction as painless as possible.
» Objectives
Describe the Reconstruction plans of Lincoln, Johnson, and Congress.
Describe the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments.
Analyze how freedmen adjusted to freedom and the role of the Freedmen’s Bureau.
Explain dejure segregation and the effect of Jim Crow laws on southern African Americans.
Explain the viewpoints of post-Reconstruction African American civil rights leaders.
» Key Terms
Reconstruction Freedmen’s Bureau Andrew Johnson Thirteenth
Amendment Radical Republicans impeach Fourteenth
Amendment
Fifteenth
Amendment
Ku Klux Kian dejure segregation disenfranchise Jim Crow laws poll tax literacy tests grandfather clauses de facto segregation Booker T.
Washington W.E.B. Du Bois
PEARSON1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
45
©
Aid for Emancipated Slaves Shortly before the war ended, Lincoln and Congress did agree on the creation of the Freedmen’s Bureau, a federal agency designed to aid freed slaves and relieve the South’s immediate needs. The black and white agents of the Bureau delivered food and healthcare and began to develop a public school system for both black and white southerners. It also helped to reunite families separated by slavery and to negotiate fair labor contracts between formerly enslaved African Americans and white landowners.
A
New President Meanwhile, debate over Reconstruction continued. Before he could gain support for his moderate plan of Reconstruction, Abraham Lincoln was assassinated on April 14, 1865. As the nation mourned, Vice President Andrew Johnson became President. As a southerner who had remained loyal to the Union, Johnson was similarly in favor of a relatively forgiving approach to Reconstruction. He put forth a plan that restored political power to southerners if they swore allegiance to the United States and ratified the Thirteenth Amendment. In return, the new President promised to uphold states’ rights, with the laws of individual states taking precedence over federal regulations.
Many members of Congress disapproved of this plan. Arguing that southerners had caused the war,
these Radical Republicans favored punishment and a harsh reorganization for the South. Radicals also advocated full citizens’ rights for African Americans and wanted states’ authority to be subordinate to federal power. When southern legislatures passed laws to restrict the activities of African Americans, Radicals became even more determined to impose a harsh Reconstruction policy on the South.
Johnson and the Radicals in Congress clashed repeatedly. In 1868, Congress voted to impeach Johnson. Johnson won his impeachment trial by a single vote in the Senate, but this victory did him little good. By that time he had lost control of Reconstruction. A few months later, Civil War hero Ulysses S. Grant was elected President.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did the Radical Republicans oppose President Johnson’s approach to Reconstruction? The Reconstruction South
With Congress firmly under their control, Radical Republicans designed a sweeping Reconstruction plan that in many ways violated the constitutional rights of southern citizens. For example, they divided the South into five military districts under the command of Union generals. As a condition of readmission to the Union, all
Rival Plans for Reconstruction
PLAN TEN PERCENT PLAN WADE-DAVIS BILL JOHNSON PLAN RECONSTRUCTION ACT
Proposed	President	Republicans	President	Radical
by	Abraham Lincoln (1863)	in Congress (1864)	Andrew Johnson (1865)	Republicans (1867)
Conditions	• 10 percent of	• Majority of	• Majority of white	• Must disband state
for Former	voters must	white men	men must swear	governments
Confederate	swear loyalty	must swear	loyalty	• Must write new
States to	to Union	loyalty	• Must ratify	constitutions
Rejoin Union 		• Must abolish slavery	•	Former Confederate volunteers cannot vote or hold office •	Wartime debts by states will not be recognized	Thirteenth Amendment •	Former Confederate officials may vote and hold office •	Each state would be appointed a governor chosen by the President	•	Must ratify Fourteenth Amendment •	African American men must be allowed to vote •	Must disqualify former officials of the Confederacy from holding public office
» Analyze Charts In what ways did the Reconstruction Act of 1867 place more restrictions on former Confederate states than previous plans?
§1 Interactive Chart
Connecting with Past Learnings
46
0.6 The Reconstruction Era
RECONSTRUCTION POLITICS
CONGRESSIONAL VOTES
IMPEACHMENT
ONE VOTE SHORT
14th	15th	
KEY		
% YAY		
NAY		
■HO		
	jjjfj	
		
SENATE HOUSE SENATE HOUSE SENATE
» Analyze Graphs How would you describe congressional support for the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments?
CONVICT PRESIDENT JOHNSON
ELECTION
OF 1868
HOUSE
southern states were required to grant voting rights to African American men.
Perhaps most important, Radicals passed the Fourteenth Amendment, which guaranteed full citizenship status and rights to every man born in the United States, including African Americans. The Bill of Rights would now apply to all Americans no matter their race. The Amendment was ratified in 1868.
Voting Rights for African Americans Under Radical Reconstruction, many white southerners were not eligible to vote or chose to stay away from the polls. African American men, on the other hand, eagerly signed up to exercise their new right of suffrage. Most new African American voters voted for the Republican Party. Thus, by 1868, many southern states had black elected officials and were dominated by a strong Republican Party. South Carolina—the first state to secede—became the only state where, for a short time, an African American majority dominated the legislature.
At this time, no laws guaranteed the vote to African Americans in the North. To remedy this imbalance, Congress passed the Fifteenth Amendment, which guaranteed that no male citizen could be denied the right to vote on the basis of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” It was ratified in 1870.
New Lives for Freedmen In the South, formerly enslaved African Americans worked to carve out new lives. Some struck out for the North or West. But many more stayed in the South. They assembled their scattered families and built strong churches that also served as community centers, employment agencies, schoolhouses, and—in later years—centers of protest.
For the first time, many African American men and women could legalize and celebrate their marriages, set up housekeeping with their families and make choices about where they would reside. Some freed women could leave field labor and care for their families at home.
Freed people also realized the importance of learning to read and do basic math. So the Freedmen’s Bureau schools quickly filled. By 1869, as many as 300,000 African American adults and children were acquiring basic literacy.
Terrorism in the Reconstruction South Even though the South remained under military occupation, organized secret societies, such as the Ku Klux Kian, used terror and violence against African Americans and their white supporters. A federal grand jury concluded that the chief goal of the Kian attacks was to keep African Americans from voting.
Connecting with Past Learnings 47	0.6 The Reconstruction Era
The Kian . . . inflicted summary vengeance on the colored citizens of these counties by breaking into their houses at the dead of night, dragging them from their beds, torturing them in the most inhuman manner, and in many instances murdering them; and this, mainly, on account of their political affiliations.
—42nd Congress, House Report No. 22, 1871
The Radical Republicans in Congress responded by passing laws making it a crime to use violence to prevent people from voting. Although Kian activities lessened somewhat, the threat of violence persisted, keeping many southern African Americans from the polls.
BT RECALL
Which three constitutional amendments were passed during Reconstruction?
» A woman representing the Solid South carries President Grant, who is sitting atop a carpetbag. “Carpetbagger” was a negative term southerners called northerners who exploited the South during Reconstruction. Analyze Political Cartoons How does this cartoon show southerners’ feelings about northern rule during Reconstruction?
Reconstruction Comes to an End
After a decade of Reconstruction, northerners began to lose interest in remaking the South. They turned their focus on other social, political, and economic issues. In the fall of 1873, a series of bank failures sparked a severe economic downturn. At the same time, a series of political scandals in the Grant administration damaged the Radical Republicans. Under these circumstances, Reconstruction began to fade. Gradually and quietly, beginning in 1871, troops were withdrawn from the South. In 1872, Congress dissolved the Freedmen’s Bureau.
The Return of Southern Democrats Meanwhile, southern white Democrats patiently devised a strategy for regaining political control of the South. They argued that Republican programs for public schools and road building resulted in higher taxes. Most white southerners shunned anyone who supported Radical Republicans. Southern Democrats grasped every opportunity to paint African American politicians as corrupt and incompetent. At the same time, the everpresent threat of violence kept African Americans from voting, thus depriving the Republicans of a large segment of their political base.
One by one, southern states reinstated wealthy white southern men as governors and sent former Confederate leaders to the U.S. Congress. In the 1874 elections, the Republicans lost control of the House of Representatives. By 1876, only South Carolina, Florida, and Louisiana—three states with large African American populations—still had Reconstruction governments and remained under military occupation.
The Disputed Election of 1876 The presidential election of 1876 brought a final end to Reconstruction. Democratic candidate Samuel Tilden won more popular votes than Republican candidate Rutherford B. Hayes, but the electoral vote was in dispute. The disputed votes were those of Florida, South Carolina, and Louisiana, the three southern states still controlled by Republican Reconstruction governments.
In an informal compromise intended to end the dispute, a congressional committee declared the Republican candidate the winner. In return, Hayes promised to pull all remaining federal troops from the South. In effect, the election of Hayes ended Reconstruction.
Evaluating Reconstruction Was Reconstruction a success or a failure? Southerners and northerners, black and white, then and now would give different
Connecting with Past Learnings
0.6 The Reconstruction Era
answers. All will agree, however, that some things were changed forever by those dozen years during which the victorious North tried to remake the vanquished South.
Certainly, Radical Reconstruction failed in most of its aims. It had violated the Constitution in several ways for years at a time. By the end of the century, the political rights of African Americans in the South had eroded. Southern states slowly took away the voting rights of African Americans. All of the former Confederate states created systems of de jure segregation that made African Americans second-class citizens. Support for African Americans was not abundant in the North either.
Still, Reconstruction did mark the beginning of the physical and economic rebuilding of the South. Despite continuing conflicts and resentments, the nation was permanently reunited. And the constitutional amendments passed during Reconstruction, especially the Fourteenth Amendment, would eventually form the basis for a revived civil rights movement that sought political equality for all citizens in the twentieth century.
H DEFINE
Define the Fourteenth Amendment. » A visiting pastor has dinner with an African American family in the South in the 1880s.
African Americans in the Late 1800s
After Reconstruction ended, many white politicians in the North and South turned their attention from racial issues, allowing racist laws and segregation to spread in the South, and, to a lesser extent, in the North. This turn away from equality for all had a lasting impact on society in the United States.
During the Gilded Age (1877 to 1900), southern state governments enacted various measures intended to disenfranchise African Americans and enacted Jim Crow laws to keep blacks and whites apart as much as possible.
Methods of Restricting Voting Rights The
Fifteenth Amendment prohibited state governments from denying someone the right to vote because of "race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” After Reconstruction, southern states got around this amendment by passing a number of other restrictive measures. They enacted a poll tax requiring voters to pay a tax to vote. Poor African Americans could scarcely afford such a fee. The states also required voters to pass literacy tests and “understanding” tests. Because African Americans had been exploited economically and denied an education, these restrictions disqualified many of them as voters.
» Jim Crow laws made it legal to segregate nonwhites and whites in places such as this school.Predict Consequences What impact did these laws have on the equality of educational opportunities for African Americans?
0.6 The Reconstruction Era
Connecting with Past Learnings
» An African American man is asked by a white passenger to give up his seat on a railway car in Philadelphia. Infer What does this image suggest about segregation in the North?
» Booker T. Washington was born a slave in Virginia. After the war he attended college and in 1881 became the first president of the newly founded black college, the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama.
i Interactive Timeline
©
Southern states got around the Fifteenth Amendment’s restriction on the use of “previous condition of servitude” with grandfather clauses that allowed a person to vote as long as his ancestors had voted prior to 1866. Some southern states also established all-white primaries, meaning only whites had a voice in selecting who got to run in general elections. In addition, whites resorted to violence to keep African Americans from participating in the political process.
As a result of these actions, throughout the Deep South, black participation in politics fell dramatically. In Louisiana, for example, the number of blacks registered to vote plummeted from 130,000 in 1894 to just over 1,300 in 1904.
Similarly, in northern states, including those that had civil rights laws that outlawed legal segregation, black migrants found many examples of de facto segregation limiting where they could live, work, and socialize.
During the 1870s, the Supreme Court issued rulings that accepted many of these methods of making African Americans into second-class citizens. In Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of Jim Crow laws. It did so by arguing that as long as states maintained “separate but equal” facilities, they did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment. Yet, in reality, separate facilities were rarely equal.
African Americans Oppose Injustice Even during the darkest days of Jim Crow, African Americans refused to accept this inferior legal and social status. They established black newspapers, women’s clubs, fraternal organizations, schools and colleges, and political associations with the goal of securing their freedom. They did not always agree on the best strategies for achieving their goals, but they were united in their determination to “never turn back” until they had achieved equality.
One of the most famous black leaders of the late-nineteenth century was Booker T. Washington. Born a slave in 1856, Washington argued that African Americans needed to accommodate themselves to segregation, meaning they should not focus their energies on seeking to overturn Jim Crow. Instead, he called for blacks to “pull themselves up from their own bootstraps” by building up their economic resources and establishing their reputations as hardworking and honest citizens.
Washington’s ideas about accommodation were opposed by W.E.B. Du Bois, a man who by many measures was a living example of Washington’s hopes. Du Bois earned his Ph.D. from Harvard University in
Connecting with Past Learnings 50	0.6 The Reconstruction Era
1896, and he lived in a relatively tolerant community. Du Bois, however, criticized Washington’s willingness to accommodate southern whites. Echoing the spirit of the abolitionists, he argued that blacks should demand full and immediate equality and not limit themselves to vocational education. The dispute between gradual progress and radicalism that characterized the Washington-Du Bois debate would define the civil rights movement throughout much of its history.
One African American woman who fought for justice was Ida B. Wells. Born into slavery in 1862, Wells moved to Memphis, Tennessee, as a young adult. There she worked as a schoolteacher and became active in the African Methodist Episcopal Church. Wells bought a local newspaper, renamed it Free Speech, and wrote numerous articles that condemned the mistreatment of blacks.
The contributions of leaders like Wells, Washington, and Du Bois, as well as the organizations they founded, would help direct the struggle for equality for African Americans as the United States entered a new era following the Civil War.
B IDENTIFY
What was the main difference between BookerT. Washington’s and W.E.B. Du Bois’s approach to the early African American civil rights movement?
W.E.B.
Du Bois’s collection of essays, The Souls of Black Folk, underscored the unique African American identity of being both American and black that resulted in, “doubleconsciousness, this sense of always looking at one’s self through the eyes of others." ASSESSMENT
1.	Contrast the goals of Radical Republicans with those of more moderate Republicans such as President Lincoln.
2.	Describe the factors that led to the decline of Reconstruction.
3.	Draw Conclusions Analyze the successes and failures of Reconstruction.
4.	Generate Explanations Explain how de jure segregation affected African Americans in the South.
5.	Compare and Contrast the ideas of Booker T. Washington, W.E.B. Du Bois, and Ida B. Wells.
51
J
0.6 The Reconstruction Era
Connecting with Past Learnings
TEKS ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Historical Eras Identify the major characteristics that define a historical era. Write a paragraph identifying the major characteristics of the era of European colonization in the Americas. Consider the nations involved and where they established colonies. 2.A
2.	Apply Relative Chronology Apply relative chronology through the sequencing of significant events. Write a paragraph describing important political traditions that influenced democratic ideals in the American colonies. Identify the influences, sequence them from oldest to most recent, and describe them. 2.C
3.	Analyze and Evaluate the Declaration of Independence Analyze and evaluate the text of the Declaration of Independence, and identify the full text of the first three paragraphs. Write a paragraph analyzing and evaluating the text of the Declaration of Independence. Identify which paragraph of the Declaration of Independence is shown in the quotation below, analyze the purpose of the text, and evaluate why the paragraph is important. 1 .A
When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel [force] them to the separation.
—Declaration of Independence
4.	Analyze the Intent and Meaning of the Declaration of Independence Analyze and evaluate the intent and meaning of the Declaration of Independence. Write a paragraph analyzing and evaluating the intent and meaning of the Declaration of Independence. Explain the intent of the document, analyze its meaning as
a statement of political ideas, and evaluate why its meaning and intent are important. 1.A
5.	Explain Contributions of John Hancock Explain the contributions of the Founding Fathers such as John Hancock. Write a paragraph describing the contributions of John Hancock. Explain who John Hancock was and how he contributed to the founding of the United States. 1 .C
6.	Analyze and Evaluate Intent of the U.S.
Constitution Analyze and evaluate the intent of the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights. Write a paragraph analyzing and evaluating the intent of the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights. Consider what the delegates to the Constitutional Convention hoped to accomplish through drafting the Constitution and why the Antifederalists insisted on a Bill of Rights. 1.A
7.	Analyze and Evaluate Importance of Constitution and Bill of Rights Analyze and evaluate the importance of the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights. Write a paragraph analyzing and evaluating the importance of the Constitution and Bill of Rights. Consider the Constitution as a whole and the significance of the Bill of Rights on its own. 1.A
8.	Analyze and Evaluate the Meaning of Federalism Analyze and evaluate the meaning of the U.S. Constitution. Write a paragraph analyzing and evaluating the principle of federalism. Be sure to explain the meaning of federalism, delegated powers, reserved powers, and concurrent powers. 1 .A
9.	Discuss “E pluribus unum” Discuss the meaning and historical significance of the motto “E pluribus unum.” Write a paragraph discussing the phrase “E pluribus unum.” Identify what the phrase means in Latin and explain its historical significance. 26.E
10.	Discuss Values of Individualism and Populism Discuss Alexis de Tocqueville’s five values crucial to America’s success as a constitutional republic, including individualism and populism. Write a paragraph discussing the values of individualism and populism
in American society and government as observed by Alexis de Tocqueville. Explain what is meant by populism, why individualism and populism were largely absent in the older social systems of Europe, and how President Andrew Jackson symbolized these values. 22.A
Connecting with Past Learnings 52
Separation of Powers
Legislative Branch
Executive Branch
Judicial Branch
AAA
(Congress) n H n
p . ftff
•	Can override president's veto
•	Approves treaties and presidential appointments
•	Can impeach and remove president and other high officials
•	Creates lower federal courts
•	Appropriates money
•	Prints and coins money
•	Raises and supports armed forces
•	Can declare war
•	Regulates foreign and interstate trade
(President)
Carries Out Laws
•	Proposes laws
•	Can veto laws
•	Negotiates foreign treaties
•	Serves as commander in chief of the armed forces
•	Appoints federal judges, ambassadors, and other high officials
•	Can grant pardons to federal offenders
(Supreme Court and Other
Federal Courts)
Interprets Laws
•	Can declare laws unconstitutional
•	Can declare executive actions unconstitutional
f
11.	Analyze and Evaluate Separation of Powers and Checks and Balances Analyze and evaluate the meaning of the U.S. Constitution. Write a paragraph analyzing and evaluating the principles of separation of powers and checks and balances. Explain why the Constitution mandated the separation of powers and use the chart above to describe how the Constitution divides the government’s power. Then explain why the Constitution includes checks and balances and use the chart above to describe some of the checks and balances. 1.A
12.	Describe American Uniqueness Describe how the American values identified by Alexis de Tocqueville are different and unique from those of other nations. Write a paragraph describing Alexis de Tocqueville’s view of American democracy. Describe who Alexis de Tocqueville was, what five values Tocqueville identified as crucial to the success of representative democracy in the United States, and what the quotation below indicates about Tocqueville’s view of the uniqueness of these values to the United States. 22.B
The general principles which are the groundwork of modern constitutions— principles which were imperfectly known in Europe, and not completely triumphant even in Great Britain, in the seventeenth century— were all recognized and determined by the laws of New England: the intervention of the people in public affairs, the free voting of taxes, the responsibility of authorities, personal liberty, and trial by jury, were all positively established without discussion. From these fruitful principles consequences have been derived and applications have been made such as no nation in Europe has yet ventured to attempt.
—Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America
Connecting with Past Learnings
A '%
i 53
TEKS ASSESSMENT
13.	Analyze and Evaluate Popular Sovereignty Analyze and evaluate the application of the founding principle
of popular sovereignty to historical events in U.S. history. Write a paragraph explaining how the principle of popular sovereignty was applied to the issue of slavery during westward expansion. Identify which congressional acts applied popular sovereignty, analyze why the principle was applied, and evaluate the effectiveness of the application. 1.B
14.	Trace Development of Civil Rights Movement Trace the historical development of the civil rights movement
in the nineteenth century, including the Thirteenth Amendment. Write a paragraph describing the Thirteenth Amendment. Explain why the Thirteenth Amendment was needed and the importance of the Thirteenth Amendment in the development of the civil rights movement. 9.A
15.	Trace Development of Civil Rights Movement Trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the nineteenth century, including the Fifteenth Amendment. Write a paragraph describing the Fifteenth Amendment. Explain why Congress passed the Fifteenth Amendment and what the amendment guaranteed. 9.A
16.	Analyze Information by Applying Relative Chronology Analyze information by applying relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals and time periods. Write a paragraph tracing the abolitionist movement over time. Organize the information using relative chronology and draw connections between individuals or issues where appropriate. 2.C, 29.B
Connecting with Past Learnings 54
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE

Connecting with Past Learnings • 55 j
In CONGRESS, Jky4.
efcX»tme&,
1	This document is important because—
A it established a three-branched government for the newly formed United States of America
B it insisted that Britain honor the Magna Carta and respect the property rights of English colonists
C it declared that the English Colonies were independent of Britain and established the United States of America
D it reminded the British Parliament that it had to have the consent of English colonists to maintain a standing army in North America
2	How did Jonathan Trumbull contribute to the American Revolution?
F
He was the liaison between the new nation and its French allies. G
He organized supplies and ammunition for the Continental Army. H
He donated large sums of money to support soldiers and manufacture armaments. J
He established the boundaries for the new United States and drew the first map of the nation. Connecting with Past Learnings 56
/Access ctuumuncti practice questions
T H .
FEDERALI
STt A COLLECTION
O 9
E S S A Y S,
WRITTEN IN FAVOUR OF TO
NEW CONSTITUTION,
AS AGREED UFON BY THE FEDERAL CONVENTION, SEPTEMBER
IK TWO TOIVMII.
VOL. I.
NIW.YOR K: '
PRINTED AND SO1D BY J. AND A.
M‘tEA>; No. 41. HANOVER-5OUARB. . DOC,tXXXVIII,
3	In the letters pictured above, John Jay argued for—
A amending the U.S. Constitution to strengthen the central government B rewriting the U.S. Constitution and changing the political system entirely C ratifying the U.S. Constitution and establishing a strong central government D revising the U.S. Constitution to abolish slavery and extend voting rights to all
4	What does the motto E pluribus unum mean?
F “In God We Trust,” which has been the nation’s official motto since 1776 G “Out of Many, One,” which refers to the establishment of one nation out of 13 states
H “United We Stand,” which honors the unified efforts of all colonists to fight for independence
J “All for One, One for All,” which refers to lasting military and economic cooperation among all states
If you have trouble with...				
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	R.1	R.1	R.2	R.2
TEKS 1.A 1.C 1.C 26.E
Connecting
with Past Learnings
57
De Tocqueville’s Five Crucial Values for Successful Representative Democracy
•	Liberty
•	Egalitarianism
•	Individualism
•	Populism
•	Laissez-faire
Of these values, which ones most surprised de Tocqueville, and why?
A
Laissez-faire and liberty because an economy based on free enterprise was not allowed by most European monarchs B
Individualism and populism because they play almost no role in the governments of Europe, where the upper classes dominated politics C
Individualism and laissez-faire because European trade guilds made it difficult for individuals to break into the better paid crafts and trades D
Individualism and egalitarianism because the United States allowed slavery in direct opposition to equal treatment of individuals under the law 6	When the founding principle of citizenship as defined in the U.S. Constitution was clarified by the Dred Scott Supreme Court ruling to mean that slaves were not citizens, the outcome was that the—
F northern states rebelled G issue of slavery was settled H debate over slavery intensified J southern states seceded immediately
Connecting with Past Learnings 58
jam:
|	ctuumui icii piduuoc pupoimi io je
'i

7	How did the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution lay the groundwork for the civil rights movement?
A
The amendment struck down segregation throughout the United States. B
The amendment made slavery illegal throughout the entire United States. C
The amendment declared that all freedmen were full citizens of the United States. D
The amendment extended voting rights to all African American men in the United States. ' ! i
		EFFECT
African Americans in the North were not guaranteed the right to vote.		?
i
8	What statement completes the graphic organizer?
F
Congress proposed the Fifteenth Amendment. G
White Southerners were denied the right to vote. H
Republicans proposed the Fourteenth Amendment. J
African Americans in the South were denied the right to vote. If you have trouble with...										
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	R.3	R.4	R.5	R.6
TEKS 22.A 1.B 9.A 9.A
Connecting with Past Learnings
59
topic i TEKS Mastery
T
Industry
and Immigration
In this Topic, you will learn about Industry and Immigration. You know the TEKS are very important, and this course will make it fun to learn about the things that will help you master them. Keep reading to see how.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
4	TEKS
3.B, 3.C, 3.D, 6.A, 10.C, 13.A, 13.B, 15.B, 15.C, 24.B, 25.A,
25.B, 26.A, 26.B, 26.C, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 28.A, 28.C, 29.B,
29.G, 29.H, 30.A, 30.B, 31.B
LESSON OUTLINE
1.1: Innovation Boosts Growth 3.B, 15.B,
A, 28.C, 29.B
1.2: Big Business Rises 3.B, 3.C, 15.B, 24.B, 27.C
1.3: The Organized Labor Movement 3.B, 3.C
1.4: The New Immigrants 3.C, 3.D, 13.B, 15.C, 26.A, 26.B, 26.C, 31.B
A
Nation of Cities 3.C, 13.A, 27.A, 28.	A
1.6: New Ways of Life 25.B, 28.A
Connect
You will start by connecting with the Topic through a video that tells a personal story about the times. You will start to think about how the Topic connects with your own experience or to what you already know. And you’ll get a chance to think about a really big question, or Essential Question: How do science and technology affect society?
Begin your study by trying the following
LEARN
Watch My Story Video: Caryl Marcus and the Mayor of Essex Street
Launch your Civic Discussion:
Andrew Carnegie
60
9 Investigate
; Then you will investigate : the Topic through a group of ; lessons. The story of industry ’■ and immigration will come to \ life as you read and interact ; with key content. You will get : a chance to read about what : happened and why. And you’ll ; be able to interact with a lot of : fascinating online materials.
: You’ll also keep working on \ your Civic Discussion as you ; build further mastery of the « Topic TEKS.
» Digital interactivity from the online course
• Synthesize
; Next you will pull it all together by ; reflecting on the Essential Question. ; This will give you a chance to be ; the storyteller, to show how you i would answer this big question.
9 Demonstrate
: Finally, you can show what you : know. You can write an essay,
: hold a discussion, or make a
presentation. You can answer : questions about every TEKS on : the Topic Review and Assessment : pages. Or you can take part in : the Civic Discussion on Andrew ♦ Carnegie.....................
TEKS in Topic 1	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 1	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
3.B	2, 6,10	26.B	16
3.C	11,20	26.C	19
3.D	14	27.A	1
6.A	12	27.B	7
10.C	4	27.C	5,8
13. A	21	28.A	22
13.B	17	28.C	3
15.B	13	29.B	20
15.C	18	29.G	10
24.B	9	29.H	6,17
25.A	23	30.A	19
25.B	24	30.B	8
26.A	15	31.B	21
» An immigrant family arrives at Ellis Island.
*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
J.B, 3.C, 3.D, 6.A, 10.C, 13.A, 13.B, 15.B, 15.C, 24.B,
25.A, 25.B, 26.A, 26.B, 26.C, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 28.A,
28.C, 29.B, 29.G, 29.H, 30.A, 30.B, 31.B
Enduring Understandings
•	In the late 1800s, rapid industrialization, driven by entrepreneurs and innovators, transformed daily life in positive and negative ways.
•	Americans tried to address some of the negative effects of industrialization.
•	In the late 1800s, immigrants from southern and eastern Europe and Asia changed American culture as they fought to establish lives in their new homes.
•	Cities grew quickly as a result of industrialization and immigration.
•	New technology, urbanization, and industrialization created new ways of life and mass cultural movements in the United States.
PEARSON 1	•
NBC LEARN
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
How do science and technology affeCt society? 

i I
to hear the story of an immigrant
Thomas Edison, one of history’s most prolific inventors, poses with one of his many creations. By the age of 22, Edison had already produced his first major invention, a machine to report stock prices.
The Industrial Revolution began in the British textile industry in the 1700s. Within a few decades, it spread to other European countries and the new country of the United States, which had the greatest number of resources to expand the revolution. The first Industrial Revolution was marked by the introduction of steam power and the factory system. Coal and iron became key resources. Around the 1850s, the Industrial Revolution entered a new phase, dominated by steel, oil, and a major new power source—electricity. These new energy sources significantly improved the standard of living throughout the country. This second Industrial Revolution also had a distinctly American character.
Interactive Flipped Video
3.B, 15.B, 27.A, 28.C
» Objectives
Analyze the factors that encouraged industrialization in the United States in the late 1800s.
Explain how new inventions, scientific discoveries, and technological innovations fueled growth and improved the standard of living.
Explain the challenges faced by the South in industry and agriculture in the late 1800s.
Describe the impact of industrialization in the late 1800s.
» Key Terms
entrepreneurs laissez-faire protective tariffs patent
Thomas Edison Bessemer process suspension bridges time zones mass production cash crop free enterprise
Innovation Boosts Growth
American Industry Grows
The Civil War challenged industries to make goods more quickly and efficiently, especially in the North, which already had an industrial base. Using new tools and methods, factories stepped up production of guns, ammunition, medical supplies, and uniforms. The food industry developed ways to process foods so they could be shipped long distances. Railroads expanded, and more efficient methods of creating power were developed. Meanwhile, the government encouraged immigration to meet the increasing demand for labor in the nation's factories.
Natural Resources Fuel Economic Development The country’s growth was fueled, in part, by its vast supply of natural resources. Numerous coal mines along the eastern seaboard provided fuel to power steam locomotives and factories. Thick forests were cut into lumber for construction.
Iron ore was converted into iron and later into steel to build bridges, railroad tracks, and machines. The nation’s many navigable riverways transported these and other resources to cities and factories.
PEARSON 1
BI | realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
64
Many technological innovations expanded the country’s natural resource base even further. In 1859, Edwin Drake used a steam engine to drill the world’s first successful oil well near Titusville, Pennsylvania. Before Drake’s innovation, oil, which was used for light and fuel, was mainly obtained from boiling down whale blubber. But whale hunting was time-consuming, and whales were becoming scarce. Drilled oil was relatively cheap to produce and easy to transport. The oil industry grew quickly after 1859 and encouraged the growth of related industries such as kerosene and gasoline.
Another technological innovation of the 1850s made it easier to process iron ore into steel. Steel production soon skyrocketed as boatloads of iron ore moved across the Great Lakes from cities in Minnesota to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and other cities that became steelmaking centers. The steel rails produced by these new steel-making cities encouraged economic development by allowing railroads to bring distant natural resources to eastern cities and factories.
The Workforce Grows Population changes also promoted the growth of industry. After the Civil War, large numbers of Europeans, and some Asians, immigrated to the United States. They were pushed from their homelands by factors such as political upheaval, religious discrimination, and crop failures.
In 1881 alone, nearly three quarters of a million immigrants arrived in America. That number climbed steadily, reaching almost one million per year by 1905.
Immigrants were willing to work for low wages because competition for jobs was fierce. And they were prepared to move frequently in pursuit of economic opportunity. All of these factors meant that industries had a huge, and willing, workforce to fuel growth. The potential workforce grew even larger in the 1890s, when droughts and competition from foreign farmers drove American farmers in large numbers to seek jobs in the cities.
Free Enterprise Encourages the Rise of Entrepreneurship In 1868, Horatio Alger published his first novel, Ragged Dick or Street Life in New York. This wildly successful novel told the story of a poor boy who rose to wealth and fame by working hard. Alger's novels stressed the possibility that anyone could vault from poverty and obscurity to wealth and fame.
In this excerpt, he describes how Ragged Dick starts his climb to success.
Ten dollars a week was to him a fortune. . . . Indeed, he would have been glad, only the day before, to get a place at three dollars a week. . . . Then
SOURCE:
Historical Statistics of the United States » Technological innovation prompted the country’s production of natural resources to increase significantly. Analyze Graphs What relationship do you see between natural resources and economic growth?
Industry and Immigration 65	1.1 Innovation Boosts Growth
he was to be advanced if he deserved it. It was indeed a bright prospect for a boy who, only a year before, could neither read nor write. . . . Dick’s great ambition to “grow up ‘spectable’” seemed likely to be accomplished after all.
—Horatio Alger, 1888
The “rags to riches” idea depended on the system of capitalism, in which individuals own most businesses.
The heroes of this system were entrepreneurs, or people who build and manage businesses or enterprises in order to make a profit. Entrepreneurs invest time, money, or both in a product or service, often risking their own livelihoods on the chance of success.
The rise of entrepreneurship fueled industrialization and economic growth in the late 1800s. Entrepreneurs thrived under the idea of free enterprise, or the freedom to run a business for profit with minimal regulation beyond what is necessary to protect the public interest. Entrepreneurs competed among themselves for consumers’ dollars. If one business priced a certain product too high, consumers might buy
» Andrew Carnegie was an entrepreneur who thrived in the American free enterprise system. He built successful businesses and contributed much of his wealth to philanthropic causes.
a similar product from a competitor. So entrepreneurs found innovative ways to increase efficiency, cut costs, and lower prices, which enabled them to compete and survive in the free enterprise system. The factories, railroads, and mines they established created jobs and also attracted foreign investment.
Laissez-Faire Policies Encourage Growth The government encouraged laissez-faire policies, which allowed businesses to operate under minimal government regulation. Without government regulation, workplace conditions were sometimes challenging. However, laissez-faire policies, along with a strong legal system that enforced private property rights, provided the predictability and security that businesses and industries desired and encouraged investment and growth. These factors created an economic environment in which entrepreneurs could flourish.
To promote the buying of American goods, Congress enacted protective tariffs, or taxes that made imported goods cost more than those made in the United States. The government also gave innovative railroad builders millions of acres of land in return for their promise to quickly link the East and West coasts.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What factors help explain the growth of industry in the late 1800s?
ELPS 1.A.1
Take turns reading the section Laissez-Faire Policies Encourage Growth. Discuss how what you already know helps you understand this section.
Innovation Drives
Economic Development
Fueled by entrepreneurship, competition, and the free enterprise system, the drive for innovation and efficiency seemed to touch every sphere of life in the United States by the late 1800s. The number of patents increased rapidly during this time. A patent is a grant by the federal government giving an inventor the exclusive right to develop, use, and sell an invention for a set period of time. Business leaders invested heavily in these new scientific discoveries and innovations, hoping to create new industries and expand old ones. Eager consumers welcomed new inventions to the market, helping to spur the nation’s economic development.
Electricity Improves Standards of Living With support from wealthy industrialists like J.P. Morgan, inventor Thomas Edison established a research laboratory at Menlo Park, New Jersey in 1876. Edison,
1.1 Innovation Boosts Growth
ELPS
Industry and Immigration 66
THE BIRTH OF MODERN TELECOMMUNICATION SENDING A LETTER
MISSOURI CALIFORNIA 1844 1866
1851
1867
» The telegraph could send a message exponentially faster than standard mail. Infer How did telecommunication innovations improve the standard of living in the United States?
Interactive Gallery
a creative genius who had only a few months of formal education, would receive more than 1,000 patents for new inventions and scientific discoveries. In 1880, for example, with the goal of developing affordable lighting for homes, Edison and his team invented the light bulb, experimenting with thousands of different types of materials to find one that worked. Within a few years, they had also developed plans for central power plants to light entire sections of cities. Other inventors later improved upon Edison’s work, and other applications for electricity quickly improved the standard of living throughout the country. George Westinghouse, for example, developed technology to send electricity over long distances. Electricity lit city streets and powered homes and factories, extending the number of hours in the day when Americans could work and play.
Innovation in Communications In 1844, inventor Samuel Morse perfected telegraph technology, or the process of sending messages over wire. In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell patented the telephone. The two inventions attracted investors. Within a few years, 148 telephone companies had strung more than 34,000 miles of wire, and long-distance lines linked several cities in the Northeast and Midwest. By 1900, there were more than one million telephones in the United States, and more than 100,000 miles of telegraph
wire linked users across the land. In 1896, Guglielmo Marconi invented the wireless telegraph. Innovative entrepreneurs later built on Marconi’s achievement and developed the radio. All of these inventions improved communication between Americans. Instead of waiting days for a letter to arrive, Americans could receive telegraphs in a matter of minutes or hear loved ones' voices immediately on the telephone. Improved communication also meant that news of public events spread quickly
Steel, Innovation, and Economic Development In
the 1850s in England, a man named Henry Bessemer developed a process for purifying iron to make strong, but lightweight, steel. American industries quickly adopted the Bessemer process, and by 1890 the United States was outproducing British steel manufacturers. Strong steel made possible a host of innovations, including skyscrapers and the elevators to service them. One of its most dramatic uses was in the construction of suspension bridges, bridges in which the roadway is suspended by steel cables. The first suspension bridge was the Brooklyn Bridge, spanning the East River in New York City. Completed in 1883, it was at the time of its construction the longest bridge in the world.
Industry and Immigration 67	1-1 Innovation Boosts Growth
Technology Affects Travel As railroads expanded, they made other use of new technologies and also encouraged innovation. George Westinghouse patented air brakes for trains in 1869, while Granville Woods patented a telegraph system for trains in 1887.
Woods was one of many African Americans who used what they had learned from manual labor to get in on the national passion for developing and patenting new inventions. Meanwhile, meatpacker Gustavus Swift developed refrigerated cars for transporting food. By 1883, there were three transcontinental railroad lines in the United States.
The expanding transportation network caused some problems, however. Throughout most of the 1800s, most towns set their clocks independently. When trains started regular passenger service between towns, time differences made it hard to set schedules. In 1884, delegates from 27 countries divided the globe into 24 time zones, one for each hour of the day. The railroads adopted this system, which is still used today.
Technology also affected how Americans traveled and where they lived. Electric streetcars, commuter trains, and subways appeared in major cities. As a result, Americans could live in neighborhoods outside the city and commute to work. Factory production of automobiles with gas-powered engines began in 1902. Experiments in manned flight in a heavier-than-air craft by Orville and Wilbur Wright, among others, in
the early 1900s marked the birth of aeronautics, another new industry.
An Upward Spiral of Growth Railroads played a key role in transforming American industries and businesses. They could transport large amounts of goods long distances quickly, cheaply, and efficiently Because they linked the nation, they allowed businesses to obtain raw materials easily and to sell finished goods to larger numbers of people. They encouraged new methods for management and administration, which were soon adopted by the rest of the business community. In addition, the expanding railroad network stimulated innovation in many other industries.
An abundance of natural resources and an efficient transportation system to carry raw materials and finished goods set up a spiral of related growth. For example, factories turned out plate glass for windows of passenger rail cars. The factories needed freight cars to carry the windows to their destinations.
Those freight cars were created in factories that used railroads to transport fuel to supply the furnaces that turned out more railroad cars. In this way, factory production generated more factory production.
To meet the growing demand, factory owners and other innovators developed systems for turning out large numbers of products quickly and inexpensively.
San Francisco
Establishing Time Zones
Tacom.
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Los Angeles
» Railroads expanded across the country in the mid-nineteenth century. Analyze Maps What effect did railroads have on the production and distribution of goods?
KEY
1318 Eastern time I I Central time I I Mountain time I I Pacific time
Interactive Map

Industry and Immigration 68	1.1 Innovation Boosts Growth
Known as mass production, these systems depended upon machinery to carry out tasks that were once done with hand tools. In addition, Frederick Taylor and others studied the flow of work and workers’ places in it to develop a system of industrial management that found the most efficient ways for workers to use new machinery. These technological and management innovations improved the standard of living for some Americans by increasing the development of an economic middle class. Middle-class Americans, especially those that lived in the industrialized North, could afford less expensive products produced by companies utilizing new technology.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did new technologies influence industrialization?
Industrialization and the New South
While industry boomed in the North after the Civil War and Reconstruction, the South fell behind. The South struggled to develop its industry, and there were some pockets of success, especially in tobacco-processing, stone-quarrying, and furniture-making. In the 1890s, Altanta, Georgia, for example, was one of the earliest cities to develop an electric trolley system. But even though cities like Atlanta and Knoxville, Tennessee, grew strongly, the South struggled to overcome economic and social obstacles to broad industrial and urban development. As a result, the South remained largely agricultural and developed a smaller middle class than the North.
However, some post-Reconstruction industrial growth was led by many southern white leaders who envisioned a modernized economy that included not only agriculture but also mills and factories. Atlanta newspaper editor Henry Grady was among those who called for a “New South.” A gifted orator, Grady thought the South should use its resources to develop industry:
There was a South of slavery and secession—that South is dead. There is a South of union and freedom—that South, thank God, is living, breathing, growing every hour. . . . The old South rested everything on slavery and agriculture, unconscious that these could neither give nor maintain healthy growth. The new South presents a perfect democracy. . . a social system
Industry and Immigration 69
» A worker does her job in a typical Alabama textile mill in the early 1900s. Interpret In what way is this worker a symbol of the “New South”?
compact and closely knitted, less splendid on the surface, but stronger at the core. . . and a diversified industry that meets the complex needs of this complex age.
—Henry Grady, 1886
New Industries Develop Before the Civil War, the South had shipped its raw materials—including cotton, wood, and iron ore—abroad or to the North for processing into finished goods. In the 1880s, northern investors and entrepreneurs backed textile factories in North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, as well as cigar and lumber production, especially in North Carolina and Virginia. Other private investment in coal-, iron-, and steel-processing created urban centers in Nashville, Tennessee, and Birmingham, Alabama.
During this time, farming also became somewhat more diversified, with an increase in grain, tobacco, and fruit crops. Even the landscape of farming changed as smaller farms replaced large plantations.
Railroads Connect Cities and Towns The South needed reliable transportation to aid its industrial growth. To meet this need, southern rail lines
1.1 Innovation Boosts Growth
expanded, joining rural areas with urban hubs such as Mobile and Montgomery in Alabama and the bustling ports of New Orleans, Louisiana, and Charleston, South Carolina. Yet, by the 1880s, only two rail lines—from Texas to Chicago and from Tennessee to Washington, D.C.—linked southern freight to northern markets.
To combat economic isolation, southerners lobbied the federal government for economic help and used prison labor to keep railroad construction costs down. Gradually, rail connections supported the expansion of small hubs such as Meridian, Mississippi, and Americus, Georgia. The newer cities of Atlanta, Dallas, and Nashville developed rapidly and began rivaling older cities.
The Southern Economy Lags Behind Despite these changes, the southern economy continued to lag behind the rest of the country. While the North was able to build on its strong industrial base, the South first had to repair the damages of war. Moreover, industry rests on a three-legged stool: natural resources, labor, and capital investment, or money invested to start or improve the business. The South had plenty of the first but not enough of the second and third.
Sustained economic development also requires workers who are well trained and productive, as well as consumers who can spend. Public education in the South was limited.
In fact, the South spent less than any other part of the country on education, and it lacked the technical and engineering schools that could have trained the people needed by industry. At the same time, low wages discouraged skilled workers from coming to the South, and the lure of higher wages or better conditions elsewhere siphoned off southern workers.
Additionally, very few southern banks had survived the war, and those that were functioning had fewer assets than their northern competitors. Most of the South’s wealth was concentrated in the hands of a few people. Poor tenant farmers and low paid factory workers did not have cash to deposit. With few strong banks, southern financiers were often dependent on northern banks to start or expand businesses or farms. The southern economy suffered from this lack of labor and capital.
Farm Issues in the South Before the Civil War, most southern planters had concentrated on such crops as cotton and tobacco, which were grown not for their own use but to be sold for cash. The lure of the cash crop continued after the war, despite efforts to diversify. One farm magazine recommended that “instead of cotton fields, and patches of grain, let us have fields of grain, and patches of cotton.” But cotton remained the centerpiece of the southern agricultural economy. Although at the end of the Civil War cotton production had dropped to about one third of its prewar levels, by the late 1880s, it had rebounded. However, during
» The price of cotton fell dramatically following the Civil War. Analyze Graphs What factors contributed to cotton’s declining value?
Industry and
Immigration 70 1
1.1 Innovation Boosts Growth
the war, many European textile factories had found suppliers outside the South, and the price of cotton had fallen. Now, the South’s abundance of cotton simply depressed the price further.
Dependence on one major crop was extremely risky. In the case of southern cotton, it was the boll weevil that heralded disaster. The boll weevil, a beetle which could destroy an entire crop of cotton, appeared in Texas in the early 1890s. Over the next decade, the yield from cotton cultivation in some states dropped by more than 50 percent. By 1900, cotton’s appeal and its problems dominated the southern economy, much as they had before the Civil War.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What factors inhibited southern economic recovery?
The Effects of
Industrialization
Free enterprise and industrialization touched every aspect of American life in the late 1800s, from the way businesses and farms operated to the kinds of products Americans used. They also affected the country’s relationship with the world and with its own environment.
Dominating World Markets By the 1880s, American exports of grain, steel, and textiles dominated international markets. Although Britain was building railroads to gain access to natural resources in Africa, Asia, and many other places across the world, by 1900, the United States had almost as many miles of railroad track as the rest of the world combined. The United States could easily transport goods from where they were made or grown to ports where they could be shipped around the world. Exports of food and goods greatly expanded the American economy. As the United States grew as a world economic power, it often clashed with the economic views and political policies of other countries.
Daily Life Changes Massive changes in industry altered how Americans lived and worked. Even farms became mechanized, meaning that fewer farm laborers were needed to feed the nation. Out-of-work farmers and their families moved to urban areas to find work, especially in the increasingly industrial North. Many moved to manufacturing centers that had sprung up around growing factories or industries. The mass production of goods meant that these new urban dwellers had easy access to clothing and supplies that they would have had to make by hand in the past. Yet
» A manager on a late nineteenth-century cotton plantation weighs the amount of cotton picked by laborers.
» From freight yards such as this massive complex in New York City, American industry transported food and other goods nationwide, greatly increasing Americans’ access to consumer products.
Industry and Immigration 71
1.1 Innovation Boosts Growth
» Factories, with their multitude of smoke stacks, created a great deal of air pollution. Industrial waste was a byproduct of the Industrial Revolution.
they faced higher costs of living, were dependent upon cash wages to buy food, and performed repetitive work in factories.
Concerns About the Environment In the early 1800s, few worried about how industry might affect the environment. However, by the late 1800s, industrial waste had risen dramatically and mining had begun to damage the land. In the Midwest, increasing
agricultural production had led to soil erosion and dust storms. People began to raise concerns about protecting natural resources. Congress responded by setting aside protected lands that would eventually become part of the National Park Service. Its creation of Yellowstone Park in 1872 was one of the first federal responses to concerns about the environment, and Yellowstone was the first such national park established anywhere in the world. Over the next decades, many more square miles of American land would be set aside to be protected.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
Explain how industrialization impacted the lives of Americans.
CESS ELPS 4.E.1
Read the section Concerns About the Environment with a partner. List the words you do not know and consult various resources to find their meanings. ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare and Contrast the risks and goals of entrepreneurs and inventors.
2.	Identify Central Issues Why was the South slower to industrialize than the North?
3.	Cite Evidence that there were some negative effects of industrialization.
4.	Infer why the free enterprise system was so important to entrepreneurs and why entrepreneurs were crucial to the free enterprise system.
5.	Support Ideas with Evidence What did the United States have that made it so successful during the second Industrial Revolution? Include as many factors as you can think of.
Industry and Immigration 72
1.1 Innovation Boosts Growth
f
The rapid industrial growth that occurred after the Civil War transformed American business and society. Yet it was only the beginning. The rise of big business, characterized by the investment of huge amounts of private financial resources, helped the United States push aside strong economies like Britain’s, to become one of the most economically powerful countries in the modern world.
Big Business Rises
Corporations Find New Ways of Doing Business
Until the mid-nineteenth century, most businesses were run by one person or family. This meant that no business could grow bigger than one family’s ability to invest in it or run it. Businesses were also local, buying and selling to customers who lived nearby. Industrialization changed all this. Railroads provided businesses with access to raw materials and customers from farther and farther away. Business leaders, desiring the profits offered by these larger markets, responded by combining funds and resources.
The Corporation Meets New Needs To take advantage of expanding markets, investors developed a form of group ownership known as a corporation. In a corporation, a number of people share the ownership of a business. If a corporation experiences economic problems, the investors lose no more than they had originally invested in the business. The corporation was the perfect solution to the challenge of expanding business, especially for risky industries such as railroads or mining. A corporation had the same rights as an individual: it could buy and sell property, and it could sue in the courts. If one person chose to leave the group, others could buy his interests.
3.B, 3.C, 15.B, 24.B, 27.C
» Objectives
Analyze different management innovations that businesses used to increase their profits.
Describe the public debate over the pros and cons of big business.
Explain how the government took steps to block abuses of corporate power.
» Key Terms
corporation
monopoly
cartel
John D. Rockefeller horizontal integration trust
Andrew Carnegie vertical integration Social Darwinism Interstate
Commerce Commission (ICC)
Sherman Antitrust Act
1 PEARSON 1’
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
73
Corporations were perfectly suited to expanding markets. They had access to huge amounts of capital, or invested money, allowing them to fund new technology, enter new industries, or run large plants across the country. Aided by railroads and the telegraph, corporations had the ability to operate in several different regions. After 1870, the number of corporations in America increased dramatically. They were an important part of industrial capitalism. The economic free-market system centered around industries.
Finding New Ways to Gain Advantage Corporations worked to maximize profits in several ways. They advertised their products widely, which enabled them to reach more potential customers. They paid low wages to workers and tried to obtain raw materials as cheaply as possible. They adopted forms of business organization, such as horizontal or vertical integration, and applied other innovations in production management to seek out efficiencies that would in turn decrease their cost of producing goods or services. Like J. P. Morgan, the heads of some corporations supported research laboratories where inventors could experiment with new processes that could lower production costs or new products that could bring future profits.
Others thought of new ways to make their businesses profitable. Cornelius Vanderbilt, an entrepreneur in the railroad industry, got his start in the steamboat business. He succeeded in getting his competitors to pay him to relocate because his low fares were driving
them out of business. Some corporations worked to eliminate competition by forming a cartel. In this arrangement, businesses making the same product agree to limit their production and thus keep prices high. John D. Rockefeller, an Ohio oil tycoon, made agreements with railroads that made it difficult for his competitors to ship their products:
[Rockefeller’s company] killed its rivals, in brief, by getting the great trunk lines to refuse to give them transportation. Vanderbilt is reported to have said that there was but one man—Rockefeller—-who could dictate to him.
D.
Lloyd, IW 1881 Business Management Innovations Business leaders continued to develop ever more effective ways to decrease costs and increase profits. One way was to merge competing firms into a giant company whose size would lead to lower production costs. This system of consolidating many firms in the same business is called horizontal integration. Some corporations used horizontal integration to gain a monopoly, or complete control of a product or service. To do this, a company either bought its competitors or drove them out of business. With no remaining competition
Economic Advantages of Being Big
$5
$4
$3
$2
$1
0
100	200	300	400
How Economies of Scale Enable Big Businesses to be More Efficient
•	Lower cost per unit as volume increases
•	Larger production facilities for increased volume
•	Bulk pricing of raw materials
•	Reduced administration and management costs
•	Specialized labor efficiencies
•	Better rates on borrowed money
Units produced
... ........ ...... .........
» Production costs usually decrease as more goods are produced. Analyze Graphs What competitive advantages do larger businesses have over smaller ones?
Industry and Immigration 74	1.2 Big Business Rises
8
vs
INTEGRATION OF BIG BUSINESS
	liilli nil	T«r«T> nvvfti	Six rival companies become the foundation of a larger, more efficient Standard Oil Company.
Clark, Payne &	Hanna, Basiington	Atlannc Refining	
Company, OH	& Company, OH	Company, OH	
PURCHASED BY
	||		ROCKEFELLER
			Standard Oil Company
Charles Pratt &	Imperial Refining	Chess, Carley &	
Company, NY	Company, PA	Company, KY	
United Airlines, Hewlett Packard, Bank of America
Integrate the businesses that provide raw materials, distribution, and retail in order to control prices and supply.
Amazon, Virgin Atlantic, Apple
Oil wells pipelines
Tank cars / railroads
. ...au.. .u. Retail
M ||	' outlets
rh PURCHASED BY
ROCKEFELLER
im
Standard Oil Company
» Management innovations such as horizontal and vertical integration allowed American businesses to remain competitive in the age of industrialization. Contrast What differences do you see between horizontal and vertical integration?
and an efficient production process, the company was free to set its own prices based on demand for its products. This power did not always mean higher prices for consumers, but the potential for setting high prices was there. The management innovation of horizontal integration made business more efficient but occasionally had a negative impact on labor, because workers at smaller companies driven out of business would need to find employment elsewhere.
Production management, a management innovation designed to maximize the efficiency of a production process, also impacted labor. Business owners were understandably interested in controlling labor costs and continually looked for ways to improve worker productivity in conjunction with new machines. As a result, business owners could often meet production goals with fewer skilled workers. Those without the required skills to work with the new technologies and those unable to maintain the pace of a regimented workflow on factory floors oftentimes found themselves without work.
Rockefeller was one of the first businessmen to use horizontal integration. However, Ohio state law prevented one company from owning the stock of another. This meant that Rockefeller could not buy out his competitors. Instead he found a way to get around the law by forming a new type of business organization
called a trust. In a trust, companies assigned their stock to a board of trustees, who combined them into a new organization that the trustees ran. By the early 1880s, Rockefeller and his Standard Oil trust controlled most of the oil refined in the United States.
In Ohio and elsewhere, trusts arose, in part, because state laws governing corporations were inadequate. In many states in the mid-1800s, corporations could only be chartered by the state legislature passing an act. Business leaders looked for more flexible ways to build their businesses. For some business leaders, trusts were also a way to bring efficiency and stability to a free market where competition could be fierce and unpredictable. As state laws changed, trusts were replaced by other types of business mergers. However, the public continued to apply the term “trust” to any form of monopolistic business association.
Rockefeller, steel tycoon Andrew Carnegie, and other business leaders also strengthened their companies and made the workplace more efficient by gaining control of the different businesses that were involved in all stages of manufacturing their products. Carnegie, for example, owned the coal mines and iron-ore fields that provided the raw materials for his steel, as well as the ships and railroads that brought them to his
Industry and Immigration
1.2 Big Business Rises
AP ELPS
steel mills. This process, called vertical integration, allowed companies to reduce their costs of production.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
How were corporations able to decrease costs and increase profits?
ELPS 4.F.1
Work with a partner and look at the infographic Big Business: Vertical vs. Horizontal Integration. How do the symbols and their arrangement show vertical and horizontal integration? Refer back to the diagram as you take turns reading the section titled Business Management Innovations.
The Pros and Cons of Big Business
Throughout the 1880s, business mergers created powerful empires for those who controlled steel, railroads, meat, farm equipment, sugar, lumber, and a number of other enterprises. However, many smaller companies and consumers began to question the goals and tactics of those who led these businesses.
“Robber Barons” or “Captains of Industry”?
Many small businesses were bought up or squeezed out of competition. Those that joined trusts often
PUCK.
THE PROTECTORS OF OUR INDUSTRIES
» “The Protectors of Our Industries” shows Cornelius Vanderbilt II and other business leaders. Analyze Political Cartoons What point of view about these leaders does this cartoon express?
Interactive Gallery
found that they received few profits. Some consumers were alarmed by the high prices that monopolies and cartels sometimes set on their products. Gradually, many consumers, workers, and the federal government came to believe that systems like trusts, cartels, and monopolies gave powerful business leaders unfair advantages. They believed that perhaps the government’s laissez-faire policies had been too hands off and costly in terms of hurting workers and consumers. People who held these views began to refer to these leaders as “robber barons.”
At the same time, other people believed that these industrialists served the nation positively. They believed that laissez-faire policies had benefited the nation by allowing business to flourish and regulate itself according to free enterprise principles. They recognized that the spread of factories, steel mills, and railroads provided jobs for an ever-growing labor force. Large, efficient corporations often lowered prices for consumers. Business supporters also noted that the industrialists’ efficient business practices and support for developing technology benefited the nation’s economy, stimulating innovation and shaping the United States into a strong international leader. Furthermore, many business leaders, like Carnegie, Rockefeller, and Vanderbilt, were important philanthropists.
They established universities, museums, and libraries, believing that such institutions made it possible for the disadvantaged to rise to wealth. For these reasons, people who took this point of view thought of business leaders as “captains of industry.”
The Causes and Effects of Social Darwinism In
1859, biologist Charles Darwin published On the Origin of Species, arguing that animals evolved by a process of “natural selection” and that only the fittest survived to reproduce. Yale professor William Graham Sumner soon applied this theory to the rough-and-tumble world of American capitalism, calling it Social Darwinism. He declared that wealth was a measure of one’s inherent value and those who had it were the most "fit."
The theory of Social Darwinism, caused by this modification of Darwin’s scientific findings, became a social issue when it was used to justify a wide variety of beliefs and conditions. Supporters of the laissez-faire economic system argued that the government should stay out of private business, because interference would disrupt natural selection.
Many Social Darwinists believed that the nation would grow strong by allowing its most vigorous members to rise to the top, and that it was wrong to use public funds to assist the poor. Social Darwinism was often used to fuel discrimination. Social Darwinists
Industry and Immigration 76	1.2 Big Business Rises
pointed to the poverty-stricken condition of many minorities as evidence of their unfitness.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did people explain their support or opposition to big business?
ELPS 1.A.2
Discuss the meanings of small business and big business with a partner. Make a list of five businesses and categorize them as “small” or “big”. Then discuss: Do you know a local business that closed? Why do you think it closed? The Changing
Relationship Between Government and Business
The great industrialists’ methods and their influence on the nation’s economy worried some Americans. Competing railroads took part in practices such as fixing rates and pooling, or entering into secret agreements to divide up the nation’s freight. Many Americans felt that price fixing and pooling drove up rates and were unfair to consumers. They also thought that unfair business practices and poor wages and working conditions for the labor force had made the costs of the government’s laissez-faire policies too high. They wanted the federal government to take action.
Attempts to Regulate Business Finally, in 1887, Congress responded by creating the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to monitor railroad shipping rates. However, it could only keep watch on railroads that crossed state lines. Also, it could not make laws or control the railroads’ transactions. Although court rulings favoring states and railroads weakened even these few powers, the ICC was the first federal agency to monitor business practices. Over the next several decades, the government would create many other federal bodies to regulate American businesses.
Similarly, the federal government slowly became involved in regulating trusts. In 1890, the Senate passed the Sherman Antitrust Act, which outlawed any trust that operated “in restraint of trade or commerce among the several states.” The government claimed that it had a constitutional right to regulate such commerce. But for more than a decade, the law was seldom enforced because court rulings generally favored business owners.
In fact, it was often used in businesses’ favor because they successfully argued in court that labor unions restrained trade. However, the ICC and the Sherman Antitrust Act began a trend toward federal limitations on corporations’ power.
» In this cartoon, men labeled Populist, Democrat, Republican, and Silverite toss a Business Man around on a sheet. Analyze Political Cartoons According to this artist, who is in control of business?
» Railroads all travel to one destination. Analyze Political Cartoons What does the “robber baron” in this cartoon represent?
Industry and Immigration ( 77 I 1.2 Big Business Rises
Sherman Antitrust Act, 1890
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
•	Enabled Congress to regulate trade between states and end monopolistic practices
•	Tried to eliminate hidden monopolies (trusts) that affected trade
•	Enabled competitors to sue trustees of rival companies for loss of revenue
•	Levied fines against those forming trusts
•	Difficult to enforce
•	Lacked clear definition of the practices that resulted in a restraint of trade
•	More often used successfully against labor unions than monopolies
» The Sherman Antitrust Act tried to create a fair marketplace in which the needs of businesses, workers, and consumers were addressed. Analyze Charts Why might some businesses disagree with the Sherman Antitrust Act?
§1 Interactive Chart
A
Difficult Balance Between Business, Government, and Consumer These limits on corporations' power were made in an attempt to create a fair environment for competition. They sought to prevent any one company from undercutting market forces by driving its competition out of the market, which would allow the company rather than the market to determine the best price for its products. To this end, the federal government tried many kinds of legislation and regulation—with a mixture of costs and benefits. Often neither businesses nor consumers felt that their interests were well-served by government policies and actions. The costs and benefits of anti-trust acts continued to be debated. Over the course of 50 years, corporations, federal regulatory agencies, consumers, unions, and the courts struggled to find an acceptable balance between fair prices and wages, as well as workers’ safety and dignity and the corporations’ legitimate quest for efficiencies that would provide a fair return on the investment and risk involved in doing business in a free-market system. Historians continue to assess the ways in which—and the degree to which— that attempt at balance was met. Historians and economists also debate the question of who should have the responsibility for developing the policies to
achieve that balance. Indeed, these issues are still part of the relationship between business, government, and the consumer in our own time.
Q IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did the federal government attempt to regulate business?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Why did forming corporations allow big business to increase in power and profitability?
2.	Interpret the effects of monopolies and cartels on the consumer.
3.	Summarize what made John D. Rockefeller such a successful businessman.
4.	Compare Points of View Why would one person use the term “robber baron” and another “captain of industry” to describe the same person?
5.	Support Ideas with Examples Cite arguments for and against increased federal regulatory power of private business using specific examples to support your answer.
Industry and Immigration 78
1.2 Big Business Rises
As industrialization intensified, the success of the booming American economy relied heavily on its workers. But struggles between business owners and workers also intensified, as workers rebelled against low pay and unsafe working conditions.
To keep the economy thriving, Americans had to find ways to ease the tensions between business owners and workers.

The Organized Labor Movement
Workers Endure Difficulties
The industrial expansion in the United States produced great wealth for the owners of factories, mines, railroads, and large farms.
It also brought general improvements to American society in the form of a higher standard of living, wider availability of cheap goods, and increased access to public institutions like museums and schools. However, the economic growth of the late 1800s caused domestic issues. Many of the people who performed the work in the nation’s great industries struggled to survive. In addition, workers— especially immigrants, women, and minorities—often faced ridicule and discrimination.
» Objectives
Assess the impact of business practices on workers in the late 1800s.
Compare the goals and strategies of the first labor unions.
Analyze the causes and effects of strikes in the late 1800s.
The Hardships of Factory Work In the 1880s and 1890s, factory owners, seeking to keep down production costs, employed people who would work for low wages. Immigrants made up a large percentage of the workforce. Far from home, lacking good English-speaking skills, and often very poor, immigrants would generally take almost any job. Factory workers toiled long hours 12 hours a day, 6 days a week. Countless thousands of others worked similar hours in small, hot, dark, and dirty workhouses known as sweatshops. Sweatshop workers,
» Key Terms
sweatshops company towns collective bargaining socialism Knights of Labor Terence V. Powderly Samuel Gompers American Federation
of Labor (AFL) Haymarket Riot Homestead Strike Eugene V. Debs Pullman Strike
i 1
i; I
PEARSON I
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
79
©
» Work in the textile mills could be very dangerous, and it was not unheard of for an inexperienced, young worker (some as young as eight years old) to lose a finger in an accident.
» A surplus of immigrant labor made it difficult for sweatshop workers, such as these women, to demand fair wages and safe working conditions.
mainly women, labored long hours at machines making mass-produced items. Owners ensured productivity by strictly regulating workers’ days. They clocked work and break hours and fined workers for breaking rules or working slowly.
Factory work was often dangerous. Workspaces were poorly lit, often overheated, and badly ventilated. Some workers lost their hearing from the noisy machines. Accidents were common, both from faulty equipment and from lack of proper training. Despite the harsh conditions, employers suffered no shortage of labor. There were always more people than jobs.
Children in the Workplace As industrialization advanced, more jobs opened up for women. They worked as laundresses, telegraph operators, and typists. But most women—and their families—worked in the factories. Since low wages meant that both parents needed jobs, bringing children to work kept them off the streets and close to their parents. It also meant that the children could earn a wage, which helped the family to survive.
By the end of the 1800s, nearly one in five children between the ages of 10 and 16 worked rather than attending school. Harsh conditions affected these children deeply. Many suffered stunted physical and mental growth. By the 1890s, social workers began to recognize the social issues caused by child labor. They lobbied to get children out of factories and into child care or schools. Eventually, the efforts of social workers and other reformers prompted states to pass legislation to stop child labor.
Company Towns and Wage Slavery Many laborers, especially those who worked in mines, were forced to live in isolated communities near their workplaces. The housing in these communities, known as company towns, was owned by the business and rented out to employees. The employer also controlled the “company store," where workers were forced to buy goods. The company store sold goods on credit but charged high interest. As a result, by the time the worker was paid, most of the wages were owed back to the employer. Since workers could be arrested if they left their jobs before they completely repaid these debts, employers could hold onto workers through a system that workers’ advocates called “wage slavery.” Through management of their company towns, employers could also reinforce ethnic competition and distrust.
Industry and Immigration 80	1.3 The Organized Labor Movement
ELPS
For example, Mexican, African American, or Chinese workers could be segregated in separate towns.
Id IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS In what ways did labor
conditions affect families?
ELPS 1.B.1
Read aloud the section Children in the Workplace with a partner. Ask your partner for feedback so that you can improve your reading skills.
The Growth of Labor
Unions
Industrialization and free enterprise lowered the prices of consumer goods but helped business investors gain large profits. Workers usually did not object to their employer making a profit from their work. After all, if the business was not profitable, it could close and leave workers jobless. Keeping companies profitable was in the best interest of the workers as well.
However, workers were understandably frustrated that their wages did not earn enough to buy many consumer goods, even at lower prices. They also resented working in unsafe conditions that in some cases ruined their health and therefore their ability to earn a living. Increasingly, workers organized to take complaints about wages and working conditions to their employers. Employers usually opposed the growing labor movement, which they saw as a threat to their businesses and profits. Employers tended to view efforts to improve wages or working conditions as a violation of their property rights—their right to run their businesses as they saw fit.
Early Labor Protests As early as the 1820s, factory workers tried to gain more power by using the technique of collective bargaining, or negotiating as a group with their employer for higher wages or better working conditions. A related tool to collective bargaining was the strike, in which workers refused to work until certain demands were met. Most strikes were local, but sometimes they involved workers in a whole industry across a state, a region, or the country.
The first national labor union, founded in 1834, was the National Trades Union, open to workers from all trades. It lasted only a few years, and no new unions formed in the wake of the depressions of the late 1830s. However, strikes succeeded in reducing the length of the workday in some regions. By the mid-1800s, a six-day work week with a 10-hour workday became the standard in most New England factories. Gradually, national unions began to reappear.
» Many working-class families struggled to get by on low wages.
Socialism Influences Labor In the 1830s, a movement called socialism spread throughout Europe. Socialism is an economic and political philosophy that favors public, instead of private, control of property and income. Socialists believe that society at large, not just private individuals, should take charge of a nation’s wealth. That wealth, they argue, should be distributed equally to everyone.
In 1848, the German philosophers Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels expanded on the ideas of socialism in a treatise titled The Communist Manifesto. This pamphlet denounced capitalism and predicted that workers would overturn it. Most Americans rejected these ideas, believing that they threatened the American ideals of free enterprise, private property, and individual liberty. The wealthy in particular opposed socialism because it threatened their fortunes. But many labor activists borrowed ideas from socialism to support their goals for social reform.
The Knights of Labor In 1869, Uriah Stephens founded a labor union called the Knights of Labor. Stephens, a tailor who had lived and worked around the country, included all workers of any trade, skilled or unskilled, in his union. The Knights also actively recruited women and African Americans. Under Stephens, the union functioned largely as a secret society, devoted to
Industry and Immigration 81	1.3 The Organized Labor Movement
broad social reform such as replacing capitalism with workers’ cooperatives. The Preamble to the Knights’ Constitution, written in 1878, read:
The recent alarming development and aggression of aggregated wealth, which, unless checked, will inevitably lead to the pauperization and hopeless degradation of the toiling masses, render it imperative, if we desire to enjoy the blessings of life, that a check should be placed upon its power . .
. and a system adopted which will secure to the laborer the fruits of his toil. . . .
—Preamble to the Knights’ Constitution, 1878
In 1879, Terence V, Powderly took on the leadership of the Knights. The son of Irish immigrants, he had worked as a machinist on the railroad before rising to become mayor of Scranton, Pennsylvania, in the 1870s. Powderly abandoned the secretive nature of the Knights. Under his leadership the union used collective bargaining, boycotts, and the threat of strikes to win gains for workers. But like Stephens, Powderly
PUCK.
KMIQ8X» OF THE R1MBTR8KTH CXMTOKY.
» The Knights of Labor were sometimes portrayed in a comical fashion in the media.
also pursued reforms intended to free workers from wage labor. He planned large-scale manufacturing cooperatives which members workers would operate and take a share in the profits. By 1885, the Knights had grown to include some 700,000 men and women nationwide, of every race and ethnicity. By the 1890s, however, after a series of failed strikes, the Knights had largely disappeared. Many Knights who worked in skilled crafts or trades abandoned the union for a new, rival labor organization, the American Federation of Labor.
A
New Organization for Workers Samuel Gompers was a poor Jewish immigrant from England who had worked his way up to head the Cigarmakers’ Union in New York. In 1886, Gompers helped found the American Federation of Labor (AFL) and served as its president for nearly 40 years. While the Knights of Labor was open to nearly all workers, the AFL was a loose organization of some 100 unions of skilled workers devoted to specific crafts. These trade unions retained their individuality but gained strength in bargaining through their affiliation with the AFL. Gompers set high dues for membership in the AFL, pooling the money to create a strike and pension fund to assist workers in need. Unlike the Knights of Labor, the AFL did not aim for larger social gains for workers. Instead, it focused on specific workers’ issues such as wages, working hours, and working conditions. In testimony before a government labor commission, Gompers argued in fact that unions and strikes were the only way workers’ issues such as these could be addressed:
We recognize that peaceful industry is necessary to successful civilized life, but the right to strike and the preparation to strike is the greatest preventive to strikes.
If the workmen were to make up their minds tomorrow that they would under no circumstances strike, the employers would do all the striking for them in the way of lesser wages, and longer hours of labor.
—Report on the (U.S.) Industrial Commission on
Capital and Labor, 1890
The AFL also pressed for workplaces in which only union members could be hired. Because of its narrow
Interactive Cartoon
Industry and Immigration ; 82 '
1.3 The Organized Labor Movement
i
Influential Labor Unions
NAME DATE FOUNDED SIGNIFICANCE
National Trades Union	1834	First national union; open to workers from all trades
Knights of Labor	1869	Sought general ideological reform; open to workers of all trades
American Federation of Labor	1886	Focused on specific workers' issues; organization of skilled workers from local craft unions
American Railway Union	1893	First industrial union; open to all railway workers
» Different labor unions continued to advocate for worker’s rights. Analyze Tables How were all of these labor unions similar? What were some ways in which they differed?
focus on workers’ issues, the AFL was often called a "bread and butter” union.
The AFL was not as successful as the Knights in rapidly gaining the widespread support of workers, partly because of its own policies. It opposed union membership for women because Gompers believed their presence in the workplace drove wages down. While it was theoretically open to African Americans, member unions usually found ways to exclude them. Nevertheless, by 1910 AFL membership had reached two million workers.
H IDENTIFY
What similarities and differences existed in the goals of various labor unions?
Labor Unions Lead
Protests
As membership in labor unions rose and labor activists became more skilled in organizing large-scale protests, a wave of bitter confrontations between labor and management hit the nation. The first major strike occurred in the railroad industry in 1877. Striking workers, responding to wage cuts, caused massive property destruction in several cities. State militias were called in to protect strikebreakers, or temporary workers hired to perform the jobs of striking workers. Finally, the federal government sent in troops to restore order. In the decades to follow, similar labor disputes
would affect businesses, the government, and the organization of labor unions themselves.
Workers Protest in Chicago In May 1886, thousands of workers mounted a national demonstration for an eight-hour workday. Strikes erupted in several cities, and fights broke out between strikers and strikebreakers. Conflict then escalated between strikers and police who were brought in to halt the violence. On May 4, protesters gathered at Haymarket Square in Chicago. The diverse crowd included anarchists, or radicals opposed to all government. A protester threw a bomb, killing a policeman. In the subsequent frenzy, dozens of people, both protesters and policemen, were killed. Eight anarchists were tried for murder, and four were executed. The governor of Illinois, deciding that evidence for the convictions had been scanty, pardoned three of the others. The fourth had already committed suicide in jail.
The Haymarket Riot left an unfortunate legacy The Knights of Labor fizzled out as people shied away from radicalism. Employers became even more suspicious of union activities, associating them with violence. In general, much of the American public at that time came to share that view.
Steelworkers Clash with the Pinkertons In the
summer of 1892, a Carnegie Steel plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania, cut workers’ wages. The union immediately called a strike. Andrew Carnegie’s partner, Henry Frick, responded by bringing in the Pinkertons,
i
i
1
i

i
i
Industry and Immigration j 83
1.3 The Organized Labor Movement


a private police force known for their ability to break up strikes. The Pinkertons killed several strikers and wounded many others in a standoff that lasted some two weeks. Then, on July 23, an anarchist who had joined the protesters tried to assassinate Frick. The union had not backed his plan, but the public associated the two. Recognizing that public opinion was turning against unions, the union called off the strike in November. The Homestead Strike was part of an epidemic of steelworkers’ and miners’ strikes that took place as economic depression spread across America. In each case, troops and local militia were called in to suppress the unrest.
A
Union Addresses Social Issues in a Pullman Town In 1893, inventor George Pullman, whose Pullman Palace Car Company produced luxury railroad passenger cars, laid off many of his workers and cut wages by 25 percent. Although the economic slowdown plaguing the nation at the time justified this action to some degree, Pullman did not reduce the rents in his company town near Chicago, where his workers lived. In May 1894, workers sent a delegation to discuss their desperate situation with Pullman. He refused to negotiate and fired three workers. His other workers responded by going on strike. When Pullman brought in strikebreakers, the workers turned to the newly organized American
Railway Union (ARU) for help. Founded by former railroad worker Eugene V. Debs, the ARU was organized as an industrial union, grouping all railroad workers together rather than into separate trade unions according to the job they held. Debs believed that industrial unions allowed workers to exert united pressure on employers.
The ARU ordered a nationwide strike against Pullman. By June 1894, nearly 300,000 railworkers were refusing to work on, handle, or move any trains that had Pullman cars on them. As the Pullman Strike escalated, the nation’s railroad traffic came to a halt. Railroad owners cited the Sherman Antitrust Act to argue that the union was illegally disrupting free trade. Since the nation’s mail moved by train, the federal government took action to end the strike. A federal court ordered a halt to the strike. When Debs defied the court order, President Grover Cleveland sent in federal troops to force the strikers back to work. Debs was jailed for conspiring against interstate commerce. Debs appealed his conviction, claiming that the government had no authority to halt the strike. However, the Supreme Court upheld Debs' conviction in the case In re Debs in 1895, ruling that protecting interstate commerce and the private property rights of the railroads was a lawful exercise of government power.
PULLMAN, ILLINOIS THE COMPANY TOWN
Pullman intended his clean, neat company town to protect workers from immoral influences. He chose a site 13 miles away from union organizers, strikes, slums, and saloons.	Skilled laborers lived in apartments or row houses. 1,400 RESIDENCES The unskilled lived in tenements.	Unable to own homes Subjected to home inspections Highest rents in the area
Haymarket ILLINOIS	’ Lab°rRiOt Pullman r	The company provided landscaping, painting, sewers, trash removal, and tenement cleaning. The town had a hotel, shops, a restaurant, library, theater, bank, school, recreation areas, and a single church.	Lack of ethnic expression No town government No religious diversity No alcohol allowed
ABOUT $8 MILLION		
1884	8,500 1892	14,700	20% 33%	of wages of wages	
» Company towns like this one provided everything workers would need, but at a significant cost. Analyze Graphs What reasons account for the workers’ complaints about Pullman?
§1 Interactive Chart
Industry and Immigration
84
1.3 The Organized Labor Movement
The Impact of Labor Unions The outcome of the Pullman Strike set an important trend. Employers, hoping to maintain profitability and thus create more jobs, appealed frequently for court orders against unions, citing legislation like the Sherman Antitrust Act. The federal courts and other federal officials routinely supported these appeals, denying unions recognition as legally protected organizations and limiting union gains for more than 30 years. As the twentieth century opened, industrialists, workers, and government continued to battle over numerous labor issues. Collective bargaining, strikes, and legislation would become the way of life for American industry.
In the decades after Pullman, the labor movement split into different factions, some increasingly influenced by socialism. By the end of the 1800s, Debs had become a Socialist. He helped organize the American Socialist Party in 1897, running for President in 1900. In 1905, he helped found the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), or Wobblies. The IWW was a radical union of unskilled workers with many Socialists among its leaders. In the first few decades of the 1900s, the IWW led a number of strikes, many of them violent.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did workers increasingly turn to the strike as a tactic to win labor gains?
EXS23 ELPS 4.F.2
Read aloud the entire reading with a partner. Then reread each section heading. Take turns summarizing your understanding of the important events and ideas mentioned in the headings. ASSESSMENT
1.	Support a Point of View with Evidence In the
late 1800s, sweatshops and other factories were horrible places to work. What evidence supports this point of view?
2.	Determine Point of View Why does the concept of child labor in factories seems so terrible to us
» Eugene V. Debs, leader of the American Railroad Union, speaks to a crowd. Debs was known as a fiery and inspirational speaker.
today when it was a widely accepted practice in the 1800s?
3.	Compare life in a company town with life today for a low-paid worker.
4.	Generate Explanations Someone’s “bread and butter” is his or her means of support, or livelihood. Why was the AFL called a “bread and butter” union while the Knights of Labor was not?
5.	Express Problems Clearly Why did labor unions such as the Knights of Labor, the AFL, and the ARU have such a difficult time carrying out a successful strike?
Industry and Immigration 85	1.3 The Organized Labor Movement
B01
Interactive Flipped Video ©
1.4
Immigration has been a central
theme in American history. However, when the foreign-born population of the United States nearly doubled between 1870 and 1900, some Americans feared that the newcomers would damage American culture. Instead, Americans adopted parts of immigrants’ cultures, while immigrants adopted parts of American culture. The contributions of immigrants, combined with the existing culture, helped shape American culture into a diverse and unique whole.
3.C, 3.D, 13.B, 15.C, 26.A, 26.B, 26.C
The New Immigrants
» Objectives
Compare the “new immigrants” of the late 1800s to earlier immigrants.
Explain the push and pull factors leading immigrants to America.
Describe the challenges that immigrants faced establishing new lives in America.
Analyze how immigrants adapted to American life while contributing to American culture.
» Key Terms
“new” immigrants
steerage
Ellis Island
Angel Island
Americanization
“melting pot”
nativism
Chinese Exclusion Act
New Immigrants Seek Better Lives
A
Rush of “New” Immigrants Immigrants had always come to America for economic opportunity and religious freedom. Until the 1870s, the majority had been Protestants from northern and western Europe. They came as families to settle in the United States, often on farms with family or friends who had come previously. Many had saved some money for the journey, had a skill or trade, or had a formal education. Many German and Irish Catholics had immigrated in the 1840s and 1850s, and more arrived after the Civil War. Some Americans had prejudices against Catholics, but the Irish spoke English and the German Catholics benefited from the good reputation of their Protestant countrymen. Although many lacked skills and money, the children of these immigrants were often able to blend into American society. Beginning in the 1870s, Irish and Germans were joined by “new” immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. They arrived in increasing numbers until the outbreak of World War I.
In contrast to “old” immigrants who had come before the Irish and Germans, “new” immigrants were often Catholic or Jewish, and likely to settle in cities rather than on farms. Many came alone, planning to
PEARSONS
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
| Access your Digital Lesson.
86
save some money in the United States and return home to live. They came from Italy, Greece, Poland, Hungary, and Russia in large numbers. After 1900, immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe made up more than 70 percent of all immigrants, up from about 1 percent in the mid-1800s. Many native-born Americans felt threatened by these newcomers with different cultures and languages.
Causes of Immigration The legal immigration of these immigrants changed demographic patterns in the United States. Two types of factors caused this immigration, as they have caused people to immigrate before and after the rush at the turn of the twentieth century. Push factors are those that compel people to leave their homes, such as famine, war, or persecution. For example, in the 1880s, farmers had a difficult time in many parts of the world. In Mexico, Poland, and China, land reform and low prices for crops forced many farmers off their land. Some chose to come to America to make a new start. Beginning in the 1840s, China and eastern Europe experienced repeated wars and political revolutions. These events disrupted economies and created political refugees. One of the largest groups to settle in America were Russian and eastern European Jews. Beginning in the 1880s, they fled religious persecution and came to the United
States to live in safety, and hopefully, achieve a better life.
Another type of factor that leads to immigration is a pull factor. Pull factors are those that draw people to a new place, such as economic opportunity or religious freedom. In addition to a vague hope for opportunity, the United States offered special attractions, including plentiful land and employment. The 1862 Homestead Act and aid from railroad companies made western farmland inexpensive. The railroads even offered reduced fares to get there because they needed customers in the West for their own businesses to succeed. Until 1885, immigrants were recruited from their homelands to build railroads, dig in mines, work in oil fields, harvest produce, or toil in factories. Others hoped to strike it rich by finding gold in the West.
Many others were “chain immigrants,” joining family or friends who had already settled in America. The immigrants who had arrived earlier promised to help the newcomers find work and housing, and sometimes they even sent them tickets for the journey. Immigrants may have lured their families and friends to America with the promise of religious and political freedom. In America, one could worship and vote as one chose without fear of persecution by the government. Many immigrants in the late nineteenth century had
Immigration from Europe, 1870-1910
■	Northern and Western Europe (includes Germany)
■	Southern and Eastern Europe (includes Poland, Austria, Spain, and Italy)

» The number of immigrants increased at the turn of the twentieth century. Analyze Graphs Which region shows the greatest increase in immigration during the time period shown on the graph?
§1 Interactive Chart
Industry and Immigration 87	1.4 The New Immigrants
both push and pull factors that helped them decide to leave the familiar for the unknown.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What details from the reading help explain why immigrants came to America?
Optimism and the
Immigrant Experience
Immigrant experiences varied greatly. However, there were common themes: a tough decision to leave home and family, a hard and costly journey with an uncertain end, and the difficulties of learning a new language and adjusting to a foreign culture. In spite of the difficult road in front of them, many immigrants were optimismic that moving to America would lead to better lives. As one young Russian Jewish woman explained, "America means for an Immigrant a fairy promised land that came out true, a land that gives all they need for their work, a land which gives morality through her churches and education through her free schools and libraries.” Millions of people decided that such possibilities outweighed the risks and set out for the United States.
» Passenger manifests such as this tracked the vital information of immigrants who entered U.S. ports to begin their lives as Americans.
The Long Journey to America Coming to America was a big task. Travelers needed money for passage and to make a new start, although some had only enough for a ticket. The immigrants’ first task was to pack the items that would help them start a new life. Usually, they brought only what they could carry: clothes, maybe a photograph of loved ones, a cherished musical instrument, or the tools of their trade. Next, they made their way to a port of departure, hoping that a ship would be leaving soon. In war-torn areas, just getting to the ship could be dangerous.
By the 1870s, steamships made the trip across the Atlantic safer and faster than ever before. However, it could be an awful voyage. Most immigrants traveled in steerage, the worst accommodations on the ship. Located on the lower decks with no private cabins, steerage was crowded and dirty. Illness spread quickly, while rough weather could force seasick passengers to stay in cramped quarters for days at a time. Under these conditions, even healthy immigrants fell ill, while frail passengers sometimes died. On other voyages, passengers were fortunate to have beautiful weather and no illness onboard.
immigrants Arrive at Ellis and Angel Islands The
first stop for ships at American ports was a processing station where immigration officials decided who could or could not stay in the United States. To enter, immigrants had to be healthy and show that they had money, a skill, or a sponsor to provide for them. Often the sponsor was an industrialist who needed workers. Most European immigrants arrived in New York Harbor. Beginning in 1892, they were processed at the busy, New York Harbor immigration station Ellis Island.
First and second-class passengers were inspected on the ship and released, unless they had obvious medical problems. All third-class, or steerage, passengers were sent to Ellis Island. There, immigration officers conducted legal and medical inspections. Since the shipowners did a preliminary screening before passengers boarded, only about 2 percent of immigrants were denied entry; the rest took a ferry to New York City. In 1907, 10-year-old Edward Corsi arrived with his family from Italy. Years later, when he had become an immigration official, he remembered his first impressions:
I	realized that Ellis Island could inspire both hope and fear. Some of the passengers were afraid . . . ; others were impatient, anxious to get through
Industry and Immigration
J 1.4 The New Immigrants
the inspection and be off to their destinations.
—Edward Corsi, In the Shadow of Liberty, 1935
Chinese and other Asian immigrants crossed the Pacific Ocean, many arriving in San Francisco Bay. Chinese immigrants came in larger numbers in the 1850s to work in mines, on railroads, and on farms and fisheries. After 1882, Chinese immigrants were turned away unless they could prove that they were American citizens or had relatives living in America. Angel Island, a processing center for Chinese immigrants, opened in San Francisco Bay in 1910. If Ellis Island was welcoming to some, Angel Island was always formidable. It was designed to filter out Chinese immigrants. Officials often assumed that Chinese newcomers would misrepresent themselves in order to gain entry.
While most immigrants left Ellis Island within hours, Chinese immigrants at Angel Island were often held for weeks or even months in poor conditions waiting to find out if they would be allowed to stay in the United States. To pass the time and express their frustrations, many carved poems into the walls at Angel Island. One detainee wrote:
Lin, upon arriving in America,
Was arrested, put in a wooden building,
And made a prisoner.
I	was here for one autumn.
The Americans did not allow me to land.
I	was ordered to be deported.
—Taoist from the Tciwn of kon
In addition to San Francisco and New York, thousands of immigrants arrived during this period through other ports on the East Coast such as Boston, Baltimore, and Philadelphia, southern ports such as New Orleans and Galveston, or western ports such as Los Angeles.
fel CHECK UNDERSTANDING What factors made the
trip to America difficult for many immigrants?
» The experience of Asian immigrants like these ones on the West Coast was often less welcoming than that of European immigrants in the East.
Social Issues Affecting Immigrants
Passing immigration inspections was just the first step. Once in America, immigrants immediately faced tough decisions such as where to settle and how to find work. On top of that, most had to learn a new language and new customs. Sometimes immigrants worked with an agent who spoke their language for help finding work and housing, but many agents took advantage of the newcomers to make money. Lucky immigrants had contacts through family and friends who could help them navigate a new and strange world.
Americanization Movement Most new immigrants stayed in cities, close to industrial jobs in factories. There, they often lived in ethnic neighborhoods with people who shared their native language, religion, and culture. Neighbors might have come from the same country, region, or even village.
By 1890, many cities had huge immigrant populations. In San Francisco and Chicago, immigrants made up more than 40 percent of the population. Four out of five inhabitants of New York City were foreign born or had foreign-born parents. While exclusionist policies forced some people to live in ghettoes, these neighborhoods also provided familiarity. Specialty
Industry and Immigration 89	1.4 The New Immigrants
shops, grocers, and clothing stores provided a taste of the food and culture that immigrants had left behind.
In many cities, volunteer institutions known as settlement houses ran Americanization programs, helping newcomers learn English and adopt American dress and diet. At the same time, immigrants helped one another through fraternal associations, such as the Polish National Alliance and the Ancient Order of Hibernians (an Irish Catholic organization). These organizations, based on ethnic or religious identity, provided social services and financial assistance to encourage people to pursue economic opportunity while making them feel more at home in the United States. Many settlement workers and immigrants alike believed that American society was a “melting pot” in which white people of all different nationalities blended to create a single culture. The term came from the name of a play that opened in 1908. This model excluded Asian immigrants, who became targets of social and legal discrimination.
Despite the hopes of settlement workers, immigrants often held on to their traditions. Their children, however, became more Americanized, without memories of homes and families left behind. Some adults reported that they dreamed of returning to their homelands, but most immigrants did not return to their country
» “Looking Backward” shows a man carrying his possessions being confronted by a group of well-dressed men. Analyze Political Cartoons What do the shadows behind the well-dressed men represent?
of origin. Instead, they established fraternal lodges and religious institutions that made them feel more comfortable in their new surroundings.
Catholics, in particular, established churches and parochial schools. In many cities, Irish Catholic churches stood side by side with Italian Catholic churches—each built to serve the needs of its own community. The immigrants’ churches, schools, and institutions reminded native-born Americans that new cultures were changing American society.
New Immigrants Face Hostility Accepting immigrants into American society was not always easy. Newcomers often faced nativism, which was a tendency towards preferring native-born, white Americans over “new” immigrants. During the economic recessions of the late nineteenth century, competition for jobs and housing fueled resentment. Many native-born workers worried that immigrants would work for lower pay. Nativist intellectuals backed up their beliefs with dubious scientific rhetoric that linked immigrants’ physical characteristics to criminal tendencies or lesser intellectual abilities. Social Darwinism also played a role in nativism.
Religious and cultural differences sparked suspicion between native-born Americans and immigrants, as well as between different immigrant ethnic groups. Many Irish, German, Italian, and Polish immigrants practiced Roman Catholicism, and some Protestants feared that Catholics’ first loyalty was to the Pope rather than to American ideals. Anti-semitism in the United States was nothing new—the U.S. Army had briefly expelled all Jews from Grant’s military department in 1862—and the arrival of Jews fleeing persecution in Eastern Europe only complicated the issue. Some native-born Jews worried that these Eastern European immigrants, who were culturally quite different than American or German Jews, would fuel anti-Jewish attitudes and that the newcomers would not be able to Americanize. Some native-born white Protestants would not hire, vote for, or work with Catholics or Jews. Some Americans even signed restrictive contracts agreeing not to rent or sell property to Catholics, Jews, African Americans, or other groups they considered “non-native.”
Policies Restrict Some Immigration Extreme hostility toward Chinese laborers had led Congress to pass the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. The act prohibited immigration by Chinese laborers, limited the civil rights of Chinese immigrants already in the United States, and forbade the naturalization of Chinese residents. The act had unintended negative consequences on the economy, especially in states
Industry and Immigration
90	1.4 The New Immigrants
such as California that relied on cheap Chinese labor. Restricting the immigration of Chinese laborers made it difficult for large single-crop ranches to be profitable. The act also prevented many Chinese in the United States from visiting their families in China, fearing they would not be permitted to return. In 1898, a court case established that Chinese people born in America were United States citizens and could, therefore, come and go freely. However, many immigration officials ignored this ruling.
In the same year, Congress passed another act that prohibited the entry of anyone who was a criminal, immoral, a pauper, or likely to need public assistance. In practice, the law was used to bar many poor or handicapped immigrants. These acts marked the beginning of legislation restricting immigration in the United States. Until then, anti-immigrant activity had been episodic and often short-lived. Immigration became a constant topic of conversation throughout America.
H IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
Why did some Americans want to restrict immigration?
ELPS
ELPS 4.F.3
Read the section titled Americanization Movement. How does the accompanying photo of immigrants relate to the terms Americanization and melting pot? Immigrants Affect
American Society
Despite anti-immigrant sentiment, immigrants of many racial and ethnic groups transformed American society. They fueled industrial growth, acquired citizenship, participated in the democratic process, and made their traditions part of American culture. Mexican Americans in the Southwest developed effective ranching techniques, while Chinese, Irish, and Mexican laborers built the railroads. Equally important, immigrants labored in coal mines, steel mills, textile mills, and factories. Immigrant women worked in factories, as seamstresses, as laundresses, and doing piecework. Others became domestic servants. Though the conditions were harsh and immigrants received few benefits, their labor helped the United States become an economic world power.
Immigrants’ Contributions to American Culture
Immigrants not only helped propel the American economic engine; they also helped shape the evolving American culture. Immigrants from around the world brought their languages, religions, and cuisines to the United States. New foods and the words to describe
» Immigrants arrive at Ellis Island. The labor provided by immigrants like these helped fuel the burgeoning U.S. economy.
Interactive Gallery
them quickly became part of the American vocabulary European Jews introduced bagels; Italian immigrants popularized pasta dishes like spaghetti; German immigrants brought sausages called wieners and Frankfurters. The Chinese introduced a vast knowledge of how to use plants for medicinal purposes as well as foods such as chow mein.
Many individual immigrants made valuable contributions to American culture. Andrew Carnegie, a Scottish immigrant, turned to philanthropy following the sale of his steel empire. He donated some $288 million to social and educational causes in the United States. James Naismith, who moved from Canada to Massachusetts, invented the sport of basketball in the late 1800s. In addition, Alexander Graham Bell, also born in Scotland, revolutionized modern communications with his patent of the telephone in 1876. Belgian immigrant Leo Baekeland transformed technology with the development of modern plastics. Inventor Nikola Tesla, born in what is now Croatia, pioneered discoveries in the generation and transmission of electricity.
immigrants Lead Labor and Social Movements
The lives of many immigrants in the 1800s were very hard. Many lived in overcrowded slums and unhealthy and unsafe tenement housing. Others took dangerous
Industry and Immigration 91	1.4 The New Immigrants
jobs in mines and factories. Increasingly, immigrants demanded a voice, becoming active in labor unions and politics. They lobbied for policies to protect the poor and powerless and used their votes to elect governments favorable to those goals. Some of the political leaders they supported became powerful.
Among these influential activists was Irish immigrant Mary Harris Jones, also known as Mother Jones. She fought for the union rights of coal miners. Samuel Gompers was a Jewish cigar maker from England who became an influential labor organizer and leader. Gompers’ leadership of the American Federation of Labor, through which he organized national unions comprised of local chapters, became the model for unionism in the United States. Union leaders like Gompers and Mother Jones demanded reforms that helped immigrants as well as all laborers. Immigrants expanded the definition of American.
Id IDENTIFY In what ways did immigrants assimilate
to and change American culture?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize What are the push and pull factors that motivate immigration? Give two examples of each.
2.	Infer What was the most likely reason that healthy first and second-class passengers were admitted to the U.S. without being processed at Ellis Island, while those in steerage had to go through processing?
3.	Compare and Contrast How were the roles of settlement houses and fraternal organizations the same? Different?
4.	Summarize How were Chinese immigrants treated in the late 1800s?
5.	Identify Central Issues How did immigrants help the United States become the country it is today?
Industry and Immigration 92
1.4 The New Immigrants
As one historian has noted, America was bom on the farm and moved to the city. In 1860, most Americans lived in rural areas, with only 16 percent living in towns or cities with a population of 8,000 or more. By 1900, that percentage had doubled, and nearly 15 million Americans lived in cities with populations of more than 50,000. Migration to urban areas dining this time changed the demographics, or statistical characteristics, of the population of the United States. This period was the beginning of an upsurge in urbanization that both reflected and fueled massive changes in the way Americans lived.
A
Nation of Cities 3.C, 13.A, 27.A, 28.A
» Objectives
Analyze urban growth in the late 1800s. Explain how technology improved city life.
Evaluate the problems caused by rapid urban growth and ways that city dwellers tried to solve them.
Americans Migrate to Cities
In the late nineteenth century, America experienced a period of urbanization in which the number of cities and people living in them increased dramatically. Still, numbers and statistics do not tell the whole story of how Americans became city folk. Urban people lived differently from rural people.
People in the country lived and worked on farms, either owned by their family or rented from a larger landowner. Their work was driven by the growing cycle. They did a lot of their work outside when weather permitted. In contrast, many people in cities worked for large companies inside factory buildings or sweatshops, rode trolley cars or walked to work, and lived in apartment buildings. Unlike farming, factory work was a year-round, daily grind, and workers had no control over their schedules. Over time, this structured scheduling, combined with the urban way of life, became part of American culture.
City Life Beckons to Immigrants and Migrants America’s major cities were manufacturing and transportation centers clustered in the northeast, on the Pacific coast, and along the waterways of the midwest. Connected by the new railroad lines, cities became magnets for immigrants and rural Americans. The newcomers were attracted by jobs in factories or the service industries. Those with a little money
» Key Terms
urbanization
rural-to-urban
migrants skyscrapers Elisha Otis mass transit suburbs Frederick Law
Olmsted
tenements
cholera
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
93
opened shops. The educated increasingly joined the new middle-class professions, working in downtown offices.
Women’s opportunities, in particular, were dramatically expanded in urban areas. In addition to factory work, they could take in boarders, do piecework, or become domestic servants. Educated women found work as teachers or in offices as secretaries and typists.
While many city jobs offered only hard work for little reward, cities offered variety, promise, and even a bit of glamour. By saving part of their wages, city workers might attain some comforts or perhaps even move into the growing middle class. At the least, they could increase their children's opportunities by sending them to school. While some laborers were trapped in an endless cycle of poverty, only the very poorest were unable to enjoy a somewhat higher standard of living in the late nineteenth century.
Life was hard in the city, but many Americans still loved it. Horace Greeley, a politician and New York City newspaper editor, wrote in the 1860s, “We cannot all live in cities, yet nearly all seem determined to do so.” City churches, theaters, social clubs, and museums offered companionship and entertainment.
Transportation out of the city and to other cities was easily accessible. In this period of growth and
» City streets became crowded as more and more people of various incomes and classes sought their fortunes in big cities.
expansion, some migrants moved from city to city, trying to improve their fortunes.
Cities Attract Immigrants The demographics of many cities changed very quickly as legal immigrants came to the country. By 1900, some urban areas had a population that was more than 40 percent foreign born. Some immigrants found their way to a city through happenstance, while others joined family members or were recruited by companies needing labor. In this way, neighborhoods, cities, regions, and industries often acquired a majority of workers from a particular locale. For example, employees at the steel mills of western Pennsylvania were predominantly Polish, while the textile factories of New York became a center for eastern European Jewish people. Domestic servants in the Northeast were primarily Irish women, while Scandinavians worked in the fish-packing industry of the Pacific Northwest.
Farmers Migrate to Urban Areas Demographic patterns also changed in response to the many rural-to-urban migrants who moved to cities in the 1890s. For many rural Americans, making a living on a farm had become increasingly difficult. In addition to unpredictable weather conditions, isolation, and limited opportunities, farmers faced economic struggles that hindered their livelihoods. New technologies enabled farmers to produce more crops, but the greater supply caused prices to drop. These factors, combined with the excitement and variety of city life, sparked widespread rural-to-urban migration. However, the move from farm to factory could be wrenching. Former agricultural workers often found themselves working in dim light and narrow confines. The pace of work was controlled by rigid schedules, with no slow seasons. However, factory work paid wages in cash, which was sometimes scarce on family farms.
Midwestern cities such as Minneapolis-St. Paul and Chicago exploded in the decade between 1880 and 1890. Many of the newcomers were immigrants or migrants from the rural West. They were attracted by land but also by economic opportunities.
African Americans moving out of the rural South were also part of the migration, although on a smaller scale. The majority of the migrating African Americans stayed in southern cities, but the few black migrants to northern and western cities paved the way for a much larger migration after World War I.
U CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did many people choose to move to cities?
©
Interactive Gallery
Industry and Immigration 94
A
Nation of Cities Comparison of Rural and Urban Populations
» The percentage of the population living in urban areas increased relative to those living in rural areas over several decades. Analyze Graphs What factors account for the demographic shift from rural to urban areas over these decades?
Technology Improves City Life
As cities swelled in size, politicians and workers struggled to keep up with the demands of growth to provide water, sewers, schools, and safety. American innovators stepped up to the task by developing new technologies to improve living conditions. The middle and upper classes benefited most from the innovations, but every city dweller was affected. Electric trolleys and subways, building codes, and other innovations increased the pace of urbanization and economic development in cities across the country.
Engineers Build Skyward with Steel The cities of the late nineteenth century began to take their modern form. For the first time, skylines became recognizable by their skyscrapers. Steel was first mass-produced to create railroad rails, but architects and engineers realized the possibilities of using this strong and resilient metal for the construction of buildings. Skyscrapers of ten stories and taller had steel frames and used artistic designs to magnify their imposing height. Inside, they provided office space in cities that had no room left on the ground. Increased office space in turn allowed more businesses to establish themselves and more people to live in closer proximity to each other, which further stimulated economic development in urban areas. But tall buildings were only realistic
because of other new technology. In the 1850s, Elisha Otis developed a safety elevator that would not fall if the lifting rope broke. Central heating systems were also improved in the 1870s. Technological innovations like these, dramatically improved the standard of living in the United States.
In these years, architecture emerged as a specialized career. The American Institute of Architecture was established in 1857 to professionalize the practice. Its members encouraged specific education and official licensing in order to become an architect. These professionals designed the buildings that were quickly becoming hallmarks of urban life: public schools, libraries, train stations, financial institutions, office buildings, and residences.
Electricity Powers New Industries and Economic Development In 1888, Richmond, Virginia, introduced a revolutionary invention: streetcars powered by overhead electric cables. Within a decade, every major city followed. It was the beginning of a transportation revolution. New industries revolving around mass transit—public systems that could carry large numbers of people fairly inexpensively—reshaped the nation’s cities. Commuter rail lines had carried people to areas in and around cities since the 1870s. However, they were powered by coal-driven steam engines, making them slow, unreliable, and dirty. Some cities used trolleys pulled by horses, which were slower and
Industry and Immigration | 95 ;
A
Nation of Cities I

» Electric cable cars carried passengers all around the city.
Interactive Illustration
» Architect Daniel Burnham designed the "White City" for the 1893 World’s Fair Columbian Exhibition in Chicago, Illinois.

left horse waste all over the streets. Electricity, on the other hand, was quiet, clean, and efficient.
Electric cars also ran on a reliable schedule and could carry many more people than horse-drawn carts. These advances in transportation were all made possible by the free enterprise system, which applied technological innovation to the needs of daily life.
Electric cable cars were not practical in every city however. Cables strung in narrow streets could block fire trucks, and traffic congestion often prevented streetcars from running on schedule. In 1897, Boston solved this problem by running the cars underground in the nation’s first subway system. New York City followed in 1904. Electric cable cars and subways allowed urban economies to expand even faster. These new industries efficiently moved people in and around cities, making it possible for urban populations to grow at an increasingly rapid pace.
Middle and upper class people who could afford transit fares moved away from the noise and dirt of the industrial city. They built housing in the cleaner, quieter perimeter, known as streetcar suburbs. From there, they rode mass transit into the center of the city to work, shop, or be entertained, returning to their homes in the evening. Poorer people remained in city centers so that they could walk to work.
City Planners Lay Out Cities As cities grew larger and more complex, architectural firms expanded to offer city-planning services designed to make cities more functional and beautiful, even as their populations skyrocketed. Architect Daniel Burnham designed his version of the ideal city for Chicago’s 1893 World’s Fair Columbian Exhibition, a fair held to commemorate Columbus’s arrival in the Americas on the event’s 400th anniversary. Called the White City, the integrated design included boulevards, parks, buildings, and even electric streetlights.
Mass transit allowed city planners to segregate parts of the city by zoning, or designating certain areas for particular functions. Through the 1890s, cities embraced designs that had separate zones for heavy industry, financial institutions, and residences. They also built public spaces, such as public libraries, government buildings, and universities.
Parks and recreational spaces were one of the most important aspects of city planning. Since the 1850s, cities had built parks as a solution to some of the problems of urban growth. Philadelphia purchased areas along the Schuylkill River to protect the city’s water supply from industrial pollution. They hired landscape engineer Frederick Law Olmsted to design Fairmount Park. Olmsted had also designed New York City s Central Park and similar parks in
Industry and Immigration 96	1.5 A Nation of Cities
Detroit, Michigan; Washington, D.C.; and Palo Alto, California.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
How did public transportation change urban areas?
ELPS 1.C/I
Read the section titled Electricity Powers New Industries and Economic Development with a partner. Create a concept map together that organizes the text’s key ideas and vocabulary.
ELPS
Urban Living Creates
Social Issues
Urbanization led to many social issues caused by overcrowding and poverty. In 1890, New York’s Lower East Side had a population of more than 700 people per acre. As immigrants and rural migrants arrived, they crowded into neighborhoods that already seemed to be overflowing.
Housing Conditions Worsen As newcomers moved into urban areas, those who could not afford to ride mass transit had to live within walking distance of the industrial plants and factories where they worked. Housing in densely populated neighborhoods was often aging and usually overcrowded. Most urban workers lived in tenements: low-cost multifamily housing designed to squeeze in as many families as possible. Sometimes, several families lived in one apartment or even one room. They used the space for sewing clothes or doing other piecework to earn money. For those who had moved from rural areas, adapting to city life could be difficult. Typical rural areas had a small town or village with several small family farms located in the surrounding few miles. People had little contact with others from outside the community, but had daily access to acres of land and open air.
Tenement owners usually lived in the suburbs or in fashionable downtown areas, away from the industrial grime. However, they built apartments for desperate people who had little choice about where they lived. With few windows and little sanitation, tenements were unhealthy and dangerous. In 1890, journalist Jacob Riis drew attention to the plight of New York tenement dwellers:
Go into any of the ’respectable’ tenement neighborhoods . , . you shall come away agreeing [that] . , . life there does not seem worth living. . . - [T] he airshaft . . . seems always so busy
» Most immigrants and rural migrants could only afford to live in poorer urban neighborhoods. Infer Why would life in an urban setting be both a blessing and a curse for new arrivals?
©
Interactive 3-D Model
letting out foul stenches . , . that it has no time to earn its name by bringing down fresh air.
-Jacob Riis, II
Public Health Concerns Cities in the late 1800s were filthy. Unpaved streets were snarled with ruts and littered with trash and even dead horses that were left to rot. Alleys between tenements were clogged with food waste and trash. Only the newest urban dwellings had indoor toilets, and the shared toilets in tenements often overflowed. These conditions were perfect for breeding epidemics, posing danger to everyone. For example, cholera, a particularly dangerous illness, reached epidemic proportions several times in the United States in the 1800s, killing thousands.
Cholera spreads when people drink contaminated water. Fresh water supplies and less burdened sanitary systems in rural areas often prevented these epidemics from happening. In urban areas, governments and city planners began to take steps to improve living conditions.
During the 1880s, planners attempted to regulate housing, sanitation, sewers, and public health. They
Industry and Immigration
A
Nation of Cities » The Great Chicago Fire blazes across land and water.
century drew to a close, many cities developed professional firefighting teams.
At night, the streets were dangerous, yet many factory workers had to travel to and from work in the dark. In response to this challenge, professional, uniformed city police forces replaced the lone constable and the decentralized neighborhood watch. The new officers were civil servants who took exams and regularly patrolled city neighborhoods. They were aided in their task of ensuring safety by new electric streetlights.
However, the police were unable to overcome the challenge of tension between urban groups. In every big city, communities clashed along ethnic and racial fault lines. Police allowed immigrants to sleep in the station houses to avoid the violence in the streets. Even very young boys joined neighborhood gangs for safety.
Race, class, and neighborhood loyalties and conflicts continued to define neighborhood life for many generations.
Q IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What issues created by urban living made life difficult for many city dwellers?
began to take water from reservoirs that were separate from the polluted rivers and lakes. In the next decade, urban standards of living improved as a new filtration system improved water quality even more. Private companies competed for lucrative contracts to manage water distribution. Especially in the Southwest, where water was in short supply, questions of who should profit from water delivery sent city planners into a frenzy.
Safety in Cities In addition to public health concerns, cities also faced the dangers of fire, crime, and conflict. Even one careless act could have devastating consequences in crowded housing.
Open fireplaces and gas lighting started fires that quickly swept through a city. A fire destroyed Chicago in 1871, killing between 200 to 300 people. It also left more than 100,000 people homeless. As the nineteenth
ASSESSMENT
1.	Support Ideas with Examples Use examples to support the claim that women had a number of options for work in cities.
2.	Identify Central Ideas What factors encouraged the rural-to-urban migration of farmers in the 1890s?
3.	Draw Conclusions Why was it important for architecture to become a specialized, professional career in the late 1800s?
4.	Generate Explanations Why was public health a major concern in large cities during the 1880s?
5.	Analyze Information How did urban gangs that were such a source of tension in the late 1800s reflect wider social problems?

Industry and Immigration 98
A
Nation of Cities Novelist Mark Twain satirized American life in his 1873 novel, The Gilded Age. He depicted American society as gilded, or having a rotten core covered with gold paint. Most Americans were not as cynical. The dizzying array of things to do and buy convinced the growing middle class that modern America was in a true golden age.
Once the bicycle was mass-produced, it became a popular mode of transportation for people who lived in the city.
Interactive Flipped Video
New Ways of Life
Free Enterprise Improves Life
Still, Twain’s label stuck, and historians refer to the last decades of the nineteenth century as “the Gilded Age.” The new lifestyle that middle-class Americans adopted during this period—shopping, sports, and reading popular magazines and newspapers—contributed to the development of a commonly shared American culture that would persist for the next century.
Industrialization and urbanization changed the lives of American workers. The application of scientific discoveries and technological innovations by the free enterprise system improved the standard of living in the United States. Driven by entrepreneurs, American businesses were able to create products and services that made daily life easier and more fun for many people. Mass produced materials and products lowered the prices of many goods, enabling ordinary Americans to purchase items that previously had been out of reach.
In addition, more people began to work for wages —in offices, on public transportation systems, or in factories as laborers and foremen. Even some farmers found themselves with extra time and cash as machinery improved and they were easily able to grow and sell more crops. At the same time, more products were available than ever before and at lower prices. This led to a culture of conspicuous consumerism, in which people wanted and bought the many new products on the market. All but the very poorest working-class laborers
» Objectives
Explain how technology, new types of stores, and marketing changed Americans’ standard of living.
Analyze mass culture and education in the late 1800s.
Describe new popular cultural movements in the late 1800s.
» Key Terms
Mark Twain Gilded Age conspicuous
consumerism mass culture Joseph Pulitzer William Randolph
Hearst Horatio Alger vaudeville Tin Pan Alley
c
PEARSON 1
SI realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
99
were able to do and buy more than they would have in the past.
New Ways of Shopping Expanding on a trend that was developing in Britain, France, Russia, and other countries, Rowland H. Macy opened what he called a department store in New York in 1858. It soon became the largest single store in America and served as a model for many more U.S. stores. Its sales methods— widespread advertising, a variety of goods organized into “departments,” and high-quality items at fair prices—became the standard in large urban stores. By the 1870s, many big cities had department stores: Jordan Marsh in Boston, Marshall Field in Chicago, and Wanamaker’s in Philadelphia.
John Wanamaker developed innovative ways to keep customers satisfied. He was the first to offer a money back guarantee. In addition, he placed large newspaper advertisements to attract customers. Later, Wanamaker became Postmaster General. In that position, he lowered the bulk shipping rates and began free delivery to rural areas, which led to a boom in the mail-order catalog business.
While department stores pioneered new marketing and sales techniques, companies began to create trademarks with distinctive logos that consumers would recognize. For the first time, consumers began
» The carpet sweeper was a new invention of the Gilded Age and a status symbol among the middle class.
to notice and buy brand name goods. Long-distance shipping allowed consumers in Atlanta, Cincinnati, and San Francisco to purchase the same products.
Technology and Free Enterprise Lead to Higher Standards of Living After the Civil War, Americans began to measure success by what they could buy. Equating purchasing power with a higher social status, middle-class and some working-class consumers rushed to update their wardrobe with new clothing styles and to modernize their homes with new technologies, such as the carpet sweeper and the telephone. Technological innovations drove the development of new industries, which in turn created more jobs; wealth; and discretionary, or extra, income in consumers’ hands. The cost of living decreased in part because factory-manufactured products often cost less than old-style handmade goods. Scientific discoveries, including better sanitation and medical care, contributed to better health, causing life expectancy to climb. The result was more middle-class Americans with more money to spend and greater opportunities to spend it on things they chose rather than just on things they needed.
The end of the nineteenth century is sometimes called the Victorian Era, after the queen of England. The rich were richer than ever before, and the middle class tried to imitate their lifestyle. Factory-produced clothing and prepackaged food gave homemakers a break from some activities, but rising expectations of cleanliness and more complicated meals meant that they spent more time on those tasks.
Other luxuries, like indoor plumbing, also became common. On the other hand, many women had to work outside their homes to achieve a middle-class lifestyle.
Life changed for men, as well. Innovations in public transportation allowed families to live at a distance from the dirt, noise, and bustle of industry. However, it often meant that men became commuters, leaving home early in the morning and returning late in the evening. Still, their culture taught them that hard work would bring the reward of more discretionary income with which to purchase the exciting products newly available on the market.
Eg? IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS How did consumption
patterns change in the late nineteenth century?
ELPS
ELPS 4.F.5
Examine the photograph associated with this text. Then read the first paragraph an write a sentence describing life during the Gilded Age. Ml Interactive Illustration
Industry and Immigration 100	1.6 New Ways of Life
A
Mass Culture Develops One of the effects of the spread of transportation, communication, and advertising was that Americans all across the country became more and more alike in their consumption patterns. Rich and poor could wear the same clothing styles, although the quality of that clothing varied. Household gadgets, toys, and food preferences were often the same from house to house. This phenomenon is known as mass culture.
The Newspaper Industry Expands The newspapers of the Gilded Age both reflected and helped create mass culture. Between 1870 and 1900, the number of newspapers increased from about 600 to more than 1,600. No one knew more about newspapers than Joseph Pulitzer, a Hungarian immigrant who had fought in the Civil War. Active in Missouri politics in the 1870s, Pulitzer moved to New York in the 1880s, where he started a morning paper, the World. It was so successful that Pulitzer soon started publishing the Evening World. The papers were inexpensive because they were supported in part by businesses that placed advertisements in their pages.
The job of a newspaper, Pulitzer believed, was to inform people and to stir up controversy. His newspapers were sensationalistic, filled with exposes of political corruption, comics, sports, and illustrations. They were designed to get the widest possible readership, rather than simply to report the news. Pulitzer soon found a competitor in William Randolph Hearst, whose Morning Journal employed the same tactics. Their sensational styles sold many papers.
At the same time, ethnic and special-interest publishers catered to the array of urban dwellers, especially immigrants. The Philadelphia Tribune, begun in the 1880s, targeted the African American market. In New York, there were six Italian-language papers by 1910. Each sold more than 10,000 copies daily. The Yiddish-language daily paper, The Forward, sold 120,000 copies.
The Arts Reflect the Characteristics and Issues of the Times Mark Twain was not the only author to take a critical look at society during the Gilded Age. Novels that explored harsh realities were popular. Stephen Crane exposed the slums of New York in his Maggie: A Girl of the Streets (1893). He later wrote The Bed Badge of Courage, which explored the psychological aspects of war. Other novelists focused on moral issues. Horatio Alger wrote about characters who succeeded by hard work, while Henry James and Edith Wharton questioned a society based upon rigid rules of conduct. Playwrights such as John Augustin Daly mirrored Twain’s disapproval of the Gilded Age.
» Joseph Pulitzer’s Evening World enjoyed a large readership.
Musicians and songwriters, who explored the realities of everyday life, also flourished in the Gilded Age. A section of New York City, which would eventually be named Tin Pan Alley, became the center of the music publishing industry and the name of the style of popular music developed there. These music publishers provided sheet music that Americans throughout the country could enjoy in their homes. Ragtime, a forerunner to jazz music, was also gaining popularity. Developed by African Americans, ragtime was upbeat and highly rhythmic, which some people found disturbing.
The vitality of city life also inspired graphic artists. Philadelphia’s Thomas Eakins painted a larger-than-life illustration of a medical operation, complete with exposed flesh. Painter Robert Henri and his associates developed a style of painting known as the Ashcan School that dramatized the starkness and squalor of New York City slums and street life.
The Growth of Public Schools Newspapers and literature flourished, in part, because more Americans could read. Public education expanded rapidly. Slowly in the South and rapidly in the North, grade-school education became compulsory. Many locales provided public high schools, although only a small percentage of young people attended. In 1870, the nation had only
1.6 New Ways of Life
Industry and Immigration
» African American children had new opportunities as students in the Gilded Age. However, they were in segregated classrooms with resources that lagged behind those available to white children.
» Amusement parks attracted large crowds. Compare How do you think today’s amusement parks compare to those of the Gilded Age?
a few hundred high schools; in 1910, there were more than 5,000. Kindergartens also appeared as a way to help working-class mothers. As a result, the literacy rate climbed to nearly 90 percent by 1900.
Schools taught courses in science, woodworking, and drafting, providing skills that workers needed in budding industries. The curriculum also included civics and business training. Urban leaders counted on schools to help Americanize immigrants, teaching them English and shaping them into good citizens.
Teacher-training schools responded to the call. Not only did they grow in number, but they also developed more sophisticated ideas about teaching and learning. Reformer John Dewey sought to enhance student learning by introducing new teaching methods.
Institutions of higher education also began to provide specialized training for urban careers. Today’s liberal arts curriculum was largely designed during this era. A few of the new careers—teaching, social work, and nursing—were open to middle-class women. This led to an upsurge in women’s colleges, since women were barred from many men’s colleges. However, many state universities began to accept women into their classes.
Limited access to white institutions led to a growth in schools and colleges for African Americans. Across the South, the number of normal schools, agricultural colleges, and industrial-training schools mushroomed as the children of newly freed slaves set out to prepare to compete as free people.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What details can you use to identify the changes in mass culture that occurred in the late nineteenth century?
ELPS 1.D.1
Read aloud the first paragraph under the heading The Growth of Public Schools with a partner. Try to explain unfamiliar words to each other by offering synonyms, using hand gestures, and providing other examples of how the words are used.
AF ELPS
A
Boom in Popular Entertainment
Urban areas with thousands of people became centers for new types of entertainment in the Gilded Age. Clubs, music halls, and sports venues attracted large crowds with time and money to spend. The middle class began to take vacations at this time, while the working classes looked for opportunities to escape from the busy city, even if just for a day.
gl Interactive Gallery
Amusement Parks Attract City Dwellers In 1884, Lamarcus Thompson opened the world’s first roller
Industry and Immigration 102	1.6 New Ways of Life
coaster. At ten cents a ride, Thompson averaged more than $600 per day in income. The roller coaster was the first ride to open at Coney Island—the nation’s best-known amusement park—at the edge of the Atlantic Ocean in New York City. Soon, Coney Island added a hotel and a horseracing track. Similar amusement parks, located within easy reach of a city, were built around the country.
While earlier generations had enjoyed a picnic in the park, the new urbanite—even those with limited means—willingly paid the entry fees for these new, more thrilling, entertainments. Urban residents of all ethnicities and races could be found at these amusement spots, though each group was usually relegated to a particular area of the parks. The parks represented a daylong vacation for city laborers who could not afford to take the long seaside vacations enjoyed by the wealthy.
Audiences Flock to Outdoor Events In 1883, “Buffalo Bill” Cody threw a Fourth of July celebration near his ranch in Nebraska. He offered prizes for competitions in riding, roping, and shooting. So many people attended that Cody took his show on the road, booking performances at points along railroad lines. Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show toured America and Europe, shaping the world’s romantic notion of the American West. The show included markswoman Annie Oakley and the Sioux leader Sitting Bull, as well as displays of riding, roping, and horse-and-rider stunts.
Religious-inspired entertainment also grew in popularity. The Chautauqua Circuit, a kind of summer camp that opened in 1874, sponsored lectures and entertainment along New York’s Chautauqua Lake. It began as a summer school for Methodist Sunday school teachers but soon became—and remains today—something of a cross between community college and a country fair, with lectures on intellectual subjects, music, exotic food, and crowd-pleasing special attractions. Soon, Chautauqua leaders were transporting their tents to small towns all across America to deliver comic storytelling, bands and singers, and lectures on politics or morals. A family might stay at a camp for as long as two weeks. Many people saw their first “moving pictures,” or movies, in a Chautauqua tent. Theodore Roosevelt called Chautauqua “the most American thing in America.”
New Forms of Urban Entertainment Cities, with their dense populations, offered many glitzy shows and various types of entertainment. At first, vaudeville shows were a medley of musical drama, songs, and off-color comedy. In 1881, an entrepreneur named Tony Pastor opened a theater in New York, aiming to provide
» Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show was a popular outdoor show in the late nineteenth century.
families with a "straight, clean variety show.” By 1900, a few companies owned chains of vaudeville theaters, stretching all across the country.
Performance theater was not the only option. Movie theaters, called nickelodeons, soon introduced motion pictures, charging a nickel for admission. Films such as The Great Train Robbery became wildly popular. In music halls, ragtime bands created a style of music that would later evolve into jazz.
Some cities—including Philadelphia, Chicago, Atlanta, Buffalo, and Omaha—hosted exhibitions of new technology and entertainment. These extravaganzas stretched Americans’ imaginations to see a future filled with machines and gadgets and other technological innovations that would continue to improve their lives. Millions of visitors saw everything from steam engines to typewriters and telephones. In many ways, the new amusements mirrored urban life, filled with variety, drama, bright colors, and a very fast pace.
Organized Sports Attract New Fans Baseball— America’s national sport—had been around for a number of years before the National League organized it into a business in 1876. After that, baseball soon became a public show. Major cities built stadiums that seated thousands, like Boston’s Fenway Park.
Industry and Immigration {103*1 1.6 New Ways of Life
» Pitcher Cy Young won 511 games over his career and helped the Boston Red Sox win the 1903 World Series.
Stadium billboards advertising everything from other sports to toothpaste and patent medicines helped pay for the extravaganza. There were even baseball songs. The most famous—Take Me Out to the Ball Game— was written in 1908. Until 1887, teams sometimes included African American players. After the Chicago White Stockings refused to play against a team that had a black player, separate African American teams emerged by 1900.
Like baseball, horse racing, bicycle racing, boxing, and football became popular spectator sports. University football clubs formed on campuses around the country, but they faced a public outcry at the violence of the game. Rule changes made it into the sport we know today. Meanwhile, James Naismith invented basketball at the Springfield, Massachusetts, YMCA in 1891. Heroes emerged in major sports, particularly in boxing, as immigrants and ethnic Americans rooted for the boxers who shared their background.
BI CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Identify changes that redefined popular entertainment in the late nineteenth century. ASSESSMENT
1.	Infer Why was Mark Twain so cynical about American society in the 1870s that he called this period “the Gilded Age?”
2.	Identify Central Issues How did the middle-class life change during the Victorian Era?
3.	Cite Evidence What evidence can you cite to support the idea that the growth of the newspaper industry is related to increasing public school attendance?
4.	Generate Explanations What factors led to the increase in the number of colleges and universities during the Gilded Age?
5.	Identify Cause and Effect Why were amusement parks so successful during the Gilded Age?

1.6 New Ways of Life
Industry and Immigration 104
TEKS ASSESSMENT
1.	Explain Economic Effects of Technological Innovations Explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations in the production
of petroleum-based products on the economic development of the United States. Write a paragraph describing how innovations in drilling for oil affected petroleum production and the growth of the oil industry. Consider such things as the technological innovation developed by Edwin Drake, how and why this innovation was important to the growth of the oil industry, and what new products resulted from increased petroleum production. 27. A
2.	Analyze the Rise of Entrepreneurship Under the Free-Enterprise System Analyze economic issues related to free enterprise and the rise of entrepreneurship. Write a paragraph that analyzes how entrepreneurship thrived under the system of free enterprise. Define the terms entrepreneurship and free enterprise. Then describe the steps that entrepreneurs took to survive in the free-enterprise system. 3.B
3.	Understand How Free Enterprise Drives Technological Innovation Understand how the free-enterprise system drove technological innovation in the late 1800s. Write a paragraph explaining how free enterprise encouraged technological innovation in the late 1800s. Consider the roles of entrepreneurship in encouraging innovation, business leaders in encouraging innovation, patents in protecting profits, and consumers in creating demand and encouraging innovation. 28.C
4.	Compare Impact of Energy on Way of
Life Compare the impact of electrical energy on the American way of life over time. Write a paragraph comparing how electricity improved the American way of life over time. Consider how people’s ways of life were changed by the work of Thomas Edison and his team and by the work of George Westinghouse. 10.C
5.	Understand Impact of Mass Production Understand the impact of the technological innovation of mass production, including the productivity enhancements for business and labor resulting from its application
in the workplace. Write a paragraph summarizing your understanding of how the application of mass production impacted workers, businesses, and consumers. Identify what the term mass production describes. Then describe how the application of mass production affects worker productivity, how the change in productivity benefits businesses, and how the application of mass production benefits consumers. 27.C
6.	Analyze Farm Issues in the South Analyze economic issues related to southern farms by using appropriate skills to interpret a graph showing wholesale prices for cotton in the late 1800s. Write a paragraph analyzing how reliance on cotton affected the economy of
the South in the decades following the Civil War. Consider the appeal of cash crops, what the graph below indicates about cotton prices following the war, what factors affected the price of cotton, and what effect these farm issues had on the South’s economy. 3.B, 29.H
Wholesale Price of Cotton, 1865-1890
Industry and Immigration 105
TEKS ASSESSMENT
7.	Explain Technological Innovations in Agriculture Explain how the need to produce and transport more food led to scientific and technological innovations related to agriculture. Write a paragraph that explains how technological innovations helped farmers and shippers meet the demand for food. Consider such things as the effect of new machinery on food production and farm laborers and the effect of new technology on how and where food was shipped. 27.B
8.	Understand the Applications of Management Innovations Understand the applications of the management innovations of horizontal integration and vertical integration and use correct social studies terminology to explain the innovations. Write a paragraph describing the management innovations of horizontal and vertical integration. Be sure to define the terms horizontal integration, vertical integration, monopoly, and trust. Then describe the processes
of horizontal integration and vertical integration and how each process helps businesses gain an advantage. 27.C, 30.B
9.	Evaluate Contributions of Andrew Carnegie Evaluate the contributions of Andrew Carnegie to business and society. Write a paragraph describing the contributions of Andrew Carnegie. Evaluate why Carnegie is considered a captain of industry by reflecting on how he strengthened his companies, how his efforts strengthened the economy, and how he used his money to help society. 24.B
10.	Analyze Points of View on Big Business Analyze economic issues related to the pros and cons of big business by identifying points of view on big business. Write a paragraph identifying the pros and cons expressed in the two points of view below. Identify each point expressed by the historians and relate each point to a specific pro or con. 3.B, 29.G
When Rockefeller founded Standard Oil, kerosene was 30 cents a gallon. Twenty years later, Rockefeller had almost a 90 percent market share and kerosene was only eight cents a gallon. Customers were the real winners here, because Rockefeller's size allowed him to cut costs. . . ,
—-Historian Burton W, Folsom, Jr.
To organize and exploit the resources of a nation upon a giant scale . . . and to do this only in the name of an uncontrolled appetite for private profit—here surely is . . . whence so much disaster, outrage, and misery has flowed.
—Historian Matthew Josephson
11.	Analyze Social Issues Affecting Philanthropy Analyze social issues affecting the philanthropy of industrialists. Write a paragraph analyzing how the philanthropy of Carnegie, Rockefeller, and Vanderbilt was linked to their views about achieving wealth. Consider what kinds of institutions they established with their wealth and what they thought these institutions could accomplish. 3.C
12.	Analyze Causes and Effects of Social Darwinism Analyze causes and effects of social issues such as Social Darwinism. Write a paragraph analyzing the causes and effects of Social Darwinism. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: On what biological theory was Social Darwinism loosely based? Who developed Social Darwinism, and what was the theory’s basic idea? What beliefs and conditions was Social Darwinism used to justify? 6.A
13.	Describe Benefits and Costs of Sherman Antitrust
Act Describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of the Sherman Antitrust Act. Write a paragraph describing the benefits and costs of the Sherman Antitrust Act. Include what the act outlawed; the intended benefits of the act; and the costs, including any unintended costs, of applying the act. 15.B
14.	Describe Immigrant Optimism Describe the optimism of the many immigrants who sought a better life in America. Write a paragraph describing why the young woman in the quotation below might have felt so optimistic about immigrating to the United States. Consider such things as the push factors that caused Russian and eastern European Jews to leave their countries and the pull factors that drew them to the United States. 3.D
America means for an immigrant a fairy promised land that came out true, a land that gives all they need for their work, a land which gives morality through her churches and education through her free schools and libraries.
-—young Russian Jewish woman
15.	Explain Actions to Expand Economic Opportunities for Minorities Explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities for immigrants from ethnic and religious minorities. Write a paragraph explaining how different organizations tried to expand economic opportunities for immigrants from ethnic and religious minorities. Consider the efforts of settlement houses and fraternal orders. 26.A
Industry and Immigration 106
Foreign-Born Population in Major Cities
100 .1 90 | 80 §■ 70
3	50
2 40 3	30
« 20 I 10 0
■	1870
■	1890
■	1910
New York Chicago San Francisco Boston Cleveland Philadelphia St. Louis
SOURCE: U.S.
Census Bureau V

16.	Discuss Americanization Movement Discuss the Americanization movement to assimilate immigrants into the culture of the United States. Write a paragraph discussing the purpose of Americanization programs. Address the following questions: Who ran the programs? What were they designed to accomplish? How might the “melting pot” view of U.S. society have influenced the programs? 26.B
17.	Analyze Causes of Changing Demographic Patterns in Cities Analyze the causes of changing demographic patterns in cities resulting from legal immigration to the United States by using appropriate skills to interpret and analyze a graph showing the percentage of foreign-born people in major cities.
Write a paragraph about how immigration changed the populations of cities in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Consider the following questions in your paragraph: What can you tell from the graph above about the size of the immigrant population in the different cities? Why might immigrant populations be high in New York City and San Francisco? How did “new” immigrants differ from “old” immigrants in the places they settled? How might “chain immigrants” and other factors have contributed to the size of immigrant populations in cities? 13.B, 29.H
18.	Explain Effects of Chinese Exclusion Act Explain how the foreign policy known as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 affected economic issues and Chinese immigrants. Write a paragraph explaining the effect
of the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 on Chinese immigrants and the U.S. economy. Identify what the act restricted and explain the negative effects on Chinese immigrants and the U.S. economy. 15.C
19.	Explain How Immigrants Shaped American Culture Create an oral presentation that explains how immigrants from various racial and ethnic groups shaped American culture. Create an oral presentation explaining how different immigrants and immigrant groups contributed to American culture in the areas of languages, religions, food, and sports; science, technology, and medicine; and politics, labor movements, and social movements. 26.C, 30.A
20.	Analyze Social Issues Affecting Women Analyze the effects of urbanization and rising standards of living on the lives of women by summarizing information. Write a paragraph summarizing some of the effects of urbanization and rising standards of living on the lives of women in the late 1800s. Consider the following questions: What opportunities for work did women find in urban areas? What difficult conditions did women face in urban areas? How did rising standards of living change the lives of middle-class women? 3.C, 29.B
Industry and Immigration 107 >
7
TEKS ASSESSMENT
Comparison of Rural and Urban Populations
21.	Pose and Answer Questions About Geographic Patterns and Distributions Pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on graphs comparing rural and urban populations. Write and answer questions about the geographic distributions and patterns shown on the graphs above, such as, how is population distributed between rural and urban in 1860? in 1900? what pattern of change in rural-to-urban migration do the graphs show? 13.A, 31.B
22.	Analyze How Transportation Improved Standard of Living Analyze how technological innovations
in transportation and their application by the free-enterprise system improved the standard of living in the nineteenth century. Write a paragraph analyzing how the development and application of advances in transportation improved people’s standard of living in the nineteenth century. Define standard of living, explain how free enterprise affected innovation, describe how railroads and new forms of transportation fostered industry and trade, and analyze the effects of better transportation on people’s lives. 28.A
23.	Describe How Art Reflects History Describe how the characteristics and issues of the Gilded Age were reflected in graphic art. Write a paragraph describing how art in the Gilded Age reflected society. Be sure to consider the paintings of Thomas Eakins and Robert Henri and the Ashcan School. 25.A
24.	Describe the Positive and Negative Impacts of Literature Describe the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of Gilded-Age literature. Write a paragraph describing the positive and negative impact of Horatio Alger’s Ragged Dick and Mark Twain’s The Gilded Age. Identify the message of both novels as described in the text and infer why each novel might have both a positive and a negative impact on people’s views. 25.B
25.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: How do science and technology affect society? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
Industry and Immigration 108
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE
' !!'
! i
' i r Si1
Industry and Immigration
109
1 Which of the following represents a benefit of the United States government’s laissez-faire policies toward business during the late 1800s?
A
Strong government regulation spurred the rise of entrepreneurship. B
Minimal government regulation encouraged investment and growth. C
Strong government regulation increased wages for unskilled workers. D
Minimal government regulation encouraged Congress to ban protective tariffs. Per Capita Income in the South, 1860 and 1880
1860
r		
L 74%	j	
k		
South
Rest of Nation
1880
Distribution of Income	Distribution of Income
SOURCE:
American Economic History, ed. Seymour E. Harris (1961) 2 Which of these economic conditions contributed to the change in the distribution of income in the South between 1860 and 1880 shown on the graphs above?
F
Falling prices for cotton G
Increasing economic diversity H Increasing number of large plantations J Declining natural resources for industry Industry and Immigration 110
1
Access additional practice questions
HORIZONTAL INTEGRATION:
ELIMINATE THE COMPETITION
Six rival companies become the foundation of a larger, more efficient Standard Oil Company.
Atlantic Refining Company, OH
Clark, Payne & Company, OH
Hanna, Baslington & Company, OH
$
PURCHASED BY
ROCKEFELLER
Standard Oil Company
L i
MODERN COMPANIES THAT ARE HORIZONTALLY INTEGRATED
United Airlines, Hewlett Packard, Bank of America 3	Which statement describes the impact of the management innovation shown in this illustration? A The use of horizontal integration enabled Standard Oil to control labor costs.
B
The use of horizontal integration enabled Standard Oil to control the price of oil. C
The use of monopoly trusts enabled Standard Oil to control the supply chain. D
The use of monopoly cartels enabled Standard Oil to control production costs. •	Enabled Congress to regulate trade between states and end monopolistic practices
•	Tried to eliminate hidden monopolies (trusts) that affected trade
•	Enabled competitors to sue trustees of rival companies for loss of revenue
—■JESS........................J
•	Difficult to enforce
•	Lacked clear definition of the practices that resulted in a restraint of trade
•	More often used successfully against labor unions than monopolies
4 This chart describes the benefits and costs associated with the—
F
Sherman Antitrust Act H Interstate Commerce Commission G
American Federation of Labor J Industrial Commission on Capital and Labor If you have trouble with...
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	1-1	1.1	1.2	1.2
TEKS 15.B 3.B 27.C 15.B
	Industry and Immigration	111		
5	Which of these techniques is most closely associated with the growth of labor unions? A Price fixing B Protective tariffs C Vertical integration D Collective bargaining
Some people in the late nineteenth century believed that certain nations and races were superior to others and therefore destined to rule over them.
Which of these groups of people would have been most likely to apply this idea to their feelings toward immigrants?
F
Nativists who opposed anti-semitism G
Nativists who believed in Social Darwinism H
Settlement-house workers who ran Americanization programs J
People who believed that American society was a “melting pot” Industry and Immigration 112
I
I
i iiranMia
7 By the late nineteenth century, architects and engineers were able to design skyscrapers because of technological innovations in—
A oil and electric production B mining and heating systems C city planning and mass transit D steel production and elevators
www.rearsuniexas.com
Access additional practice questions
8 The Gilded Age by Mark Twain can be described as a reflection of the characteristics and issues of the late nineteenth century because—
F
Twain satirized the life of middle-class Americans G Twain explored the harsh realities of New York slums H Twain questioned a society based on rigid rules of conduct J Twain wrote about people who succeeded through hard work If vou have trouble with...	_ „			
Question	5 ( 6	7	8
See Lesson	1.3	i	1-4	1.5	1.6
TEKS 24.B I 3.C, 6.A 27.C 25.A
Industry and Immigration 113
TOPIC 2 TEKS Master
k’j
Challenges in the Late 1800s
In this Topic, you will learn about challenges in the late 1800s. You will also find lots of interesting ways to master the TEKS associated with this Topic.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
3.A, 3.B, 3.C, 5.C, 6.B, 9.A, 12.A, 12.B, 13.A, 13.B, 14.A,
15.A, 15.C, 15.E, 24.A, 26.A, 26.B, 28.A, 29.A, 29.B, 29.D,
29.F, 29.H, 30.A, 30.C, 31 .A, 31.B
•	Connect
i	Connect with this Topic by watching a video ; about a fascinating person or situation related to : this Topic. You can think about how this Topic : connects to your own life. And you’ll encounter : an intriguing Essential Question: What are the ; challenges of diversity?
\ Begin your study by trying the i following:
NBC LEARN
Watch My Story Video: I
Sitting Bull, The Fight for the Black Hills Launch your Project:
•	Create a Layered Map of the American West
LESSON OUTLINE
2.1: American Indians Under Pressure 3.A, 3.C, 12.B, 13.A, 26.B
2.2: The West Is Transformed 3.B, 12.A, 12.B, 13.A, 15.A, 29.B
2.3: Corruption Plagues the Nation 3.A, 15.E, 29.H
2.4: Farm Issues and Populism 3.A, 3.B, 5.C, 29.B
114
9 Investigate
; The Lesson Outline lists : all the lessons you will : investigate in this Topic.
: As you read and interact : with key content, the story of : challenges in the late 1800s : will come to life. Read the : texts; try the interactivities.
\ Investigate the fascinating ; story of challenges in the late j 1800s.
And keep working on your ; Project to help build your * mastery of the Topic TEKS.
O
Major Indian Wars.1861-1866 ft tntnMfucfcOft end insbuetton*	-----------		
As setters	toe West, htoSw
American peoples were pressured to gms up the Sand they iwed on and
onto reservations. Hwwa, rscd sH Native Americas were wfeg to relocate onto reservam or t© mrnwrs ©enfced more Seme feugm to protect toer WkJ and way of He,
Select she toatoe cons to Seam about toe fighting toai took p^ace

iui}„
’V— '
TA,
-A-.L. J-W#

KEY
Bll Native American reservatton, 1890 Major battle
>*•©. Tr»be name
» Digital interactivity from the online course
9 Synthesize
e
You will get a chance to pull together everything you have learned by thinking again about the Essential Question. How would you answer the question now: What are the challenges of diversity?
e
Demonstrate
Now you will get to show what you know. You will get a chance to complete the TEKS Review and Assessment pages, answering questions about every TEKS for this Topic. Or you can write an essay, take part in a discussion, or share your Project. No matter which you do, it will be a real-world demonstration of the things you now understand about the Topic.«
Tfeksjh' Topic 2	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 2	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
3.A	14,16,18	24.A	15
3.B	5,20	26.A	6
3.C	2,9	26.B	3
5.C	22	28.A	7
6.B	19, 21	29.A	20
9.A	13	29.B	15,22
12. A	4	29.D	14
12.B	1	29.F	18
13. A	12	29.H	13,18
13.B	11	30.A	12
14. A	10	30.C	12
15. A	8	31 .A	19
15.C	9	31.B	19
15.E	17		
115

3.A, 3.B, 3.C, 5.C, 9.A, 12.A, 12.B, 13.A, 13.B, 15.A, 15.C, 15.E, 24.A, 26.A, 26.B, 28.A, 29.A, 29.B, 29.D, 29.F, 29.H, 30.A, 30.C, 31 .A, 31.B
NBC LEARN
» A crowd watches the completion of the transcontinental railroad.
Enduring Understandings
•	As Americans continued to migrate, Native Americans and Mexican Americans already living in the West were pressured and pushed aside.
•	Mining, ranching, and farming drew people to settle in the Great Plains and other parts of the West, helped by the growth of the railroad.
•	Different groups of people in the West used land and resources differently, leading to conflict in some places.
•	Corruption and difficult conditions for farmers led to a push to reform.
PEARSON
Two Ogala chiefs, American Horse (left) and Red Cloud (right) led the resistance against the government's plans to build a road through Sioux hunting grounds.
In 1787, the Constitution granted sole power for regulating trade with the Native Americans to the federal government.
This began the long, strained relationship between the federal government and Native Americans. During the 1830s, the federal government forced Native Americans from the east to resettle west of the Mississippi River and promised them the land there forever. In the 1840s through the 1860s, pressure from white settlers weakened this promise. The conflicts between settlers and Native Americans continued during and after the Civil War. The interaction changed both cultures, but irrevocably damaged Native American cultures.
BPj Interactive Flipped Video
3.A, 3.C, 13.A, 26.B
» Objectives
Compare the ways Native Americans and white settlers viewed and used the land.
Describe the conflicts between white settlers and Indians.
Analyze the impact of the Indian Wars.
Evaluate the effectiveness of the government’s Americanization and reservation policies towards American Indians.
American Indians Under Pressure
Cultures Forced to Adapt
By the end of the Civil War, most Native Americans—about 250,000 of them—lived in the region west of the Mississippi River referred to as “The Great American Desert.” Although they were lumped together in the minds of most Americans as “Indians,” Native Americans embraced many different belief systems, languages, and ways of life.
» Key Terms
reservations Sand Creek
Massacre Sitting Bull Battle of the Little
Big Horn Chief Joseph Wounded Knee assimilated Dawes General
Allotment Act
Cultural Similarities and Differences Geography influenced the cultural diversity of Native Americans. In the Pacific Northwest, the Klamaths, Chinooks, and Shastas benefited from abundant supplies of fish and forest animals. Farther south, smaller bands of hunter-gatherers struggled to exist on diets of small game, insects, berries, acorns, and roots. In the arid lands of New Mexico and Arizona, the Pueblos irrigated the land to grow corn, beans, and squash. They built adobe homes high in the cliffs to protect themselves from aggressive neighbors. The more mobile Navajos lived in homes made of mud or in hogans that could be moved easily.
The most numerous and nomadic Native Americans were the Plains Indians, including the Sioux, Blackfeet, Crows, Cheyenne, and Comanches. Some of these groups included Indians from east of the
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
118
Appalachians, who had blended into the Plains Indian groups. The Plains Indians were expert horsemen and hunters. The millions of buffalo that roamed the Plains provided a rich source for lodging, clothing, food, and tools.
Indian cultures shared a common thread—they saw themselves as part of nature and respected the natural world. Many white people valued and respected nature, too. However, many also viewed the land as a resource that could be used to produce wealth. These differing views sowed the seeds of conflict.
American Settlers Move West In the early 1800s, the government carried out a policy of moving Native Americans out of the way of white settlers.
President Jackson moved the Cherokees off their land in Georgia and onto the Great Plains. To white settlers, Native Americans were welcome to what they called the Great American Desert as they thought it was uninhabitable. To limit conflict, an 1834 law regulated trade relations with Indians and strictly limited the access of white people to this Indian Territory. New European-American settlement generally paused at the eastern rim of the territory and resumed in the Far West.
By the 1850s, however, federal policy toward Native Americans was again challenged: gold and silver had been discovered in Indian Territory as well as settled
regions farther west. Americans also wanted a railroad that crossed the continent. In 1851, therefore, the federal government began to restrict Indians to smaller areas. By the late 1860s, many Indian peoples had been placed on reservations, specific areas set aside by the government for the Indians’ use. This change in their demographic patterns, a direct result of being forced to migrate to reservations, made their previous ways of life difficult if not impossible to sustain. Indians often faced poverty and the loss of their traditional ways of life on reservations.
Two more developments also threatened Native American civilizations: White settlers introduced diseases to which Indians had no immunity, and the vitally important buffalo herds were destroyed. In the 1870s, hunters would kill hundreds of buffaloes in a single day for their hides. They skinned the animals and left the meat to rot. In addition, trainloads of tourists arrived to kill buffaloes purely for sport. They left both the meat and the valuable hides behind.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How were Native American cultures threatened in the 1800s?
’V ELPS
________ELPS 4.F.6 Read the section titled American
Settlers Move West with a partner. Help each other with pronouncing difficult words and pausing at the proper places.
Native American Land Loss, 1850-1890
PACIFIC
OCEAN
KEY
Land lost |	| Before 1850
|	|1850-1869
[""I 1870-1890 |	| Native American
reservations, 1890 Hopi Group name
» The U.S. government relocated many Native American groups following the Civil War. Analyze Maps Describe the process of how Native Americans lost their land.
Challenges in the Late 1800s	119	2.1 American Indians Under Pressure
Settlers and Native
Americans Collide
The rapid industrial development and economic expansion that followed the Civil War set Native Americans and white settlers on a path to conflict. Advances in communication and transportation that supported industrial growth also reinforced white Americans’ faith in manifest destiny. Horace Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune, encouraged the poor to move west.
If you strike off into the broad, free
West, and make yourself a farm from
Uncle Sam’s generous domain, you will crowd nobody, starve nobody, and neither you nor your children need evermore beg. . . .
—New York Tribune, February 5, 1867
Greeley, and many others, ignored the fact that Native Americans inhabited half of the area of the United States. Indians often fought to retain or regain whatever they could.
Conflict Throughout the Plains In 1862, while the Civil War raged in the East, a group of Sioux Indians
resisted threats to their land rights by attacking European-American settlements in eastern Minnesota. In several attacks, the Sioux killed more than 400 settlers, including many women and children. In response, the government waged a full-scale war against the Sioux, who then were pushed west into the Dakotas.
The Sioux rebellion sparked a series of attacks on settlements and stagecoach lines as other Plains Indians also saw their way of life slipping away. Each battle took its toll, raising the level of distrust on all sides. In the fall of 1864, a band of Colorado militia under commanding officer John Chivington came upon a camp of Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians near Fort Lyons at Sand Creek. The fort’s commander had given the Cheyenne leader permission to stay there temporarily. Chivington’s troops opened fire, killing between 150 to 200 Cheyenne and Arapaho men, women, and children.
The incident became known as the Sand Creek Massacre. It spawned another round of warfare as Plains Indians joined forces to repel white settlement.
Once the Civil War ended, regiments of Union troops—both white and African American—were sent to the West to bring peace to the plains. Recruitment posters for volunteer cavalry promised that soldiers could claim any "horses or other plunder” taken from
CAUSES OF MIGRATION
toT»e GREAT PLAINS FREE LAND UNDER THE HOMESTEAD ACT
FREE ACRES
• LIVE ON IT FOR 5 YEARS FARM AND BUILD A PERMANENT DWELLING
HOMESTEADACT
OF ILS. LAND
GIVEN AWAY UNDER HOMESTEAD ACT
YEARS THE ACT WAS IN EFFECT CLAIMS (APPROXIMATE)
MADE UNDER HOMESTEAD ACT
nW 270,000,000 ACRES
I DISTRIBUTED BY HOMESTEAD ACT
FREEDOM
When I landed on the soil
[of Kansas] I looked on the
ground and I says this is
free ground. Then I looked
on the heavens and I says
them is free and beautiful
heavens. Then I looked
within my heart and I says to
myself, I wonder why I was
never free before?
-John Solomon Lewis, Exoduster
» Analyze Data What characteristics of the West made it attractive to those seeking economic opportunity?
Challenges in the Late 1800s	120	2.1 American Indians Under Pressure
PACIFIC
OCEAN
0	400 km
Lambert Conformal Conic
Projection
Native American Wars, 1860-1890
KEY
I I
Native American reservation, 1890 'jfa Major battle Hopi Tribe name
» Analyze Maps What do the locations of the clashes between Native Americans and the U.S. government suggest about westward expansion?
Interactive Map
©
the Indians. The federal government asserted that the troops were needed to maintain order.
Efforts to Promote Peace Fail As the Plains Indians renewed their efforts to hold onto what they had, the federal government announced plans to build a road through Sioux hunting grounds to connect goldmining towns in Montana. Hostilities intensified. In 1866, the legendary warrior Red Cloud and his followers led Captain William Fetterman and his troops into an ambush, killing them all. The human costs of the struggle drew a public outcry and called the government’s Indian policy into question.
As reformers and humanitarians promoted education for Indians, European-American settlers sought strict controls over them. The government-appointed United States Indian Peace Commission concluded that lasting peace would come only if Native Americans settled on farms and reservations and adapted to the white way of life.
In an effort to pacify the Sioux, the government offered the Fort Laramie Treaty of 1868. The government agreed not to build the road through Sioux territory and to abandon three forts. The treaty included the Black Hills in the Sioux reservation, and it also promised a school and other communal buildings. The Sioux and other Indians who signed the treaty agreed to live on
a reservation under federal supervision with support from the federal government.
This type of promise of government support to Native Americans was part of many agreements between the government and Native American groups who were going onto reservations in various parts of the West.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs, established in 1824, handled affairs between Native Americans and the government. The agency appointed an agent who was responsible for distributing land and adequate supplies to anyone willing to farm as well as for maintaining peaceful relations between a reservation and its neighbors.
The government's plans and policies for peace did not always work out, however. Most Native Americans were disappointed with the reservations on which they were living and had little trust that government would keep its promises. Chief Piapot, an Indian leader in Canada facing a similar situation with the government there, offered his viewpoint:
In order to become sole masters of our land they relegated us to small reservations as big as my hand and make us long promises, as long as my arm; but the next year the promises
Challenges in the Late 1800s	121	2.1 American Indians Under Pressure
» The Plains Indians fought the Red River War to protect their tradition of buffalo hunting. Here, braves leave camp to hunt buffalo.
were shorter and got shorter every year until now they are the length of my finger, and they keep only half of that,
—Chief Piapot, 1895
Unfortunately, in the United States, many Indian agents were unscrupulous and stole funds and resources that were supposed to be distributed to the Indians. Even the most well-meaning agents often lacked support from the federal government or the military to enforce the terms of the treaties that were beneficial to Native Americans. Not unexpectedly, some Indians refused to live under such conditions.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did tensions exist between settlers and Native Americans?
The Indian Wars Conclude
The conditions facing Native Americans had all the ingredients for tragedy. Indians were confined to isolated areas, which were regularly ravaged by poverty and disease. The government, intentionally or not, failed to live up to many of the promises made to various groups of Native Americans. Frustration, particularly among young warriors, turned to violence. Guns replaced treaties as the government defeated Native Americans who were openly rebelling.
The Long Walk of the Navajos In 1863 the government sent the famous frontiersman Kit Carson to subdue the Navajos, who were fighting to protect their southwestern homeland. After Carson’s forces destroyed their homes, crops, and livestock, about two thirds of the 12,000 Navajos surrendered in 1864. Carson then sent them on a 300-mile forced march, known as the Long Walk, to a reservation in what is now eastern New Mexico.
The poor soil on the small reservation was not suited to the kinds of agriculture the Navajos practiced. In addition, they were forced to live alongside their Apache enemies. Finally, after four years of death, disease, and starvation, the government relented. The surviving Navajos were allowed to return to a new reservation in their homeland.
The Southern Plains Indians Surrender The Red
River War, a series of major and minor incidents, led to the final defeat of the powerful southern Plains Indians, including the Kiowas and Comanches. It marked the end of the southern buffalo herds and the opening of the western panhandle of Texas to white settlement.
Challenges in the Late 1800s	122	2.1 American Indians Under Pressure
At the heart of the matter was the failure of the United States government to abide by and enforce the terms of the 1867 Treaty of Medicine Lodge. White buffalo hunters were not kept off Indian hunting grounds, food and supplies from the government were not delivered, and white lawlessness was not punished. Hostilities began with an attack by Indians on a group of Texans near the Red River in June 1874. Hostilities ended a year later, after the last Comanche holdouts surrendered to U.S. troops.
Battle of the Little Big Horn It was the lure of gold that led to the defeat of the Indians on the northern Plains. The Black Hills Gold Rush of 1875 drew prospectors onto Sioux hunting grounds in the Dakotas and neighboring Montana. Some of this area was supposed to be protected by the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie. When the Sioux, led by chiefs Crazy Horse and Sitting Bull, assembled to drive them out, the U.S. Army sent its own troops against the Native Americans.
In June 1876, a colonel named George Custer rushed ahead of the other columns of the U.S. cavalry and arrived a day ahead of the main force. Near the Little Bighorn River, in present-day Montana, Custer and his force of about 250 men unexpectedly came upon a group of at least 2,000 Indians. Crazy Horse led the charge at what became known as the Battle of the Little Big Horn, killing Custer and all of his men.
Cries for revenge motivated army forces to track down the Indians. Sitting Bull and a small group of followers escaped to Canada. Crazy Horse and his followers surrendered, beaten by weather and starvation. By then, their will and the means to wage major resistance had been crushed.
The Fighting Concludes Further West Farther west, in Idaho, another powerful drama played out. In 1877, the federal government decided to move the Nez Perces to a smaller reservation to make room for white settlers. Many of the Nez Perces were Christians and had settled down and become successful horse and cattle breeders. They had a great deal to lose.
Trying to evade U.S. troops who had come to enforce their relocation, the Nez Perces’s leader Chief Joseph led a group of refugees on a trek of more than 1,300 miles to Canada. Stopped just short of the border, Chief Joseph surrendered with deeply felt words: “I will fight no more forever.” Banished with his group to a barren reservation in Oklahoma, he later traveled twice to Washington, D.C., to unsuccessfully appeal for his people’s return to their homeland.
» Sitting Bull was a famed fighter and Hunkpapa war chief. By the late 1860s, his reputation was so great that the Lakota Sioux chose him as the first-ever chief of all seven Lakota tribes.
Indian Resistance Comes to an End With the loss of many leaders and the destruction of their economy, Native Americans’ ability to resist diminished.
In response, many Indians welcomed a religious revival based on the Ghost Dance. Practitioners preached that the ritual would banish white settlers and restore the buffalo to the Plains. As the popularity of the movement spread, government officials became concerned about where it might lead.
In 1890, in an effort to curtail these activities, the government ordered the arrest of Sitting Bull. In the confrontation, he and several others were killed. In response, a group of Sioux left their reservation, hoping to hide out in the Badlands region. Troops then set out after the group of Indians as they fled. The cavalry finally caught up with them at Wounded Knee, in present-day South Dakota. Having been partially disarmed by U.S. troops, the Sioux were badly outgunned in the fight that followed. In the end, more than 100 men, women, and children died. The end of the Ghost Dance War at Wounded Knee also marked the end of major Indian resistance to white expansion and large-scale resistance to the Indian policies of the United States government.
U LIST
What conflicts ended major Indian resistance? Challenges in the Late 1800s	123	2.1 American Indians Under Pressure
There is not among these three hundred bands of Indians one which has not suffered cruelly at the hands either of the Government or of white settlers. The poorer, the more insignificant, the more helpless the band, the more certain the cruelty and outrage to which they have been subjected .... It makes little difference where one opens the record of the history of the Indians; every page and every year has its dark stain....
—Helen Hunt Jackson, 1881
A
Native American family poses unhappily at the Warm Springs Reservation in Oregon, visual evidence of the discontent created by the policy of relocating Indians to reservations. The Government
Encourages
Assimilation
The reservation policy was a failure. Making Indians live in confined areas as wards of the government was costly in human and economic terms. Policy makers hoped that as the buffalo became extinct, Indians would become farmers and be assimilated into national life by adopting the culture and civilization of whites.
Critics Disagree with Indian Policies
A few outspoken critics defended the Indians’ way of life. In A Century of Dishonor, Helen Hunt Jackson decried the government's treatment of Native Americans. Susette La Flesche, the granddaughter of a French trader and an Omaha Indian woman, also used her writing and lecturing talents to fight for recognition of the Indians and Indian rights in the courts. Born on the Omaha reservation in Nebraska, she studied in the East and returned to the reservation to teach.
The Americanization Movement In
1871, Congress had passed a law stating that “no Indian nation or tribe within the United States would be recognized as an independent nation, tribe, or power with whom the United States may contract by treaty.” Indians were now to be dealt with as individuals. One reason for this change was to weaken Native Americans’ tribal cultures.
Reformers believed that Indians had to give up tribal loyalties and behaviors before they could adopt mainstream American values and assimilate into American society. The Americanization movement aimed at Native Americans was also aimed at new immigrants from other countries.
One way reformers thought assimilation and Americanization could be accomplished was with the passage
of the Dawes General Allotment
Act (sometimes known as the Dawes Severalty Act) by Congress in 1887, which encouraged Indians to become private
Challenges in the Late 1800s	124	2.1 American Indians Under Pressure
property owners and farmers. The Dawes Act ended the reservations' tribal landholding system. Each Indian family was allotted, or assigned, 160-acres of the tribe's reservation to own as a farmstead. The size of these allotments was based on the eastern experience of how much land was needed to support a family. In the arid West, however, the allotment was often not big enough.
To protect Indian landowners from unscrupulous land speculators, the Dawes Act specified that the land could not be sold or transferred from its original family for 25 years. Congress hoped that by the end of that time, younger Indians would embrace the values of farming and individual land ownership.
Traditional tribal feasts, dances, and even funeral practices were outlawed, and Native American religions were discouraged. To further speed assimilation, missionaries and other reformers established boarding schools, to which Indian parents were pressured to send their children. There Indian children were to learn and live by the rules, dress, customs, and culture of white America. Ultimately, the struggle to retain their homelands, freedom, and culture proved tragic. Although many Indian peoples faced these challenges with courage and determination, tens of thousands died in war or on poverty-stricken reservations. Only a small number were left to carry on their legacy.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What was the main idea of the Americanization movement, and how did the Dawes Act promote that idea?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the reasons Native American culture was irrevocably changed by the end of the 1800s.
2.	Compare and Contrast how white settlers and Native Americans viewed nature.
» As their old way of life was taken from them, many Native Americans were forced to assimilate into contemporary American life.
3.	Support a Point of View with Evidence
Determine why Chief Piapot asserted that the European-led government “keep[s] only half” of the promises made to Native Americans.
4.	Compare and Contrast the relocations and outcomes for the Navajo and Nez Perces.
5.	Hypothesize What lasting effects did the removal to reservations have on the various Native American tribes, including the efforts of the U.S. government to abolish their practices and beliefs?
Challenges in the Late 1800s	125
2.1 American Indians Under Pressure
2.2
The West was swept by enormous change after the Civil War. As railroads increased access, settlers, ranchers, and miners permanently transformed millions of acres of western land. Mining was the first great boom in the West. Gold and silver were the magnets that attracted a vast number of people. Prospectors from the East were just a part of a flood that included people from all around the world.
3.B, 12.A, 12.B, 13.A, 15.A
» Objectives
Analyze the impact of mining and railroads on the settlement of the West.
Explain the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the settlement of the Great Plains.
Analyze treatment of Chinese immigrants and Mexican Americans in the West.
Discuss the ways various groups used land in the West and conflicts among them.
» Key Terms
vigilantes
Transcontinental
Railroad
land grants
open-range system
Homestead Act
Exodusters
Las Gorras Blancas
The West Is
Transformed
Mining and the Growth of
Railroads
Mining Towns Expand Across the West From the Sierra Nevada to the Black Hills, there was a similar pattern and tempo to the development of mining regions. First came the discovery of gold or silver.
Then, as word spread, people began to pour into areas such as Pikes Peak in Colorado and the Yukon river near what is now Alaska. During the Klondike Gold Rush, mining camps sprang up quickly to house the thousands of people who flooded the region near the Yukon river. They were followed by more substantial communities. Miners dreamed of finding riches quickly and easily. Others saw an opportunity to make their fortune by supplying the needs of miners for food, clothing, and supplies.
The rough-and-tumble environment of these communities called out for order. To limit violence and administer justice in areas without judges or jails, miners set up rules of conduct and procedures for settling disputes. In extreme situations, self-appointed law enforcers known as vigilantes punished lawbreakers. As towns developed,
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.

126
they hired marshals and sheriffs, like Wyatt Earp and Bat Masterson, to keep the peace. Churches set up committees to address social problems.
Some mining towns—like Leadville, Colorado, and Nevada City, Montana—were “boomtowns.” They thrived only as long as the gold and silver held out.
Even if a town had developed churches and schools, it might become a ghost town, abandoned when the precious metal disappeared. In contrast, Denver, Colorado; Boise, Idaho; and Helena, Montana, were among the cities that diversified and grew.
Mining Becomes Big Business The first western mining was done by individuals, who extracted the minerals from the surface soil or a stream bed. By the 1870s, the remaining mineral wealth was located deep underground. Big companies with the capital to buy mining equipment took over the industry. Machines drilled deep mine shafts. Tracks lined miles of underground tunnels. Crews—often recruited from Mexico and China—worked in dangerous conditions underground.
The arrival of the big mining companies highlighted an issue that would relentlessly plague the West: water and its uses. Large-scale mining required lots of water pumped under high pressure to help separate the precious metals from silt. As the silt washed down the
mountains, it fouled water being used by farmers and their livestock.
Despite these concerns, the federal government continued to support large mining companies by providing inexpensive land and approving patents for new inventions. Mining wealth helped fuel the nation’s industrial development.
The Transcontinental Railroad Impacts the Frontier As industry in the West grew, the need for a railroad to transport goods increased as well. The idea of a transcontinental railroad, a rail link between the East and the West, was not new. Arguments over the route it should take, however, had delayed implementation. While the Civil War kept the South out of the running, Congress finally took action.
Unlike Europe, where railroads were built and owned by governments, in the United States, not all railroads were built with government support; they were built by private enterprise. However, Congress encouraged construction of the transcontinental railroad in two ways: It provided money in the form of loans and made land grants, giving builders wide stretches of land, alternating on each side of the track route.
Simultaneously in 1863, the Central Pacific started laying track eastward from Sacramento, California, while the Union Pacific headed westward from Omaha,
PACIFIC
OCEAN
KEY
® Gold mining town (date of ore strike)
• Silver mining town (date of ore strike)
Mining Towns, 1850-1890
200 km Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
200 mi
Interactive Chart
Coloma, 1848 Sacramento San Francisco^
Mariposa, 1849’
» The hope of wealth from gold and silver drew many Americans west. Analyze Maps Where were the biggest gold mining regions? How do you think gold discoveries affected migration?
[®]l
N
Challenges in the Late 1800s
127
2.2 The West Is Transformed
Nebraska. Construction proved to be both difficult and expensive.
The human cost of building the railroad was also high. Starved for labor, the Central Pacific Company brought recruits from China and set them to work under harsh contracts and with little regard for their safety. Inch by inch, they chipped and blasted their way through the granite-hard Sierra Nevada and Rockies. Meanwhile, working for the Union Pacific, crews of Irish immigrants crossed the level plains from the East. The two tracks eventually met at Promontory, Utah, in 1869, the same year that the Suez Canal was completed in Egypt. The continent and the world seemed to be shrinking in size.
Railroads Spur Settlement and Growth The
completion of the Transcontinental Railroad inspired a flurry of similar railroad building. By 1883, the Northen Pacific Railroad had connected St. Paul, Minnesota, with Seattle in Washington Territory.
Ten years later, James J. Hill completed a competing railroad line between St. Paul and Everett, Washington. Hill and his business partners built the Great Northern Railway without any government support. His low fares drew thousands of immigrants and other Americans to migrate west and settle along his tracks. His success allowed him to eventually gain control of the Northern Pacific, too.
The effects of the railroads were far reaching. They tied the nation together, moved products and people, and spurred industrial development. They brought western meat and farm products to the tables of eastern consumers. In turn, goods manufactured in eastern factories moved west by train and improved the lives
of settlers on the frontier. Once again, the application of technological innovation by the free enterprise system was clearly raising the standard of living in the United States.
The growth of railroads also stimulated the growth of towns and cities. Speculators vied for land in places where a new railroad might be built, and towns already in existence petitioned to become a stop on the western rail route. Railroads intensified the demand for Indians’ land and brought white settlers who overwhelmed Mexican American communities in the Southwest. The economic impact of the transcontinental railroads helped lead to the closing of the frontier in the late nineteeth century. There was no turning back the tide as waves of pioneers moved west. The arrival of masses of new residents led to changes in political boundaries, as territories became states.
The addition of states to the Union exemplifies the West’s growth. Requirements for statehood included a population of at least 60,000 inhabitants. Between 1864 and 1896, ten territories met those requirements and became states.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did the railroads encourage economic growth in the West?
The Cattle Industry Boom
Cattle ranching fueled another western boom. This was sparked by the vast acres of grass suitable for feeding herds of cattle. Once the railroad provided the means to move livestock to eastern markets, the race was on for land and water.
Statehood Achieved, 1864-1896
1889
[ North Dakota k	r
[ Montana__________J [ Wyoming
» Analyze Data Based on the dates of admission in this timeline, during which decade did the most population growth in the West probably take place?
Challenges in the Late 1800s
128
2.2 The West Is Transformed
Land Use in the West
0	400 km
Lambert Conformal Conic Projection
KEY
Predominant land use I I Cropland | Forest and cropland and pasture I Grazing land
I j Sparsely populated or unusable land
— Railroad — Cattle trail
Gulf of Mexico
» Ranching was an important economic activity throughout much of the West. Analyze Maps How might the physical geography of the West have affected where ranching most flourished?

Longhorns and Vaqueros Long before the arrival of eastern settlers in the West, Mexicans in Texas had developed an efficient system for raising livestock. The Texas longhorn, which originated in Mexico, roamed freely and foraged for its own feed. Each owner marked—or “branded”—the cattle so they could be identified. Under this open-range system, property was not fenced in. Though ranchers claimed ownership and knew the boundaries of their property, cattle from any ranch grazed freely across those boundaries. When spring came, the ranchers would hire cowboys to comb thousands of acres of open range, “rounding up” cattle that had roamed all winter.
The culture of the cowboy owed its very existence to the Mexican vaqueros who had learned to train horses to work with cattle and had developed the roping skills, saddle, lariat, and chaps needed to do the job.
Cowboys and Cattle Drives Once the cattle were rounded up, cowboys began the long cattle drive to take the animals to a railroad that would transport them to eastern markets. The trek from Texas, Colorado, or Montana to the nearest junction on the transcontinental railroad could take weeks or even months.
The cowboys’ work was hard, dangerous, low-paying, and lonely—often involving months of chasing cattle over the countryside. A band of cowboys
often included a mix of white, Mexican, and African American men.
Cow Towns Cattle drives concluded in such railroad towns as Dodge City, Kansas, where the cattle were sold and the cowboys were paid. These “cow towns” gave rise to stories about colorful characters, often outlaws, such as Wild Bill Hickok, Doc Holliday, Wyatt Earp, and Jesse James. They were also the site of rodeos, competitions based on the cowboys' skills of riding, roping, and wrestling cattle. Bill Pickett, an African American cowboy, is credited with inventing bulldogging, in which a cowboy leaps from his horse onto a steer’s horns and wrestles the steer to the ground.
The Open Range Comes to a Close Open-range ranching flourished for more than a decade after the Civil War. During that time, several million cattle were driven from Texas north to railroad stops in Wyoming, Nebraska, and Kansas. However, by the mid-1880s, the heyday of open-range ranching came to an end.
Several factors contributed to the demise of the open range. The invention of barbed wire made it possible to fence in huge tracts of land on the treeless plains. The supply of beef exceeded demand, and the price of beef dropped sharply. Added to these factors
Challenges in the Late 1800s	129	2.2 The West Is Transformed
» Settlers on the relatively dry, treeless Great Plains used the available sod to build homes for their families.
Interactive 3-D Model
» African Americans welcome new migrants from the South to St. Louis.Hypothesize Why might the lands and opportunities of the Great Plains have been especially appealing to African Americans following the Civil War?

was a period of extreme weather in the 1880s—brutally freezing winters followed by summer droughts. As springs dried up, herds of cattle starved. The nature of cattle ranching changed as ranchers began to raise hay to feed their stock, and farmers and sheepherders settled on what had been open range.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did the railroad affect the cattle industry?
Farmers Settle the Plains
The Great Plains were the last part of the country to be heavily settled by white people. The region was originally set aside for Indians because it was viewed as too dry for agriculture. Yet, with the coming of the transcontinental railroad, millions of farmers moved into the West in the last huge westward migration of European Americans in the mid to late 1800s.
The push-and-pull factors that encouraged settlement were varied. Like the miners and cattle ranchers, farmers were looking for a better life.
Railroads advertised land for sale, even sending agents to Europe to lure new immigrants, especially from Scandinavia. Other immigrants fled political upheavals in their native lands.
Westward Migration and Settlement Throughout its history, the nation’s westward expansion had been marked by migrants settling on public land they did not own. These settlers, called “squatters,” pressured the government to allow them to gain ownership of this land. In 1841, Congress passed the Preemption Act, giving squatters the right to buy up to 160 acres for $1.25 per acre before the land was offered for sale to other buyers. This law set the stage for the Homestead Act, passed in 1862. Under the Homestead Act, the government offered farm plots of 160 acres to anyone willing to live on the land for five years, dig a well, and build a road. These two laws encouraged further settlement and farming in the West, eventually leading to the close of the frontier.
Opportunities in the West such as mining and cattle herding were generally male occupations, so much of the western migration was led by men. But as farming expanded, more women arrived, too. They all had a job to do, such as tending the family and farm or working as an entrepreneur running a boardinghouse, laundry, or bakery.
Some of the new settlers were former slaves who fled the South after the end of Reconstruction. Benjamin Singleton, a black businessman from Tennessee, helped organize a group of African Americans called the “Exodusters.” They took their name from the
Lallenges in the Late 1800s	130	2.2 The West Is Transformed
EARLY FARMING TECHNOLOGY
on the PLAINS Lower cost than traditional wood fencing
Easy to install and maintain

24 HOURS
Kept animals out of cropland
Kept animals off of railroad tracks
I I H
S hMuKS
Limited open grazing space, thereby changing the cattle business
» Analyze Data How did the growth of innovative technology allow the Great Plains to support a larger population and more profitable economic activities?
biblical story of Moses leading the exodus of the Jews out of bondage and into a new life in the “Promised Land." The Exodusters’ “promised land” was in Kansas and Oklahoma, where they planted crops and founded several enduring all-black towns.
Homesteading the Plains Physical and human geographic factors made the lives of homesteaders on the Plains difficult. Windstorms, blizzards, droughts, plagues of locusts, and heart-rending loneliness tested their endurance. On the treeless plains, few new arrivals could afford to buy lumber to build a home. Instead, they cut 3-foot sections of sod and stacked them like bricks, leaving space for a door and one window. The resulting home was dark, dirty, and dingy.
Necessity is the mother of invention, and farmers on the Plains had many needs beyond housing. The development of barbed wire, a length of wire with twisted barbs, enabled a farmer to fence land cheaply to keep out wandering livestock. The development of a plow that could tackle the sod-covered land, the grain drill that opened furrows and planted seed, the windmill that tapped underground water, and dryfarming techniques were some of the innovations that enabled farmers to succeed. To spur development of better ways to farm, Congress passed the Morrill Act in
# ELPS
1862, which made land grants to states for the purpose of establishing agricultural colleges.
Nothing, however, prepared farmers for a series of blizzards and droughts in the 1880s and 1890s that killed animals and ruined harvests. Some of the discouraged and ill-prepared settlers headed back east. The farmers who remained became more commercial and depended more on scientific farming methods.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why did farmers move to the Plains? ELPS 4.F.7 Read the section titled Homesteading
the Plains with a partner. During and after your reading, ask and answer each other’s questions in order to improve your understanding of the text.
Minorities Encounter Difficulties
From the 1850s onward, the West had the widest diversity of people in the nation. With fewer than 20 percent of the nation’s total population, it was home to more than 80 percent of the nation's Asian, Mexican and Mexican American, and Native American residents. Almost all of the nation’s 100,000 Chinese immigrants lived in the West.
Challenges in the Late 1800s	131	2.2 The West Is Transformed
» Frequently faced with job discrimination, some Chinese immigrants managed to start their own businesses. These immigrants pose proudly in front of their own grocery store.
» Surviving harsh conditions, these Mexican-American women in San Antonio, Texas, prepare a meal outside their dwelling.
Challenges in the Late 1800s
Economic Issues Challenge Chinese Immigrants
During the same time that Jim Crow arose in the South, Chinese immigrants faced racial prejudice on the West Coast. In 1879, California barred cities from employing people of Chinese ancestry. Several years later, San Francisco established a segregated “Oriental” school. Elsewhere, mobs of whites attacked Chinese workers, saying they had taken “white” jobs. Congress responded to these attacks by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882, which prohibited Chinese laborers from entering the country.
Brave Chinese immigrants challenged discrimination. Saum Song Bo questioned why he should support a fund-raising drive to build the Statue of Liberty. “That statue represents Liberty holding a torch which lights the passage of those of all nations who come into this country,” Bo wrote in a letter published in American Missionary in 1898. “But are the Chinese allowed to come? As for the Chinese who are here, are they allowed to enjoy liberty as men of all other nationalities enjoy it?”
Chinese immigrants also turned to the federal courts to protect their rights but with mixed results. In 1886, in the case of Yick Wo v. Hopkins, the U.S. Supreme Court sided with a Chinese immigrant who challenged a California law that banned him and other Chinese from operating a laundry. In 1898, the Court ruled that individuals of Chinese descent, born in the United States, could not be stripped of their citizenship. Yet the Court upheld the Chinese Exclusion Act and several other discriminatory measures.
Land Ownership Proves Difficult for Mexican Americans Like African Americans and Asian Americans, Mexican Americans struggled against discrimination in the latter decades of the 1800s. One historian has described Mexican Americans as “foreigners in their own land.” At the center of their struggle stood land. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, signed at the end of the Mexican-American War, guaranteed the property rights of Mexicans who lived in the Southwest prior to the war. Still, four out of five Mexican Americans who lived in New Mexico lost their land, as did Mexican Americans in other southwestern states.
This land loss resulted from several factors. When Anglo Americans and Mexican Americans laid claim to the same land, U.S. courts put the burden of proof on Mexican Americans to show that they really owned the land. Differences in legal customs, and the fact that much of the land was held communally, not individually made it difficult for many Mexican Americans to do so.
In addition, Anglo Americans used political connections to take land away from Mexican Americans.
132	2.2 The West Is Transformed
The "Sante Fe Ring,” an association of prominent white businessmen and government officials, got the federal government to grant the group control of millions of acres of land in New Mexico. Thousands of Mexican Americans had lived on and farmed this land for many years. Since New Mexico was a territory, not a state, however, Mexican Americans, who comprised the majority of the population, had no representatives in Washington, D.C., to challenge this deal.
Mexican Americans Defend Property Rights
Throughout the Southwest—in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California—Mexican Americans fought to maintain their rights. Many especially resented the loss of their land. One group, Las Gorras Blancas, targeted the property of large ranch owners by cutting holes in barbed-wire fences and burning houses. The group declared: “Our purpose is to protect the rights and interests of the people in general; especially those of the helpless classes.” Supported by a national labor organization, the Knights of Labor, the group also had a newspaper to voice their grievances.
As anti-Mexican feelings increased, a group of Hispanic citizens in Tucson, Arizona, formed the Alianza Hispano-Americana in 1894 to protect the culture, interests, and legal rights of Mexican Americans. Within two years, new branches of the organization opened in other cities.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
During this period, what impact did the Supreme Court have on people of Chinese descent?
Struggles and Change Across the West
There is a sharp contrast between the picture of the West depicted in novels and movies and the reality of life on the Plains. The West was a place of rugged beauty, but it was also a place of diversity and conflict.
Tension Over Economic Resources The various ways that settlers sought to use western land were sometimes at odds with one another. Conflicts between miners, ranchers, sheepherders, and farmers led to violence and acts of sabotage. Grazing cattle ruined farmers’ crops, and sheep gnawed grass so close to the ground that cattle could not graze the same land. Although miners did not compete for vast stretches of grassland, runoff from large-scale mining polluted water that ran onto the Plains and everyone needed water. And no matter who won, Native Americans lost.
» Miners used a great deal of water in their mining operations, often with negative consequences for farmers and ranchers.
Early on, geologist John Wesley Powell recognized water as an important but limited resource. He promoted community control and distribution of water for the common good. Despite his efforts, water usage remained largely unregulated, a system that benefited some but disadvantaged others.
Prejudices and Discrimination Conflict came in many guises. For example, ranchers often belittled homesteaders, labeling them “sodbusters” to mock their work in the soil and their modest houses. Conflict also arose because the view of the ownership of natural resources varied. For many generations, Mexicans had mined salt from the salt beds of the El Paso valley. Mexicans viewed these areas as public property, open to all. However, when Americans arrived in the 1870s, they laid claim to the salt beds and aimed to sell the salt for profit. In 1877, in what became known as the El Paso Salt War, Americans and Mexicans clashed over access to this crucial commodity. When the battles ended, the salt beds were no longer communal property. Now, users would have to buy this natural product.
Ethnic tensions often lurked beneath the surface. Many foreign-born white people sought their fortunes on the American frontier, especially in the years following the mid-century revolutions in Europe. Their multiple languages joined the mix of several dozen
Challenges in the Late 1800s	133	2.2 The West Is Transformed
» Hopeful settlers gathered for the last great land rush in U.S. history, signaled by a cavalry bugle call at noon on April 22, 1889.
The following year, the 1890 national census revealed the extent of population growth in the West when it concluded that there was no longer a square mile of the United States that did not have at least a few white residents. The great American frontier was closed. This was in part due to completion of transcontinental railroads, which made it easier for people to migrate across the country. The country, the report said, no longer had a “frontier,” which at the time was considered an uninhabited wilderness where no white person lived. The era of free western land had come to an end.
However, the challenges and tensions were far from over. Controversies over Indians’ land rights were still to come. So, too, were more battles over water and over the mistreatment of minority citizens—especially Chinese and Mexican Americans. As African Americans migrated west and claimed places among the farmers, miners, railroad workers, entrepreneurs, inventors, and public servants, they indeed found new opportunities, but often these new opportunities were intertwined with discrimination.
Ed IDENTIFY What reasons can you identify to help
explain prejudice and discrimination in the West?
Native American language groups. Differences in food, religion, and cultural practices reinforced each group’s fear and distrust of the others. But mostly it was in the larger cities or towns that discrimination was openly displayed. Chinese immigrants, Mexicans, and Mexican Americans were most often its targets.
Population Growth Ends the Frontier The last major land rush took place in 1889 when the federal government opened the Oklahoma Territory to homesteaders. On April 22, thousands of “boomers" gathered along the border. When the signal was given, they charged in to stake their claims. However, they found that much of the best land had already been taken by “sooners," who had sneaked into the territory and staked their claims before the official opening.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Support Ideas with Examples Explain the ways mining shaped the West.
2.	Identify Cause and Effect Describe the effects of large companies mining for minerals in the West.
3.	Summarize the effects of the Transcontinental Railroad on the United States.
4.	Identify Patterns in the effects of white settlers’ westward expansion on other cultures.
5.	Hypothesize Why did settlers expand westward despite the challenges of the physical environment there?
Challenges in the Late 1800s	134
2.2 The West Is Transformed
While Congress enacted many major reforms during Reconstruction, it passed very few measures between 1877 and 1900. Instead, inaction and corruption were serious political issues during the Gilded Age. This raised questions of whether or not democracy could succeed in a time dominated by large and powerful industrial corporations and men of great wealth.
I,
Former Civil War general Ulysses S. Grant proved unable to keep corruption and scandal from troubling his presidential administration.
Corruption Plagues the Nation
Political Power Proves Difficult to Keep
Party loyalties were so evenly divided that no faction or group gained control for any period of time. After Grant left office, only twice between 1877 and 1897 did either the Republicans or Democrats gain control of the White House and both houses of Congress at the same time. Furthermore, neither held control for more than two years in a row. This made it very difficult to pass new laws. Most of the elections were very close as well, allowing those who lost to block new legislation until they got back in power.
Political Corruption Under President Grant Ulysses S Grant was a popular war hero but a disappointing President. Allied with the Radical Republicans, he promised to take a strong stand against southern resistance to Reconstruction. But Grant s ability to lead was marred by scandal. He gave high-level advisory posts to untrustworthy friends and acquaintances who used their positions to line their own pockets. His own Vice President, Schuyler Colfax, was investigated and implicated in a scheme to steal profits from the Union Pacific Railroad. In addition, a plan by railroad developer and financier Jay
» Objectives
Analyze the issues of weak leadership and corruption in national politics in the 1870s through 1890s.
Discuss civil service reform in the late 1800s.
Assess the importance of economic issues in the late 1800s.
» Key Terms
spoils system civil service Pendleton Civil
Service Act gold standard political machines fiat money
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
i
135
Gould to corner the gold market actually included President Grant’s brother-in-law.
When Grant ran for reelection in 1872, some reform-minded Republicans withdrew their support and teamed up with some Democrats to create the Liberal Republican Party. The Liberal Republicans advocated civil service reform, removal of the army from the South, and an end to corruption in southern and national governments. Grant easily defeated their presidential candidate, the New York Tribune editor Horace Greeley.
Not long after the election, however, Americans sensed the aura of greed surrounding American politics. When scandal swirled around the members of his administration including his private secretary, the Secretary of War, and members of Congress, Grant seemed to look the other way. Even though he had stated, “Let no guilty man escape,” he seemed to lack the will to root out this corruption. Confidence in public officials plummeted.
Across the nation, local scandals came to light. Many city officials sold lucrative public construction contracts to their friends or diverted money from city accounts. The most notorious of these scandals involved a band of New York City Democratic politicians led by state senator William "Boss” Tweed. The “Tweed
» Scandals such as the secret deal that gave Republican Rutherford B. Hayes (on left) the presidency troubled Gilded Age politics. A number of administrations from this era suffered under weak or corrupt leadership.
Interactive Chart
Ring,” as it came to be known, plundered millions of dollars from the city's treasury. By 1873, when Tweed was convicted and sentenced to prison, the public’s confidence in its leaders was at a low ebb.
Corruption Continues in Subsequent Administrations In comparison to Lincoln, Grant and the other Presidents of the Gilded Age that followed him appeared particularly weak. Although they, like Lincoln, won by slim margins that reflected the nation's diversity of opinion on important issues, these presidents differed from Lincoln in that, once in office, they lacked integrity. Rutherford B. Hayes owed his election in 1876 to a secret deal to end Reconstruction. Benjamin Harrison became only the second President in history to lose the popular vote but win the electoral college vote. Chester Arthur, who took the helm following James Garfield’s assassination, upset so many of his fellow Republicans that he failed to win his own party’s presidential nomination in 1884.
The most noteworthy President of the era was Grover Cleveland. In an era known for its corruption, Cleveland maintained a reputation for integrity. He once observed, "A Democratic thief is as bad as a Republican thief.” Cleveland enjoyed an extremely rapid rise to political prominence. In 1881, running as a reformer, he won the race for mayor in Buffalo, New York. A year later, he became the governor of New York, and in 1884, he became the first Democrat to win the White House in 24 years.
In 1888, even though he won the popular vote, Cleveland lost to Benjamin Harrison. But Cleveland came back to rewin the presidency in 1892.
fcl IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS Why did the public lose
trust in the federal government?
Growth of Political
Machines and Corruption
Grover Cleveland's reputation for honesty was the exception. Many government officials routinely accepted bribes. As Henry Adams, the great-grandson of John Adams, observed, “One might search the whole list of Congress, Judiciary, and Executive . . . [from] 1870 to 1895, and find little but damaged reputation.”
Political Supporters Are Given Jobs Political parties and the spoils system were central components of politics during the Gilded Age.
Under the spoils system, which was first used by President Andrew Jackson as far back as the 1820s, politicians awarded government jobs to loyal party
Challenges in the Late 1800s	136	2.3 Corruption Plagues the Nation
Voter Turnout in Selected Presidential Elections, 1872-1916
YEAR J TOTAL TURNOUT J REPUBLICANS I DEMOCRATS I VOTER TURNOUT
I PERCENTAGE 1 RESULT 1872 6,460,000 3,597,000 2,843,000 71.3
Ulysses S. Grant, Republican 1876	8,422,000	4,037,000	4,284,000	81.8	Rutherford B. Hayes, Republican
1880	9,217,000	4,453,000	4,414,000	79.4	James A. Garfield, Republican
1884	10,053,000	4,850,000	4,880,000	77.5	Grover Cleveland, Democrat
1892	12,061,000	5,183,000	5,555,000	74.7	Grover Cleveland, Democrat
1900	13,968,000	7,218,000	6,357,000	73.2	Theodore Roosevelt, Republican
1908	I 14,884,000	7,675,000	6,412,000	65.4	William Howard Taft, Republican
1916	I 18,531,000	8,534,000	9,128,000	61.6	Woodrow Wilson, Democrat
SOURCE:
Historical Statistics of the United States, U.S. Census Bureau » Analyze Data Is it probable that the presidents of the Gilded Age enjoyed strong popular support for their ideas? Why or why not?
workers, with little regard for their qualifications. Parties held elaborate rallies and parades to get out the vote. However, candidates for the presidency did not take part in the campaign. They felt it lowered the reputation of the presidency.
Parties developed sophisticated political machines that reached virtually into every ward, in every precinct, in many cities in the nation. In large cities, political machines were often run by “bosses” or a small group of people. These groups, like Tammany Hall in New York City or the Pendergast machine in Kansas City, controlled cities for decades. The political machines worked by winning the loyalty of large immigrant groups by promising, and in some cases, delivering, solutions to problems like poor sanitation or transportation. The spoils system also played a role, with political machines rewarding loyal organizers with city jobs. With voter loyalty secured, the political machine was assured of its political power and often became very corrupt.
The spoils system served as the glue that helped make the parties so powerful. The Postmaster General, who headed the U.S. Postal Service, for example, could reward thousands of supporters with jobs. Likewise, other officials could and did use federal contracts to convince people to vote for their candidates. Ironically, political participation probably got a boost from the spoils system and the fierce partisanship of the era.
About 75 to 80 percent of all those who could vote did vote in presidential elections during the Gilded Age.
Political Cartoons Alert the Public Though many Americans saw nothing wrong with politicians rewarding their friends, writers such as Mark Twain, political cartoonists, and others who thought about American politics expressed their concern about the damaging effects of corruption.
“The Bosses of the Senate,” one of the most famous political cartoons of the time, drawn by Joseph Keppler, showed a cluster of businessmen representing various trusts, glaring down on the chambers of the Senate.
Thomas Nast created a series of cartoons which exposed the illegal activities of Boss Tweed and the Tammany Hall political machine in New York City. Eventually, Tweed was arrested. He escaped and fled to Spain. While there, Tweed was identified through one of Nast’s cartoons. The Tammany Hall machine, however, lived on.
Civil Service Reform Efforts The feeling that the spoils system corrupted government, or at least made it terribly inefficient, prompted a number of prominent figures to promote civil service reform. The civil service is a system that includes federal jobs in the executive branch. In a reformed system, most government workers would get their jobs due to their
Challenges in the Late 1800s	137	2.3 Corruption Plagues the Nation
expertise and maintain them regardless of which political party won the election.
Reforming the spoils system did cause controversy. Without the spoils system, politicians felt they would not attract the people needed to run their parties. Independent attempts by politicians to change the system failed. For example, when Rutherford B. Hayes became President in 1877, he worked for civil service reform. He even placed well-known reformers in high offices. However, the Republican Party did not support his reform efforts. It took the 1881 assassination of President James Garfield by Charles J. Guiteau to make civil service reform a reality. Guiteau shot Garfield because he believed that the Republican Party had not fulfilled its promise to give him a government job.
The Pendleton Civil Service Act Chester A Arthur became President after the assassination of Garfield. While Arthur defended the spoils system, he supported the movement for civil service reform, which had been strengthened because of public indignation over Garfield’s assassination. Arthur signed the Pendleton Civil Service Act in 1883. This act established a Civil Service Commission, which wrote a civil service exam. Individuals who wanted to work for the government had to take the exam, and getting a job depended on doing
» Charles J. Guiteau, an unstable individual who felt he was owed a government position, assassinated President Garfield in 1881. Infer What effect did Garfield’s assassination have on civil service reform?
©
Interactive Gallery
well on the exam, not on manipulating one’s political connections. Initially, the act covered only a small percentage of federal employees, but its reach grew over time, reducing the power of the spoils system.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did the spoils system encourage government corruption and, eventually, government reform? ELPS
ELPS 4.F.8
Read aloud Political Supporters Are Given Jobs with a partner. Discuss the meanings of spoils system and political machines, as well as why they are important to understanding the section. Economic Policy
Challenges Continue
The public’s discontent was worsened by economic turmoil and uncertainty. In the fall of 1873, one of the nation’s most influential banks failed, apparently as a result of overextended loans to the expanding railroad industry. A wave of fear known as the Panic of 1873 spread through the financial industry and across the nation. Bank failures, job losses, and the uncertain economy added to the array of the nation’s concerns. Events such as this prompted political leaders to debate the best ways to keep the economy moving forward.
The tariff and monetary policy were critical economic issues during this time. Leaders looked to these two areas for ways to stabilize the economy, but both issues were divisive. The tariff issue sharply split the Democrats and Republicans.
Monetary policy gave rise to independent political parties or movements that disagreed with the major parties’ commitment to the gold standard. Using the gold standard meant that the government would use gold as the basis of the nation’s currency. Paper money was backed by the government’s gold reserves, and could, in theory, be redeemed for actual gold
Americans Continue to Discuss Tariffs The debate over the tariff had deep roots in American history. The tariff, or the tax on imports of manufactured goods and some agricultural products, was created as early as 1810 to protect newly developed industries. Since then, the debate to lower or increase tariffs continued. Differences over the tariff had divided the Federalists and Jeffersonians and the Democrats and Whigs. During the Gilded Age, it divided the Republicans and Democrats. The tariff question became a major issue during the presidential election of 1888. The Republicans favored a high tariff, arguing that it would allow American industries to grow and promote jobs in manufacturing. Democrats countered that high tariffs
Challenges in the Late 1800s	138	2.3 Corruption Plagues the Nation
increased the costs of goods to consumers and made it harder for American farmers to sell their goods abroad.
Different Ideas About Monetary Policy Two
related factors turned monetary policy into a bitter issue during the Gilded Age. During the Civil War, the federal government issued paper money, known as greenbacks. The greenbacks were fiat money , or currency not backed by gold or silver. After the war, because the fiat money had contributed to wartime inflation (a rise in prices), the government retired, or got rid of, the greenbacks. Over the next century, the United States and other major world economies would edge towards going off a metallic standard and onto fiat money gradually, making the final move in the 1970s. However, in the 1870s, the debate centered on whether to use gold or gold and silver to back the paper money.
In 1873, Congress passed the Coinage Act of 1873. This law reversed the government policy of backing
money with both gold and silver. Using only gold meant that the money supply was smaller and each dollar would be worth more. Bankers and others involved in international trade favored the gold standard because it discouraged inflation and made dollars worth more overseas. In contrast, most farmers favored keeping silver to create inflation. Already struggling, they hoped the rise in prices would increase their income. Those who favored the minting of silver—in other words, considering silver as money—protested against what they termed the “Crime of 1873” and prompted Congress to mint silver dollars. The Bland-Allison Act, passed in 1878, specified that the U.S. Treasury make a certain amount of silver-backed dollars each month, but not as many as the Free Silver advocates would have liked. The debate over whether to consider silver as money alongside gold continued until the passage of the Gold Standard Act in 1900, which set gold as the only metal backing paper dollars.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did Republicans and Democrats differ in their view of the tariff issue? » This silver-backed dollar from 1896 featured portraits of George and Martha Washington.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the reasons why President Cleveland's reputation was considered the exception to the rule for presidents from the 1870s through the 1890s.
2.	Interpret Why do you think that party loyalties were so evenly divided after the end of the Civil War?
3.	Cite Evidence of the corruption of the spoils system.
4.	Compare Points of View Describe the debate pertaining to tariffs during the Gilded Age.
5.	Draw Conclusions Why were political cartoons such an effective weapon against corruption?
Challenges in the Late 1800s	139	2.3 Corruption Plagues the Nation
xi'
» Life was difficult for prairie farmers, who faced the difficulties of nature as well as unpredictable prices and rising debts.
? co : ? ■>" -? Why were farmers willing to put up with the hardships that came with their way of living?
Following the Civil War, millions of men and women migrated west in search of the American dream.	j
However, in the late 1880s and early 1890s, their dream began to turn into a nightmare, which, in turn, sparked a j social and political movement known as populism. This movement displayed the	|
o	'i
dissatisfaction of millions of ordinary	>
Americans—poor farmers, small landholders, and urban workers—and	i
produced one of the largest third-party movements in American history.
Ml I Interactive Flipped Video
TEKS

» Objectives
Analyze the economic issues farmers faced in the late 1800s.
Describe the groups farmers formed to address their problems and what they accomplished.
Evaluate the impact of the Populist Party, and explain why the party did not last.
» Key Terms
Oliver H. Kelley
Grange
Populist Party
William Jennings Bryan
William McKinley
Farmers’ Alliance
Farm Issues and
Populism
Farmers Face Economic Difficulty
The farmers of the West and the South were willing to accept the difficulties of farm life. Yet farmers discovered that other enormous obstacles stood in the way of realizing their dreams.
They received low prices for their crops, but they had to pay high costs for transportation. Debts mounted while their influence on the political system declined.
Farm Issues Result in Rising Debt Between 1870 and 1895, farm prices plummeted. Cotton, which sold for about 15 cents a pound in the early 1870s, sold for only about 6 cents a pound in the mid-1890s. Corn and wheat prices declined nearly as rapidly. One study estimated that by the early 1890s, it was costing farmers more to produce corn than they could get by selling it, so they burned it to use as fuel. Planting more crops did not help. On the contrary, the more crops farmers produced, the more prices declined.
During the same time period, the cost of doing business rose. To pay for new machinery, seed, livestock, and other needs, farmers went into debt. An increasing number of farmers mortgaged their farms to
PEARSON 1 -	-
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
140
raise funds to survive and became tenant farmers— meaning they no longer owned the farm where they worked.
Big Business Practices Affect Farmers Farmers blamed big business, especially the railroads and the banks, for their difficulties. They protested that railroads, as monopolies, charged whatever rates they wanted. Likewise, they complained that banks set interest rates at unfairly high levels. Southern farmers, especially black sharecroppers, faced the added problem of having to deal with dishonest merchants and landlords who paid less for crops and charged more for supplies than promised.
In addition, farmers grew angry because they felt the nation had turned its back on them. The United States had a long tradition of electing leaders from farm states with agricultural backgrounds, like Thomas Jefferson. Yet it now appeared that most of the nation’s leaders came from urban industrial states. Moreover, farmers felt that they performed honest labor and produced necessary goods, while bankers and businessmen were the ones who got rich. One editor for a farmers’ newspaper explained:
There are three great crops raised in
Nebraska. One is the crop of corn, one a crop of freight rates, and one a crop of interest. One is produced by farmers who sweat and toil to farm the land.
The other two are produced by men who sit in their offices and behind their bank counters and farm the farmers.
9 . ,-U - > ' 1890
Farmers, however, refused to accept these circumstances. They took action.
Id DESCRIBE What concerns did many farmers share
about their businesses?
ES3EEI ELPS 4.F.9
Read the first paragraph with a partner. Discuss how the last sentence is structured. What purpose do the dashes have? Farmers Seek Change Through Alliances
Farmers created a network of organizations, first in the Midwest and then in the South and West, to address their problems. The Granger movement, also known as the “Patrons of Husbandry,” was the first.
The Courts Have Their Say Organized in 1867 by Oliver H. Kelley—a Minnesota farmer, businessman, journalist, and government clerk—the organization popularly known as the Grange attracted about a million members. The goals of the Grange included providing education on new farming techniques and
Falling Prices of Farm Crops
» Over this 30-year period, falling commodity prices hit American farmers hard. Analyze Charts What trend does the graph show? What might explain that trend?
Challenges in the Late 1800s	141	2.4 Farm Issues and Populism
» The Granger movement, which promoted the rights and interests of farmers, inspired this illustration. Determine Point of View How does the illustrator view the importance of American farmers?
» Farmers plowed through difficult soil, often with no family members or hired workers to help them, just one of the many hardships they faced.
calling for the regulation of railroad and grain elevator rates.
In the mid-1870s, the states of Illinois, Wisconsin, and Minnesota enacted laws that set maximum rates for shipping freight and for grain storage. The railroad companies challenged these “Grange Laws” in the courts. The Supreme Court upheld some decisions and overturned others, depending on the context of individual cases. In one of the significant “Granger Cases,” Munn v. Illinois, the Court ruled against a Chicago grain-storage facility that challenged the constitutionality of an 1871 Illinois law setting maximum rates for shipping freight. This decision upheld the right of states to regulate private industries in some circumstances. However, in Wabash v. Illinois (1886) the Court ruled against state regulation. In this decision, the Court overturned an Illinois law by declaring that individual states did not have the power to regulate interstate commerce. Eventually, the Grangers helped to prompt the federal government to establish the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to oversee interstate transportation.
Farmers and the Railroads Disagree Although the Grange declined in the late 1870s, farm protest remained strong. Faced with serious difficulties, Texas farmers in the 1870s began to organize and to negotiate as a group for lower prices for supplies.
The idea spread. Local organizations linked together in what became known as the Farmers’ Alliance. These organizations soon connected farmers not only in the South but also in the West, and for a brief period farmers of all races and ethnicities banded together for their common cause. Because of regularly rising rates, the Alliances wanted the government to regulate the interest that banks could charge for loans. Farmers’ Alliance members also tried to convince the government to force railroads to lower freight prices so members could get their crops to markets outside the South at reduced rates.
The railroads, however, argued that their prices were justified by the expense of building the railroads to begin with and by intense competition between rail companies. They had to charge high prices to earn profits and create more jobs. Often railroads would offer rebates or other incentives to larger shippers who used their rails. In addition, they would charge more to ship freight short distances than they would for long trips because they had competitors for long hauls, but not for short hauls. This was known as the “short haul and long haul” practice.
The Interstate Commerce Act, passed in 1887, prohibited several of these practices, although it proved hard to enforce.
Challenges in the Late 1800s
142	2.4 Farm Issues and Populism
Alliances Encourage Reform Farmers’ Alliances, such as the Southern Farmers’ Alliance, became important reform organizations. They formed cooperatives to collectively sell their crops, and they called on the federal government to establish "sub-treasuries, or postal banks, to provide farmers with low-interest loans. They hoped the cooperatives would push the costs of doing business down and the prices for crops up. Some of the cooperative efforts succeeded. The Georgia Alliance led a boycott against manufacturers who raised the price of the special cord that farmers used to wrap bundles of cotton.
Farmers’ alliances organized across racial lines were short-lived. Soon, the Southern Farmers’ Alliance organized only white farmers.
There was also an Alliance network for African American farmers. R. M. Humphrey, a white Baptist minister, headed the Colored Farmers’ Alliance, which had been organized by African American and white farmers.
Nearly one million African American farmers joined the group by 1891. The Colored Farmers’ Alliance recognized that both white and African American farmers shared the same difficulties, but racial tensions prevented any effective cooperation between the groups.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What reforms did the farmers’ organizations introduce?
The Beginnings of
Populism
The spread of the Farmers’ Alliances culminated with the formation of the Populist Party, or People’s Party, in 1892. These Populists sought to build a new political party from the grass roots up. They ran entire slates of candidates for local, state, and national positions. Like a prairie fire, the Populist Party spread rapidly, putting pressure on the two major political parties to consider their demands.
Populist Goals The Populist Party spelled out their views in their platform, which they adopted in Omaha, Nebraska, in July 1892. The platform warned about the dangers of political corruption, an inadequate monetary supply, and an unresponsive government. The Populist Party proposed specific remedies to these political issues. To fight low prices, they called for the coinage of silver, or "free silver.” To combat high costs, they demanded government ownership of the railroads. Mary Elizabeth Lease, a fiery Populist Party
» The Populists, or People’s Party, fielded candidates for office in local, state, and national elections in 1892. Interpret What Populist political goals does the slogan shown here suggest?
Challenges in the Late 1800s	143
2.4 Farm Issues and Populism
spokesperson, also advanced the cause of women’s suffrage.
The Populist Party nominated James B. Weaver of Iowa as their presidential candidate and James Field of Virginia as his running mate. Both had risen to the rank of general in the United States and Confederate armies, respectively, and their nominations represented the party’s attempt to overcome the regional divisions that had kept farmers apart since the end of the Civil War. (Southern white voters had supported the Democrats; northerners, the Republicans.) The Populist Party also sought to reach out to urban workers, to convince them that they faced the same enemy: the industrial elite.
Early Impacts of the Populist Party For a new
political party, the Populists did quite well in 1892. Weaver won more than one million votes for the presidency, and the Populists elected three governors, five senators, and ten congressmen. In 1894, the Populist Party continued to expand its base, gaining seats in the state legislatures and prompting the major political parties to consider endorsing its ideas.
In the South, the Populist Party had to unite black and white voters if it hoped to succeed politically. Tom Watson, Georgia’s most famous Populist Party leader, made a strong case for casting aside racial prejudice in favor of a political alliance between the races. However,
the Democratic Party successfully used racist tactics, such as warning that a Populist victory would lead to “Negro supremacy,” to diminish the appeal of the Populist Party.
B IDENTIFY
What did the Populist Party hope to accomplish? Populism’s Declining
Influence
In 1893, a four-year-long depression began that worsened conditions not only for already-suffering farmers but for other Americans as well. Labor unrest and violence engulfed the nation. The major parties failed to satisfactorily respond to the nation’s distress.
In the midst of national discontent, the Populist Party’s dream of forging a broad coalition with urban workers grew. The Populists' relative success at the polls in 1892 and 1894 raised their hopes further. The decision of the Democratic Party to nominate William Jennings Bryan as their presidential candidate put the election for the Populists on an entirely different plane, leading some to believe they could win the White House that year.
The Populist Party, 1890-1900
0	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
» Around the turn of the century, the Populist Party became a viable alternative to the two established political parties. Analyze Maps What does the map show about the popularity of the Populist Party?
Interactive Chart
©
Challenges in the Late 1800s	144	2.4 Farm Issues and Populism
The Impact of William Jennings Bryan Born in Salem, Illinois, William Jennings Bryan moved to Lincoln, Nebraska, where he set up a law practice in 1887. He earned the nickname the “boy orator,” in part by displaying his strong debating skills during his successful run for the United States Congress in 1890. In 1896, Bryan addressed the national Democratic convention on the subject of the gold standard, attacking Grover Cleveland and others in the party who opposed coining silver. The audience listened and cheered as Bryan spoke for “the plain people of this country,” for “our farms,” and declared “we beg no longer.” The speech became known as the “Cross of Gold” speech because it ended with the following line: “You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.”
The speech so moved the Democratic delegates that they nominated Bryan as their party’s presidential candidate. He was just 36 years old and had not been a contender for the nomination until then. Bryan’s advocacy of “free silver,” or the coinage of silver as well as gold, and his support of a number of other Populist Party proposals, placed the Populists in a difficult situation.
Holding their convention after the Democrats, the Populists had to decide whether to nominate their own presidential candidate and continue to focus on building a broad-based movement from the bottom up or to endorse Bryan with the hope that they could capture the White House in 1896. They chose the latter course.
Bryan's campaign was like none other before. For the first time, a presidential candidate toured the nation, speaking directly to the people. In contrast, William McKinley, the Republican candidate, accumulated approximately $15 million, 30 times the amount Bryan had, and allowed party regulars to do the campaigning for him. Marcus Hanna, the political powerhouse who orchestrated McKinley’s run, cast Bryan and his Populist Party supporters as a potential dictator and a threat to the Republic. For instance, one cartoon published in the pro-Republican Los Angeles Times depicted the Democratic-Populist coalition as a collection of evil witches, who fed the fires of sectionalism, discontent, and prejudice in order to win the election.
Populism’s Long-Term Impact McKinley won the election of 1896 and went on to win reelection, again over Bryan, in 1900. Bryan’s emphasis on monetary reform, especially free silver, did not appeal to urban workers, and the Populist Party failed to win a state outside of the South and West. Moreover, the decision
» William Jennings Bryan, a gifted orator and Populist Party stalwart, gives a speech to his supporters.
» This cartoon depicts William Jennings Bryan as a large snake swallowing the Democratic donkey. Analyze Cartoons Was this cartoon’s creator a Populist supporter? How can you tell?
Challenges in the Late 1800s	145	2.4 Farm Issues and Populism
The Presidential Election of 1896
Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote	Popular Vote	% Electoral Vote	% Popular Vote
HI
William McKinley (Republican) 271 7,104,779 60.6 51.0 ■ William Jennings Bryan (Democrat)	176	6,502,925	39.4	46.7
E3
Other — 314,226 — 2.3 » In the presidential election of 1896, William Jennings Bryan won more states but fewer electoral votes than the victorious William McKinley. Analyze Maps In which regions was Bryan the most popular?
to endorse Bryan weakened the Populists at the local and state levels, and the party never recovered from its defeat in 1896. The Populist Party lingered for nearly a decade. By the early 1900s, it had disappeared as a feasible alternative to the two major political parties. Most of the voters who supported the Populist Party returned to the Democratic Party in 1896.
Even though the Populist Party fell apart, its impact as a third party inspired other third parties, notably the Progressive Party in the early 1900s. Many of the specific reforms that it advocated became a reality in the early decades of the 1900s. The Progressives supported a graduated income tax, regulation of the railroads, and a more flexible monetary system. Moreover, populism had a lasting effect on the style of politics in the United States. For a brief time, there was even a coalition of whites and blacks in Texas. They were able to find a common political ground.
Increasingly, candidates campaigned directly to the people, and, like Bryan, they emphasized their association with ordinary Americans.
H RECALL
How did some of the ideas of the Populist Party influence twentieth century politics?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Why did farmers blame big business for their hardships?
2.	Summarize the strategies by which farmers sought economic change at the end of the nineteenth century.
3.	Draw Conclusions Determine the reasoning behind the Democratic Party’s decision to nominate William Jennings Bryan as their presidential candidate.
4.	Compare and Contrast the positions of the Democratic Party and the Populist Party with regard to racial equality.
5.	Identify Patterns Explain how the Populist Party influenced twentieth-century politics, even after its decline.
Challenges in the Late 1800s
2.4 Farm Issues and Populism
1889
^Montana__________j Wyoming
Identify and Explain Reasons for Changes in Political Boundaries Identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood. Use the timeline above to write a paragraph identifying what territories became states between 1864 and 1896 and explaining the reasons for the change. Be sure to consider the requirements for statehood. 12.B
Analyze Social Issues Affecting Native
Americans Analyze social issues affecting minorities, such as Native American land rights. Write a paragraph analyzing how westward expansion caused conflict with the Sioux over their rights to land. Consider the effect of the idea of manifest destiny, how some Sioux responded to threats to their land rights, how the government responded to the Sioux, and the role of the United States Indian Peace Commission. 3.C
Discuss Americanization Movement Discuss the Americanization movement to assimilate American Indians into American culture. Write a paragraph discussing the Americanization movement and its effect on Native Americans. Indicate the goal of the Americanization movement. Then discuss the role of the Dawes General Allotment Act, other measures used to speed assimilation, and the effects on Native Americans. 26.B
Analyze Growth of Railroads Analyze economic issues such as the growth of railroads. Write a paragraph analyzing the economic issues involved in building railroads, including the transcontinental railroad. Consider the economic roles played by the government
and business in building the transcontinental railroad, the human cost of building the transcontinental railroad, and the effect of the transcontinental railroad on the growth of other railroads. 3.B
5.	Explain Actions to Expand Economic Opportunities and Political Rights Explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights for Chinese Americans. Write a paragraph analyzing the steps taken by Chinese immigrants
to challenge the discrimination they faced. Be sure to consider the Supreme Court case of Yick Wo v. Hopkins; the Supreme Court’s 1898 ruling, and the letter below, in which Saum Song Bo, a Chinese immigrant, questioned why he should support a fund-raising drive to build the Statue of Liberty. 26.A
That statue represents Liberty holding a torch which lights the passage of those of all nations who come into this country But are the Chinese allowed to come? As for the Chinese who are here, are they allowed to enjoy liberty as men of all other nationalities enjoy it? -—Saum Song Bo, American Missionary, 1898
6.	Analyze Effect of Transportation Innovations on Standard of Living Analyze how the application
of technological innovations, including those in transportation, by the free-enterprise system improved the standard of living in the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing how railroads raised the standard of living in the United States in the late 1800s. Consider
Challenges in the Late 1800s	147
TEKS ASSESSMENT
The Presidential Election of 1896
I
:)
Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote	Popular Vote	% Electoral Vote	% Popular Vote
W
William McKinley (Republican) 271 7,104,779 60.6 51.0 HB
William Jennings Bryan (Democrat) 176 6,502,925 39.4 46.7 I | Other	—	314,226	—	2.3
v—	lll t				
AT

18.	Use Databases to Create Thematic Maps Pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns on available databases in order to create a thematic map showing the election results in the presidential election of 1900 between William Jennings Bryan and William McKinley. Use information from this topic and other sources, including online databases, to locate the state-by-state election results for the 1900 presidential election. Using the 1896 election map as a model, use the statistics you have collected to create a map showing the 1900 election results. Then ask and answer one question about a geographic distribution and one question about a geographic pattern shown on the map. Consider questions like the following: In what areas of the country did William McKinley gain the most electoral votes? What pattern is evident from analyzing where William Jennings Bryan won electoral votes? 6.B, 31.A, 31.B
19.	Analyze Farm Issues Use valid primary and secondary sources to analyze economic issues related to farming. Use the primary source quotation below and information from the lessons in this topic to write a paragraph analyzing the economic issues farmers faced. Consider the roles of prices and costs, rising debt, big business, and declining political influence. 3.B, 29.A
There are three great crops raised in Nebraska. One is the crop of corn, one a crop of freight rates, and one a crop of interest. One is
produced by farmers who sweat and toil to farm the land. The other two are produced by men who sit in their offices and behind their bank counters and farm the farmers.
Alj'uuci Kn;i
20.	Analyze Impact of William Jennings Bryan Analyze the impact of significant individuals such as William Jennings Bryan. Write a paragraph analyzing his impact on the Populist movement. Identify who Bryan was; describe his “Cross of Gold” speech and its impact
on the Democratic convention; analyze the position of the Populists, what the Populists decided to do, and describe the outcome of the election of 1896. 6.B
21.	Evaluate Impact of Populist Party Evaluate and analyze the impact of third parties, including the Populist Party, by making generalizations. Write a paragraph evaluating the long-term impact of Populism and generalizing about the impact of third parties. Consider the effect on the Populist Party after supporting Bryan
in the 1896 election; the Populist Party’s impact on the Progressive Party; and the success of later third-party candidates such as George Wallace, Ross Perot, and Ralph Nader. 5.C, 29.B
22.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What are the challenges of diversity? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
Challenges in the Late 1800s
150
’i Hi
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE
I i

Challenges in the Late 1800s	151
5	Which of the following groups would support the monetary policy that led to the money shown above?
A
Supporters of flat money B Farmers who favored high inflation C Supporters of the Coinage Act of 1873 D Bankers who wanted dollars to be worth more overseas 6	Congress created the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1887 to— F monitor railroad shipping rates G oversee enforcement of the Sherman Antitrust Act H create cartels to lower the cost of manufactured goods J settle contract disputes between labor and management
Challenges in the Late 1800s	154
Access additional practice questions J
7	According to the beliefs of Social Darwinism—
A laissez-faire economic policies work against natural selection B public funds should be used to improve the conditions of the urban poor C government should support natural selection by regulating private business D the poverty-stricken condition of many minorities is evidence of their unfitness
8	What statement best describes the economic impact of the transcontinental railroad?
F
The transcontinental railroad provided a quick way for prospectors and miners to get to California just in time for the great gold rush. G
The transcontinental railroad was such a success that it brought great wealth to the investors who funded the project and the workers who built it. H
The transcontinental railroad encouraged people to travel for enjoyment, causing a boom in tourism throughout the Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains. J
The transcontinental railroad started a rail network that tied the nation together, moved goods and people, sparked new industries, and stimulated the growth of towns and cities. 
t!
!
If vou have trouble with...						
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	2.3	2.2	1.2	2.2
TEKS 15.E 15.B 6.A 3.B
Challenges in the Late 1800s
i
topic 3 TEKS Master
y_________
America Comes of Age
In this Topic, you will learn about how America came of age. You will also find lots of ways to investigate the ideas of this Topic and to master the TEKS.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
2.D, 3.C, 4.A, 4.B, 5.A, 5.B, 5.C, 6.A, 6.B, 9.A, 9.B, 12.A, 14.A, 14.B, 14.C, 15.B, 15.C, 15.D, 15.E, 19.E, 21.A, 21.B,
23.A, 23.B, 24.A, 26.A, 26.D, 29.A, 29.B, 29.C, 29.E, 29.F, 29.G, 30.A
Connect
My Story Video and Topic Essential Question—see how they connect to your past experience or to what you have already learned. The Essential Question for this Topic is: What can individuals do to affect society?
Begin your study by trying the following;
NBC LEARN
Watch My Story Video: Jane Addams, Neighboring With the Poor
Launch your Document-Based Question:
LESSON OUTLINE
3.1: Progressives Drive Reform 3.C, 5.A, 5.B
3.2: Women Gain Rights 3.C, 5.A, 5.B, 23.B
3.3: Striving for Equality 5.B, 26.A 3.4: Reformers in the White House 5.A,
5.B, 5.C, 14.B, 14.C, 15.B, 15.E, 29.B 3.5: American Influence Grows 4.A, 4.B,
12. A
3.6: The Spanish-American War 2.D, 4.A, 4.B, 15.D
3.7: The United States Emerges as a World Power 4.A, 4.B, 12.A, 15.C
Historians’ Viewpoints on the Spanish-American War
156
Go
The Women’s Rights Movement, 1848 to Today
9 Investigate
: The Lesson Outline lists all the : lessons you will investigate in ; this Topic. As you read and ; interact with key content, the : story of America coming of : age will come to life. Read the : texts; try the interactivities.
: Investigate the fascinating ; story of how America came ; of age.
; And keep working on your ; Document-Based Question to ; help build your mastery of the i Topic TEKS.
ffflroductloo sod Insfructtons
1848
1964
TITLE VII
Or THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT Prohibits sex discrimination in employment
» Digital interactivity from the online course
0
li ■
9 Synthesize
i You’ll see that this Topic is about ; more than fascinating texts and i fun interactivities. It’s really about
how those things help you think
•	about big ideas, like the Essential
•	Question for this Topic.
9 Demonstrate
: Completing this Topic is like : practicing all your soccer skills or : rehearsing the scenes in a play.
: Now you get a chance to pull it i all together for the final game or ; the live performance. You can : do this on the Topic Review and : Assessment pages. Or you can
•	complete work on your Document-
•	Based Question.............
TEKS in Topic 3	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 3	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
2.D	31	15.D	33
3.C	2	15.E	28
4.A	30, 31,32	19.E	29
4.B	27	21 .A	10
5.A	4, 5,8	21.B	5
5.B	11,16	23.A	7
5.C	19	23.B	14
6.A	23,26	24.A	15, 25
6.B	24	26.A	6
9.A	9	26.D	3
9.B	12,13	29.A	12
12. A	18	29.B	25
14. A	22	29.C	8
14.B	17	29.E	32,33
14.C	21	29.F	26
15.B	1	29.G	11
15.C	20	30.A	12
157



■B

Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
z

2.D, 3.C, 4.A, 4.B, 5.A, 5.B, 5.C, 6.A, 6.B, 9.A, 9.B,
12.A, 14.A, 14.B, 14.C, 15.B, 15.C, 15.D, 15.E, 19.E, 21 .A, 21.B, 23.A, 23.B, 24.A, 26.A, 26.D, 29.A, 29.B, 29.C, 29.E, 29.F, 29.G, 30.A


1


Enduring Understandings
•	At the turn of the century, reformers worked for equality in political rights and economic opportunities in the United States.
•	Political organizations dedicated to various causes won significant gains, while several presidents worked to enforce fair business practices and protect the environment.
•	In the same period, the United States worked to expand trade and territory around the world.
•	The United States emerged as a world power after the Spanish-American War and diplomatic measures with East Asia and Latin America.


PEARSON
NBC LEARN


y




ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
What can individuals do to affect society? » Theodore Roosevelt
» 5 to learn about the life of Jane Addams, an important reformer.



3"} America Comes of A€Te
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments

159
Interactive Flipped Video
©
Industrialization, urbanization, and immigration brought many benefits to America, but they also produced challenging social problems. In response, a movement called Progressivism emerged in the 1890s. Progressives believed that new ideas and honest, efficient government could bring about social justice. Progressive ideas brought lasting reforms that still affect society today.
3.C, 5.A, 5.B
» Objectives
Identify the causes of Progressivism and compare it to Populism.
Analyze the role that journalists and novelists played in the Progressive Movement.
Evaluate some of the social reforms that Progressives tackled.
Explain what Progressives hoped to achieve through political reforms.
» Key Terms
Progressivism muckraker Lincoln Steffens Jacob Riis Social Gospel settlement house Jane Addams direct primary initiative referendum recall
Upton Sinclair Seventeenth
Amendment
referendum
Progressives Drive Reform
The Progressive Era Begins
The people who made up the Progressive Movement came from many walks of life. They came from all political parties, social classes, ethnic groups, and religions. Many Progressive leaders emerged from the growing middle class, whose power and influence was rapidly spreading. Dissatisfied industrial workers also joined the Progressive Movement. So did wealthy Americans driven by a desire to act for the good of society.
Progressive Beliefs and Influences What the Progressives shared in common was a belief that industrialization and urbanization had created troubling social and political problems. Progressives wanted to bring about reforms that would correct what they saw as problems and injustices. They encouraged their state legislatures and the federal government to enact laws to address the issues faced by the poor. Progressives wanted to use logic and reason to make society work in a more efficient and orderly way. Many, motivated by religious faith, sought social justice.
Progressivism was similar to the Populist Movement of the late 1800s. Both were reform movements that wanted to get rid of corrupt
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
160
government officials and make government more responsive to people’s needs. Both sought to eliminate the perceived abuses of big business. Still, the two movements differed. At the forefront of Progressivism were middle-class people. They believed that highly educated leaders should use modern ideas and scientific techniques to improve society. Leaders of the Populist Movement, on the other hand, consisted mostly of farmers and workers.
Progressive Goals Some Progressives thought that political reform was the most urgent need. For many women, the number one goal was winning the right to vote. Other Progressives considered honest government to be the most important goal.
Reformers targeted city officials who built corrupt organizations, called political machines. The bosses of these political machines used bribery and violence to influence voters and win elections. They counted on the loyalty of city workers who looked the other way when they took public money for themselves. Bosses also helped people solve personal problems, which often kept voters loyal.
Corrupt and ineffective government combined with the booming growth of cities produced other problems. The people living in America’s crowded cities needed paved streets, safe drinking water, decent housing, and adequate municipal services. The lack of adequate services led to wretched living conditions for the urban poor. Too often, dishonest business owners and politicians controlled municipal services. Bribes and shady deals made them rich while conditions for urban residents remained unsafe and little changed.
While some Progressives focused on government, others were worried about big business. As you have learned, wealthy industrialists built huge companies that limited competition and sometimes raised prices. Middle-class Progressives wanted the government to “bust the trusts” and so create more economic opportunities for smaller businesses. Progressives complained that the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 was inadequate and ineffective in limiting the abuses of big business. Business leaders, in contrast, argued that big companies produced goods more efficiently and therefore consumers could buy them at lower prices. They feared that government regulation would hurt these efficiencies and the economy as a whole.
Other Progressive reformers focused on the class system. Often motivated by religious faith, they sought to reduce the gap between the rich and the poor. They attacked the harsh conditions endured by miners, factory workers, children forced to work, and other laborers. They wanted to improve conditions in
» During the Progressive Era, volunteers like this one from the Salvation Army helped those less fortunate in many ways.
» Analyze Political Cartoons According to the artist, what is the effect of the street railroad monopoly on the taxpayer?
America Comes of Age
3.1 Progressives Drive Reform
» Progressives worried about the unhealthy conditions facing children who lived in urban slums. These children are playing near a dead horse.
» Muckrakers such as Nelly Bly wrote news articles that stirred public opinion in favor of Progressive causes.
city slums. They wanted social welfare lews to help children, workers, and consumers.
B LIST
Which areas of society did Progressive reformers wish to change? ELPS
ELPS LEARNING 1.F.1
With a partner, define the word progress. Then read the first paragraph of the text.
How does your understanding of the word progress help you nthor \A/nrHc in thn naranranh?
The Impact of Muckrakers
Socially conscious journalists and other writers dramatized the need for reform. Their sensational investigative reports uncovered a wide range of ills afflicting America in the early 1900s. Even though Theodore Roosevelt agreed with much of what they said, he called these writers muckrakers because he thought them too fascinated with the ugliest side of things. (A muckrake is a tool used to clean manure and hay out of animals’ stables.) The writers were angry at first but in time took up Roosevelt’s taunting name as a badge of honor.
The muckrakers’ articles appeared in magazines and newspapers that entered millions of American homes. People across the nation were horrified by the conditions that muckrakers revealed. Muckrakers' accounts prompted Americans to push for reforms to correct these ills.
Journalists Uncover Injustices One leading muckraker was Lincoln Steffens. He was the managing editor at McClures, a magazine known for uncovering social problems. In 1903, Steffens published The Shame of the Cities, a collection of articles on political corruption in the nation’s cities. His reports exposed how the government of Philadelphia let utility companies charge their customers excessively high fees. He showed how corrupt politicians won elections by bribing and threatening voters, and revealed how political corruption affected all aspects of life in a city.
The visitor [to St. Louis] is told of the wealth of the residents, of the financial strength of the banks, and of the growing importance of the industries; yet he sees poorly paved, refuse-burdened streets, and dusty or mud-covered alleys; he passes a ramshackle firetrap crowded with the sick and learns that it Is the City Hospital. . . .
America Comes of Age 162	3.1 Progressives Drive Reform
Finally, he turns a tap in the hotel to see liquid mud flow into [the] wash basin or bathtub.
—-Lincoln Steffens and Claude Wetmore, “Corruption and Reform in St. Louis,” McClure’s Magazine, October 1902
Another influential muckraker was Jacob Riis, a photographer for the New York Evening Sun. Riis turned his camera on the crowded, unsafe, rat-infested tenement buildings where the urban poor lived. Between 1890 and 1903, he published several works, including How the Other Half Lives, that shocked the nation’s conscience and led to reforms.
Other outraged writers joined Riis and Steffens. In The History of Standard Oil, Ida Tarbell reported that John D. Rockefeller used ruthless methods to ruin his competitors, charge higher prices, and thereby reap huge profits. Others proclaimed the need to improve schools or warned of the breakdown of family life because mothers had to work long hours in factories. John Spargo focused attention on the dangerous and difficult lives of child workers.
Novelists Highlight Social Issues Fiction writers put a human face on social problems. They developed a new genre — the naturalist novel — that honestly portrayed human misery and the struggles of common people. Theodore Dreiser, a midwesterner raised in poverty, published Sister Carrie in 1900. His provocative novel traces the fate of a small-town girl drawn into the brutal urban worlds of Chicago and New York.
Naturalist novels became very popular. Frank Norris’s The Octopus fascinated readers by dramatizing the Southern Pacific Railroad's stranglehold on struggling California farmers.
In The Jungle, Upton Sinclair related the despair of immigrants working in Chicago’s stockyards and revealed the unsanitary conditions in the industry. Sinclair’s account eventually prompted regulations to protect food safety. African American author Frances Ellen Watkins portrayed some of the struggles of black Americans in her 1892 novel Iola Leroy.
Q RECALL
Who were the muckrakers and what did they accomplish?
ELPS READING 4.F.10
Read the first paragraph of the text with a partner. Discuss what you know about muckrakes, stables, and farm work. How does this information help you to understand muckraker journalists?
’V ELPS
» Walter Rauschenbusch became the leading proponent of the Social Gospel movement with the publication of his 1907 work Christianity and the Social Crisis.
Reformers Impact Society
The work of the muckrakers increased popular support for Progressivism. Progressive activists promoted laws to improve living conditions, public health, and schools. They urged government to regulate businesses. They worked as volunteers living among the people they sought to help. They believed that careful social planning would make American life better.
Issues Affecting the Social Gospel Many reformers, like Walter Rauschenbusch, thought that Christianity should be the basis of social reform. A child of German immigrants, Rauschenbusch had become a Baptist minister. He blended ideas from German socialism and American Progressivism to form what he called the Social Gospel. By following Bible teachings about charity and justice, he explained, people could make society “the kingdom of God;” that is, make life on earth closer to the promised paradise of heaven by helping others and making the world more just.
Many Protestant leaders followed Rauschenbusch’s program. Many churches already provided community support and help. Issues such as child labor and long working hours led social Gospel adherents to call for the end of child labor and a shorter workweek. They
America Comes of Age 163	3.1 Progressives Drive Reform
also pushed for the federal government to limit the power of corporations and trusts.
Jane Addams Contributes to the Settlement House Movement An important goal of many Progressives, including those influenced by religious ideals, was to improve the lives of poor people in the cities. One approach was the settlement house, a community center that provided social services to the urban poor. Most settlement houses were privately funded and run by volunteers. Settlement house workers gave mothers classes in child care and taught English to immigrants. They ran nursery schools and kindergartens. They also provided theater, art, and dance programs for adults.
A woman named Jane Addams became a leading figure in the settlement house movement. While visiting Europe, she was inspired by the work at Toynbee Hall, a settlement house in London. In 1889, Addams opened Hull House, a settlement house in Chicago. Over the years, Hull House grew to include 13 buildings. Through Hull House’s programs, Addams made significant social and economic contributions to the lives of the people living in its poor Chicago neighborhood. By educating poor children and adults, these programs increased their earning power.
Furthermore, the success of Hull House inspired other college-educated, middle-class women to become social workers. By 1911, the country had more than
400 settlement houses. Addams was also politically active. She supported the Progressive party candidacy of Theodore Roosevelt in 1912 and later helped found the American Civil Liberties Union. She worked closely with labor and other reform groups seeking to use political means to improve working conditions for the urban poor.
Using Hull House as a base, Addams also worked to accomplish political goals, including laws regulating labor and tenement houses. In addition, she worked for women’s suffrage and world peace, sharing the Nobel Peace Prize in 1931.
Religious organizations such as the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) also provided services to the urban poor. In addition to its goal of promoting Christian values, the YMCA offered classes, dances, and sports.
Progressive-Era Issues Affecting Children
Progressives also tried to help children. Leading the effort was a lawyer named Florence Kelley. Kelley helped convince the state of Illinois to ban child labor, and other states soon passed similar laws. In 1902, Kelley helped form the National Child Labor Committee, which successfully lobbied the federal government to create the U.S. Children’s Bureau in 1912. This new agency examined any issue that affected the health and welfare of children. The agency still works to protect children today.
» Analyze Information How did child labor laws affect children’s employment levels during the Progressive Era?
America Comes of Age ' 164 ' 3.1 Progressives Drive Reform
But progress in children’s rights had a long way to go. In 1916, Congress passed the Keating-Owens Act, which banned child labor in all states. However, two years later, the Supreme Court ruled the law unconstitutional. It was not until 1938 that Congress would end child labor for good.
Progressives also tried to better children’s lives by improving education. A number of states passed laws that required children to attend school until a certain age. However, there were heated debates about what children should learn and how they should learn. Some argued that they should be taught only work skills. Others said they should learn to appreciate literature and music. Most educators agreed that girls should learn different things from boys.
Educator John Dewey criticized American schools for teaching children to memorize facts but not to think creatively. Dewey wanted schools to teach new subjects such as history and geography, as well as practical skills like cooking and carpentry. His ideas were not adopted at once, but in later years, many states put them into effect.
Reforms in the Workplace In the early 1900s, the United States had the highest rate of industrial accidents in the world. Long hours, poor ventilation, hazardous fumes, and unsafe machinery threatened not only workers’ health but also their lives. Each year some thirty thousand workers died on the job, while another half a million were injured.
In March 1911, a fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in New York City shocked Americans and focused attention on the need to protect workers. Workers in the factory had little chance to escape the raging fire because managers had locked most of the exits. The fire killed 146 workers, most of them young Jewish women. Many jumped from the windows in desperation. Inside the smoldering ruins, firefighters found many more victims, “skeletons bending over sewing machines.”
After the blaze, outraged Progressives intensified their calls for reform. New York passed laws to make workplaces safer, and other cities and states followed suit. Many states also adopted workers' compensation laws, which set up funds to pay workers who were hurt on the job.
Progressives also persuaded some states to pass laws limiting the workday to ten hours. However, their efforts suffered a blow in 1905 when the Supreme Court ruled in Lochner v. New York that such laws were unconstitutional. Until the 1930s, the court ruled
» Jane Addams founded one of the nation’s first settlement houses, Hull House, in 1889. Here, she sits with a group of children visiting Hull House in 1935.
» Firefighters fought to extinguish the catastrophic Triangle Shirtwaist Fire. Draw Conclusions How did accidents like this fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in 1911 lead to improvements in working conditions?
Interactive Gallery
America Comes of Age 165	3.1 Progressives Drive Reform
against many labor laws, but Progressives continued to work towards the goal of protecting workers.
KJ RECALL
How did Progressives work to help the urban poor?
Progressive Reforms
Impact Government
Progressive reformers sought to reform the political process in order to reform society. They wanted to free government from the control of political bosses and powerful business interests. They wanted to give people more control over their government and make government more effective and efficient in serving the public.
Reformers Change City Government Just as the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire spurred reformers to action, so did another disaster. In 1900, a massive hurricane left the city of Galveston, Texas, in ruins. One of the greatest national calamities in American history, the hurricane killed more than 8,000 people. As an emergency measure, Galveston replaced its mayor and board of aldermen with a five-person commission. Each commissioner was an expert in a different area of
» The Galveston Hurricane of 1900 destroyed countless structures, such as this public school.
city affairs, such as public safety or streets and sewers, and headed the departments responsible for that area.
The commission form of government proved very efficient as the city carried out a tremendous rebuilding effort. The following year, Galveston decided to permanently adopt the commission form of government.
Known as the Galveston plan, many other cities decided to take up the commission form of government. By 1918, nearly 500 cities had adopted some form of the Galveston plan. Dayton, Ohio, and other cities modified the plan by empowering the city council or commission to hire a professional city manager to oversee all of city government. The new city governments curbed the power of bosses and their political machines. The reform governments purchased public utilities so that electric, gas, and water companies could not charge city residents unfairly high rates.
Progressive Reforms Impact Political Process
Progressives also pushed for election reforms, taking up some Populist ideas. Traditionally, party leaders picked candidates for state and local offices.
But in Wisconsin, reform governor Robert M. La Follette established a direct primary, an election in which citizens themselves vote to select nominees for upcoming elections. By 1916, all but four states had direct primaries.
Progressives also wanted to make sure that elected officials would follow citizens’ wishes. To achieve this goal, they worked for three other political reforms: the initiative, the referendum, and the recall. The initiative gave people the power to put a proposed new law directly on the ballot in the next election by collecting citizens’ signatures on a petition. This meant that voters themselves could suggest laws instead of waiting for elected officials to act. The referendum allowed citizens to approve or reject laws passed by a legislature. The recall gave voters the power to remove public servants from office before their terms ended.
Progressives won yet another political reform: They adopted the Populist call for the direct election of senators by voters, not state legislators.
Progressives believed that Americans should choose their own senators rather than allowing state legislatures to do so. Several states already held elections in which voters advised their legislature about which person to name, although states formally retained this decision under the U.S. Constitution. However, the proposed reform was not universally popular. Some members of Congress argued that direct election would weaken the states’ power to block actions of the federal government, an important constitutional check. With the support of 31 state legislatures, however, Congress passed a constitutional amendment to enact this
America Comes of Age 166	3.1 Progressives Drive Reform
PROGRESSIVES and ELECTION REFORMS

THE SEVENTEENTH BEFORE U.S.
senators were elected by state legislatures. AMENDMENT AFTER
Senators were chosen by the voters in the states by direct election. STATE ELECTION REFORMS
STARTED IN THE PROGRESSIVE ERA
Initiative Voters can petition to place constitutional amendments on the ballot.
Referendum Voters can petition to repeal an existing law.
Recall Voters can remove elected representatives without waiting for the next election.
USE OF INITIATIVES
ON STATE BALLOTS
Total
Passed
ATTEMPTED
RECALLS
OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS
25% Other Levels of State Government
75% City Council & School Board Level
400
300
200
iOO
0
■■■■..■ill
«ys «r»
TT'TTTT’T’7<?C<’
<S»	0	0	O	0	0	O	0	eh
Source: Eagleton Institute of Poiitics
Source: Initiative and Referendum Institute
o
i S

I
i i

» Analyze Information What was the most significant Progressive election reform? Cite two pieces of information to support your answer.
change in 1911. The states ratified the Seventeenth Amendment two years later.
States Lead the Progressive Movement Dynamic Progressives became the leaders of several states, and chief among them was Robert La Follette of Wisconsin. Elected governor in 1900, “Fighting Bob” won the passage of many reform laws. Under his leadership, the Wisconsin state government forced railroads to charge lower fees and pay higher taxes. La Follette helped his state to improve education, make factories safer, and adopt the direct primary. Progressives called Wisconsin the “laboratory of democracy.”
Hiram Johnson, governor of California, shattered the Southern Pacific Railroad’s stranglehold on state government. He put in place the direct primary, initiative, referendum, and recall. He also pushed for another goal of some Progressives—planning for the careful use of natural resources such as water, forests, and wildlife.
Other Progressive governors included Theodore Roosevelt of New York and Woodrow Wilson of New Jersey Roosevelt worked to develop a fair system for hiring state workers and made some corporations pay taxes. Wilson reduced the railroads power and pushed
for a direct primary law. Both Roosevelt and Wilson later became President and brought reforms to the White House.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did Progressive reformers change local and state governments?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare and Contrast the Populist and Progressive movements.
2.	Summarize the ways in which Progressives tried to help children.
3.	Generate Explanations How did the
development of settlement houses affect urban American society?
4.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire affected workers’ rights.
5.	Draw Conclusions How did muckrakers influence efforts to enact social reform?
America Comes of Age 167
3.1 Progressives Drive Reform
8
Women often used protests to demand suffrage.	Why did
activists in the women’s suffrage movement draw criticism from some groups of American women?
Interactive Flipped Video
3.C, 5.A, 5.B, 23.B
» Objectives
Analyze actions taken by women to address social issues affecting workers and families.
Explain actions taken during the Progressive era to expand opportunities for women, including the right to vote.
Evaluate the tactics reform leaders used to win passage of the Nineteenth Amendment.
» Key Terms
Florence Kelley National Consumers
League (NCL) temperance
movement Margaret Sanger Ida B. Wells Carrie Chapman
Catt.
National American
Woman Suffrage
Association
(NAWSA)
Alice Paul Nineteenth
Amendment Frances Willard
suffrage
Susan B. Anthony
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
(X2)
3.2
In the early 1900s, a growing
number of women were no longer content to have a limited role in society. Women activists helped bring about Progressive reforms and won the right to vote. In the years ahead, women would continue the struggle to expand their roles and rights.
Women Gain Rights
Expanding Opportunities for Women
In the early 1900s, more and more middle-class women wanted to do more than fulfill their roles as wives and mothers. They were ready to do other tasks besides the important ones of raising children, cooking meals, keeping the home clean, and caring for family members. They wanted to expand their role in the community
Education helped many women achieve their goals. By the 1890s, a rising number of women’s colleges prepared them for careers as teachers or nurses. Some, such as Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania and the School of Social Work in New York, trained them to lead the new organizations working for social reform. The number of women attending college jumped. By 1900, one third of all college students, nationwide, were women. By attending college, women expanded their own economic opportunities. Armed with education and modern ideas, many middle-class white women began to tackle problems they saw in society.
Economic and Social Issues for Women Working-class women had worked outside of the home for decades. For these women, working outside the home meant difficult jobs, with long hours and dangerous conditions. And they were usually expected to hand over their wages
168
to their husbands, fathers, or brothers. Many women labored in factories that made cigars or clothing. Others toiled as laundresses or servants. Immigrants, African Americans, and women from rural areas filled these jobs, and most of them had little or no education.
As a result, they could easily be cheated or bullied by their employers. Without being able to vote, women had little influence on the politicians who could expand their rights and look after their interests.
Addressing Economic Issues A key goal of women reformers was to limit the number of work hours. They succeeded in several states. For example, a 1903 Oregon law capped women’s workdays at ten hours. Five years later, in Muller v. Oregon, the Supreme Court reviewed that law. Lawyer Louis D. Brandeis argued that long working hours harmed working women and their families.
The Supreme Court agreed with Brandeis. Based on their role as mothers, it said, women could be “properly placed in a class” by themselves. As a result, laws could limit their work hours, even if similar laws would not be allowed for men. At the time, Progressives viewed this decision as a victory for women workers. In later years, however, this ruling was used to justify paying women less than men for the same job.
Florence Kelley believed that women were hurt by unfair prices for goods they had to buy to run their homes. In 1899, she helped found the National Consumers League (NCL), which is still active today. The NCL gave special labels to “goods produced under fair, safe, and healthy working conditions” and urged women to buy them and avoid products that did not have these labels. The NCL pushed for other reforms as well. It backed laws calling for the government to inspect meatpacking plants, to make workplaces safer, and to make payments to the unemployed.
Florence Kelley also helped form the Women’s Trade Union League (WTUL), another group that tried to improve conditions for female factory workers. It was one of the few groups in which upper-class and working-class women served together as leaders. The WTUL pushed for federal laws that set a minimum wage and an eight-hour workday. It also created the first workers’ strike fund, which could be used to help support families who refused to work in unsafe or unfair conditions.
Women Address Social Issues A main goal of Progressive women was to improve family life. They pushed for laws that could help mothers keep families healthy and safe. One focus of this effort was the temperance movement led by the Womens Christian Temperance Union (WCTU). The WCTU,
» Like their male counterparts, women workers, like these women in a cigar factory near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, struggled with unpleasant and sometimes unhealthy working conditions.
» Women protested the production and sale of alcohol to generate support for the Eighteenth Amendment.
America Comes of Age
169
3.2 Women Gain Rights
along with other groups such as the Anti-Saloon League promoted temperance, the practice of never drinking alcohol. Members felt that alcohol often led men to squander their earnings on liquor and neglect or abuse their families. Formed in the 1870s, the WCTU gained strength during the Progressive Era. The WCTU was led by the influential speaker Frances Willard from 1879 until her death in 1898. Her work contributed to the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919, which outlawed the production and sale of alcohol.
Temperance was Willard’s primary goal, but she also supported women’s suffrage—the right to vote. She argued that women needed the vote to prohibit the sale of alcohol. Like many WCTU members, Willard also promoted other social causes, such as public health and welfare reform.
Nurse Margaret Sanger thought that family life and women’s health would improve if mothers had fewer children. In 1916, Sanger, herself one of 11 children, opened the country's first birth-control clinic. Very controversial at the time, Sanger was jailed several times as a “public nuisance” for distributing information about birth control. But federal courts eventually said doctors could give out information about family planning. In 1921, Sanger founded the American Birth
» Ida B. Wells, who was born into slavery, became a prominent Progressive activist promoting freedom from violence and equal opportunities for African Americans.
Interactive Gallery
Control League to make this information available to more women.
African American women also worked for social change. In 1896, Ida B. Wells, an African American teacher and journalist, helped form the National Association of Colored Women (NACW). Wells was well-known for leading an anti-lynching campaign through writing for several newspapers and speaking tours. The NACW’s goal was to help families strive for success and to assist those who were less fortunate. With money raised from educated black women, the NACW set up daycare centers to protect and educate black children while their parents went to work.
BT RECALL
What steps did women take to win workers’ rights?
Women Seek Equal Political Rights
One of the boldest goals of Progressive women was suffrage. They argued that women participating in the democratic process through voting was the only way to make sure that the government would protect children, foster education, and support family life. As Jane Addams explained, women needed the vote because political issues reached inside people’s homes.
If the street is not cleaned by the city authorities no amount of private sweeping will keep the tenement free from grime; if the garbage is not properly collected and destroyed a tenement-house mother may see her children sicken and die of diseases from which she alone is powerless to shield them, although her tenderness and devotion are unbounded.
She cannot even secure untainted meat for her household, . . . unless the meat has been inspected by city officials.
—Jane Addams, Ladies Home Joinnai, 1.910
The Early Fight for a Constitutional Amendment Since the 1850s, reformers such as Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton had tirelessly struggled for the right for women to have a voice in political issues.
170	3.2 Women Gain Rights
America Comes of Age
Major Organizations of the Progressive Era With High Female Participation
NCL
National Consumers League The nation's oldest consumer advocacy organization; it represents consumers on marketplace and workplace issues. WTUL
Women's Trade Union League The WTUL strove to reform working conditions by supporting women in labor unions and strikes. WCTU
Women's Christian Temperance Union The WCTU conducted "Women's Crusades" to "agitate, educate, and legislate" against the destructive power of alcohol. NACW
National Association of Colored Women The NACW promoted the moral, mental, and material progress by women of color, through women's suffrage and education. NAWSA
National American Woman Suffrage Association The NAWSA lobbied for state suffrage amendments that would lead to a federal amendment. NAOWS
National Association Opposed to Woman Suffrage Until passage of the 19th Amendment, the NAOWS argued that woman suffrage would impede women from making social changes. NWP
National Woman's Party Grown out of the NAWSA, the NWP used more militant methods to enfranchise women nationally. NAACP
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People The NAACP aims to educate citizens on civil rights, eliminate race prejudice, and ensure political, educational, social, and economic equality. » Hypothesize Why would an organization such as NAOWS oppose woman suffrage?
Although Anthony and other women's right activists had favored ending slavery, they felt betrayed when Radical Republicans did not include women in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments.
In 1869, Anthony and Stanton formed the National Woman Suffrage Association to fight for a constitutional amendment that would grant women the right to vote. They argued that just as the Constitution had been amended to extend the vote to African Americans, it should be amended to extend the vote to women.
In 1872, Anthony voted in an election in Rochester, New York, an illegal act for which she was tried and ultimately convicted in federal court. While awaiting trial, she toured the nation, delivering a speech titled "Is It a Crime for a Citizen of the United States to Vote?” Anthony declared, “Our . . . government is based on .
. . the natural right of every individual member ... to a voice and a vote in making and executing the laws.” However, her speech failed to convince the nation to enact a women’s suffrage amendment. An amendment was introduced in Congress and rejected in 1887. By the time of Anthony’s death in 1906, only four western states—Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, and Idaho had granted women the right to vote.
Women Lobby for Expanded Rights In the 1890s, the national suffrage effort was reenergized by Carrie Chapman Catt. Catt had studied law and worked as one of the country’s first female school superintendents.
A captivating speaker, Catt traveled around the country urging women to join the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), created in 1890 by the merger of Anthony’s organization and a rival women’s suffrage group. In 1900, Catt became the president of the NAWSA. She promoted what became known as her "winning plan,” which called for action on two fronts to expand women’s right to participate in the democratic process. Some teams of women lobbied Congress to pass a constitutional amendment giving women the right to vote. Meanwhile, other teams used the new referendum process to try to pass state suffrage laws. The strategy at the state level eventually helped women win the right to vote in New York, Michigan, and Oklahoma.
Catt introduced a “society plan” to recruit wealthy, well-educated women. She and her army of workers signed on women from all levels of society, including African Americans, Mexican Americans, and Jewish immigrants. All these women, called “suffragettes,” helped promote suffrage in their own areas.
Activists Use Nonviolent Protests By 1910, as Progressivism was nearing its height, the women’s suffrage movement was growing stronger too. A new generation of leaders had emerged. Besides Catt, they included Jane Addams and Harriet Stanton Blatch, the daughter of Elizabeth Cady Stanton. The movement’s new leaders expanded its goals to include
America Comes of Age 171	3.2 Women Gain Rights
calls for improvements in education, reforms of corrupt government, and labor reforms such as the passage of child labor laws. These activists presented suffrage as not only an expansion of the democratic process but also as a way to help solve many of society’s other ills. This strategy linked the women’s suffrage movement with the powerful wave of Progressive reform.
The suffrage movement’s new goals also helped it grow by making it more appealing to working women. The rising number of college-educated women flooded into the movement as well. Some women, known as social activists, took to the streets, organizing mass parades and rallies. Catt, while cautious about these new methods, added them to her tactics at the NAWSA. Some women social activists grew even more daring in their strategies to win the vote.
Alice Paul, their best known leader, was raised in a Quaker home where she was encouraged to be independent. Paul attended a Quaker college and the New York School of Social Work before earning a Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania in 1912. She believed that drastic steps were needed to win the vote. By 1913, she was organizing women to recruit others across the nation. They drew in women of many backgrounds, from Maud Younger, known as the “millionaire waitress” because she organized California’s first waitresses’ union, to Nina Otero-
Warren, a Hispanic woman who headed New Mexico’s State Board of Health.
By 1917, Paul had formed the National Woman’s Party (NWP), which used public protest marches. The NWP became the first group to march with picket signs outside the White House. Hundreds of women were arrested in these protests. Some went on hunger strikes, stating that they would not eat until they could vote. While in jail, some women, including Paul, were force-fed to end their hunger strikes. The NWP methods angered many people, including women in other suffrage groups. Nevertheless, they did help women the right to vote because the NWP’s actions drew attention to their cause and made less-radical groups like the NAWSA look tame by comparison.
The Nineteenth Amendment Expands Political Rights In the 1916 presidential election, both the Democratic and the Republican parties called for extending the right to vote to women. As the movement gained support, however, opposition to it also increased. The liquor industry strongly opposed women’s suffrage because of women’s support for temperance. The textile industry also opposed suffrage because it feared women would favor laws limiting child labor. Even some women worked against the movement. The National Association Opposed to Woman Suffrage (NAOWS) believed that the effort to

KEY
[~~1 Full suffrage
before 1900, with date granted
I [ Full suffrage 1900-1919, with date granted
I I
Partial suffrage before 1920 I | Full suffrage by the Nineteenth Amendment, 1920
Passage of Women's Suffrage
» Analyze Maps In which region of the United States did the majority of states achieve full suffrage for women before the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment?
America Comes of Age 172	3.2 Women Gain Rights
win the vote would take women’s attention away from family and volunteer work that benefited society in many ways. But as pressure for women’s suffrage grew, the NAOWS faded away.
When the United States entered World War I in April 1917, President Woodrow Wilson proclaimed that “the world must be made safe for democracy.” Suffragists were astounded.
How could America be a democracy, they wondered, if women could not vote? Nevertheless, Carrie Catt and Florence Kelley led the NAWSA to support the war effort. Their actions and those of the NWP convinced a growing number of legislators to support a women’s suffrage amendment.
In June 1917, envoys from Russia visited President Wilson. Alice Paul and her activists saw a golden opportunity. The Russians had just overthrown their czar, established a republic, and granted women the right to vote. As the envoys neared the White House, the suffragists stunned an embarrassed Wilson by unveiling a banner that proclaimed America was not a democracy. In 1918, an amendment to extend the vote to women was once again considered by Congress. It passed in the House of Representatives but was narrowly rejected in the Senate.
The following year, the amendment was offered in Congress once again. In June 1919, Congress finally approved the Nineteenth Amendment, which stated that the right to vote “shall not be denied or abridged on account of sex.”
On August 18, 1920, the Tennessee State House of Representatives passed the amendment by one vote. With Tennessee’s ratification, enough states had passed the amendment that it became official. Alice Paul and Carrie Catt both claimed responsibility for the victory. In fact, according to historian Nancy Cott, “neither the shocking militancy of the National Women’s Party nor the ladylike moderation of NAWSA was so solely responsible for victory as each group publicly claimed.” The rival groups both contributed to the triumph of the women’s suffrage movement, which also gave a boost to the budding civil rights movement of the twentieth century. The impact of the Nineteenth Amendment was felt immediately. On November 2,1920, Catt, Paul, and millions of other American women voted for the first time in a U.S. presidential election.
fei CHECK UNDERSTANDING How did the Nineteenth
Amendment expand participation in the democratic process?
» Women who protested their lack of suffrage often landed in jail, where they continued to protest despite the limitations of their environment.
» Millions of women voted for the first time after the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment prohibited states from denying the right to vote based on sex.
America Comes of Age 173	3.2 Women Gain Rights
ASSESSMENT
Generate Explanations Explain how Mullerv. Oregon represented a victory for women reformers during the Progressive Era but presented a setback for them in later years.
Determine Point of View Explain why some women’s rights activists were angry when the rights of African Americans were expanded after the Civil War.
3.	Summarize Discuss the strategies of Carrie Chapman Catt’s “winning plan.”
4.	Generate Explanations Explain how the women’s suffrage movement changed with the rise of Progressivism.
5.	Compare and Contrast the strategies of the National American Woman Suffrage Association and the National Woman’s Party.

America Comes of Age 174
3.2 Women Gain Rights
Prejudice arid discrimination against minorities continued even as the Progressive Movement got underway. But in the spirit of Progressivism, African Americans, Latinos, Catholics, Jews, and new immigrant groups worked to help themselves. Their efforts paved the way for the era of civil rights that would follow decades later.
Striving for Equality E
Minorities Face Challenges in the Progressive Era
The Progressive Era was not so progressive for nonwhite and immigrant Americans. Most Progressives were white Anglo-Saxon Protestant reformers who were indifferent or actively hostile to minorities. They tried to make the United States a model society by encouraging everyone to follow white, middle-class ways of life.
The Americanization Movement Settlement houses and other civic groups played a prominent role in the Americanization efforts of many Progressives. While they taught immigrants English, their programs also tried to change how immigrants lived. They advised immigrants how to dress like white middle-class Americans and pushed them to replace the foods and customs of their homelands with Protestant practices and values. These reformers believed that assimilating immigrants into American society would make them more loyal and moral citizens.
Many Progressives found the immigrants’ use of alcohol especially alarming. In many European countries, it was customary for families to serve wine or beer with meals. Many reformers, however, believed that these practices showed moral faults. As a result, prejudice against immigrants was one of the forces behind the temperance movement.
» Objectives
Analyze Progressives’ attitudes toward minority rights.
Describe the political organizations formed by African Americans to promote civil rights.
Examine the actions taken by other minority groups to expand their rights.
» Key Terms
Americanization	Anti-Defamation
Booker T.	League
Washington W.E.B. Du Bois Niagara Movement National Association
for the
Advancement of
Colored People
(NAACP)
Urban League Anti-Defamation
League mutualistas American Indian
Citizenship Act of
1924
c
BSV PEARSON I
31 realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
175
Effects of Racism and Plessy v. Ferguson Many Progressives shared the same prejudice against nonwhites held by other white Americans of the time. They believed that some people were more fit than others to play a leading role in society. They agreed with invalid scientific theories that said that dark-skinned peoples had less intelligence than whites. In the late 1800s, southern Progressives used these misguided theories to justify the passage of laws that kept African Americans from voting.
Some southern Progressives urged an end to the violence and terrorism waged against African Americans but still did not advocate equal rights. Edgar Gardner Murphy, an Episcopal minister and a leading Alabama Progressive, advised that African Americans “will accept in the white man’s country the place assigned him by the white man, . . . not by stress of rivalry, but by genial cooperation with the white man’s interests.”
After the Supreme Court issued its Plessy v. Ferguson decision, which upheld Jim Crow laws, states across the North and the South had passed segregation laws. By 1910, segregation was the norm across the nation. After 1914, even the offices of the federal government in Washington, D.C., were segregated as a result of policies approved by President Woodrow Wilson, a Progressive.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What attitudes did most Progressives hold about minorities and immigrant groups?
African Americans
Promote Civil Rights
In the face of these injustices, the nation's most visible African American leader urged patience. Booker T. Washington told blacks to move slowly toward racial progress. By working hard and waiting patiently, he believed, African Americans would gradually win white Americans’ respect and eventually would be able to exercise their full voting and citizenship rights.
Other African Americans rejected this view. The most outspoken among them were W.E.B. Du Bois and William Monroe Trotter. Both men had been raised in New England and educated at Harvard University. Both urged African Americans to demand immediately all the rights guaranteed by the Constitution.
A
New Civil Rights Organization Du Bois and Trotter were especially concerned that all across the South, black men were being denied the right to vote. In the summer of 1905, they and other leading African American thinkers met at Niagara Falls. They had to meet in Canada because no hotel on the New York side of the border would give them rooms. The Niagara Movement, as the group called itself, denounced the idea of gradual progress. Washington, they said, was too willing to compromise African Americans’ basic rights. They also condemned his notion of teaching only trade skills. This kind of education, Du Bois said, “can create workers, but it cannot make men.” Talented blacks should be taught history, literature, and philosophy, so they could think for themselves. DuBois had a significant impact on the ways African Americans and concerned white people thought about equality.
Two Views on Civil Rights
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
W.E.B. DUBOIS
1868-1963 "[The Negro must] live peaceably with his white neighbors ... the Negro [must] deport himself modestly ... depending upon the slow but sure influences that proceed from the possessions of property, intelligence, and high character for the full recognition of his political rights."
Washington believed that African Americans had to achieve economic independence before civil rights. Black people must tolerate discrimination while they proved themselves equal to white people. Slowly, civil rights would come.
v
» Analyze Information How did the views of these two leaders on the ways in which African Americans should secure civil rights differ?
"We claim for ourselves every single right that belongs to a freeborn American ... and until we get these rights we will never cease to protest... How shall we get them? By voting where we may vote, by persistent, unceasing agitation, by hammering at the truth, by sacrifice and work."
Du Bois believed that black Americans had to demand their social and civil rights or else become permanent victims of racism. African Americans must fight every day for the rights given to them in the Constitution.
©
Interactive Timeline
..
America Comes of Age 176	3.3 Striving for Equality
Still, despite its bold ideas, the Niagara Movement never grew to more than a few hundred strong. To make a difference, African Americans needed a more powerful voice.
NAACP
Promotes Civil Rights In the summer of 1908,	a white mob in Springfield, Illinois, attempted to lynch two African American prisoners in the city jail. Upon learning that the prisoners had been removed to safety, the rioters turned their anger against the city’s black residents, killing two people and burning 40 homes. The Niagara Movement members were outraged that such an attack could happen in Abraham Lincoln’s hometown.
The Springfield riot also got the attention of a number of white reformers. They now acknowledged the need to help African Americans protect their lives, win the right to vote, and secure their civil rights. In
1909,	several white reformers joined with leaders of the Niagara Movement to form the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The NAACP was a political organization that aimed to help African Americans be “physically free from peonage [forced, low-paid labor], mentally free from ignorance, politically free from disfranchisement, and socially free from insult.”
NAACP leaders included white and black Progressives who had worked in other areas of social reform. Among them were Jane Addams, Ray Stannard Baker, and Florence Kelley. Ida B. Wells, owner of a Tennessee newspaper, used her publication to make clear the horror of lynching at great risk to her own safety. She and the others planned the group’s strategy—to use litigation in the courts to challenge unfair laws and expand the right to participate in the democratic process. In the early 1900s, the NAACP focused on the battle for equal access to decent housing and professional careers like teaching. W.E.B. DuBois continued to have an impact on American society as editor of the NAACP’s magazine, The Crisis.
Urban League Seeks to Expand Economic Opportunities Across the country, African Americans were migrating from rural to urban areas during this period. Local black clubs and churches set up employment agencies and relief efforts to help African Americans get settled and find work.
In 1911, more than 100 of these groups in many cities joined into a network called the Urban League. While the NAACP helped middle-class blacks struggle for political and social justice, the Urban League focused on poorer workers. It helped families buy clothes and books and send children to school. It also helped factory workers and domestic servants find jobs. Both
W.E.B.
Du Bois (center) and other founding members of the Niagara Movement attended the Niagara Conference in 1905. Interactive Gallery
the NAACP and the Urban League still aid African Americans today.
Ki RECALL Why did African Americans and others
decide it was time to organize against discrimination?
Protecting Rights for Ethnic and Religious Minorities
African Americans were not alone in seeking rights. Individuals and organizations of diverse ethnic and religious groups spoke out against unfair treatment and took action by creating self-help agencies. For example, in northern cities, Catholic parishes offered a variety of social services to immigrants. In Chicago, a network of Polish Catholic groups grew so strong that it earned the nickname American Warsaw.
Expanding Rights and Opportunities for Jews
Jews in New York had formed the B’nai B’rith in 1843 to provide religious education and to help Jewish families. In response to growing anti-Semitism, the group founded the Anti-Defamation League in 1913. Its goal was— and still is—to defend Jews and others
America Comes of Age
177
3.3 Striving for Equality
against physical and verbal attacks, false statements, and “to secure justice and fair treatment to all citizens alike. . . .” In this way, the group expanded political rights for Jews and others. During the late 1800s and early 1900s, some business refused to hire or serve Jewish people. The Anti-Defamation League led efforts to expand economic opportunities for Jews and other minorities by fighting this form of discrimination.
Expanding Rights and Opportunities for Mexican Americans Mexican Americans also organized to help themselves. Those living in Arizona formed the Partido Liberal Mexicano (PLM), which offered Mexican Americans many of the same services that the Urban League gave to African Americans. In several states, Mexican Americans formed mutualistas, groups that made loans and provided legal assistance. The mutualistas also had insurance programs to help members if they were too sick to work.
Many Mexican Americans were forced to sign unfair labor contracts that kept them in debt to people whose land they worked. In 1911, the Supreme Court struck down a law that enforced that system.
Native Americans Gain Citizenship Progressives did little to help Native Americans. The Dawes Act, passed in 1887, had divided reservations into plots for
» Asian Americans faced widespread discrimination. California state laws placed barriers to the property rights of Japanese immigrant farmers, for example.
individuals to farm. But the law also said that lands not given to individual Indians could be sold to the general public. By 1932, nearly two thirds of the lands held by tribes in 1887 were in the hands of whites.
Carlos Montezuma, a Native American from Arizona, helped establish the Society of American Indians in 1911, the first organization formed to promote Indian rights and protest federal Indian policy. A doctor, Montezuma treated Native Americans living on reservations. He urged Native Americans to preserve their cultures and avoid being dependent on the government. Many reformers, who hoped that Indians could be assimilated into American society like immigrants, found this position troubling.
The Dawes Act barred Native Americans from selling their plots of land for 25 years. The law provided that they would then get the title to the land and become citizens. This policy was intended to speed Native Americans’ assimilation into white society. By the 1920s, however, it was clear that the policy was not achieving this goal. So Congress tried another approach. The congressional act American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 made all Native Americans citizens of the United States, with full voting rights. For Native Americans, this law was an important step toward political equality with other Americans.
The official reason for granting citizenship and voting rights was to reward Native Americans for their service in World War I. However, supporters also hoped that the reform would help the Americanization process.
Fighting for Rights and Opportunities for Asian Americans Asian Americans also had to protect themselves and struggled to expand their political rights. A 1913 California law said that only American citizens could own land. Because Japanese immigrants could not become citizens, the law forced them to sell their land. Japanese Americans found a way around this, however, by putting the land in their children’s names. Because their children had been born in the United States, they were American citizens. The law also affected immigrants from China and India, who were also not allowed to become citizens.
Japanese immigrant Takao Ozawa fought the law in court that blocked Asian Americans from becoming citizens. In 1922, however, the Supreme Court ruled against him. A newspaper read by Japanese Americans commented, “The slim hope that we had entertained . . . has been shattered completely.”
E2 IDENTIFY
What strategies did other minority groups use to defend their rights? America Comes of Age 178	3.3 Striving for Equality
'I !
ft ELPS
ELPS READING 4.G.2
Read aloud the text with a partner. Then reread the section about an ethnic or religious minority that you found most interesting. Together, summarize the main ideas of the section. ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Discuss the contradictions of the Progressive Movement.
2.	Compare and Contrast the ideologies of Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. Du Bois.
3.	Draw Conclusions Discuss both the positive and negative implications of the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924.
4.	Summarize What were the goals of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)?
5.	Compare the efforts of Mexican Americans, Native Americans, Asian Americans, and Jews to fight against discrimination during the Progressive Era.
3.3 Striving for Equality
America Comes of Age
President Theodore Roosevelt dedicated his considerable energy and abilities to achieving Progressive reforms.
In the late 1800s, the United States had several weak and ineffective Presidents. The arrival of Theodore Roosevelt, a charismatic figure who embraced Progressive ideals, ushered in a new era. Roosevelt pushed for many Progressive reforms and expanded the powers of the presidency. He changed the way Americans viewed the roles of the President and the government.
Interactive Flipped Video
5.A, 5.B, 5.C, 14.B, 14.C, 15.B, 15.E
» Objectives
Analyze how Theodore Roosevelt influenced the changing relationship between the federal government and private business.
Explain the impact of Roosevelt’s actions towards managing the environment.
Compare and contrast Roosevelt’s policies with Taft’s and Wilson’s policies.
Describe Wilson’s efforts to regulate the economy.
Assess the legacy of the Progressive Era.
» Key Terms
Square Deal Hepburn Act Meat Inspection Act Pure Food and Drug
Act
John Muir Gifford Pinchot National
Reclamation Act New Nationalism Progressive Party Woodrow Wilson New Freedom
Sixteenth
Amendment
Federal Reserve Act Federal Trade
Commission
(FTC).
Clayton Antitrust Act Theodore Roosevelt monetary policy
Reformers in the White House
Roosevelt Changes the
Relationship Between
Government and Business
In 1901, when Theodore Roosevelt became President of the United States, he was only 43 years old.
However, he had packed quite a lot into those years, gaining a reputation for being smart, energetic, and opinionated. The sickly child of wealthy parents, he had used his family’s resources to develop both his strength and his mind. Observers said Theodore Roosevelt generated so much energy that if you met him, you left the event with bits of his personality “stuck to your clothes."
Roosevelt’s Path to the Presidency Roosevelt had graduated with honors from Harvard University in 1880. He spent only a few months studying law at Columbia University before being elected to the New York State Assembly. After three years’ service there, and after the deaths of both his mother and his wife, Alice, Roosevelt retired to a ranch in the West. There he developed a love of the wilderness.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
| Access your Digital Lesson.
180
Theodore Roosevelt could not remain long out of the spotlight, however. By 1889, he had returned to politics. As president of New York City’s Board of Police Commissioners, he gained fame by fighting corruption. President William McKinley noticed him and named him Assistant Secretary of the Navy. When the Spanish-American War broke out in 1898, Roosevelt resigned the post to form the Rough Riders, a volunteer cavalry unit that became famous during the war.
After the end of the conflict, the young war hero was elected governor of New York, where he pushed for Progressive reforms. His reform efforts annoyed Republican leaders in the state, however. They convinced McKinley to choose Roosevelt as his running mate so Roosevelt would leave New York— and them—alone. McKinley was reelected President in 1900, but within a few months he was assassinated, and Roosevelt became President. He soon dominated public attention. Journalists vied for interviews with him and children begged their parents for a teddy bear, the new stuffed animal named for him.
Progressive reformers were pleased to see the benefits of the ICC spreading, namely that the powerful railroads were finally under control. This pleased farmers as well, who had long sought such regulation. But the Elkins Act and the ICC in general had costs.
He called his program the Square Deal. Its goals were to keep the wealthy and powerful from taking advantage of small business owners and the poor. Roosevelt’s idea of fair government did not mean that everyone would get rich or that the government should take care of the lazy. He compared his Square Deal to a hand of cards.
When I say I believe in a square deal, I do not mean to give every man the best hand. If good cards do not come to any man, or if they do come, and he has not got the power to play them, that is his affair. All I mean is that there shall be no crookedness in the dealing.
—Theodore Roosevelt, 1905
Intervening Between Owners and Workers
Roosevelt often stepped in to labor disputes with the authority and power of the federal government. One example was in 1902, when Pennsylvania coal miners went on strike. The miners wanted a pay raise and a shorter workday Roosevelt sympathized with the overworked miners, but he knew that a steady supply of
coal was needed to keep factories running and homes warm. He wanted the strike ended quickly.
First, Roosevelt tried to get mine owners to listen to workers' concerns. When this failed, he threatened to send federal troops to take control of the mines and to run them with federal employees. His threat forced the mine owners to give the miners a small pay raise and a nine-hour workday. For the first time, the federal government had stepped in to help workers in a labor dispute.
This coal strike intervention was one of many steps Roosevelt took to control the power of corporations. Within a year, Roosevelt convinced Congress to establish the Department of Commerce and Labor to monitor businesses engaged in interstate commerce.
The ICC Takes on the Railroads The cost of shipping freight on railroads had been an issue since the 1870s. Railroad companies often could charge whatever they wanted. The railroads’ power was especially troublesome for western farmers. They had no other way to move their products to eastern markets.
In 1887, Congress had created the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to oversee rail charges for shipments that passed through more than one state.
» People seize coal from a stalled train during the 1902 coal strike. Analyze Images How does this image reinforce Roosevelt's belief that it was important for the coal strike to end quickly?
America Comes of Age
3.4 Reformers in the White House
The ICC was supposed to make sure that all shippers were charged the same amounts. By 1900, though, the Supreme Court had stripped away most of the ICC’s power. So Roosevelt pushed Congress to pass the Elkins Act in 1903, which imposed fines on railroads that gave special rates to favored shippers. In 1906, he got Congress to pass the Hepburn Act, which gave the ICC even greater powers. This law allowed ICC for the first time to set maximum shipping rates. The act also set maximum rates for ferries, toll bridges, and oil pipelines. Finally, it gave any ruling by the ICC the legal force of a court order.
Progressive reformers were pleased to see the powerful railroads finally brought under control. Farmers who had long sought such regulation especially felts its benefits. But the Elkins Act and the ICC in general had costs, as its critics pointed out. The ICC’s five commissioners were not elected to their positions. Once appointed by the President and approved by the Senate, they could not be removed during their term.
Some Americans found the ICC’s independence from the public will and from all three branches of government to be troubling. In addition, when the ICC exercised its new power and limited railroad rates, its action harmed the economy. The value of railroad stocks plummeted, which helped to bring on the financial panic that swept the nation in 1907.
A
Trustbuster Enforces Legislation It did not take long for the President and his administration to earn a reputation as "trustbusters.” In response to an
antitrust suit filed by Roosevelt’s attorney general, the Supreme Court ruled in 1904 that the Northern Securities Company—a big railroad company—was an illegal trust. The decision forced the company to split into smaller companies. The next year, the Court found that a beef trust and several powerful agricultural companies had broken antitrust laws.
Roosevelt was not interested in bringing down all large companies. He saw a difference between “good trusts” and “bad trusts.” Big businesses could often be more efficient than small ones, he believed. Big business was bad, he said, only if it bullied smaller companies or cheated consumers.
So he supported powerful corporations as long as they did business fairly. His supporters called him a “trust-tamer,” but some wealthy Progressives criticized his trustbusting. Other critics claimed that his good trust-bad trust distinction meant that antitrust laws were being applied unevenly and thus unfairly. This practice may even have been unconstitutional—a violation of the private property protections in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.
Despite such criticisms, most Americans were pleased with the antitrust prosecutions. However, they were also conflicted. They deeply distrusted and feared the big corporations’ huge concentrations of wealth and power. But at the same time, they treasured the consumer benefits the companies’ size often provided.
Regulating the Food and Drug Industries In
1906, muckraker Upton Sinclair published his novel
Early Progressive Legislation
LEGISLATION
Sherman Antitrust Act (1890)
National Reclamation Act (1902)
jl
!l
Elkins Act (1903)
Outlawed monopolies and practices that restrained trade, such as price fixing
Provided for federal irrigation projects by using money from the sale of public lands
Imposed fines on railroads that gave special rates to favored shippers
Hepburn Act (1906)
Authorized the federal government to regulate railroad rates and set maximum prices for ferries, bridge tolls, and oil pipelines
Meat Inspection Act (1906)
Allowed the federal government to inspect meat sold across state lines and required inspections of meat-processing plants
Pure Food and Drug Act (1906)
Allowed federal inspection of food and medicine and banned the shipment and sale of impure food and the mislabeling of food and medicine
» Analyze Charts Which of these acts do you believe was the most important? Why?

America Comes of Age 182	3.4 Reformers in the White House
The Jungle. His descriptions of the filthy, unhealthy conditions in meatpacking plants revolted the public and infuriated the President, having an immediate impact. Roosevelt urged Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act that same year.
It provided federal agents with the power to inspect any meat sold across state lines and required federal inspection of meat-processing plants. Today, when we eat lunchmeat or grilled chicken, we trust that federal inspectors have monitored the plant where it is produced. If there is a serious problem, the government can force the meatpacker to pull the product off the shelves before many people become sick. This regulation is one lasting result of Progressives’ insistence that the government take responsibility for food safety.
The Pure Food and Drug Act benefited the public by placing the same controls on other foods and on medicines. Although there was some concern that here again the federal government was taking on too much of the states’ constitutional police power, most Americans felt like the benefits outweighed the costs. The act also banned the interstate shipment of impure food and the mislabeling of food and drugs. Today, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) still enforces this law and others. The FDA monitors companies to make sure people are not hurt by dangerous substances or dishonest labels. For example, before a drug can be sold, it must be tested and approved by the FDA.
B RECALL
What was the purpose of such legislation as the Hepburn Act and the Meat Inspection Act?
Managing the
Environment
Roosevelt’s deep reverence for nature also shaped his policies. The books he published on hunting and the rugged West reflected his fascination with the competition between humans and the wilderness. He was pleased that the federal government had established Yellowstone National Park in 1872 to protect wildlife, and he admired California naturalist John Muir, whose efforts had led Congress to create Yosemite National Park in 1890.
Conservation or Preservation? In 1891, Congress had given the President the power to protect timberlands by setting aside land as federal forests. Following Muir’s advice, Roosevelt closed off more than 100 million acres of forestland. However, the President did not agree with Muir that all wild areas should be preserved, or left untouched. Some wild lands held
» Analyze Political Cartoons What does this cartoon suggest about Roosevelt’s differing approaches to regulating trusts?
» President Roosevelt met with John Muir in Yosemite National Park, California, in 1903. Contrast How did Roosevelt’s views on preserving wilderness areas differ from Muir’s?
Interactive Gallery
America Comes of Age 183	3.4 Reformers in the White House
valuable resources, and Roosevelt thought those resources were meant to be used. This view became clear in his forest policy. In typical Progressive style, he called on experts to draw up plans for both conserving and using the forests.
Roosevelt drew on the "rational use” ideas of Gifford Pinchot, who led the Division of Forestry in the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Pinchot recommended a different approach—that forests be preserved for public use. By this, he meant that forests should be protected so that trees would have time to mature into good lumber. Then the protected areas should be logged for wood to build houses and new areas placed under protection. “The object of our forest policy,” explained Pinchot, “is not to preserve the forests because they are refuges for the wild creatures of the wilderness, but rather they are the making of prosperous homes.”
Pinchot’s views came to dominate American policies toward natural resources. Conservation, or the planned management of natural resources, became government policy for managing public lands. But private ownership inspired conservation, too. In some cases, private ownership gave people the incentive to handle the natural resources on their land wisely so they would not damage the long-term value of their property.
In all, Roosevelt worked with Congress to establish five national parks and established 18 national
monuments or historical landmarks under the Antiquities Act of 1906. Together, these unique places formed the core of the National Park Service, which was established in 1916 and still works today to conserve and share many natural and historic landmarks in the United States.
Roosevelt’s views on land use went beyond the belief that public lands should, in some cases, be preserved or put to use for wider societal benefit. In 1908, the Supreme Court of the State of Maine handed down a decision saying, essentially, that the government could restrict the cutting of trees on private land in order to prevent erosion. Roosevelt backed up this governmental action, publicly stating his view that the needs of the community outweighed the private property rights of individuals or industries.
This was a controversial stance. The idea that private property, whether a person’s own personal property or that of his or her business, is protected by the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution is one of the bedrock ideals of American society and industry. The Fifth Amendment states that no “private property [shall] be taken for public use, without just compensation.” Many individuals and busines owners felt that restrictions on the use of their property, such as those imposed by antitrust regulation or environmental protection regulation, violated this right. This tension
National Land Conservation
» Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, when were the majority of national parks established? What region of the country holds the largest parks?
KEY
National Parks and Forests m Established before Roosevelt's presidency
H|
Established during Roosevelt's presidency |gg Established after
Roosevelt's
presidency
America Comes of Age	184 ; 3.4 Reformers in the White House
between private property rights and public use for the good of the community is still present today.
Changes in Population Affect Water Policy
Another highly controversial natural resource issue was water. Over centuries, Native Americans had used various irrigation methods to bring water to the arid Southwest. The situation changed in the late 1800s, when newcomers began mining and farming in Utah, New Mexico, Colorado, Nevada, and California. Mining machinery required a great deal of water, and watersharing systems long used by those states’ Mexican American residents were challenged by the new people and businesses who arrived. Private irrigation companies came to the area, staked claims to sections of riverbeds, and redirected the water so farmers could revive—or “reclaim”— dried-up fields. As increases in population strained environmental resources, bitter fights developed over who should own water rights and how the water should be shared.
Roosevelt sprang into action on this issue. He listened to Nevada representative Francis Newlands, who wanted the federal government to help western states build huge reservoirs to hold and to conserve water. Roosevelt pushed Congress for a law that would allow it.
In 1902, Congress passed the National Reclamation Act, which gave the federal government the power to decide where and how water would be distributed. The government would build and manage dams that would create reservoirs, generate power, and direct water flow. This would make water from one state’s rivers and streams available to farmers in other states. The full effect of the Reclamation Act was felt over the next few decades, as water management projects created huge reservoirs and lakes where there had been dry canyons. Examples include the Salt Valley Project in Arizona and the Roosevelt Dam and Hoover Dam on the Colorado River.
RECALL
What was the purpose of the National Reclamation Act? A
New Direction In Presidential Politics
Roosevelt left the presidency after two terms in office, saying he wished to enjoy private life. He was still a powerful force in the Republican Party, however, and he used that power to help his Secretary of War William Howard Taft win the presidency in 1908. Roosevelt expected Taft to continue his programs of managing business and natural resources. Political cartoonists
» Analyze Political Cartoons What clues in this cartoon reveal what type of policies the author believes Taft will enact as president?
made caricatures of Roosevelt handing over what he called “my policies” to Taft, who seemed to have no ideas of his own.
Taft’s Agenda Differs But Taft soon set his own agenda. He approved the Payne-Aldrich Act (1909), which did not lower tariffs as much as Roosevelt had wanted. He also pushed Congress to pass the Mann-Elkins Act (1910), which gave the government control over telephone and telegraph rates. He encouraged Congress to propose an income tax. Perhaps most importantly, he dropped Roosevelt’s distinction between good trusts and bad trusts.
Taft’s Justice Department brought lawsuits against twice as many corporations as Roosevelt’s had done. One result was that in 1911, the Supreme Court “busted” the trust built by the Standard Oil Company. But Taft also supported what the Court called its “rule of reason,” which relaxed the hard line set by the Sherman Antitrust Act. The rule of reason allowed big monopolies so long as they did not “unreasonably” squeeze out smaller companies. Roosevelt publicly criticized these decisions. Then Taft’s attorney general sued to force U.S. Steel to sell a coal company it had bought. Roosevelt, who had earlier approved the purchase of the company, fumed.
America Comes of
185	3.4 Reformers in the White House
Taft further infuriated Roosevelt and other Progressives in the Republican Party when he fired Gifford Pinchot for publicly criticizing Secretary of the Interior Richard Ballinger. Pinchot charged that Ballinger, who opposed Roosevelt’s conservation policies, had worked with business interests to sell federal land rich in coal deposits in Alaska. Although a congressional investigation later cleared Ballinger of these charges, the damage had been done.
Roosevelt’s Response Roosevelt began traveling the country speaking about what he called the New Nationalism—a program to restore the government’s trustbusting power. Declaring himself as “strong as a bull moose,” Roosevelt vowed to tackle the trusts in a third presidential term. The Taft-Roosevelt battle split the Republican Party as an election neared. Progressives bolted from the Republican party and set up the Progressive Party. Reformer Jane Addams nominated Roosevelt as the Progressive Party’s candidate for the 1912 presidential election.
The Republicans nominated Taft. The question was whether a third party like the Progressive Party could have an impact in a national election. A bitter election loomed.
Wilson Takes Advantage of Republican Discord
The split created an opportunity for the Democrats and their candidate, Woodrow Wilson, to win the White House. Wilson’s ideas had caught the attention of William Jennings Bryan, who helped Wilson win
the Democratic nomination. As a student and later as a professor, Wilson had thought a great deal about good government. His doctoral thesis, Congressional Government,had launched him on a career teaching in college before he became the reforming governor of New Jersey.
Wilson shaped his ideas into a program he called the New Freedom. His plan looked much like Roosevelt’s New Nationalism. It, too, would place strict government controls on corporations. In a speech on the New Freedom, Wilson outlined his aim to provide more opportunities—more freedom—for small businesses.
The man with only a little capital is finding it harder and harder to get into the field, more and more impossible to compete with the big fellow. Why? Because the laws of this country do not prevent the strong from crushing the weak.
— Woodrow Wilson, “The New Freedom, ” 1913
Though he did not win the majority of the popular vote, Wilson received more than four times the number of Electoral College votes that went to Roosevelt or to Taft. The Progressive Party had indeed had an impact on the election. By splitting the Republican vote, the Progressive Party helped the Democrat Wilson to win the White House. The pious and intellectual son of a
Taft and Roosevelt
TAFT
•	Offended Progressives
•	Sought to rein in presidential power
•	Conservative Republican
•	Promoted foreign policy through trade and investment (dollar diplomacy)
ROOSEVELT
•	Became head of Progressive Party
•	Sought to increase presidential power
•	Progressive Republican
•	Promoted assertive foreign policy (big stick diplomacy)
>> Analyze Information How did Taft’s and Roosevelt’s views on government and politics differ?
America Comes of Age 186	3.4 Reformers in the White House

*Two of California's electors voted for Wilson
/	 Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote	Popular Vote	% Electoral Vote
■ Wilson (Democrat)	435	6,296,547	82
H
Roosevelt (Progressive) 88 4,118,571 17 H
Taft (Republican) 8 3,486,720 1 Presidential Election of 1912
» Analyze Maps What evidence shown on the map supports the conclusion that divisions within the Republican party made the Democrats more likely to win the 1912 election?
Sil Interactive Chart
Virginia minister, Wilson was the first man born in the South to win the presidency in almost 60 years.
tS CHECK UNDERSTANDING How did President Taft
influence Roosevelt’s decision to run for a third term?
Wilson Endorses Further Regulation
Republicans Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft introduced the country to forceful Progressive Presidents. Democrat Woodrow Wilson used the expanded power of the presidency to promote a far-reaching reform agenda. Some of Wilson’s economic and antitrust measures are still important in American life today.
President Wilson attacked what he called the “triple wall of privilege”—the tariffs, the banks, and the trusts—that blocked businesses from being free. Early in his first term, he pushed for new laws that would bring down those three walls and give the government more control over the economy.
A
New Tax on Income First, Wilson aimed to prevent big manufacturers from possibly charging unfairly high prices to their customers. One way to do this was to lower the tariffs on goods imported from foreign countries so consumers could buy foreign goods if American companies’ prices were too high. Wilson called a special session of Congress and convinced its members to pass the Underwood Tariff Bill, which cut tariffs.
Tariffs had been one of the main sources of revenue, or money coming in, for the federal government. To make up for the loss of tariff revenue, the Underwood Tariff Act of 1913 included a provision to create a graduated income tax. The recently passed Sixteenth Amendment gave Congress the power to collect an income tax without restrictions. A graduated income tax means that wealthy people pay a higher percentage of their income than do poor people. The revenue from the income tax more than made up for the money the government lost by lowering tariffs on imports.
Taxing incomes proved to be a very controversial reform. Both Republicans and conservative Democrats strongly opposed ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment, as did prominent business leaders. The graduated tax became and continues to be the battleground between those who favor lower rates to stimulate economic growth and those who view it as a means to further public investment.

America Comes of Age
187
3.4 Reformers in the White House
Regulation of Commercial Banks Next, Wilson tried to change the banking system. At the time, the country had no central authority to supervise banks and establish monetary policy, which is control of the supply of money in circulation at any given time. Monetary policy, carried out by a central authority, helps to influence and control interest rates with the goal of promoting economic growth and stability and controlling inflation and deflation. Without such a central authority, interest rates for loans could fluctuate wildly, and a few wealthy bankers had a great deal of control over national, state and local banks’ reserve funds. This meant that a bank might not have full access to its reserves when customers needed to withdraw or borrow money.
Wilson pushed Congress to pass the Federal Reserve Act (1913). This law placed commercial banks under the control of a Federal Reserve Board, which set up regional banks to hold the reserve funds from those commercial banks. This system, still in place today, helps protect the American economy from having too much money end up in the hands of one person, bank, or region.
The Federal Reserve Board also sets the interest rate that banks pay to borrow money from other banks, and it supervises banks to make sure they are well run.
The financial community bitterly opposed passage of the Federal Reserve Act. Critics claimed that it
gave the federal government too much control over the nation’s economy and banking system, a point of view that some Americans still hold today. However, some historians have called the Federal Reserve Act the most important piece of economic legislation before the 1930s.
Wilson and Congress Strengthen Antitrust Regulation Like Presidents before him, Wilson focused on trusts. He agreed with Roosevelt that trusts were not dangerous as long as they did not engage in unfair practices.
In 1914, Wilson persuaded Congress to create the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Members of this group were named by the President to monitor business practices that might lead to monopoly. The FTC was also charged with watching out for false advertising or dishonest labeling. Congress also passed the Clayton Antitrust Act (1914), which strengthened earlier antitrust laws by spelling out those activities in which businesses could not engage.
These laws are still in effect today, protecting both businesses and consumers from abusive business activities. In recent years, the FTC has prosecuted companies that traded stocks dishonestly and fined companies that published false ads. The FTC also regulates buying on the Internet. Some Americans argue, however, that such government regulation
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY
PROPERTY RIGHTS COMPREHENSIVE ZONING

EQUITABLE
BUILDING
REGULATE LAND USE
ZONING
ORDINANCES
r...... i
iilh

iilfi
I« 1«»
1915 1916
1926
» Analyze Information How did comprehensive zoning both protect and possibly violate property rights?
America Comes of Age 188	3.4 Reformers in the White House
Progressive Legislation During Wilson's Presidency
LEGISLATION I
EFFECT
Underwood Tariff Act (1913)
Lowered tariffs on imported goods and established a graduated income tax
Federal Reserve Act (1913)
Created the Federal Reserve Board to oversee banks and manage reserve funds
Federal Trade Commission Act (1914)
Established the Federal Trade Commission to monitor business practices, false advertising, and dishonest labeling
Clayton Antitrust Act (1914)
Strengthened the Sherman Antitrust Act by spelling out specific activities businesses could not do
» Analyze Charts Which of these pieces of legislation do you think is the most important?
interferes with the workings of a free enterprise system and sometimes hurts competition.
Workers Gain Rights The Clayton Antitrust Act also ushered in a new era for workers by protecting labor unions from being attacked as trusts. Now, workers could organize more freely. Samuel Gompers of the American Federation of Labor (AFL) praised the new law as the “Magna Carta” of labor.
On the heels of these protections came the Workingman’s Compensation Act (1916), which gave wages to temporarily disabled civil service employees. That same year, Wilson pushed for the Adamson Act to prevent a nationwide railroad strike, which would have stopped the movement of coal and food, leaving millions of Americans cold and hungry. Railroad union leaders insisted on the eight-hour day, but railroad managers would not accept it. Wilson called many company leaders to the White House, pleading with them to change their minds and avert a strike. When those efforts failed, he worked with Congress to pass the Adamson Act, which limited railroad employees’ workdays to eight hours.
However, Wilson did not always support organized labor, as a tragic incident known as the Ludlow Massacre showed. In the fall of 1913, coal miners in Ludlow, Colorado, demanded safer conditions, higher pay, and the right to form a union. When the coal company refused, they walked off the job. Evicted from company housing, the miners and their families set up in a tent city near the mines. The strike continued through the winter. Then, on April 20,1914, the Colorado National Guard opened fire on the tent city and set fire to the tents, killing some 26 men, women, and children. In the end, Wilson sent federal troops to restore order
and break up the strike. The miners’ attempt to form a union had failed.
Q IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did the government regulate commercial banks?
ELPS
READING 4.G.3
Read the section titled A New Tax on Income. Then answer these questions, returning to the text if needed: What is a graduated income tax? Why did Wilson cut tariffs?
The Progressives’ Legacy
The political reforms of the Progressives had a lasting effect on the American political system. The initiative, referendum, and recall and the Seventeenth and Nineteenth amendments expanded voters’ influence. Progressive reforms also paved the way for future trends. Starting in this period, the federal government grew to offer more protection to Americans, but at the same time gaining more control over people’s lives.
The American economy today showcases the Progressives’ legacy. Antitrust laws, the Federal Reserve Board, and the other federal agencies watch closely over the economy. Controls that Roosevelt and Wilson put in place continue to provide consumer protections. In later years, the government, for better or worse, built on those actions to extend regulation over other aspects of business.
The Progressive years also greatly expanded the government’s role in managing natural resources. However, federal action on dams, national parks, and resource use remain major areas of debate, especially in the West. Those debates and decisions affect people in other regions as well. For example, while farmers
America Comes of Age 189	3.4 Reformers in the White House
in California, Arizona, or New Mexico worry about getting enough water to grow crops, the rest of the nation awaits the delivery of the food they grow.
It is true that many of the problems identified by the Progressives still plague us today. There are still dishonest sellers, unfair employment practices, and problems in schools, cities, the environment, and public health. However, the Progressive reformers passed on the idea that government can take action to help people and private enterprise fix those problems.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What is the essential legacy of Progressive political reform movements? ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare and Contrast the domestic policies of President Roosevelt and President Taft.
2.	Compare Points of View Explain why some people supported President Wilson’s graduated income tax and why others opposed it.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain the purpose of the Federal Trade Commission and discuss the criticism it has received.
4.	Contrast Explain how President Roosevelt disagreed with John Muir about environmental preservation.
5.	Generate Explanations Explain how President Wilson affected workers’ rights.
America Comes of Age	190	3.4 Reformers in the White House

For most of its early history, America played a small role in world affairs, mostly by choice. But in the late 1800s, this began to change.
With leading spokesmen calling for the United States to join the ranks of the world’s major powers, the United States began to acquire influence and territories outside its continental borders. The United States was abandoning isolationism and emerging as a new power on the global stage.
American Influence Grows
America on the World Stage
During the Age of Imperialism, from the mid-1800s through the early 1900s, powerful nations engaged in a mad dash to extend their influence across much of the world. European nations added to colonies they had established during the Age of Exploration by acquiring new colonies in Africa and Asia.
Following European success, Japan and the United States also began to consider the benefits of imperialism, the policy by which strong nations extend their political, military, and economic control over weaker territories. Although imperialism would prove an awkward fit for the United States, the nation’s desire to take its place on the world stage spurred some territorial expansion and a larger increase in influence.
Economic Causes of Imperialism One reason why Europeannations and Japan rushed to grab colonies was the desire for raw materials and natural resources. They sought colonies to provide tea, rubber, iron, petroleum, and other materials for their industries at home. These colonial economies were examples of extractive economies. The imperial country extracted, or removed, raw materials from the colony
4.A, 4.B, 12.A
» Objectives
Identify the key factors that caused Americans to want to take a greater role overseas.
Explain how the United States took its first steps toward the position of a world power.
Evaluate the acquisition of Hawaii by the United States.
» Key Terms
imperialism
extractive
economies Alfred T. Mahan Social Darwinism Frederick Jackson
Turner
Matthew Perry Queen Liluokalani Sanford B. Dole
Q
PEARSON 1
[Si realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
191
and shipped them to the home country. Possession of colonies gave nations an edge in the competition for global resources. In contrast to those other world powers, however, the resource-rich United States had fewer concerns about shortages of raw materials in the nineteenth century.
For Americans, the problem was not a shortage of materials, but a surplus of goods. The booming U.S. economy of the late 1800s was producing more goods than Americans could consume. Farmers complained that excess production resulted in declining crop prices and profits. Industrialists urged expanding trade into new overseas markets where American commodities could be sold. Otherwise, they warned, American factories would close and unemployment would rise. Senator Albert J. Beveridge, a Progressive and friend of Theodore Roosevelt, explained why the United States needed to become a world power:
Today we are raising more [crops] than we can consume. Today we are making more than we can use. . . . Therefore we must find new markets
» The USS Brooklyn played a substantial role in American naval operations in the Caribbean Sea and in Asia. U.S. leaders believed in the value of a strong military during the late 1800s.
for our produce, new occupation for our
capital, new work for our labor.
—Senator Albert J. Beveridge, “The March of the Flag,” 1898
Alfred T. Mahan Stresses U.S. Military Strength
To expand and protect their interests around the world, nations built up their military strength. Alfred T. Mahan, a military historian and an officer in the United States Navy, played a key role in transforming America into a naval power. In The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, Mahan asserted that since ancient times, many great nations had owed their greatness to powerful navies. Mahan believed strongly that control of the seas during wartime was crucial to a nation’s success. He called upon America to build a modern fleet. Mahan also argued that the United States would need to acquire foreign bases where American ships could refuel and gather fresh supplies.
Influenced by the ideas of Mahan and others, the United States expanded and modernized its navy by building new steel-plated, steampowered battleships such as the USS Maine. By 1900, the United States had the third-largest navy in the world. Leaders such as U.S. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, a strong supporter of American expansionism, continued to encourage a naval build-up into the early twentieth century. Lodge and others believed that the a strong navy was vital to the protection of U.S. interests both at home and abroad.
Social Darwinism, Missionaries, and National Superiority European and Japanese imperialists used ideas of racial, national, and cultural superiority to justify taking over colonies. One of these ideas was Social Darwinism, the belief that life consists of competitive struggles in which only the fittest survive. Social Darwinists felt that certain nations and races were superior to others and therefore were destined to rule over inferior peoples and cultures. Some prominent Americans embraced these ideas and began to worry that if the United States remained isolated while European nations gobbled up the rest of the world, America would not survive.
One reason that these Americans embraced Social Darwinism was that they had long believed that God had granted them the right and responsibility to settle the frontier. They spoke of America’s “Manifest Destiny” to expand all the way to the Pacific Ocean. In a best-selling work titled Our Country Josiah Strong picked up on this theme. A religious missionary, Strong argued that Americans had a responsibility to spread their Western values. “God is training the
Interactive Chart
America Comes of Age 192	3.5 American Influence Grows
Anglo-Saxon race,” he asserted, "for its mission [to civilize] weaker races.” Influenced by Strong, many American missionaries journeyed to foreign lands to gain converts to Christianity. Although missionaries were often motivated by a sincere desire to spread their faith, the linking of missionary work to the concept of U.S. expansionism strengthened American presence in these territories.
In The Significance of the Frontier in American History, historian Frederick Jackson Turner noted that the frontier had been closed by gradual settlement in the nineteenth century. Throughout American history, he continued, the frontier had traditionally supplied an arena where ambitious Americans could pursue their fortunes and secure a fresh start. It had thus served as a “safety valve,” siphoning off potential discontent.
Now that America had spanned the continent, advocates of Turner's thesis urged overseas expansion as a way to keep the "safety valve” open and avoid internal conflict.
E3 IDENTIFY
What factors influenced Americans to play a more active role in the world?
» Draw Conclusions What part of the Salvation Army’s mission do the blue-jacketed people seem to be carrying out in this illustration?
America Begins to Expand
Beginning in the mid-1800s, with little fanfare, America focused more and more on expanding its trade and acquiring new territories. One of America’s first moves toward world power came before the Civil War.
American Expansionism in the Pacific Begins In 1853, Commodore Matthew Perry sailed a fleet of American warships into present-day Tokyo Bay, Japan. Prior to Perry’s arrival, Japan had denied the rest of the world access to its ports. In fact, because most Japanese people had never seen steamships before, they thought the ships in Perry’s fleet were "giant dragons puffing smoke.” Perry cleverly won the Japanese emperor's favor by showering him with lavish gifts. Japanese leaders also realized that by closing off their nation to the outside world, they had fallen behind in military technology. Within a year, Perry negotiated a treaty that opened Japan to trade with America.
Perry’s journey set a precedent for further expansion across the Pacific Ocean. In 1867, the United States took possession of the Midway Islands. Treaties in 1875 and 1887 increased trade with the Hawaiian Islands and gave the United States the right to build a naval base at Pearl Harbor.
The Klondike Gold Rush In 1867, Secretary of State William Seward bought Alaska from Russia for
$7.2 million. Journalists scoffed at the purchase and referred to Alaska as "Seward’s Folly” and “Seward’s Icebox.” They wondered why the United States would want a vast tundra of snow and ice 1,000 miles north of its border. But Seward’s purchase almost doubled the country’s size, and the “icebox” turned out to be rich in timber, oil, and other natural resources. Alaska also greatly expanded America’s reach across the Pacific. Scholars today see Seward’s purchase as a key milestone on America’s road to power.
By the mid-1880s, gold had been discovered in several locations near Alaska, sparking the Klondike Gold Rush. The stampede to the Klondike goldfields in British Columbia and Yukon territory led to the development of new towns in Alaska. However, the human geography challenges of sparse settlement and lack of transportation routes and the physical geography challenges caused by nearby mountains and a frigid climate ended the rush by 1899.
American Expansionism in Latin America US.
business leaders saw Latin America as a natural place to expand their trade and investments. Secretary of State James Blaine helped them by sponsoring the First International Pan-American Conference in 1889. Blaine preached the benefits of economic cooperation to delegates of 17 Latin American countries. The
America Comes of Age
193
3.5 American Influence Grows
» In Hawaii, American owners of sugar plantations, such as this one, exerted broad and increasing influence over local affairs.
conference also paved the way for the construction of the Pan-American Highway system, which linked the United States to Central and South America.
In 1895, tensions rose between America and Great Britain because of a border dispute between British Guiana and Venezuela. Claiming that Britain was violating the Monroe Doctrine, President Cleveland threatened U.S. intervention. After some international saber-rattling, the British accepted a growing U.S. sphere of influence in Latin America. Relations between Britain and the United States soon improved.
B RECALL
Why did journalists criticize Seward for his purchase of Alaska?

Interactive Gallery
» Hawaiian Queen Liluokalani unsuccessfully resisted U.S. influence in Hawaii.
The Acquisition of Hawaii
By the 1890s, the Hawaiian Islands had been economically linked to the United States for almost a century. Since the 1790s, American merchant ships had stopped at Hawaii on their way to East Asia. Missionaries had established Christian churches and schools on the islands. Americans had also established sugar cane plantations there. In 1887, American planters convinced King Kalakaua (kah LAH kah oo ah) to amend Hawaii’s constitution so that voting rights were limited to only wealthy landowners, who were, of course, the white planters.
Influence of Dole and Other Americans in Hawaii
In the early 1890s, American planters in Hawaii faced two crises. First, a new U.S. tariff law imposed duties on previously duty-free Hawaiian sugar. This made Hawaiian sugar more expensive than sugar produced in the United States. The sugar growers in Hawaii therefore feared that they would suffer decreasing sales and profits.
The other problem was that in 1891, Kalakaua died and his sister Liliuokalani (lih lee oo oh kah lah nee) was his successor. A determined Hawaiian nationalist, Queen Liluokalani resented the increasing power of the white planters, who owned much of Hawaiian land. She abolished the constitution that had given political power to the white minority.
With the backing of U.S. officials, the American planters responded quickly and forcefully. In 1893, they overthrew the queen. John Stevens, U.S. minister to Hawaii, ordered United States Marines to help the rebels seize power. The new government, led by influential lawyer Sanford B. Dole, asked President Benjamin Harrison to annex Hawaii to the United States.
Dole, born in Hawaii of missionary parents, was a well-respected lawyer and jurist who was connected to
America Comes of Age 194	3.5 American Influence Grows
Hawaii’s planter elite. His cousin, James Dole, moved to Hawaii in 1899 and helped build a pineapple company that still exists today.
The United States Annexes Hawaii After Liluokalani's overthrow, President Harrison signed the treaty of annexation but could not get the required Senate approval before Grover Cleveland became President. Cleveland ordered a full investigation, which revealed that the majority of the Hawaiian people did not approve of the treaty. Cleveland refused to sign the agreement and apologized for the “flagrant wrong” done by the “reprehensible conduct of the American minister.”
However, American sentiment for annexation remained strong, especially on the West Coast, where California business interests had close ties with the planters in Hawaii. In 1897, a new President entered the White House. William McKinley’s administration favored annexation, and in 1898, after the outbreak of the Spanish-American War, Congress proclaimed Hawaii an official U.S. territory with Sanford B. Dole as its first governor.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did American planters react to Queen Liluokalani’s actions when she gained power?
CESS ELPS READING 4.G.4
Read aloud the text with a partner. At the end of each paragraph, write down one or two important points from it. Organize your notes into a bulleted list. ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Explain why many world powers developed extractive economies during the 1800s, and why this was less important for the United States.
2.	Draw Conclusions Explain why the United States needed to expand its trade into new markets.
3.	Evaluate Arguments Explain how some used Social Darwinism to justify imperialism.
4.	Summarize the concept of Manifest Destiny.
5.	Generate Explanations Explain how the United States gained influence in Latin America.
America Comes of Age	195	3.5 American Influence Grows
I
2.D, 4.A, 4.B, 15.D
American power and economic interests around the world were growing. Still, the United States remained reluctant to risk war with other powers to acquire colonies. That changed, however, in 1898, when America went to war against Spain. The United States acquired colonies and became a world power.
I

» Objectives
Explain the causes of the Spanish-American War.
Identify the major battles of the Spanish-American War.
Describe the consequences of the war, including the debate over imperialism.
Examine the causes and consequences of the Philippine insurrection.
» Key Terms
Jose Marti William Randolph
Hearst Yellow Press jingoism George Dewey Emilio Aguinaldo Rough Riders Treaty of Paris insurrection guerrilla warfare William Howard Taft
The Spanish-
American War
Causes of the Spanish-American War
U.S.
Sympathies for Cuban Rebels At the end of the nineteenth century, Spain was an imperial nation in decline. Its formerly vast empire had dwindled to a small number of possessions, including the Philippine Islands in the Pacific and the Caribbean islands of Puerto Rico and Cuba. By 1897, American entrepreneurs had invested $50 million in sugar cane plantations and other ventures in Cuba, which lay just 90 miles off the Florida coast. These businessmen saw Cuba as a growing market for American products. However, the island was very unstable. Yearning for freedom, the Cubans repeatedly rebelled against Spanish rule.
In 1895, Cuban patriot Jose Marti launched a war for independence from Spain. With cries of “Cuba Libre!” (“Free Cuba!”), rebel fighters used guerrilla tactics of hit-and-run raids against Spanish forces. In response, Spanish General Valeriano Weyler devised a plan to deprive the rebels of food and recruits. He herded the rural population into reconcentration camps, where tens of thousands died from disease
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
196
and starvation. Meanwhile, the Cubans and Spanish destroyed American property.
Many Americans favored the Cubans, whose struggle for freedom and democracy reminded Americans of their own revolutionary heritage. The brutality of Spanish tactics intensified American affection and sympathy for the rebels. But other Americans, especially business people, were worried about U.S. economic interests in Cuba and hoped that Spain would quickly put down the rebellion.
Influence of Mass Media Rival newspaper publishers Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst heightened the public’s dislike of the Spanish government. Their publications were called the Yellow Press because they featured a popular comic-strip character called The Yellow Kid. To boost readership, Pulitzer’s New York World, Hearst’s New York Journal, and similar newspapers pasted sensational headlines and pictures on their front pages. Their stories exaggerated Spanish atrocities and compared Cuban rebels to the patriots of the American Revolution.
President William McKinley warned the Spanish to quickly establish peace, or the United States would take whatever steps it “should deem necessary to procure this result.” Spain recalled General Weyler and offered the Cuban rebels some reforms. But the rebels insisted on independence, which Spain refused to grant. McKinley ordered the battleship Maine to Havana harbor to protect American citizens in Cuba.
Then, in February 1898, the Journal published a private letter written by Enrique Dupuy de Lome, Spain’s ambassador to Washington, D.C. The letter, stolen by Cuban rebels and leaked to Hearst, called McKinley a weak and stupid politician. Hearst published the letter under the sensational headline, “Worst Insult to the United States in Its History.” The letter fueled American jingoism, or aggressive nationalism, and inflamed relations with Spain.
The Explosion of the Maine Soon after the Journal published de Lome’s letter, the Maine exploded in Havana harbor. Of the 350 officers and crew on board at the time, 266 died. The Yellow Press promptly accused Spain of blowing up the battleship. One Journal headline even declared: "War? Sure!”
But President McKinley did not ask Congress to declare war just yet. Instead, he ordered a special naval board of inquiry to investigate the cause of the explosion. On March 28, 1898, the board concluded that a mine had destroyed the battleship. Years later, follow-up investigations raised doubts about the naval board’s findings, but, at the time, most people blamed Spain.
» A group of Cuban rebels attacked a Spanish plantation overseer.
» Graphic illustrations such as this one depicting the explosion of the USS Maine had a profound influence on attitudes in the United States.
Interactive Gallery
©
America Comes of Age 197 ,	3.6 The Spanish-American War
The Spanish-American War Begins War fever gripped the nation. In newspapers, speeches, and songs, patriotic Americans implored their fellow citizens to “Remember the Maine\” In response to American demands, Spain agreed to abolish the reconcentration camps and make other concessions, but it was too little too late. On April 11, 1898, McKinley asked Congress for the authority to use force against Spain to end the fighting in Cuba “in the name of humanity, in the name of civilization, in behalf of endangered American interests."
Eight days later, Congress enacted four resolutions that amounted to a declaration of war on Spain. The fourth resolution—the Teller Amendment—stipulated that the United States had no intention of annexing Cuba. The navy quickly blockaded Cuban ports, and McKinley called for more than 100,000 volunteers to join the army. In response, Spain declared war on the United States.
Id RECALL Why did Americans object to Spanish
actions in Cuba?
American Forces Defeat the Spanish
Americans responded enthusiastically to the war. About 200,000 men enlisted in the army, up from the 25,000 that enlisted at the beginning of 1898. In early May, as the United States Army prepared to attack, Americans heard news of a great naval victory over Spain. But, surprisingly, the victory was not in Cuba. Rather, it was in the Pacific Ocean, on the opposite side of the world.
Acquiring the Philippines On May 1, 1898, Commodore George Dewey steamed his squadron of vessels into Manila Bay, in the Spanish-held Philippines. The Americans completely surprised the Spanish fleet that was stationed in the bay.
Upon issuing the order to “fire when ready,” Dewey watched his ships quickly destroy the Spanish force. While no Americans died during the naval battle, nearly 400 Spanish sailors lost their lives. American gleefully received news of the victory and proclaimed Dewey a hero.
While Dewey was winning an astounding victory over the Spanish navy, Filipino nationalists led by Emilio Aguinaldo (ahg ee nahl doh) were defeating the Spanish army. Like the Cubans, the Filipinos were fighting for freedom from Spain. In August, after some
Spanish-American War: Securing the Philippines
» Analyze Maps Why did American forces likely launch their attack on the Philippines from the British port city of Hong Kong?
PACIFIC OCEAN
400 mi	
400 km Miller Cylindrical Projection	
	KEY
/	|	| Spanish colonies U.S. forces
	U.S. victory
..b.
198
America Comes of Age
3.6 The Spanish-American War

Spanish-American War: Securing Cuba
» Analyze Maps How do you think the U.S. naval blockade affect Spain’s troop shipments to Cuba during the Spanish-American War?
15,000 U.S. soldiers had landed on the islands, Spanish troops surrendered to the United States.
Victory in the Philippines Meanwhile, American troops landed in Cuba in June 1898. U.S. Marines captured Guantanamo Bay, and a force of 17,000 soldiers under U.S. Army General William Shafter stormed ashore east of Santiago.
In spite of their excitement for the war, the troops faced deplorable conditions. They were poorly trained and supplied.
As they assembled for duty around Tampa, Florida, the soldiers were issued obsolete weapons and heavy wool uniforms that were unsuitable for Cuba's tropical climate. Corrupt and inefficient officials provided the men with rotting and contaminated food.
General Shafter’s army consisted of state National Guard units and regular army units, including the African American Ninth and Tenth Cavalry regiments from the western frontier. Another cavalry unit was organized and commanded by the future President Theodore Roosevelt. His Rough Riders consisted of rugged westerners and upper-class easterners who relished what Roosevelt called the "strenuous life.”
The Rough Riders and Roosevelt gained fame for the role they played in the battles for Kettle and San Juan hills outside Santiago, Cuba. Joined by African
American soldiers from the Ninth and Tenth Cavalries, the Riders stormed up those hills to secure high ground surrounding Santiago. One war correspondent described a charge of the African American soldiers:
[T]hey followed their leader up the terrible hill from whose crest the desperate Spaniards poured down a deadly fire of shell and musketry. They never faltered. . . . [T]heir aim was splendid, their coolness was superb. . . . The war had not shown greater heroism.
—War correspondent, 1898
Two days after the battle of San Juan Hill, the Spanish navy made a desperate attempt to escape from Santiago’s harbor. U.S. forces, which had blockaded the harbor, destroyed the Spanish fleet as it tried to break out. Surrounded, outnumbered, and dispirited, Spanish forces in Santiago surrendered. Although a few battles followed when U.S. forces occupied the island of Puerto Rico, another Spanish possession, the fighting had come to an end. Although almost 3,000 Americans died during the war, only around 380 died in combat. Disease, especially malaria and yellow fever, caused most of the deaths.
fcl RECALL How did the Rough Riders and African
American cavalry units contribute to the war effort?
America Comes of Age 199	3.6 The Spanish-American War
The War as a Turning Point
Secretary of State John Hay referred to the conflict with Spain as a “splendid little war” because of the ease and thoroughness of America’s victory. Although the war may have been “splendid,” it created a new dilemma for Americans: What should the United States do with Spain's former possessions?
Pros and Cons of the Treaty of Paris Signed by Spain and the United States in December 1898, the Treaty of Paris officially ended the war. Spain gave up control of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Pacific island of Guam. It also sold the Philippines to the United States for $20 million.
The Teller Amendment, passed by Congress when it declared war on Spain, prevented the United States from taking possession of Cuba. The amendment did not, however, apply to the Philippines. Americans disagreed over whether to grant the Philippines independence or take full control of the Pacific nation.
Guam, with its excellent harbor and mid-Pacific location, was desired as a coaling station to fuel U.S. Navy and merchant ships traveling to the Far East. Between 1898 and 1950 (aside from the period of its occupation by Japan during World War II), Guam’s governor was an American naval officer appointed from Washington, D.C.
Differing Views on U.S. Expansionism In an 1899 interview, President McKinley explained, “We could not give [the Philippines] back to Spain—that would be cowardly and dishonorable.” He believed that America had no choice but to “take them all, and to educate the
Filipinos, and uplift and civilize . . . them.” McKinley's imperialist supporters presented similar reasons for maintaining control of the Philippines. They argued that the United States had a responsibility to govern the Filipinos. They reasoned that the islands represented a valuable stepping stone to trade in China. They warned that if the United States gave up the Philippines, other nations would take control of them.
Anti-imperialists, including William Jennings Bryan and Mark Twain, rejected these arguments. In 1899, a large group of anti-imperialists formed the American Anti-Imperialist League. The league condemned imperialism as a crime and attacked it as “open disloyalty to the distinctive principles of our government.”
The debate reached its climax in the U.S. Senate, where senators had to consider ratifying the Treaty of Paris. In February 1899, the Senate voted 57 to 27 in favor of the treaty. By a single “yes” ballot, the vote met the two-thirds majority necessary to ratify the treaty.
Although the military conflict had been expensive, its economic effects on the United States were mainly positive. There was much more agreement about the war’s effects among the U.S. business community than in Congress.
The acquisition of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines gave the U.S. Navy secure bases and coaling stations for its ships. The westward move of American power and influence was desired by farmers and industrialists who saw Asia, and China especially as an untapped market for their goods.
After the war, tropical agriculture, mostly in sugar, became big business for U.S. companies in Puerto Rico and Cuba. By 1895, U.S. interests already had more than $50 million invested in Cuba, and trade with the
Pros and Cons of the Treaty of Paris,
1898
PROS
CONS
•	U.S. acquires the Philippines
•	Treaty benefits U.S. much more than Spain
•	Guam and Puerto Rico become part of U.S. territory
•	U.S. expands influence and becomes new player in world politics
•	Guerilla fighting against U.S. troops in the Philippines lasts three years
•	U.S. loses ten times more troops in the Philippines than in the Spanish-American War
•	Public opinion in U.S. divided over the issue of imperialism in Philippines
•	Because of its rising global influence,
U.S. clashes with China and Japan
» Analyze Information How did the Spanish-American of the United States as a world power?
contribute to the rise
America Gomes of Age 200	3.6 The Spanish-American War
island, mostly in sugar, was worth twice that. These interests certainly welcomed the increased American intervention and control after the Spanish-American War. In 1901, U.S. legislation known as the Platt Amendment put the internal, external, and economic affairs of Cuba under the control of the United States. It also established the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay The amendment was mostly repealed in 1934, but the naval base remains even today.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did American leaders think it was important to keep the Philippines?
Effects of U.S.
Expansionism in the
Philippines
America’s decision to keep the Philippines reflected a desire to expand its influence, compete with European colonial powers, and gain new trade in Asia.
The Filipino nationalist leader Emilio Aguinaldo had thought that the United States was an ally in the Filipino struggle for independence. His forces had fought side by side with the Americans against the Spanish. However, after the United States decided to maintain possession of the Philippines, Aguinaldo grew disillusioned with America. He helped organize an insurrection, or rebellion, against U.S. rule. The rebels believed they were fighting for the same principle of self-rule that had inspired America's colonial patriots during the American Revolution.
Guerrilla War Erupts in the Philippines Outgunned by American troops, Filipino insurgents relied on guerrilla warfare, a form of nontraditional warfare generally involving small bands of fighters attacking behind enemy lines. In turn, the American military used extraordinary measures to crush the rebellion. Like the Spanish in Cuba, U.S. soldiers gathered civilians into overcrowded concentration camps. General Jacob Smith ordered his soldiers not to take prisoners. “I wish you to kill and burn, the more you kill and burn the better you will please me,” he commented. A California newspaper defended such actions:
Let us all be frank. WE DO NOT
WANT THE FILIPINOS. WE WANT
THE PHILIPPINES.
All of our troubles in this annexation matter have been caused by the presence in the Philippine Islands of the Filipinos. . . » Analyze Political Cartoons What does the portrayal of the territories on the wall poster imply about American involvement in those regions?
Interactive Chart
» Emilio Aguinaldo fought first as an American ally against the Spanish, then led an insurrection against America in favor of Filipino self-rule.
America Comes of Age 201
3.6 The Spanish-American War
. The more of them killed the better.
It seems harsh. But they must yield before the superior race.
-—San Francisco Argonaut, 1902
In the spring of 1901, the Americans captured Aguinaldo. Although the fighting did not end immediately, his capture marked the beginning of the end of the insurrection. The war in the Philippines took more lives than the Spanish-American War. Nearly 5,000 Americans and 200,000 Filipinos died in the fighting. The U.S. government sent more than 100,000 troops to fight in the war and spent upwards of $400 million to defeat the insurgency. The conflict highlighted the rigors of fighting against guerrilla insurgents.
The Philippines Begin Limited Self-Rule In 1901, William Howard Taft—a future President of the United States—became governor of the Philippines. Taft had large ambitions for helping the islands recover from the rebellion. He censored the press and placed dissidents in jail to maintain order and to win the support of the Filipino people. At the same time, he began several policies to improve the situation of the Filipinos. He extended limited self-rule, with the Philippine Assembly convening in Manila in 1907. He alsoordered the construction of roads, bridges, and
schools. He established a public health system to care for Filipinos.
In 1916, Congress passed the Jones Act, which pledged that the Philippines would ultimately gain their independence. Thirty years later, after U.S. forces liberated the islands from Japanese occupation at the end of World War II, the Philippines finally became an independent nation.
Growing U.S. Position as a World Power In
1900, William Jennings Bryan ran against William McKinley for the presidency. To bolster his chances of winning reelection, the Republican McKinley named Theodore Roosevelt, the “hero of San Juan Hill,” as his vice-presidential running mate. Emphasizing the overwhelming U.S. victory over Spain, McKinley soundly defeated Bryan. The President’s reelection signaled America’s continuing faith in his expansionist policies.
The Spanish-American War was a significant event in the emergence of the United States as a world power. As a result of the war, the United States had an empire and a new stature in world affairs. The war marked a turning point in the history of American foreign policy.
H RECALL
Why did hostilities erupt in the Philippines after the Spanish-American War?
ECONOMIC BENEFITS
of AMERICAN EXPANSIONISM NEW MARKETS FOR PRODUCTS NEW PLACES TO INVEST ACCESS TO RAW MATERIALS
AMERICAN INTERESTS IN CUBA
RISING DOMINANCE IN GLOBAL MANUFACTURING
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES 30.1% UNITED STATES 35.8% OTHERS 31.7% OTHERS 33.8% OTHERS 34.5%
GERMANY 13.2%	GERMANY 16.6%	GERMANY 15.7%
GREAT BRITAIN
GREAT BRITAIN 19.5% GREAT BRITAIN 14%
» Analyze Information How did American investment in Cuba in the early 1900s affect the level of sugar production in Cuba? America Comes of Age 202	3.6 The Spanish-American War
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how the Yellow Press affected relations between the United States and Spain.
2.	Compare Points of View Discuss how Emilio Aguinaldo’s opinion of the United States changed after the Spanish-American War.
3.	Summarize the results of the Treaty of Paris and the Teller Amendment, and explain why these proved to be complicated for the United States.
4.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the role of the Spanish-American War in determining the winner of the 1900 U.S. presidential election.
5.	Make Generalizations Describe the conditions that U.S. troops faced during the Spanish-American War, and how they affected the war’s outcome.
3.6 The Spanish-American War
America Comes of Age 203
%	J?'
!
! ! !
» Objectives
Analyze how economic concerns influenced the Open Door Policy and U.S. relations with Japan.
Examine what happened to Puerto Rico and Cuba after the Spanish-American War.
Analyze the effects of Roosevelt’s “big stick” diplomacy and Taft’s “dollar diplomacy.”
Compare Wilson’s “moral diplomacy” with the foreign policies of his predecessors.
» Key Terms
spheres of influence John Hay Boxer Rebellion Open Door Policy Russo-Japanese
War
“Gentlemen’s
Agreement”
Great White Fleet Foraker Act Platt Amendment “big stick”
diplomacy Panama Canal
Roosevelt Corollary “dollar diplomacy” “moral diplomacy” Francisco “Pancho”
Villa
3.7
As the United States emerged as a world power following the Spanish-American War, American leaders looked to strengthen economic and military interests in Latin America and East Asia. In East Asia, American leaders devised policies to open China and other Asian markets to U.S. producers. Meanwhile, Americans called for a more substantial role in Latin America, viewing the region as the nation’s backyard. Increasing influence in both regions brought economic benefits, but also increased international tensions.
The United States Emerges as a World Power
U.S.
Trade and Intervention in China By 1899, once-mighty China had fallen into political, economic, and military disarray. Its huge population, however, was a tempting target for other nations’ imported goods. Rather than compete for Chinese trade, Britain, France, Germany, and Russia carved China into distinct spheres of influence. Within its zone, each power had privileged access to Chinese ports and markets. Japan also expanded its regional influence, grabbing territory in China and Korea. Since the United States did not have a zone, this system of “special privileges" threatened to limit American trade in China.
A
Call for Equality in Commerce In order to overcome these barriers, U.S. Secretary of State John Hay issued the first of a series of notes to foreign diplomats in 1899. He notified the leaders of imperialist nations that the United States expected “perfect equality of treatment for commerce” in China. Hay’s note had little immediate www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
204
impact on the actions of European nations or Japan. However, it served as a guiding principle of American foreign policy in Asia for years to come.
The U.S. Intervenes in the Boxer Rebellion In
response to the growing influence of outsiders in their country, some Chinese joined secret societies. One such society, the Righteous and Harmonious Fists, won the nickname “Boxers” from Europeans because its members trained in martial arts. The secret societies celebrated traditional Chinese customs and criticized Western ways. They also condemned Chinese converts to Christianity. Over time, simmering anger exploded into an outright rebellion against the “foreign devils.”
In May 1900, the Boxers killed foreign missionaries and besieged the foreign diplomats’ district in Beijing. A multinational force of European, American, and Japanese troops was sent to the Chinese capital to quash the Boxer Rebellion. An initial force of 2,100 soldiers grew to more than 20,000, including 2,000 Americans. After putting down the rebellion, European powers compelled China’s imperial government to pay an indemnity, or money to repair damage caused by the rebellion. This poured more fuel onto the nationalist fire. Chinese nationalists would eventually revolt and overthrow the emperor in 1911.
The Open Door Policy As the Boxer Rebellion engulfed China, Secretary of State Hay reasserted America’s Open Door Policy, which argued for equal privileges among countries trading with China. In a second note to European powers, Hay stated that the United States wanted to “preserve Chinese territorial and administrative entity.” In other words, America did not want colonies in China; it just wanted free trade there. As an act of goodwill, the United States used some of the indemnity money it received from China to fund scholarships for Chinese students to study in America. Hay and others strongly believed that access to the markets in China was crucial to rebounding from an economic depression in the 1890s. The goal of the Open Door Policy was to bring American businesses the new foreign markets they needed.
fel IDENTIFY What was the purpose of the Open Door
Policy?
Roosevelt Works With Japan
Like the United States, Japan wanted to expand its influence in China. Japan also disapproved of the European “carve-up” of the region. Furthermore, the Japanese took offense to the presence of Russian troops
Spheres of Influence in China
KEY
— China border Spheres of Influence
H
British | | French §11 German IBS Japanese BI Russian
» Analyze Maps What can you conclude about the influence of the United States in China during the early twentieth century?
1,000 mi
1,000 km Mercator Projection
America Comes of Age 205	3.7 The United States Emerges as a World Power
in Manchuria, a region of China that bordered Russia. In February 1904, without a declaration of war, Japan attacked and bottled up Russia’s Pacific fleet stationed at Port Arthur, China. The Japanese followed up on this victory with a series of major land engagements in Manchuria that caused more than 100,000 Russian casualties. However, Japan also suffered heavy losses in the fighting.
Resolving the Russo-Japanese War In 1905, representatives from Russia and Japan met in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, to negotiate an end to the Russo-Japanese War. When the talks stalled, Theodore Roosevelt, now President, intervened and convinced the two sides to sign a peace treaty. For his efforts, Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize. The President's intervention—and his receipt of the famous award—prominently displayed America’s growing role in world affairs.
Racial Prejudice Affects Foreign Relations Despite Roosevelt’s achievement, America entered troubled waters in its relations with Japan. A root cause of this trouble was anti-Asian sentiment on the West Coast of the United States. In the fall of 1906, the San Francisco
» The Great White Fleet, part of Roosevelt’s plan to protect American interests in Asia, departs from a U.S. port in 1907. Analyze Information Explain why Asian nations might have not have believed that the voyage of the fleet was a “good will cruise.”
School Board banned Japanese, Chinese, and Korean children from attending public schools with white children. The incident drew Japan’s immediate wrath. One Tokyo journal demanded that Japan retaliate. “Stand up Japanese nation! Our countrymen have been HUMILIATED on the other side of the Pacific,” the newspaper cried out.
Roosevelt disapproved of the decision to segregate Asian children in the San Francisco schools. He understood Japan’s anger with America. To calm tensions, he negotiated a “Gentlemen’s Agreement” with Japan. According to the pact, the school board pledged to end its segregation policy. In return, Japan agreed to limit the emigration of its citizens to the United States.
The Great White Fleet Shows Naval Power While Roosevelt used diplomacy to ease tensions with Japan, he also promoted military preparedness to protect U.S. interests in Asia. Expressing rising concerns about Japan’s territorial expansion at the expense of China, Korea, and Russia—the President won congressional support for a new force of navy ships, known as the Great White Fleet. In 1907, Roosevelt sent this armada of 16 white battleships on a “good will cruise” around the world. The voyage of the Great White Fleet demonstrated America’s increased military power to the world.
SUMMARIZE
What conditions led to the Russo-Japanese War? American Foreign Policy in Latin America
As the United States tentatively asserted its interests in East Asia, Americans called for a more aggressive role in Latin America. American entrepreneurs and government leaders wanted the region to be a sphere of influence from which other great powers were excluded. American influence in Latin America brought obvious benefits to the United States, but it also contributed to anti-American hostility and instability in the region.
America’s victory over Spain liberated the Puerto Rican and Cuban people from Spanish rule. But victory left the fates of these islands unresolved. Would Puerto Rico and Cuba become independent nations? Or would they become colonies of the United States? As questions lingered in the aftermath of war, the United States assumed control in Puerto Rico and Cuba.
Foreign Policy Decisions in Puerto Rico As
the smoke from the Spanish-American War cleared,
America Comes of Age
206	3.7 The United States Emerges as a World Power
U.S.
Interventions in Latin America Miller Cylindrical Projection
» Analyze Maps Describe U.S. foreign policy towards Latin America in the early 1900s.
America’s new acquisition of Puerto Rico remained under direct U.S. military rule. In 1900, Congress passed the Foraker Act, which established a civil government in Puerto Rico. The act authorized the President of the United States to appoint a governor and part of the Puerto Rican legislature. Puerto Ricans could fill the rest of the legislature in a general election.
Whether Puerto Ricans could enjoy citizenship rights in the United States, however, remained unclear. This unusual situation led to a series of court cases, known as Insular Cases, in which the Supreme Court determined the rights of Puerto Ricans. One case examined whether the U.S. government could assess taxes on Puerto Rican goods sold in the United States. The Supreme Court ruled the taxes legal and determined that Puerto Ricans did not enjoy the same rights as U.S. citizens.
In 1917, President Woodrow Wilson signed the Jones-Shafroth Act. It granted Puerto Ricans more citizenship rights and gave the islanders greater control over their own legislature. Still, many Puerto Ricans expressed their discontent because they did not enjoy all of the same rights as Americans.
Relations with Cuba Although the Treaty of Paris granted Cuban independence, the United States Army did not withdraw from the island until 1902. But
before the U.S. military left, Congress obliged Cuba to add to its constitution the Platt Amendment. The amendment restricted the rights of newly independent Cubans and effectively brought the island within the U.S. sphere. It prevented Cuba from signing a treaty with another nation without American approval. It also required Cuba to lease naval stations to the United States. Additionally, the Platt Amendment granted the United States the “right to intervene” to preserve order in Cuba.
Many Cubans strongly disliked the Platt Amendment but soon realized that America would not otherwise end its military government of the island. The United States, for its part, was unwilling to risk Cuba’s becoming a base for a potentially hostile great power.
Cuba thus added the Platt Amendment to its constitution as part of a treaty with the United States. The treaty made Cuba a protectorate of the United States and governed their relationship for decades.
B GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
Why did Cuba add the Platt Amendment to its constitution?
America Comes of Age 207	3.7 The United States Emerges as a World Power
“Big Stick” Diplomacy
Upon assuming the presidency after McKinley’s assassination, Theodore Roosevelt promoted a new kind of diplomacy based on America’s success in the Spanish-American War. Beyond determining what would happen to Puerto Rico and Cuba, Roosevelt developed a broader policy for U.S. action in Latin America. Historians have called this Roosevelt’s “big stick” diplomacy since it depended on a strong military to achieve America’s goals. “Big stick” stemmed from the President’s admiration for an old African saying, “Speak softly and carry a big stick; you will go far.”
Roosevelt’s view that America needed to carry a big stick during the Age of Imperialism flowed from his adherence to balance-of-power principles and from his view of the United States as a special nation with a moral responsibility to “civilize,” or uplift, weaker nations. In this sense, the new President held beliefs similar to those of imperial powers in Europe and Asia. Roosevelt also felt that America’s elite—its statesmen and captains of industry—had to accept the challenge of international leadership.
Physical and Human Geographic Factors Impact the Panama Canal One of Roosevelt’s biggest dreams was to create a passage from the Caribbean Ocean to the Pacific Ocean through Central America. He did not
originate the plan, but he played a crucial role in making it happen. But first, Roosevelt and the American team of engineers worked to overcome a number of human and physical geographic challenges.
In the late 1800s, a French company had tried to link the Atlantic to the Pacific across the Isthmus of Panama but failed. Afterwards, some suggested building a canal through Nicaragua. However, those plans came to nothing.
Eventually, an agent from the French company that had abandoned its canal attempt convinced the United States to buy the company’s claim. In 1903, the U.S. government bought the Panama route for $40 million.
Before it could build a canal through Panama, however, the United States needed the consent of the Colombian government. At the time, Panama was part of independent Colombia. American efforts to negotiate a purchase of land across the isthmus stalled when Colombia demanded more than the United States was willing to provide.
So Roosevelt stepped in. The President dispatched U.S. warships to the water off Panama to support a Panamanian rebellion against Colombia. The appearance of the United States Navy convinced the Colombians not to suppress the uprising. Panama soon declared its independence from Colombia. The new nation immediately granted America control over the “Canal Zone.” To secure this land for its vital trade link,
N
2,000 mi
0	2,000 km
Miller Cylindrical
Projection
The Panama Canal
San Francisco
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
KEY
—	Route before Panama Canal
—	Route after Panama Canal
» Analyze Maps How did the construction of the Panama Canal benefit longdistance shippers?

Interactive Gallery
America Comes of Age 208	3.7 The United States Emerges as a World Power
DOLLAR DIPLOMACY
in the EARLY 1900S ★ (TOTAL)
I $64 MILLION
EXAMPLES OF U.S. BUSINESSES ABROAD
Mining operations Oil operations in in Chile	Mexico and Venezuela
•	Kennecott	* Sinclair
•	Braden	• StandardOil
•	Anaconda	of California
Banana industry in Central America ♦ United Fruit Company

MU
U.S. GOODS AS A PERCENTAGE OF THE COUNTRY’S TOTAL IMPORTS
U.S. INVESTMENT IN LATIN AMERICA
$5.2 ■g'	«		
§ s *		
•51 $3		
15 8		$1.6
ISsiSiiittiB O	$1 $9	$L308	■
	1897	1914
1929
Source: Thomas F. O’Brien, The Revolutionary Mission: American Enterprise in Latin America
1
Mexico
Central American and Caribbean Republics
Venezuela
Brazil
Source. The Cambridge History of Latin America, Voi. IV




» Analyze Information How did U.S. involvement in Latin American economies illustrate “dollar diplomacy”?
©
Interactive Map
America agreed to pay Panama $10 million and an annual rent of $250,000.
More than 35,000 workers helped dig the Panama Canal. The physical geography and climate of the region were both factors that impacted the enormous project. Workers built a series of locks to raise ships to the level of Gatun Lake, 85 feet above sea level, to cross the isthmus. Completion of the canal depended on scientific breakthroughs by doctors as they learned how to combat tropical diseases. Still, more than 5,000 canal workers died from disease or accidents while building the canal. When the finished waterway opened in 1914, it cut some 8,000 nautical miles off the trip from the west coast to the east coast of the United States.
American Expansionism Requires an Updated Monroe Doctrine In the early 1900s, the inability of Latin American nations to pay their debts to foreign investors raised the possibility of European intervention. In 1903, for example, Germany and Britain blockaded Venezuelan ports to ensure that debts to European bankers were repaid. Roosevelt concluded: “If we intend to say hands off to the powers of Europe, then sooner or later we must keep order ourselves.” So in a 1904 message to Congress, he announced a new Latin American policy.
The President’s Roosevelt Corollary updated the Monroe Doctrine for an age of expansionism and
economic influence. In the case of “chronic wrongdoing” by a Latin American nation—the kind that Europeans might use to justify military intervention—the United States would assume the role of police power, restoring order and depriving other creditors of the excuse to intervene. This change, Roosevelt argued, merely reasserted America's long-standing policy of keeping the Western Hemisphere free from European intervention.
The Latin American Response Many Latin Americans resented America’s role as the hemisphere’s police force. They disagreed with Roosevelt’s belief that Latin Americans could not police themselves. Francisco Garcia Calderon, a Peruvian diplomat, contended that the Monroe Doctrine had taken on an “aggressive form with Mr. Roosevelt.” Like Calderon, Nicaraguan spokesman Augusto Sandino felt that the United States threatened the “sovereignty and liberty” of his people. Sandino eventually led an army of guerrillas against U.S. Marines in Nicaragua in the 1920s.
Taft’s Foreign Policies Lead to “Dollar Diplomacy”
Roosevelt handpicked William Howard Taft to succeed him as the Republican candidate for President in 1908. Taft shared Roosevelt’s basic foreign policy objectives. After defeating William Jennings Bryan in the general election, Taft wanted to maintain the Open Door Policy
America Comes of Age 209 : 3.7 The United States Emerges as a World Power
in Asia and ensure ongoing stability in Latin America. The new President pursued both goals with the aim of affecting economic issues such as expanding American trade through foreign policy.
Taft hoped to achieve these ends by relying less on the "big stick” and more on “dollar diplomacy.” As Taft commented in 1912, he looked to substitute “dollars for bullets.” The policy aimed to increase American investments in businesses and banks throughout Central America and the Caribbean. Americans busily invested in plantations, mines, oil wells, railways, and other ventures in those regions. Of course, “dollar diplomacy” sometimes required a return to the “big stick” and military intervention. Such was the case when President Taft dispatched troops to Nicaragua in 1909—and again in 1912—to protect the formation of a pro-American government there.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
How did “dollar diplomacy” affect American foreign policy?
Wilson’s “Moral
Diplomacy”
During the 1912 presidential election campaign, Democratic candidate Woodrow Wilson criticized the foreign policies of his Republican predecessors
Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft. After his election victory, Wilson appointed the anti-imperialist William Jennings Bryan as Secretary of State, which sent a strong message to the American people.
A
New Emphasis on Foreign Policy The new President intended to take U.S. foreign policy in a different direction. He promised that the United States would "never again seek one additional foot of territory by conquest” but would instead work to promote "human rights, national integrity, and opportunity.” Wilson spelled out his new “moral diplomacy” in a message to the American people:
We must prove ourselves [Latin America’s] friends and champions upon terms of equality and honor. . . .
We must show ourselves friends by comprehending their interest, whether it squares with our own interest or not. . . . Comprehension must be the soil in which shall grow all the fruits of friendship. ... I mean the development of constitutional liberty in the world.
—Woodrow Wilson, October 27, 1913
» Contrast How did Roosevelt and Wilson differ in their approach to governing colonial territories?
America Comes of Age 210	3.7 The United States Emerges as a World Power
In spite of his stated preference for “moral diplomacy” over “big stick” or “dollar diplomacy,” Wilson used the military on a number of occasions to guide Latin Americans in the directions that he thought proper. In 1915, Wilson sent marines to Haiti to protect American investments and to guard against the potential of German or French aggression in the nation. Wilson prodded the government of Haiti to sign an agreement that essentially gave the United States the right to control its financial and foreign affairs. The marines did not leave until 1934. Under Wilson, U.S. soldiers and sailors also intervened in the Dominican Republic and in Mexico.
Revolution Grips Mexico For decades, Mexican dictator Porfirio Diaz had followed policies that benefited his country’s small upper class of wealthy landowners, clerics, and military men. With Diaz’s encouragement, foreign investments in Mexico grew. As a result, American business leaders owned large portions of Mexico’s industries. While foreign investors and Mexico’s artistocracy grew rich, Mexico’s large population of farmers struggled in poverty.
In 1911, Francisco Madero led the Mexican Revolution that toppled Diaz. Madero was committed to reforms but was a weak administrator. In 1913, General Victoriano Huerta seized power and executed Madero. Under “dollar diplomacy,” Taft likely would have recognized Huerta as the leader of Mexico because Huerta pledged to protect American investments. But under “moral diplomacy,” Wilson refused to do so, declaring that he would not accept a “government of butchers.” Instead, Wilson favored Venustiano Carranza, another reformer, who had organized anti-Huerta forces.
Intervention in Mexico In 1914, the President used the Mexican arrest of American sailors as an opportunity to help Carranza attain power. Wilson sent marines to occupy the Mexican port of Veracruz. The action caused Huerta’s government to collapse, and Carranza assumed the presidency.
Huerta’s fall from power cheered many Mexicans and appeared to validate Wilson’s “moral diplomacy.” However, Wilson soon discovered that he faced more trouble in Mexico. The new Carranza government was slow in bringing about reforms, and rebels again rose up, this time under the leadership of Francisco “Pancho” Villa. For a while, Wilson courted Villa. After American support disappeared in 1916, Villa’s forces crossed into New Mexico and raided the town of Columbus, leaving 18 Americans dead. President
» The United States supported Mexican rebel leader Pancho Villa’s insurrection against the Mexican government until his forces conducted an attack in the United States in 1916.
Wilson responded by sending General John J. Pershing and more than 10,000 troops on a “punitive expedition” to Mexico.
Pershing’s forces chased Villa for several months but failed to capture the rebel leader. Wilson eventually withdrew American troops from Mexico in 1917, mostly because of his concerns about World War I raging in Europe.
Not long afterward, the United States declared war on Germany. Free from hunting Villa, Pershing took command of the American Expeditionary Force in France.
A generation earlier, few would have believed it possible that more than one million American troops would engage in a large-scale war in Europe. But the triumph over Spain and U.S. actions in Asia and Latin America demonstrated that America had emerged as a world power. Now, World War I would test that new global strength.
El IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS What effect would
“moral diplomacy” have on American foreign policy decisions?
\1
America Comes of Age 211	3.7 The United States Emerges as a World Power
ASSESSMENT
Summarize What was the impact of the Platt Amendment?
Sequence Events Discuss the events that led to the Boxer Rebellion.
3.	Identify Cause and Effect What events that contributed to a hostile relationship between Japan and the United States?
4.	Draw Conclusions How did Puerto Rico pose a problem for the United States after the Spanish-American War?
5.	Generate Explanations Explain the purpose of the Roosevelt Corollary.
America Comes of Age 212
3.7 The United States Emerges as a World Power
1.	Describe Benefits and Costs of Antitrust Acts
Describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the benefits and costs of antitrust acts. Write a paragraph describing how Progressives and owners of large businesses differed in their views on antitrust regulations. Consider what Progressives saw as the benefits of antitrust legislation and what owners of large businesses argued were the costs of government regulations like the Sherman Antitrust Act. 15.B
2.	Analyze Social Gospel Analyze social issues affecting the Social Gospel. Write a paragraph describing the Social Gospel. Consider what the Social Gospel was, the role that Walter Rauschenbusch played in the movement, and what types of social issues adherents of the Social Gospel became involved in. 3.C
3.	Identify Social and Economic Contributions of Jane Addams Identify the social and economic contributions of women such as Jane Addams to American society. Write a paragraph describing the social and economic contributions Jane Addams made through Hull House. Identify what a settlement house is, what inspired Addams to open Hull House, and what social and economic contributions Addams made through Hull House. 26.D
4.	Evaluate Impact of Progressive Political Reforms Evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including the initiative, referendum, and recall. Write a paragraph evaluating the impact of Progressive political reforms. Consider the initiative, referendum, and recall and what the graph below indicates about the use of the initiative over time. 5.A
USE OF INITIATIVES
Total a ON STATE BALLOTS I
Source: Initiative and Referendum institute
5.	Evaluate Impact of Seventeenth
Amendment Evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including the passage of the Seventeenth Amendment, and discuss historical reasons why the Constitution has been amended. Write a paragraph
evaluating the impact of the Seventeenth Amendment. Consider why Progressives were unhappy with the way senators were selected, how the Seventeenth Amendment changed the process, why some members of Congress opposed the change, and why the process could not be changed without a constitutional amendment. 5.A, 21.B
6.	Explain Actions to Expand Economic Opportunities for Women Explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities, including those for women, in American society. Write a paragraph explaining the efforts of Florence Kelley to expand economic opportunities for women. Consider Kelley’s efforts related to the National Consumers League (NCL) and the Women’s Trade Union League (WTUL). 26.A
7.	Identify and Analyze Methods for Expanding Democratic Participation Identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including lobbying. Write a paragraph identifying Carrie Chapman Catt’s two-front strategy to expand women’s right to participate in the democratic process. Consider the roles of lobbying and the referendum and the impact of the strategy. 23.A
8.	Evaluate Impact of Nineteenth Amendment
Evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment, and understand how historians interpret the past. Write a paragraph evaluating the impact of the Nineteenth Amendment and the roles played by Alice Paul and Carrie Catt in its passage. Describe the views of historian Nancy Cott about the contributions of Paul, Catt, and their organizations and the immediate and long-term impact of the Nineteenth Amendment. 5.A, 29.C
9.	Trace Development of Civil Rights Movement Trace the historical development of the civil rights movement
in the twentieth century, including the Nineteenth Amendment. Write a paragraph tracing the development of the women’s civil rights movement. Include important events before passage of the Nineteenth Amendment, the Nineteenth Amendment, and important legislation after the Nineteenth Amendment. 9.A
10.	Analyze Effects of Plessy v. Ferguson Analyze the effects of U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Plessy v. Ferguson. Write a paragraph analyzing the effects of the Supreme Court’s decision in Plessy v. Ferguson. Consider what the Court ruled in Plessy v. Ferguson and how the ruling affected laws and policies in the North and South. 21 .A
America Comes of Age
213
TEKS ASSESSMENT
11.	Evaluate Impact of W.E.B. Du Bois Evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as W.E.B. Du Bois on American society, and identify a point of view on a social studies issue or event. Write a paragraph evaluating the impact of W.E.B. Du Bois on African American civil rights. Consider how the views of Du Bois and Booker T. Washington expressed in the quotations below differ, what Du Bois advocated as part of the Niagara Movement, and what led Du Bois to help found the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). 5.B, 29.G
[The Negro must] live peaceably with his white neighbors . . . the Negro [must] deport himself modestly. . . depending upon the slow but sure influences that proceed from the possessions of property intelligence, and high character for the full recognition of his political rights.
— Bookei T W-.snricrxi
We claim for ourselves every single right that belongs to a freeborn American . . . and until we get these rights we will never cease to protest. . . How shall we get them? By voting where we may vote, by persistent, unceasing agitation, by hammering at the truth, by sacrifice and work.
..W.E.B, Du Bois
12.	Describe Roles of Political Organizations Use
a variety of valid primary and secondary sources to acquire information to create a written presentation describing the continuing roles of political organizations that promote civil rights for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities. Use the information from the lessons in this topic and other primary and secondary sources to create a presentation on the continued efforts of political organizations to protect the civil rights of racial, ethnic, and religious minorities. Consider the work of the following organizations: NAACP, Urban League, Anti-Defamation League, National Council of La Raza, and Native American Rights Fund. 9.B, 29.A, 30.A
13.	Describe Roles of American Indian Political Organizations Describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from American Indian civil rights movements. Write
a paragraph describing the formation of the Society of American Indians. Describe when the organization was founded, why the organization was founded, and
who Carlos Montezuma was and the role he played in promoting Native American civil rights. 9.B
14.	Evaluate the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 Evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights, including congressional acts such as the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924. Write a paragraph evaluating the American Indian Citizenship Act. Explain what the Dawes Act was and how its failure led to the American Indian Citizenship Act, what the American Indian Citizenship Act officially did, and what supporters hoped the act would do. 23.B
15.	Describe Qualities of Effective Leadership Describe qualities of effective leadership. Write a paragraph describing the qualities that made Theodore Roosevelt an effective leader. Consider what personal qualities made Roosevelt an effective leader, what political points of view made Roosevelt an effective leader for the Progressive Era, and what Roosevelt’s Square Deal and the quotation below indicate about his leadership qualities. 24.A
When I say I believe in a square deal, I do not mean to give every man the best hand. If good cards do not come to any man, or if they do come, and he has not got the power to play them, that is his affair. All I mean is that there shall be no crookedness in the dealing.
-.Theodore Roosevelt. 1905
16.	Evaluate Impact of Upton Sinclair Evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as Upton Sinclair on American society. Write a paragraph evaluating the impact of Upton Sinclair’s novel, The Jungle. Describe what The Jungle is about and evaluate the novel’s short- and long-term impact on food safety. 5.B
17.	Identify Roles of Private Citizens in Managing the Environment Identify the roles of private citizens in managing the environment. Write a paragraph identifying how private citizens can help manage the environment and conserve natural resources. Define what conservation means and identify how private ownership can inspire conservation. 14.B
18.	Analyze Klondike Gold Rush Analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the Klondike Gold Rush. Write a paragraph analyzing how the physical and human geography of Alaska affected the Klondike Gold Rush. Consider when and where the gold rush occurred and the effects of human and physical geography on it. 12.A
214
America Comes of Age

*Two of California's electors voted for Wilson
Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote	Popular Vote	% Electoral Vote
■ Wilson (Democrat)	435	6,296,547	82
■ Roosevelt (Progressive)	88	4,118,571	17
IB
Taft (Republican) \ 8 3,486,720 1 Presidential Election of 1912
19.	Evaluate Impact of Progressive Party Evaluate the impact of third parties, including the Progressive Party. Write a paragraph evaluating how Theodore Roosevelt’s run as the candidate for the Progressive Party affected the 1912 presidential election. Consider what led to
the formation of the Progressive Party and Roosevelt’s third-party candidacy, what the map above shows about the popular vote and the electoral vote, and what the impact of the Progressive Party was on the election. 5.C
20.	Explain Dollar Diplomacy Explain how foreign policies affected economic issues such as dollar diplomacy. Write a paragraph explaining President William Howard Taft’s “dollar diplomacy.” Consider what “dollar diplomacy” was and what effect it had on Central America and the Caribbean. 15.C
21.	Understand Effects on Fifth Amendment Property Rights Understand the effects of governmental actions on individuals, industries, and communities, including the impact on Fifth Amendment property rights. Write a paragraph describing how President Roosevelt’s public support for a Maine Supreme Court ruling created a controversy. Consider what the Maine Supreme Court ruling stated, what President Roosevelt said publicly in support of the ruling, and why the ruling and Roosevelt’s stance was controversial for many in terms of the Fifth Amendment. 14.C
22.	Identify Effects of Population Growth and Distribution Identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment. Write
a paragraph describing how people moving into the Southwest to mine and farm resulted in the need to change water policy. Consider how population growth affected the use of water supplies in the Southwest, what legislation resulted from conflicts over water, and how the legislation was used in coming decades. 14.A
23.	Analyze Causes and Effects of Social Darwinism Analyze causes and effects of events and social issues such as Social Darwinism. Write a paragraph analyzing what beliefs led to the development of Social Darwinism and how Social Darwinism was used to justify imperialism. Consider what Social Darwinism
is, what beliefs led to Social Darwinism, how imperialists used Social Darwinism as a justification for expansion, and the effects of Social Darwinism and Manifest Destiny on American views of expansion. 6.A
24.	Analyze Impact of William Jennings Bryan Analyze the impact of significant individuals such as William Jennings Bryan. Write a paragraph analyzing the impact that William Jennings Bryan had on the debate over imperialism. Consider how Bryan’s views about the Philippines differed from those of the imperialists and what his later appointment as Secretary of State by President Woodrow Wilson said about Wilson’s view of an expansionist foreign policy. 6.B
America Comes of Age 215
TEKS ASSESSMENT

Early Progressive Legislation
LEGISLATION EFFECT
Sherman Antitrust Act (1890)	Outlawed monopolies and practices that restrained trade, such as pricefixing
National Reclamation Act (1902)	Provided for federal irrigation projects by using money from the sale of public lands
Elkins Act (1903)	Imposed fines on railroads that gave special rates to favored shippers
Hepburn Act (1906)	Authorized the federal government to regulate railroad rates and set maximum prices for ferries, bridge tolls, and oil pipelines
Meat Inspection Act (1906)	Allowed the federal government to inspect meat sold across state lines and required inspections of meat-processing plants
Pure Food and Drug Act (1906) k	:		Allowed federal inspection of food and medicine and banned the shipment and sale of impure food and the mislabeling of food and medicine
25.	Categorize Information Describe qualities of effective leadership by analyzing information by categorizing.
Write a paragraph describing how President Theodore Roosevelt and Congresses during his terms (1901 to 1909) showed leadership by regulating business, the economy, public safety, and the environment. Categorize which acts in the chart above dealt with business regulation, public safety, and the environment. 24.A, 29.B
26.	Analyze Effects of Social Darwinism Analyze effects of events and social issues such as Social Darwinism, and identify bias in written material. Write a paragraph identifying the bias in the quotation below and analyzing how the ideas being expressed reflect Social Darwinism.
6.A, 29.F
Let us all be frank. WE DO NOT WANT THE FILIPINOS. WE WANT THE PHILIPPINES. All of our troubles in this annexation matter have been caused by the presence in the Philippine Islands of the Filipinos. . . . The more of them killed the better. It seems harsh. But they must yield before the superior race.
—San Francisco Argonaut, 1902
27.	Evaluate Acquisition of the Philippines Evaluate American expansionism, including acquisitions such as the Philippines. Write a paragraph evaluating
the problems that arose from the acquisition of the Philippines in the Spanish-American War. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What led to guerrilla war in the Philippines, and how was the
insurrection put down? What steps did William Howard Taft take to restore order in the Philippines? What was the purpose of the 1916 Jones Act? 4.B
28.	Describe Federal Reserve Act Describe the emergence of monetary policy in the United States, including the Federal Reserve Act of 1913. Write a paragraph describing why the Federal Reserve Act was needed and what the act set up. Define what monetary policy is and describe what problem the lack of monetary policy produced in the early 1900s. Then use the chart and text to describe the system that the Federal Reserve Act established. 15.E
America Comes of Age 216
Pros and Cons of the Treaty of Paris, 1898
PROS
CONS
•	U.S. acquires the Philippines
•	Treaty benefits U.S. much more than Spain
•	Guam and Puerto Rico become part of U.S. territory
•	U.S. expands influence and becomes new player in world politics
•	Guerilla fighting against U.S. troops in the Philippines lasts three years
•	U.S. loses ten times more troops in the Philippines than in the Spanish-American War
•	Public opinion in U.S. divided over the issue of imperialism in Philippines
•	Because of its rising global influence, U.S. clashes with China and Japan
29.	Evaluate Pros and Cons of International Treaties Evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international treaties. Use the chart above and the text to write a paragraph evaluating the pros and cons of the Treaty of Paris that ended the Spanish-American War. Consider the terms of the treaty, the advantages and disadvantages the United States received from signing the treaty. 19.E
30.	Explain Role of Theodore Roosevelt Explain why significant individuals such as Theodore Roosevelt moved the United States into the position of a world power. Write a paragraph describing how President Theodore Roosevelt’s use of diplomacy showed America’s growing role in world affairs. Explain Roosevelt’s efforts in resolving the Russo-Japanese War and his “Gentlemen’s Agreement” with Japan. 4.A
31.	Explain Spanish-American War As Turning Point Explain the significance of the 1898 Spanish-American War as a turning point by explaining how it moved the United States into the position of a world
power. Write a paragraph explaining why the 1898 victory in the Spanish-American War was a turning point for the United States as a world power. Consider why Secretary of State John Hay referred to the conflict with Spain as a “splendid little war,” why the war was a turning point for the United States, and how the cartoon below illustrates the new position of the United States in the world. 2.D, 4.A
32.	Evaluate Primary Sources Explain why significant policies, such as U.S. expansionism, moved the United States into the position of a world power by evaluating the validity of a source based on language, corroboration with other sources, and the author’s points of view, frames of reference, and historical context. Use the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to discuss expansionism. Then, locate a primary source quotation about expansionism and evaluate the validity of the source based on the following criteria: language; corroboration with other sources; and the author’s points of view, frames of reference, and historical context. 4.A, 29.E
33.	Describe Economic Effects of the Spanish-American War Describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including the Spanish-American War, on the United States. Write a paragraph describing how economic considerations drew the United States into the Spanish-American War. Consider what economic interests the United States had in Cuba, how the conflict between the Spanish and Cuban rebels affected American economic interests, and how protecting American interests in Cuba helped lead the United States to war with Spain. 15.D
34.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What can individuals do to affect society? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
America Comes of Age 217
1	What was the impact of the Progressive reform known as the initiative?
A
Citizens could write in candidates on the official ballot. B
Voters could change the wording of laws passed by Congress. C
Citizens could bring laws to a vote by gathering proof of public support. D
Voters could directly express their political dissatisfaction with corrupt officials. Our... government is based on ... the natural right of every individual member... to a voice and a vote in making and executing the laws.
B.
Anthony, 1872 What reform movement was Susan B. Anthony promoting when she gave this speech?
F
She was promoting the right of female landowners to run for elected office. G
She was promoting the right of female citizens to vote only in state elections. H
She was promoting expanding the right to vote to all female American citizens. J
She was promoting expanding the right to vote to all female American college graduates. America Comes of Age
218
Access additional practice questions
3 What was one goal of the political rights granted to Native Americans by Congress in the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924?
A
The awarding of citizenship rights was intended to Americanize Native Americans. B
The awarding of voting rights was intended to create social equality for Native Americans. C
The awarding of citizenship rights was a way to keep Native Americans from selling their lands. D
The awarding of voting rights was intended to encourage Native Americans to sign up for military service. 4	The conditions described in author Upton Sinclair’s book The Jungle so disgusted President Theodore Roosevelt that he—
F urged Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act without delay
G started a campaign to reform industry and institute workers’ rights throughout the world H urged Congress to pass laws prohibiting muckrakers from publishing controversial books
J warned owners of meatpacking factories to regulate themselves or the government would step in
If you have trouble with...
Question	1	2 !	3			4
See Lesson	3.1					 		"							i 3.2	I	3.3	I	3.4
TEKS 5.A 5.B J
America Comes of Age 219
5
Today we are raising more [crops] than we can consume. Today we are making more than we can use.... Therefore we must find new markets for our produce, new occupation for our capital, new work for our labor.
—Senator Albert J. Beveridge, “The March of the Flag,” 1898
Which statement best represents what powerful industrialists claimed was the most significant economic reason to move the United States into a position of world power?
A
The United States was heading toward a shortfall of materials that could only be obtained elsewhere. B
If the United States increased production of surplus goods, more businesses would become profitable. C
If the United States became an extractive economy, the country would have a competitive edge in the international marketplace. D
The United States was risking factory closings and farm failures, as well as increasing unemployment, if they did not pursue overseas markets. 6	In 1898, the Spanish-American War marked a turning point in American history. What major change resulted from this war?
F
The United States began to support the rights of foreign rebel forces. G
The United States began to gain territories and exercise power around the globe. H
Latin American countries began to depend upon the United States for financial and political support. J
American investors began to feel confident about putting money into businesses in foreign countries. America Comes of Age 220
Access additional practice questions
7	Among the goals set forth in the Populist Party’s first platform were—
A more political representation for farmers and strict adherence to the gold standard
B the coinage of silver, government ownership of the railroads, and support for women’s suffrage
C the passage of legislation to ban urban machine politics, opposition to women’s suffrage, and equality for all races.
D the strict regulation of railroad shipping costs and grain storage and the abolition of the Interstate Commerce Commission
You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.
— William Jennings Bryan
The speech referenced above led to William Jennings Bryan’s—
F nomination as the Democratic presidential candidate in 1896
G victory over William McKinley in the 1896 presidential election
H decision to run against the Populist Party in the 1896 presidential election J election to the U.S. Congress as the representative from Nebraska in 1896
If you have trouble with...
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	3.5	3.6	2.3	2.4
TEKS 4.A 2.D 3.A 3.A
221
- -
America Comes of Age
topic 4 TEKS Mastery
World War I and the 1920s
In this Topic, you will learn about World War I and the 1920s. You know the TEKS are very important, and this course will make it fun to learn about the things that will help you master them. Keep reading to see how.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
2.D, 4.A, 4.C, 4.D, 4.E, 4.F, 4.G, 5.A, 5.B, 6.A, 6.B, 9.B,
10.C, 12.B, 13.A, 15.C, 15.D, 16.A, 16.B, 19.B, 19.C, 19.E,
21.B, 24.A, 25.A, 25.B, 25.C, 25.D, 26.A, 26.C, 26.F, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 28.A, 29.B, 29.G, 30.A, 32.B
LESSON OUTLINE
4.1: America Enters World War I 4.C, 4.E 4.2: The Home Front During World War I
2.D, 4.F, 13.A, 15.D, 19.B 4.3: The End of World War I 4.D, 4.F, 4.G,
12.B, 19.E, 26.F
4.4: The Postwar Economy Booms 2.D, 6.A, 6.B, 15.D, 16.A, 27.A, 27.C, 28.A
4.5: Government in the 1920s 16.A, 19.C, 29.B
4.6: An Unsettled Society 5.A, 6.A, 6.B, 15.C
4.7: The Roaring Twenties 6.A, 6.B, 25.A, 25.B, 25.C, 26.C
4.8: The Harlem Renaissance 6.B, 25.A, 25.B, 26.C
Connect
You will start by connecting with the Topic through a video that tells a personal story about the times. You will start to think about how the Topic connects with your own experience or to what you already know. And you’ll get a chance to think about a really big question, or Essential Question: How should we handle conflict?
Begin your study by trying the following
NBC LEARN
Watch My Story Video: Louise Brooks, Icon of the Modern Age
Launch your Civic Discussion:
• The League of Nations
222
9 Investigate
; Then you will investigate : the Topic through a group of ; lessons. The story of World ; War I and the 1920s will come ; to life as you read and interact ; with key content. You will get j a chance to read about what ; happened and why. And you’ll ; be able to interact with a lot of ; fascinating online materials.
; You’ll also keep working on ; your Civic Discussion as you ; build further mastery of the • Topic.
o
» Digital interactivity from the online course
• Synthesize
Next you will pull it all together by reflecting on the Essential Question. This will give you a chance to be the storyteller, to show how you would answer the big question.
• Demonstrate
Finally, you can show what you know. You can write an essay, hold a discussion, or make a presentation. You can answer questions about every TEKS on the Topic Review and Assessment pages. Or you can take part in the Civic Discussion on The League of
• Nations..............................
TEKSto Topic 4	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 4	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
2.D	7	19.B	5
4.A	6	19.C	22
4.C	2	19.E	15
4.D	10	21.B	25
4.E	1	24.A	14
4.F	4	25.A	29,30
4.G	12	25.B	34
5.A	7,25	25.C	33
5.B	9	25.D	27
6.A	24, 25, 28	26.A	26
6.B	17,23	26.F	11
9.B	26	27.A	19
10.C	18	27.B	3
12.B	13	27.C	17, 32
13. A	31	28.A	18,20
15.C	24	29.B	21
15.D	8	29.G	29
16. A	16	30.A	29
16.B	21	32.B	15
» Dancers on the cover of a 1926 Life magazine
*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
2.D, 4.A, 4.C, 4.D, 4.E, 4.F, 4.G, 5.A, 5.B, 6.A, 6.B, 9.B,
10.C, 12.B, 13.A, 15.C, 15.D, 16.A, 16.B, 19.B, 19.E,
24.A, 25.A, 25.B, 25.C, 25.D, 26.C, 26.F, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 28.A, 28.C, 29.B, 29.G, 30.A
Enduring Understandings
•	The United States was drawn into World War I on the side of the Allies.
•	Americans rallied around the war effort, although some dissenters were treated harshly.
•	President Wilson’s vision for a peace was dashed when the U.S. Senate refused to support the League of Nations.
•	In the 1920s, the nation saw an economic boom, spurred by technological innovation.
•	While many prospered, tensions created an unsettled society.
•	During the 1920s, a new mass culture emerged, women assumed new roles, and African Americans enjoyed a flowering in the arts in Harlem.
PEARSON 1	®
realize nbc learn

PEMEMBERRELGIUM
ENLIST TO DAY
This poster highlights the fact that even though Belgium declared its neutrality Germany still invaded.
I PSI
Interactive Flipped Video ©
4.1
In 1914, nationalism, militarism, imperialism, and entangling alliances combined with other factors to lead the nations of Europe into a brutal war. The war quickly spread around the globe. The United States remained neutral at first but ended up abandoning its long tradition of staying out of European conflicts.
4.C, 4.E
» Objectives
Identify the causes of World War I.
Analyze the impact of technological innovations in weaponry that resulted in stalemate on the Western Front.
Analyze reasons behind isolationism and neutrality in the United States before 1917.
Explain why the United States entered the conflict on the side of the Allies.
America Enters World War 1
The Causes of World War I
Until 1914, there had not been a large-scale European conflict for nearly one hundred years. However, bitter, deep-rooted problems simmered beneath the surface of polite diplomacy. Europe was sitting on a powder keg of nationalism, regional tensions, economic rivalries, imperial ambitions, and militarism.
» Key Terms
Alsace-Lorraine militarism Francis Ferdinand William II Western Front casualty contraband U-boats Lusitania
Zimmermann note
Nationalism Escalates Tension in Europe Nationalism, or devotion to one’s nation, kick-started international and domestic tension. In the late 1800s, many Europeans began to reject the earlier idea of a nation as a collection of different ethnic groups. Instead, they believed that a nation should express the nationalism of a single ethnic group.
This belief evolved into an intense form of nationalism that heightened international rivalries. For example, France longed to avenge its humiliating defeat by a collection of German states in 1871 and regain Alsace-Lorraine, the territory it lost during that conflict. Nationalism also threatened minority groups within nation states. If a country existed as the expression of "its people,” the majority ethnic group, where did ethnic minorities fit in?
Blj realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
226
' The spread of the theory of Social Darwinism did not help soothe the competitive instinct. Social Darwinism applied biologist Charles Darwin’s ideas of natural selection and “survival of the fittest” to human society. Social Darwinists believed that the fittest nation would come out ahead in the constant competition among countries.
Nationalism also destabilized old multinational empires such as Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire. This was particularly true in the Balkan region of southeastern Europe.
For example, when Serbia emerged as an independent nation in 1878, it challenged the nearby empire of Austria-Hungary in two ways: by trying to gain territory controlled by the empire, where Serbs lived, and by the example it offered to Austria-Hungary’s diverse peoples.
The nationalist sentiments of the period sometimes spilled over into the economic goals of each nation. Industrial output, trade, and the possession of an overseas empire were the yardsticks of wealth and greatness. The leading industrial nations competed for lands rich in raw materials as well as for places to build military bases to protect their empires. Britain already had a large empire, and France commanded a smaller one. But Germany, Italy, Belgium, Japan, and the United States also rushed to join the race to expand. Together, industrialized nations jostled among themselves as
they carved colonies out of Africa, claimed islands in the Pacific, and began to nibble away at China.
Militarism Increases Arms Production For some European leaders, the question was not so much if a. great war would start but when.To prepare, leaders increased the size of their armies and stockpiles of weapons. No nation readied its war machinery more than Germany. By 1914, it had a huge standing army and the largest, deadliest collection of guns in the world. It also built up its navy enough to rival Britain’s, the world’s strongest at that time. To keep up, Britain, too, increased the size of its navy. A spirit of militarism, or glorification of the military, grew in the competing countries and fueled this arms race even more.
The contest between Germany and Britain at sea and between Germany, France, and Russia on land guaranteed one important thing: The next major war would involve more troops and more technologically advanced weapons than ever before. Machine guns, mobile artillery, tanks, submarines, and airplanes would change the nature of warfare.
Alliances Between Nations increase the Potential for War European leaders also prepared for war by forming alliances. Before 1914, two major ones emerged.
Europe Before World War I
KEY
M
Allied Powers I | Central Powers [ | Neutral countries ATLANTIC OCEAN
» Analyze IVIaps Based on the map, describe one possible disadvantage the Central Powers of Germany and Austria-Hungary face.
World War I and the 1920s	227	4.1 America Enters World War I
Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy joined together in the Triple Alliance (although Italy never fought with it). Opposed to the Triple Alliance was the Triple Entente, made up of France, Russia, and Great Britain. Alliances emboldened leaders to act recklessly. They knew that if they did declare war, powerful allies were obligated to fight along with them. No country wanted to be seen as an unreliable partner. As years passed, European leaders thought less of the advantages of peace and more of the possible benefits of war. Some also hoped that a foreign war would help to smooth over domestic problems.
A
Significant Assassination On June 28, 1914, Archduke Francis Ferdinand, heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, and his wife Sophie left for what they thought would be a routine visit to Sarajevo (sar uh YAY voh), the capital city of the Austro-Hungarian province of Bosnia. But a handful of young Bosnians had other plans for the archduke and his wife. These men were ethnic Serbs who believed that Bosnia rightfully belonged to Serbia, and they saw Francis Ferdinand as a tyrant. After the archduke’s driver made a wrong turn, Gavrilo Princip, one of the conspirators, noticed the couple in the car, pulled a pistol from his pocket, and fired it twice. First Sophie and then Francis Ferdinand died. People around the world were shocked by the
senseless murders. But no one expected that they would lead to a great world war.
B RECALL
What countries formed the Triple Entente? The Great War Begins
Everything was in place for a great conflict—nationalist ambitions, large armies, stockpiles of weapons, alliances, and military plans. The nations of Europe were hurtling like giant trains toward a great collision. Archduke Francis Ferdinand’s assassination was the incident that triggered this conflict.
Alliances Cause a Chain Reaction Soon after the assassination, Kaiser William II, the German emperor, assured Austria-Hungary that Germany would stand by its ally if war came. Confident in Germany’s support, Austria-Hungary then sent a harsh ultimatum to Serbia demanding Serbia’s total cooperation in an investigation into the assassination. When Serbia did not agree to all of the demands, Austria-Hungary declared war on July 28,1914.
Because of the alliance system, what otherwise might have been a localized quarrel quickly spread. In early August, Russia mobilized for war to help its ally Serbia against Austria. This caused Germany to declare war against Russia.
France, Russia’s ally, promptly declared war against Germany. The very next day, Germany declared war
Major Players in World War I
NEUTRAL POWERS
SOURCE:
Britannica Encyclopedia Switzerland
Spain
The Netherlands
Denmark
Sweden
Norway
Albania
» Analyze Charts Why was one alliance called “The Central Powers”? (Consulting a map may help you answer.)
World War I and the 1920s	228	4.1 America Enters World War I
» Analyze Maps What challenge did Germany’s location present to its pursuit of victory in the war?
against neutral Belgium, so that it could launch an invasion of France through that small country. Great Britain, which had treaties with France and Belgium, immediately declared war against Germany. In less than one week, the Central Powers of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Bulgaria were at war against the Allied Powers of Britain, France, Russia, and Serbia. The Ottoman Empire later joined the Central Powers.
German soldiers fought through Belgium and moved southwest into France, toward Paris. Then in September, with the German advance only 30 miles from Paris, the French and the British counterattacked and stopped the German forces near the Marne River.
Technological Innovations Lead to Stalemate
After the Battle of the Marne, the Germans settled onto high ground, dug trenches, and fortified their position. When the French and British attacked, the German troops used machine guns and artillery to kill thousands of them. The French and British then dug their own trenches and used the same weapons to kill thousands of counterattacking Germans.
Soon, 450 miles of trenches stretched like a huge scar from the coast of Belgium to the border of Switzerland. Although fighting went on in Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and in other parts of the world, this Western Front in France became the critical battle front. The side that won there would win the war.
The war dragged on for years, and it was hideously deadly—much more so than anyone had expected. The primary reason for the length of the war and its deadly nature was the simple fact that the defensive weapons of the time were better and more devastating than the offensive ones. Generals on each side threw their soldiers into assaults against the enemy without fully considering the new technology. Charging toward trenches that were defended by artillery, machine guns, and rifles was futile. In virtually every battle on the Western Front, the attacking force suffered terribly.
Even the use of poison gas did nothing to benefit the offense, despite its horrifying effects. Airplanes and tanks were both first used during World War I, but neither broke the stalemate.
Airplanes were mostly used for reconnaissance, or observing an area for military purposes. The torn-up ground caused by endless shelling created a need for a new military technology—the tank. Military leaders hoped tanks could plow through devastated battlefield areas, but the first tanks weren’t able to ride over such uneven terrain and often broke down during crucial battles. Ineffective offensives and effective defenses produced only a deadly stalemate.
The Reality of Trench Warfare The stalemate led to gruesome conditions for the men in the trenches of the Western Front. The soldiers battled the harsh
World War I and the 1920s ; 229	4.1 America Enters World War I
conditions of life often as fiercely as they attacked the enemy. They developed “trench foot" from standing for hours in wet, muddy trenches. They contracted lice from the millions of rats that infested the trenches. Dug into the ground, the soldiers lived in constant fear, afraid to pop their heads out of their holes and always aware that the next offensive might be their last.
Even on a quiet day, soldiers could be killed by snipers or a surprise gas attack, like the one described by French officer Paul Truffaut at Verdun:
The special shells the men call
“shells on wheels" [shells filled with poison gas] are whizzing by continuously They explode silently and have no smell but can be deadly. They killed several men yesterday. One of my men refused to put his mask on because he couldn’t smell anything.
All of a sudden, he was dizzy, foaming at the mouth and his skin went black, then he went rigid and died,
—Paul Truffaut. Mascn 5. 1917
In between enemy lines was an area known as “no man’s land.” Artillery barrages had blasted no
man’s land until any fields, trees, or homes, that had once existed there, were charred beyond recognition. Soldiers went "over the top” of their trenches into this muddy, nearly impassable wasteland when they attempted to attack the entrenched enemy.
Casualties—or soldiers killed, wounded, or missing—mounted first in thousands, then hundreds of thousands, and finally in millions. Almost one million French soldiers were killed or wounded in just the first three months of the war. The Germans lost only slightly fewer. In two battles in 1916—Verdun (ver duhn) and the Somme (suhm)—the British, French, and Germans sustained more than 2 million casualties. The British suffered 60,000 casualties on the first day alone at the Somme and achieved virtually nothing. And still the stalemate dragged on.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What technologies encouraged a stalemate between opposing armies?
The United States Remains Neutral
As the war spread in Europe, President Woodrow Wilson called for Americans to be “impartial in thought as well as action.” In a “melting pot” nation that tried
Deadly Technology of World War I
TECHNOLOGY I APPLICATION
POISON GAS
Gases such as chlorine, phosgene, and mustard gas could kill, blind, or burn their victims. MACHINE GUNS
1 Improved machine guns could fire 600 bullets per minute. FLAMETHROWER I A
new technology, flamethrowers consisted of a backpack and a gun that could shoot flames as far as 60 feet. ARTILLERY FIELD GUNS
These long-range cannons caused more casualties than any other type of weapon. TANKS AND ARMORED CARS
Both sides tried to develop vehicles that could go over rough ground and barbed-wire no, with limited success. AIRPLANES
Planes were used for reconnaissance, bombing, and fighting but did not prove decisive. SUBMARINES
German U-boats, or submarines, used torpedoes as well as on-deck 1 guns to sink ships. » Analyze Charts Based on the types of weapons listed in the chart, what can you conclude about either side’s ability to inflict casualties on the other side?
World War I and the 1920s	230 ; 4.1 America Enters World War I
to make Americans of peoples from diverse origins, Wilson did not want to see the war set Americans against one another. At first, most Americans viewed the conflict as a distant European quarrel for land and influence. Unless the nation’s interests were directly threatened, Americans wanted no part of it. They preferred to maintain what they viewed as traditional American isolation from European disputes. Still, many Americans felt the war's effects and few were truly impartial in thought. Most held a preference for one or another combatant, and many businesses benefited from the increased demand by warring nations for American goods.
Many Americans Choose Sides In 1914, one third of Americans were foreign-born. Many still thought of themselves in terms of their former homelands— as German Americans, Irish Americans, Polish Americans, and so on. With relatives in Europe, many people supported the nation in which they were born.
Some German Americans in the Midwest and some Irish Americans along the East Coast felt strongly that the Central Powers were justified in their actions. Many Americans had emigrated from Germany or Austria-Hungary. Millions of Irish Americans harbored intense grudges over the centuries of Great Britain’s domination of their homeland. They hoped that Ireland would gain its independence as Britain became entangled in the war. Many Jewish Americans who had fled Russia to escape the Czarist regimes’ murderous pogroms against Jews hoped for Russia’s defeat.
Most Americans, however, sided with Britain and France, both of which had strong historic ties with the United States. America’s national language was English, its cultural heritage was largely British, and its leading trading partner was Britain. France had aided the American cause during the Revolutionary War.
U.S.
Opinion Solidifies No event at the beginning of the war swayed American opinion more than the vicious German invasion of neutral Belgium. German soldiers marching through Belgium committed numerous atrocities, killing unarmed civilians, and destroying entire towns. British journalists and propagandists stressed, and sometimes exaggerated, the brutality of the Germans’ actions. Americans might have only dimly understood the causes of the war, but they clearly perceived the human cost of the war for Belgium. Eventually, three distinct positions on the war crystallized among Americans. One group, the isolationists, believed that the war was none of America’s business and that the nation should isolate itself from the hostilities. A second group, the
» Soldiers took cover in trenches during gas attacks. Hypothesize Why do you think many people consider poisonous gas attacks to be morally wrong while accepting attacks by machines guns, artillery, and tanks?
» Analyze Political Cartoons Based on the cartoon, what can you infer about President Wilson’s attitude toward the war?
©
Interactive Chart
World War I and the 1920s	231	4.1 America Enters World War I
» The British Navy was the strongest in the world. Draw Conclusions Why was naval superiority so important to Great Britain’s war effort?
» After German U-boats sank the British passenger ship Lusitania near the Irish coast, it became clear to many Americans that even ships carrying civilians were potential targets.
interventionists, felt that the war did affect American interests and that the United States should intervene in the conflict on the side of the Allies. A third group, the internationalists, occupied the middle ground. Internationalists believed that the United States should play an active role in world affairs and work toward achieving a just peace but not enter the war.
Q CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Into what three positions did U.S. opinion generally fall? Reasons for U.S. Entry into the War
An internationalist, President Wilson sincerely desired peace in his country and around the world. Between the start of the war in 1914 and America’s entry into it in 1917, Wilson attempted to use his influence to end the conflict among the warring countries. He failed in this great effort. Ultimately, he also failed to keep the United States out of the war.
Britain Blockades German Ports Early in the war, British leaders decided to use their navy to blockade Germany to keep essential goods from reaching the other country. International law generally allowed contraband goods, usually defined as weapons and other articles used to fight a war, to be confiscated legally by any belligerent nation. Noncontraband goods, such as food, medical supplies, and other nonmilitary items, could not be confiscated. Britain, however, contested the definition of noncontraband articles. As the war continued, Britain expanded its definition of contraband until it encompassed virtually every product, including gasoline, cotton, and even food—in spite of international law.
Passenger Ships Fall Victim to the War at Sea
Germany responded by attempting to blockade Britain—even though it lacked the conventional naval forces to do so. Instead, in February 1915, Germany began sinking Allied ships using its U-boats, or submarines. The reality of the German blockade struck America on May 7, 1915, when a German U-boat sank the British passenger liner Lusitania off the coast of Ireland.
Nearly 1,200 people perished. German officials correctly claimed that the ship was carrying ammunition and other contraband. Americans protested that an unarmed and unresisting ship should not be sunk without first being warned and provided with safety for its passengers. President Wilson was stunned but still wanted peace. “There is such a thing
World War I and the 1920s	232	4.1 America Enters World War I
0__________100 mi
0	100 km
Lambert Conformal Conic Projection
Ships Sunk by U-boats, May 1917-January 1918
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
• • •
••.I*	*• •*.•••	Brest
• ••* • *•••
•	••• .*•••, A’ •••5^
•	•	* • •• s ••	••	• •
» German U-boats destroyed more than 11 million tons of Allied shipping and killed nearly 14,000 people. Analyze Maps Why were U-boat attacks clustered in particular areas?
as a man being too proud to fight,” he told his fellow citizens. “There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right.”
Germany helped to keep the United States out of the war by eventually promising not to sink any more passenger ships. But in 1916, Germany violated that promise by sinking the unarmed French passenger ship Sussex. Another storm of protest erupted in America. Again, Germany pledged not to sink unarmed ships. This promise, called the Sussex Pledge, would not last long.
Preparations for War President Wilson wanted to remain at peace, but even he must have realized the futility of that hope. At the end of 1915, Wilson began to prepare the nation for war.
Many believed that “preparedness” was a dangerous course that could actually provoke war. Even so, Congress passed two pieces of legislation in 1916 to prepare for the possibility of U.S. involvement. The National Defense Act expanded the size of the army, and the Naval Construction Act ordered the building of more warships.
Still, Wilson hoped to avoid conflict. In 1916, he ran for reelection with the slogan “He kept us out of war.” It
was a close election, but Wilson won a narrow victory over Republican Charles Evans Hughes.
The United States Is Neutral No Longer Wilson did not have much time to enjoy his victory. In early 1917, two events occurred that helped to push the United States into the war. Both events showed Germany’s increasing aggression, the main reason why the United States ultimately entered the war.
American trade with the Allies had sustained Britain and France in the war, while the British blockade of Germany had stopped the flow of American goods to the Central Powers. As far as Germany was concerned, desperate times demanded desperate measures.
In January 1917, suffering severe supply shortages due to the blockade, Germany took action. First, German Foreign Minister Arthur Zimmermann sent a telegram to Mexico. The Zimmermann note proposed an alliance with Mexico, stating that if the United States declared war on Germany, Mexico should declare war on the United States. In return, after a German victory, Mexico would get back the states of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, which it had lost in 1848 after its defeat in the Mexico-American War. The telegram was intercepted by the British, who gave it to American authorities. Next, Germany once again
World War I and the 1920s	233	4.1 America Enters World War I
GEPMA5 LEGATION
MEXICO CITY
13C	13042	13401	85C1	115	3528	416
1814V	18222	215**0	1C247	11518	23677
59C5	11311	11392	10371	C302
17504	lie*’*)	18270	10101	0317
22200	19451	21589	67893	5569
4725	4458	5905	17106	13851	44
12224	6929	14991	7382	15857
98C92 13571 £2284 1333 13857 • 087C
	
	
	
	
	*-
11310	%
	
14935	
	
4473	£
S'
10439 21 l.\
21 tH
5144
1C4&2
1"7?e	7 11*1
£7552	22C3’’
18140	222**C
52'U
14814	4178
21£72	9346
E7"6	7381
£831	1792.
97530	3569
£1«C4 5903 ‘ £/-’£ 6992 9359
98092 11347 3C70
ML 18222 4757
13347 134<? 8784 224P4 J6127 17142
15217 0715	14331
?4v7	22461
2C420	39689
22C19	13339
7652	7357 f
15874	185C2
13486	9350
11264	7667
16102
17214	6491
13605	3494
1290	5161
0228	17694
13918	8958	12137
B 17149	14471	6706
7893	14218	36477
22801	17138
15021	23845
£0855	4377
13732	20867
11265	22295
26	52262	11267
18500	15857
220	76038	14219
7762	15099	9110
We shall be satisfied when those rights have been made as secure as the faith and the freedom of nations can make them.
—Woodrow Wilson, April 2, 1917
Congress responded on April 6, 1917, with a declaration of war. Wilson’s long struggle to keep America at peace was over.
fci IDENTIFY What two events finally led to U.S.
involvement in World War I?
ELPS LISTENING 2.C.1
Read aloud the text with a partner. Listen for the word not. Where is it located in the sentence? How does it change the sentence’s meaning?
ELPS
BEPf.STOPFF .
ASSESSMENT
» Discovery of the Zimmermann note (a coded telegram) along with unrestricted submarine warfare by Germany led Wilson to ask Congress for a declaration of war.

Interactive Timeline
announced unrestricted submarine warfare against Britain.
Although most leaders knew Mexico had no intention of attacking the United States, Americans were shocked by the publication of the Zimmermann note. Even Wilson no longer called for peace. On April 2, 1917, he asked Congress for a declaration of war against Germany:
The world must be made safe for democracy. Its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty. . . . We are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind.
1.	Analyze Information Discuss the form of nationalism that prevailed in Europe before World War I, and explain how it contributed to the start of the war.
2.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain why the assassination of Francis Ferdinand led to more than a localized quarrel.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain why President Wilson initially opposed U.S. involvement in World War I, and why he later changed his mind.
4.	Make Decisions World War I is generally considered to be the first instance of total war, where every of-age citizen and all possible resources are mobilized in the war effort. In light of this, do you believe Britain’s blockade of Germany—which eventually extended to all goods thereby violating international law—was justified? Explain your opinion.
5.	Compare and Contrast Discuss the ways in which World War I differed from previous wars.
World War I and the 1920s	234
4.1 America Enters World War I
Before the war, the federal government played a minor role in the daily lives of most Americans. But during World War I, the government assumed new powers. It regulated industrial and agricultural production, worked to shape public opinion, and established a new military draft. While war required sacrifice, it also brought new economic opportunities, and many Americans migrated to other parts of the country in search of these opportunities. The war permanently changed Americans’ relationship with their government.
KSl Interactive Flipped Video
The Home Front
During World War 1
Mobilizing for War
War affects many things, but its greatest impact is on the lives of ordinary people. People fight, sacrifice, and sometimes die in war. People work to produce the food that soldiers eat and the guns that soldiers fire. People shape the information that others receive about the war. War may be the result of conflicts between nations, but it touches the lives of millions of individuals.
Expanding the Army When the United States entered World War I, the U.S. Army was only a small fraction of the size of European armies. To build the army, President Wilson encouraged Americans to volunteer for service and pushed Congress to pass the Selective Service Act. The act, which Congress passed in May 1917, authorized a draft of young men for military service in Europe. On the first day of its enactment, June 5, 1917, more than 9.6 million Americans registered for the draft and were assigned a number. The government held a “great national lottery” in July to decide the order in which the first draftees would be called into service. Blindfolded, Secretary of War Newton D. Baker pulled number 258 out of a jar. The group of men assigned that number became the very first draftees.
2.D, 4.F, 13.A, 15.D, 19.B
» Objectives
Analyze how the U.S. government mobilized the public to support the war effort.
Describe opposition to World War I and how the federal government responded to it.
Analyze the causes and effects of migration and social changes that occurred during World War I.
» Key Terms
Selective Service
Act
Bernard Baruch Committee on
Public Information
(CPI)
George Creel conscientious
objector Espionage Act Great Migration
c
PEARSON 1
@1 realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
235
Over the course of the war, more than 24 million Americans registered for the draft. Of these, about 2.8 million were actually drafted into the armed forces. Including volunteers, the total number of American men in uniform during World War I reached nearly 4.8 million. More than 4 million of these were sent to help the Allies in France.
Managing Economic Effects The economic effects of the international military conflict of World War I on the United States were significant. While the Selective Service Commission raised an army, President Wilson worked to shift the national economy from peacetime to wartime production. This process proved slow and frustrating. First, the Council of National Defense, which was formed in August 1916, created an array of new federal administrative agencies to oversee different phases of the war effort. Individual agencies regulated food production, coal and petroleum distribution, and railway use. In practical terms, this meant that the government determined what crops farmers grew, what products industries produced, and how supplies moved around on the nation’s trains.
Problems and administrative overlap soon led to the creation of the War Industries Board (WIB). The WIB eventually became independent of the Council of National Defense. Headed by Bernard Baruch(buh rook), an influential Wall Street investment broker who
reported directly to the President, the WIB regulated all industries engaged in the war effort. Baruch’s agency determined what products industries would make, where those products went, and how much they would cost. The system of free enterprise was curtailed to fulfill the nation’s acute need for war materials. Americans decided to cooperate rather than compete in order to defeat the Central Powers.
What Baruch did for industry, future U.S. president Herbert Hoover achieved for agriculture. As head of the Food Administration, he set prices high for wheat and other foodstuffs to encourage farmers to increase production. He also asked Americans to conserve food as a patriotic gesture. If the American people ate less, then more food could be shipped to American and other Allied soldiers fighting the war overseas. To this end, Hoover instituted wheatless Mondays and Wednesdays, meatless Tuesdays, and porkless Thursdays and Saturdays.
Convincing the American People Hoover's efforts would have been fruitless if the American people did not believe in supporting the war. Most Americans did not understand the reasons for the war in 1914, and many questioned why the United States became involved in 1917. It was the job of the Committee on Public Information (CPI) to educate the public about the causes and nature of the war. The CPI had
U.S. ECONOMY WORLD WAR I
CHANGES IN THE WORKFORCE
1014-1918
RISING PRODUCTION
I
I'i t K
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
97%
DECREASE IN THE NUMBER OF
oaa non approximate
NUMBER OF
MEXICAN IMMIGRANTS
most taking agricultural jobs in the Southwest
4fin AAA approximate TXVivlj vlvlvl NUMBER OF
Arar an k; -t '
who left the rural South for northern industrial jobs
Ur
Uh
* in 1916, agricultural output did not increase above the 1914 levels.
A
UU BU DU
» Analyze Charts Which segment of the U.S. economy was strongest from 1914-1918? Why?
World War I and the 1920s	236	4.2 The Home Front During World War I
to convince Americans that the war effort was a just cause.
Wilson appointed George Creel as the director of the CPI. A former journalist and a passionate admirer of American institutions, Creel combined education and a widespread advertising campaign to “sell America.” The CPI distributed 75 million pamphlets and 6,000 press releases, and it assembled an army of 75,000 speakers who gave lectures and brief speeches on America's war aims and the nature of the enemy. In addition, the CPI designed, printed, and distributed millions of posters that dramatized the needs of America and its allies. The CPI also stressed the cruelty and wickedness of the enemy, particularly Germany, which in some cases aggravated resentment toward German Americans. Still, using these methods, Creel and the CPI earned widespread support for the American war effort.
H RECALL
What cornerstone of U.S. business philosophy was partially abandoned to aid the war effort?
+ ELPS
ELPS LISTENING 2.C.2
Read aloud the first two paragraphs with a partner. Look at the phrase played a minor role, and discuss its meaning. Where have you heard or used the phrase to play a role? Opposition to the War
The CPI’s work was important because Americans did not always peacefully agree with one another about the war. Members of two large ethnic groups, German Americans and Irish Americans, tended to oppose the Allies for different reasons. Swept up in patriotic fervor, some people treated German Americans with prejudice, or intolerance. Other Americans were pacifists who opposed war for any reason. One major issue raised by U.S. involvement in World War I was that the government acted in ways that sometimes trespassed on individual liberties to quiet dissent, or differing opinions.
Opposition to the Draft Without a doubt, the draft created controversy. Some Americans believed it was an illegal intrusion of the federal government into their private lives. Some men refused to cooperate with the Selective Service process.
They were often court-martialed and imprisoned. Others simply tried to avoid the draft. Perhaps as many as 12 percent of men who received draft notices never responded to them.
Many Americans were conscientious objectors, people whose moral or religious beliefs forbid them
» Some citizens showed their opposition to the war and the draft by staging protests.

to fight in wars. In theory, the Selective Service Act exempted from combat service members of “any well recognized religious sect or organization... whose existing creed or principles forbid its members to participate in war.” In practice, this policy was widely ignored. This was a constitutional issue, because the First Amendment guarantees freedom of religion. In addition, some conscientious objectors were treated badly by their local draft boards, and others were humiliated in training camps. As America’s participation in the war increased, however, the government improved its treatment of conscientious objectors.
Women Oppose the War Some American women also opposed the war. Before the war, a number of leading American feminists, including reformer Jane Addams, formed the Women’s Peace Party and, with pacifist women from other countries, the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. Jeannette Rankin, the first woman to serve in the U.S. House of Representatives, voted against the declaration of war. After America joined the Allies, some women continued to oppose the war, but most supported American war efforts. For example, the influential National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) dropped its initial peace initiatives and supported America’s war
World War I and the 1920s	237	4.2 The Home Front During World War I
objectives. After adopting this new policy, NAWSA doubled in size.
The Federal Government Stifles Dissent
Constitutional issues raised by federal government policy during World War I also centered on the First Amendment rights of free speech. The work of the CPI created a mood in America that did not welcome open debate. Some felt the CPI stifled the free expression of controversial opinions and worried about the impact of a rigorous military campaign on democracy. They did not want the freedoms that Americans held most dear to become victims of the conflict. Americans treasured their Constitution and the Bill of Rights.
And were not U.S. soldiers fighting for freedom? At the same time, since so much depended on individuals doing their part in the military or on the home front, retaining national unity was vital to America’s success in the war. As in previous and future wars, the government navigated a difficult path between respecting and restricting individual rights. Authorities tended to treat harshly individuals who worked against U.S. participation in the war.
In June 1917, Congress passed the Espionage Act, allowing postal authorities to ban treasonable or seditious newspapers, magazines, or printed materials from the mail. Thus, another First Amendment freedom, the freedom of the press, was compromised. It also
enacted severe penalties for anyone engaged in disloyal or treasonable activities. Anyone found obstructing army recruiters, aiding the enemy, or generally interfering with the war effort could be punished with up to a $10,000 fine and 20 years of imprisonment.
In 1918, Congress limited freedom of speech even further with the passage of the Sedition Act. The act made it unlawful to use “disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language” about the American form of government, the Constitution, or the military forces. The government employed the Sedition Act to prosecute socialists, political radicals, and pacifists. Eugene V. Debs, the leader of the Socialist Party in America, was imprisoned under the act. For his crime—giving a mildly antiwar speech to a convention of socialists in Canton, Ohio—he was sentenced to a 10-year term in a federal prison.
The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Sedition Act in the case of Schenck v. United States (1919). The Court ruled that there are times when the need for public order is so pressing that First Amendment protections of speech do not apply. The Debs case and others like it show that the war did lead the federal government to follow policies that raised important constitutional issues about the suppression of personal freedoms and individual rights.
Espionage and Sedition Court Cases During World War I
DEFENDANT
EUGENE V. DEBS
KATE
RICHARDS
O’HARE
CHARLES T. SCHENCK
EMMA
GOLDMAN
ACCUSATIONS
ARGUMENT
» Analyze Charts Do you think Eugene V. Debs should have been arrested during	p——
World War I? Why or why not?	| ©
Interactive Gallery
World War I and the 1920s	238 > 4.2 The Home Front During World War I
Prejudice Against German Americans Sometimes, the war enthusiasm created by the CPI and other groups took an ugly turn. Some German Americans were treated harshly during the war. Largely because of CPI efforts, Americans regarded Germany’s kaiser as arrogant, its generals as ruthless, and its soldiers as spike-helmeted brutes. Germany was seen as the primary foe among the Central Powers. Popular movies, such as The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin, as well as some CPI posters and speeches intensified this feeling by portraying Germany as a cruel enemy. Some Americans wrongly generalized that if Germany was cruel, then all German people were cruel.
As a result, Americans stopped teaching German in public schools and discontinued playing the music of Beethoven and Brahms. They renamed German measles “liberty measles,” cooked “liberty steaks” instead of hamburgers, and walked their “liberty pups” instead of dachshunds.
German Americans were pressured to prove their loyalty to America by condemning the German government, giving up speaking German and reading German-language newspapers, and participating enthusiastically in any patriotic drive. Occasionally, hatred of the German enemy boiled over into violence against German Americans. Some German Americans were harassed, others were beaten, and a few were killed for no other reason than they were born in Germany or spoke with a German accent.
ET GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
Why was the status of conscientious objectors a constitutional issue?
The War Changes
American Society
The war was not only a turning point in the economic and political lives of Americans, but it also brought substantial social changes. New opportunities opened up for women, African Americans, and Mexican Americans. Some left their homes to seek new ones where they could take advantage of these opportunities.
Women Welcome New Opportunities Before the war, some American women campaigned for women’s suffrage. They won the vote in several western states and still hoped to gain the franchise nationally. Many feared that the war would draw attention away from their efforts. In fact, the war gave women new chances and won them more support for the right to vote.
As men entered the armed forces, many women moved into the workforce for the first time. Women
A CERTAIN CURE FOR THE
GERMAN MEASLES.
Mix some Woolwich Powders with Tinct. of Iron or Essence of lead, and administer in pills (or shells), Have ready a little British Army (a little goes a long way) some Brussels Sprouts and French Mustard. Add a little Canadian Cheese and Australian Lamb and season with the best Indian Curry, Set it on a Kitchener and keep stirring until quite hot.
If this does not make the Patient perspire freely, rub the best Russian Bears* Grease on his chest and wrap in Berlin Wool.
Dr, Cannon’s Prescrip.
P*S*-
The patient must on no account have any Peace-Soup until the swelling in the head has quite disappeared*
So,
» Unlike this humorous postcard with a “cure” for
German measles, other anti-German sentiment was
often more strident.
filled jobs that were vacated by men who had gone to fight.
They worked in munitions factories, on the railroads, as telegraph operators and trolley conductors, and in other jobs that were previously open only to men. Others labored on farms. Some joined the Red Cross or the American Women’s Hospital Service and went overseas. They worked as doctors, nurses, ambulance drivers, and clerks. Thousands enlisted when the Army Corps of Nurses was created in 1918. Women proved that they could succeed in any type of job, regardless of difficulty or risk.
By their efforts and sacrifices during the war, women convinced President Wilson to support their suffrage demands. He contended that granting the vote to women was “vital to winning the war.” If women could do the work of men, they certainly deserved the same voting privileges as men. Finally, in 1919, Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment giving the vote to women. The required two thirds of states ratified the amendment in the summer of 1920, a victory more than 70 years in the making.
African Americans and the Great Migration The
war similarly presented new opportunities to African Americans.
4.2 The Home Front During World War I
World War I and the 1920s
From the outset, most African American leaders supported the war. “If this is our country, then this is our war,” wrote African American leader W.E.B. Du Bois. He viewed the struggle as an excellent opportunity to show all Americans the loyalty and patriotism of African Americans. Thousands of them enlisted or were drafted into the army and sailed for the battlefields of France. On the battlefield, they fought in segregated units under the command of white officers. Altogether, 367,000 African Americans served in the military. Hundreds died for their country.
Meanwhile, a great movement of African Americans from the rural South to the industrial North was taking place. This movement to the “Land of Hope,” as many African Americans referred to the North at that time, is called the Great Migration. A migration is a movement of a group people to a new place. Migrations are often described as being caused by “push-pull” factors: people migrate because some factors “push” them away from where they have been living while other factors “pull” them toward their destination.
For African Americans during the Great Migration, factors that “pushed” them out of the South included Jim Crow segregation laws, lynching and other racial violence, and few economic opportunities other than as servants, sharecroppers, or tenant farmers. Many raised cotton, and the arrival in 1910 of an insect pest called the boll weevil ruined their crops, providing yet another push out of the South.
At the same time, the North “pulled” them with the chance of economic opportunities to be found in prosperous cities and wartime factories. As more African Americans moved North, they themselves became pull factors for family and friends back in the South. Newspapers in the North, such as the Chicago Defender, an African American newspaper that was widely read in the South, encouraged the migration:
I	beg you, my brother, to leave the benighted land. . . .Get out of the South. . . . Come north then, all you folks, both good and bad. . . .The Defender says come.
—Chu a; to Defended
African Americans moved to Chicago, as the Defenderencouraged, where they found work in meatpacking plants. They migrated to Detroit, where they obtained jobs in auto factories. They traveled to smaller industrial towns in the Midwest and to the giant cities of the Northeast. Between 1910 and 1930, more than 1.2 million African Americans moved to the North. Millions more eventually made the journey. Although they did not entirely escape discrimination in the North, many did find more opportunity. The Great Migration was one of the most dramatic demographic, or population, shifts in American history.
The Great Migration
» Analyze Maps How did World War I help create this demographic shift?
400 mi
0	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
KEY
I I
States that had significant loss of African American population I
States that had significant gain in African American population ♦ African American migration
Interactive Chart
©
✓
World War I and the 1920s	240	4.2 The Home Front During World War I
The effects of this change in demographic pattern are still with us today. For example, in 1910, about one percent of Detroit’s population was African American. In 2010, 83 percent of the residents were African American. Similarly, other large cities across the North—Chicago, Philadelphia, New York—have high concentrations of African Americans as a direct result of the Great Migration.
Mexicans Move North Some of the same factors that pushed African Americans out of the South and pulled them to the North caused Mexicans to cross the border into the United States. Because of the ongoing Mexican Revolution, many Mexicans faced violence and desperate poverty.They also wanted better economic opportunities. Most immigrated to the American West, where they sought work on large ranches and farms in Texas and along the Pacific Coast. Increased wartime demands for food and a decrease in American farmworkers (since many were serving in the army) created jobs that Mexican migrants filled.
Some of the Mexican migration was seasonal. Many workers crossed the border to harvest fruits or grains or to pick cotton while each crop was in season, then crossed back into Mexico. But others stayed and made the United States their home. Some Mexican workers migrated first to the Southwest and then to the northern states in search of factory jobs, but a large population stayed in California. They formed barn'os(BAHR ee ohz), or Hispanic neighborhoods, in Los Angeles and in smaller cities in California's Imperial Valley, a farming region just north of the Mexican border. California had always had a rich Hispanic heritage, but these new immigrants added an important economic dimension to that heritage.
B DRAW CONCLUSIONS
What do you think was the most significant motivation behind the Great Migration?
» As Mexican immigrants came to the United States they sought to create new economic opportunities for themselves and their children in the American West.
2.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the purposes and effects of the Committee on Public Information.
3.	Evaluate Arguments Discuss the constitutional issues raised by the government’s response to antiwar sentiments.
4.	Make Generalizations How did wartime patriotism affect German Americans?
5.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss women’s roles in the war effort, and explain how the war influenced the women’s suffrage movement.
ASSESSMENT
1. Generate Explanations Explain how the role of the federal government changed during World War I.
World War I and the 1920s < 241
4.2 The Home Front During World War I
4.3
The energy and enthusiasm that American forces brought to the battlefield gave a tremendous boost to the Allied war effort.
When the United States entered World War I in the spring of 1917, the conflict had become a deadly, bloody stalemate. The war would be won or lost on the Western Front in France. Since 1914, both sides had tried desperately to break the stalemate there—and failed. The American entry into the war would play a key role in the Allied victory.
I
I
fCjl Interactive Flipped Video
4.D, 4.F, 4.G, 12.B, 19.E, 26.F
» Objectives
Understand the contributions of the American Expeditionary Force to the Allied victory in World War I.
Describe the issues raised by President Wilson’s Fourteen Points.
Analyze the decisions made at the Paris Peace Conference and included in the Treaty of Versailles.
Evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in the League of Nations.
Explain why the U.S. Senate did not ratify the Treaty of Versailles.
» Key Terms
convoy
Vladimir Lenin John J. Pershing Fourteen Points self-determination League of Nations Henry Cabot Lodge reparations irreconcilables reservationists
American Expeditionary Forces (AEF)
influenza
The End of World
Warl
America Joins the Fighting
To European leaders, the United States was a great unknown. Ethnic divisions in the United States raised questions about how committed American troops would be in combat. Some doubted that the United States could raise, train, equip, and transport an army fast enough to influence the outcome of the war. Desperate German military leaders renewed unrestricted submarine warfare, hoping to end the conflict before the Americans could make a difference.
The Convoy System The Allies immediately felt the impact of the renewed unrestricted submarine warfare. German U-boats sank merchant ships in alarming numbers, faster than replacements could be built. As one merchant ship after another sank to the bottom of the sea, the Allies lost crucial supplies.
Together, the Allies addressed the problem of submarine warfare by adopting an old naval tactic: convoying. In a convoy, groups of merchant ships sailed together, protected by warships. The arrangement was designed to provide mutual safety at sea. Convoys made up of British and American ships proved to be an instant success.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
242
Shipping losses from U-boat attacks fell as sharply as they had risen. Germany’s gamble had failed.
The War Ends on the Eastern Front Meanwhile, the situation on land began to swing in favor of the Central Powers. The Allies were exhausted by years of combat. Russia was torn by revolutions. In March 1917, a moderate, democratic revolution overthrew Czar Nicholas II but kept Russia in the war. In November 1917, radical communists led by Vladimir Lenin (lehn ihn) staged a revolution and gained control of Russia.
Russia stopped fighting in mid-December, and on March 3, 1918, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk ended the war between Russia (soon to become the Soviet Union) and Germany. The end of the war on the Eastern Front allowed Germany to send more soldiers to the Western Front.
General John J. Pershing and the AEF In the spring of 1918, Germany launched an all-out offensive on the Western Front. A series of five offensives threatened to break through Allied defenses and open a path to Paris. The hard-pressed Allies organized a joint command under French General Ferdinand Foch (fawsh).
General John J. Pershing, the commander of U.S. forces in Europe, arrived in France with a small force in mid-1917. However, it was not until early 1918 that U.S. troops began arriving in larger numbers. The forces under Pershing’s command were called the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF). By the end of the war, more than two million men would serve overseas in the AEF. Although the Allies wanted to use U.S. soldiers to replenish their armies, Pershing was adamant about keeping U.S. forces independent.
At about the time of Pershing’s arrival, the first German offensive began to stall. By the end of March 1918, Allied counterattacks and German exhaustion ended the first great German offensive. Germany had gained miles rather than yards of land but failed to end the war before American troops could arrive in force. Both sides lost hundreds of thousands of men, but the Allied forces were being bolstered by American troops.
More fighting followed, and with each passing week, American troops made more and more contributions on the battlefield, driven forward by Pershing's leadership. Germany launched several more offensives. Allied defenses buckled and stretched but did not break. Each failed offensive weakened Germany more and raised Allied hopes. A British volunteer nurse working near the front described the arrival of new American troops:
I pressed forward with the others to watch the United States physically
» A church in Ypres (EE-pruh), Belgium, lies in ruins. The use of powerful new military technologies by both the Allied and Central powers left many parts of Europe devastated.
» American vessels crossed the Atlantic Ocean in convoys to help defend themselves against German U-boat attacks.Identify Cause and Effect Why was it so important to find a solution to the U-boat threat?
World War I and the 1920s	243	4.3 The End of World War I
entering the War, so god-like, so magnificent, so splendidly unimpaired in comparison with the tired, nerve-wracked men of the British Army.
So these were our deliverers at last, marching up the road to Camiers in the spring sunshine!
—Vera Brittain, Testament of Youth
American Troops in Battle American troops, called "doughboys,” saw significant action in the late spring and summer of 1918. Americans fought on the defensive along with the French at the Second Battle of the Marne and on the offensive at the Battle of Cantigny (kahn tee nyee), where they dislodged a large German force from fortified positions. They battled valiantly at Chateau-Thierry (sha toh tir ee) and Belleau (beh loh) Wood, Meuse-Argonne (myooz ahr gahn) and Saint-Mihiel (mee yehl). Although it took some time, American troops learned quickly and fought bravely.
One of America’s greatest war heroes was Alvin York of Tennessee. On October 8, 1918, York was one of thousands of Americans fighting in the Meuse-Argonne region of northeastern France. Trapped behind enemy lines, York and 16 other Americans took cover from blistering machine-gun fire. As half of the
American force fell to German bullets, York took aim with his rifle and silenced a nearby German machine-gun nest. He then dodged a flurry of bullets to attack several other machine gunners and even charged one German position with only a pistol! When the firefight died down, York and the surviving Americans had taken the German position against amazing odds. York’s battlefield heroics earned him a Congressional Medal of Honor.
Alvin York was only one of thousands of heroes, many of whom died and most of whom were never recognized for their deeds. They followed orders, fought bravely, and made great sacrifices. Although African American soldiers often faced discrimination in the United States Army, they demonstrated their patriotism in dozens of engagements. For example, an entire African American unit, the 369th Infantry Regiment, received the Croix de Guerre, a French award for bravery, for its members’ actions in the Meuse-Argonne region.
The fighting in the Meuse-Argonne region is also called the Meuse-Argonne campaign. The campaign was a widespread attack along the Western Front launched in September of 1918. The AEF under General Pershing were tasked with advancing through the thick, tangled Argonne Forest. The dense trees and rocky ridges gave the advantage to the German defenses, but the Americans persisted. After weeks of heavy fighting, they had driven the Germans from
Key Battles Involving Americans in World War I
w
KEY
I 1 Allies, 1918 m Central Powers, 1918 I | Neutral countries, 1918
—	Allied front line, July 1918
—	Armistice line, November 1918 Battle, 1918 W
» Analyze Maps Why did Germany ask for peace while they still controlled most of Belgium and northeast France?
Interactive Map
World War I and the 1920s	244 4.3 The End of World War I
the forest. The American victory in the Battle of the Argonne Forest was a devastating defeat for Germany that hastened the end of the war.
Germany Surrenders The American troops, added to those of France, Britain, and Italy, gave the Allies a military advantage. By the fall of 1918, the German front was collapsing. Both the German and Austro-Hungarian armies had had enough. Some men deserted, others mutinied, and many refused to fight. Their leaders faced little choice but to surrender. On November 11, 1918, Germany surrendered to the Allies in a railway car in Compiegne (kohn pyehn), France.
The war was over.
Of the millions of soldiers who mobilized to fight, almost 5 million Allied and 8 million Central Power troops were dead. Nearly 6.5 million civilians were also dead, victims of the terrible conflict. Of the 2 million U.S. soldiers sent to Europe, about 1.4 million served on the front. More than 50,000 lost their lives, and about 230,000 were wounded. It was left to the peacemakers to determine whether the results would justify the costs.
B GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
What contributions did the U.S. military make to World War I?
Wilson Wants “Peace Without Victory”
Vladimir Lenin, leader of the communist revolution in Russia, maintained that the entire war was nothing more than an imperialistic land-grab. Once in power, he exposed secret treaties that Russia had made with the other Allies in which they agreed to divide among themselves the empires of their enemies. These revelations undercut the morality of the Allied cause in the war.
For President Woodrow Wilson, however, the war was not about acquisitions and imperialism—it was about peace and freedom. In January 1917, Wilson had introduced the idea of a “peace without victory” in an address to Congress:
Only a tranquil Europe can be a stable Europe. . , .[There] must be a peace without victory . . . .Victory would mean peace forced upon the loser, a victor’s terms imposed upon the vanquished. It would be accepted in humiliation....and would leave a
» Alvin York, a conscientious objector before the war, earned the Medal of Honor after helping Allied forces defeat the Germans at the Battle of Argonne Forest.
I!
» President Wilson asks Congress to declare war in April, 1917.

World War I and the 1920s	245
4.3 The End of World War I
sting, a resentment, a bitter memory upon which terms of peace would rest, not permanently, but only as upon quicksand.
\	v,	>	U tip t b dtOl\ 'hi tag
The Fourteen Points In another address to Congress in January 1918, Wilson answered Lenin’s charges about the nature of the conflict by outlining America’s war aims in what became known as the Fourteen Points. At the heart of the Fourteen Points was his idea of “peace without victory.” Wilson proposed a peace inspired by noble ideals, not greed and vengeance.
The Fourteen Points raised some major issues. They sought to fundamentally change the world by promoting openness, encouraging independence, and supporting freedom. Critical of all secret treaties, Wilson called for open diplomacy. He insisted on freedom of the seas, free trade, a move toward ending colonialism, and a general reduction of armaments.
He also championed national self-determination, or the right of people to choose their own form of government. This would lead to the creation of several new, independent states but also raised many questions of which populations would achieve statehood and under what circumstances. Finally, he asked for a
League of Nations to secure “mutual guarantees of political independence and territorial integrity to great and small states alike.”
Wilson Travels to Paris In early 1919, the victorious Allies held a peace conference in Versailles (ver si), a suburb of Paris, in the former palace of Louis XIV. President Wilson believed that the peace conference was too important to be left to career diplomats and lesser politicians, so he crossed the Atlantic Ocean himself to represent the United States at the conference, something no president had ever done.
Wilson did not invite any leading Republicans to join him in his peace delegation. Wilson’s decision angered Republicans,who had won control of Congress in the 1918 elections.
Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, a leading Republican foreign policy expert, was especially angry. Wilson left Lodge behind because Wilson disliked him intensely, but the feeling was mutual. Lodge and Wilson had fundamentally different views about America’s place on the world stage. Lodge was suspicious of Wilson’s progressivism and idealism, which he viewed as dangerously naive. Whereas Wilson spoke of “peace without victory” and “mutual guarantees,” Lodge, keen to move the United States into the position of a world power, spoke unabashedly about putting American interests first:
Wilson's Fourteen Points, 1918
1.	Make no secret diplomatic agreements.
2.	Allow freedom of the seas in peace and war.
3.	Remove as many economic trade barriers as possible between countries.
4.	Reduce stockpiles of military armaments to lowest point needed for domestic safety.
5.	Adjust colonial claims, giving more weight to the views of the colonized peoples.
6.	Evacuate and restore Russian territories seized during the war.
7.	Restore and protect Belgium's sovereignty.
8.	Restore French territory and settle the debate over Alsace-Lorraine.
9.	Adjust Italy's boundaries according to the nationalities of populations living there.
10.	Allow the peoples of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire to choose their own governments.
11.	Redraw boundaries of Balkan states based on nationalities and historical allegiances.
12.	Separate the Ottoman Empire into independent countries according to nationality; guarantee all nations access to the Dardanelles.
13.	Restore and protect Poland as a sovereign state with access to the sea.
14.	Establish an association of nations to provide collective security and to ensure peace.
» Analyze Charts How did Wilson’s Fourteen Points aim to reduce the potential for future wars to develop?
World War I and the 1920s	246	4.3 The End of World War I
“I can never be anything else but an American, and I must think of the United States first, and when I think of the United States first ... I am thinking of what is best for the world, for if the United States fails, the best hopes of mankind fail with it,”
1	r	(Sue
VC'Sn, 191?
The decision to leave Lodge behind would come back to haunt Wilson.
However, when the American president arrived in France, adoring crowds greeted him. “Never has a king, never has an emperor received such a welcome,” wrote one journalist.
H IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
What was the central idea behind Wilson’s “peace without victory” proposal?
The Paris Peace
Conference
Wilson’s idealism did not inspire the other Allied leaders at the peace conference. They blamed Germany for starting the war, reminded Wilson that they had suffered more in the war than the United States, and insisted that Germany make reparations, or payment for war damages. They wanted to weaken Germany so that it would never threaten Europe again.
Allied Leaders Reject Wilson’s Ideas British prime minister David Lloyd-George and French premier Georges Clemenceau (klay mahn soh) knew that the citizens of their countries expected both peace and victory. Lloyd-George insisted on protecting the existing colonial status quo and punishing Germany. Clemenceau wanted to make Germany pay dearly for what it had done to France. In addition to reparations, he demanded the return of Alsace-Lorraine and several key German colonies. Besides Britain and France, other Allies also had goals of their own and were skeptical of Wilson’s grand vision.
Once the Versailles conference began, Clemenceau, Lloyd-George, Italian Premier Vittorio Orlando, and other Allied leaders started to chip away at Wilson’s Fourteen Points. Onto the scrap heap of failed proposals they piled freedom of the seas, free trade, the liberation of colonial empires, a general disarmament, and several other ideas.
» Woodrow Wilson joined French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau on the left, and British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, on the right, at Versailles in 1919.
» Senator Henry Cabot Lodge disagreed with Wilson over the proposed League of Nations, arguing that entangling the United States in European affairs would weaken U.S. sovereignty.
World War I and the 1920s	247	4.3 The End of World War I
» The League of Nations’ first session took place in Geneva, Switzerland, in November 1920.
» The spread of the influenza pandemic from 1918 to 1919 left millions dead worldwide, creating a sense of dread among peoples of all nations. Pictured are soldiers at an army hospital in Kansas.
The League of Nations Wilson lost a number of battles but kept fighting to salvage a League of Nations, a world organization where countries could gather and peacefully resolve their quarrels. On this point, Wilson refused to compromise. The other delegates finally voted to make the League of Nations part of the treaty.
Problems With the Peace In the end, the various peace treaties created almost as many major issues as they solved. The changes in political boundaries that resulted from the international conflict were not always driven by self-determination or the best interests of the people living there. In the new map that emerged from the Paris Peace Conference, national self-determination was violated almost as often as it was confirmed. In Europe, several populations of Germans found themselves attached to non-German nations. The same was true of several Austrian populations.
Furthermore, in the Middle East, the breakup of the Ottoman Empire led to new political boundaries in which ethnic groups were clustered together randomly. To form Iraq, for example, the Versailles peacemakers threw together three provinces of the defeated Ottoman Empire—Basra, Baghdad, and Mosul. But Basra had natural links to the Persian Gulf and India, Baghdad to Persia, and Mosul to Turkey and Syria. The various regions had no sense of Iraqi nationalism. In addition, Iraq, like other holdings in the Middle East, Asia, and Africa, was not allowed to practice self-determination. It was attached to Britain as a mandate, or territory overseen by another nation.
fel DRAW CONCLUSIONS Why did the Allies reject
Wilson’s ideas for peace?
America Rejects the
Treaty of Versailles
When Wilson left Versailles to return to the United States, he knew the treaty was not perfect. But he believed that over time the League could correct its problems. He still thought that a lasting peace could emerge.
The Flu Pandemic The movement from war to peace would have been difficult even in the best of times. But the end of 1918 and 1919 were not the best of times. In September 1918, an unusually deadly form of the influenza, or flu, virus appeared. Research in recent years shows that the 1918 influenza virus was originally a bird flu that mutated to spread to humans. Many historians now believe that the virus originated
World War I and the 1920s	248	4.3 The End of World War I
Comparing Irreconcilables, Reservationists, and Wilson Democrats
IRRECONCILABLES
RESERVATIONISTS
WILSON DEMOCRATS
•	Opposed the treaty in any form
•	Convinced that the idea of a League of Nations was idealistic and unrealistic
•	Suspicious of the actions and intents of the other countries in the League of Nations
•	Wished to maintain American isolationism
•	Would accept the treaty if it were modified
•	Believed the League of Nations removed congressional power to declare war, making it unconstitutional
•	Opposed Article 10 of the League Covenant, which required the U.S. to defend other members of the League under certain circumstances
•	Most supported the treaty
•	Believed no changes to the treaty were necessary
•	Wanted U.S. to be part of the League of Nations
» Analyze Charts What was the primary difference between reservationists and irreconcilables?
in the United States, then traveled around the world, thus becoming a pandemic.
As many as 50 million people died—among them, about 675,000 Americans. The Great Influenza pandemic, also called the Great Pandemic or the Flu Pandemic of 1918, coming on the heels of the Great War, gave a sense of doom and dread to people around the globe.
The pandemic may have even reached Wilson at the Paris Peace Conference. He fell seriously ill, and his temperature reached 103 degrees. Wilson’s physician diagnosed the president as suffering from the flu. Although there is some doubt that it was actually the flu, there is no doubt that Wilson’s sickness kept him from participating in many meetings. His illness may have been factor in Wilson not achieving all he had hoped to.
Wilson Faces Opposition at Home Much as Wilson faced opposition to his ideas at the Paris Peace Conference, he faced opposition in the United States to the Treaty of Versailles he had negotiated—but for different reasons. German Americans thought the treaty was too harsh toward Germany, especially the “war guilt clause” that suggested that Germany had caused the war. Irish Americans criticized the failure to create an independent Ireland.
Most important, however, the treaty would need to be submitted to the Republican-controlled Senate Foreign Relations Committee and then ratified, or approved, by the Republic-controlled Senate. In both
bodies, as well as in his own Democratic Party, Wilson faced stiff opposition.
A handful of senators believed that the United States should not get entangled in world politics or involved in world organizations at all. Known as “irreconcilables,” these isolationist senators opposed any treaty that had a League of Nations folded into it. They particularly disliked Article 10 of the League covenant. Article 10 called for mutual defense by the signers of the treaty, a pledge that each nation would “respect and preserve . . . the territorial integrity and existing political independence of all the Members of the League.”
A larger group of senators, led by Henry Cabot Lodge and known as “reservationists,” were opposed to the treaty as it was written. Some wanted only small changes, while others demanded larger ones.
For example, many felt Article 10 could lead the United States into a war without the consent of Congress, which was unconstitutional. Reservationists believed that the language of the article was too vague and demanded that it not contradict the power of Congress to declare war. But with some changes, the reservationists were prepared to vote for the Treaty of Versailles. They knew that polls indicated that the American people favored the League of Nations.
Wilson had compromised in Versailles, but he was not ready to compromise in Washington, D.C. When the Senate delayed its ratification vote, Wilson took his case directly to the people. The League of Nations had become his personal crusade, and convincing the
World War I and the 1920s	249	4.3 The End of World War I
» As part of his speaking tour to promote the League of Nations, President Wilson makes a stop in St. Louis, Missouri.
Interactive Chart
American people of its worth would test his leadership. The qualities of effective leadership, for a president of the United States, include the ability to appeal to a wide variety of people and persuade them that certain ideas are in the best interest of the country. Even though he was ill and weak, he set himself the grueling task of crossing the country and giving 32 addresses in 33 days. But his health failed on September 25,1919, in Pueblo, Colorado. He was rushed back to Washington, D.C., but suffered a debilitating stroke a few days later. As the Senate prepared to vote on the treaty, Wilson lay close to death, barely able to speak.
The United States Fails to Approve Treaty of Versailles In November 1919, one year after the war ended, a treaty revised to eliminate the complaints of the reservationists reached the Senate for a vote. Wilson would not compromise and told his Democratic supporters to vote with the irreconcilables against it. They did, and it was defeated. Next, the Senate voted on the treaty without any changes. The Democrats voted for it, but the combined strength of the irreconcilables and reservationists defeated it. Once more it was voted on, this time with only modest changes. Again, Wilson told his followers to vote against it. Although
some Democrats voted for it, the combination of Wilson Democrats and irreconcilables defeated the treaty.
The problem was not that most of the Senate was isolationist. Except for the irreconcilables, most senators wanted the United States to participate in world affairs. They differed slightly on what form that participation would take.
However, at a moment that demanded compromise, Wilson and his opponents refused to put aside personal and political differences for the good of the country. The tragedy of the failed votes was that without full American support, the League of Nations would prove unable to maintain peace among nations.
It was the League of Nations that U.S. opponents of the Treaty of Versailles most objected to. In evaluating the pros and cons of U.S. participation in the international organization and treaty, opponents judged that the cons outweighed the pros. They were especially concerned that the League would entangle the United States in conflicts that would not advance U.S. interests. Supporters, in contrast, thought the pros outweighed the cons. They thought the United States would benefit by being part of an international organization in which other countries could come to the aid of the United States. They also wanted the United States to have a voice in international politics—before a huge conflict broke out.
HI DRAW CONCLUSIONS
What was the principal argument of the irreconcilables against the Treaty of Versailles?
November 11,1918, was a day celebrated around the world. World War I—known then as the Great War—had ended with the armistice. The greatest war in human history to date had ended. Every year, the United States celebrates Veteran’s Day on November 11 to commemorate the service of Americans in the armed forces in any war. With the war’s end, the United States faced a painful adjustment period, then a decade of amazing economic growth and prosperity.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Evaluate Arguments Explain the reasoning behind President Wilson’s concept of “peace without victory.” Do you think it was a viable idea? Explain why or why not.
2.	Apply Concepts What opposition did President Wilson’s ideas face among Allied nations as well as within the United States?
3.	Generate Explanations Explain how European and Middle Eastern nations adjusted to peace after the Paris Peace Conference.
4.	Describe the impact of the Great Influenza pandemic after World War I.
5.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain why the United States failed to approve the Treaty of Versailles, and discuss how this impacted the future of world relations.
The Postwar Economy Booms
Postwar Issues
But in 1918, the victory was bittersweet. The flu pandemic still raged, and it would end up killing far more Americans than had died in the war.
2.D, 6.A, 6.B, 15.D, 16.A, 27.A, 27.C, 28.A, 28.C
» Objectives
Describe the economic problems America faced after World War I.
Explain the economic growth and prosperity of the 1920s, including how Henry Ford and the automobile industry helped spark the boom.
Analyze the consumer revolution and the bull market of the 1920s.
Compare the different effects of the economic boom on urban, suburban, and rural America.
h
[The ¥ear]1918 has gone: a year momentous as the termination of the most cruel war in the annals of the human race; a year which marked the end, at least for a time, of man’s destruction of man; unfortunately a year in which developed a most fatal infectious disease causing the death of hundreds of thousands of human beings.
\ n n	Mod - as Association, December 28, 1918
The flu faded out in 1919. The next year, an American public tired of world affairs and problems at home, elected a new president. Republican Warren G. Harding easily defeated the Democratic nominee, Governor James M. Cox of Ohio. Harding campaigned on a slogan that captured perfectly the American spirit of the time:
» Key Terms
Henry Ford mass production Model T scientific
management assembly lines consumer revolution installment buying bull market buying on margin inflation creditor nation
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
World War I and the 1920s
250
4.3 The End of World War I
251
» As part of his speaking tour to promote the League of Nations, President Wilson makes a stop in St. Louis, Missouri.
Interactive Chart
I
some Democrats voted for it, the combination of Wilson Democrats and irreconcilables defeated the treaty.
The problem was not that most of the Senate was isolationist. Except for the irreconcilables, most senators wanted the United States to participate in world affairs. They differed slightly on what form that participation would take.
However, at a moment that demanded compromise, Wilson and his opponents refused to put aside personal and political differences for the good of the country. The tragedy of the failed votes was that without full American support, the League of Nations would prove unable to maintain peace among nations.
It was the League of Nations that U.S. opponents of the Treaty of Versailles most objected to. In evaluating the pros and cons of U.S. participation in the international organization and treaty, opponents judged that the cons outweighed the pros. They were especially concerned that the League would entangle the United States in conflicts that would not advance U.S. interests. Supporters, in contrast, thought the pros outweighed the cons. They thought the United States would benefit by being part of an international organization in which other countries could come to the aid of the United States. They also wanted the United States to have a voice in international politics—before a huge conflict broke out.
November 11, 1918, was a day celebrated around the world. World War I—known then as the Great War—had ended with the armistice. The greatest war in human history to date had ended. Every year, the United States celebrates Veteran’s Day on November 11 to commemorate the service of Americans in the armed forces in any war. With the war’s end, the United States faced a painful adjustment period, then a decade of amazing economic growth and prosperity.
To help speed up production and ensure his cars were made well, Ford had his workers build cars on an assembly line, where each worker had a specific task.
Interactive Flipped Video
American people of its worth would test his leadership. The qualities of effective leadership, for a president of the United States, include the ability to appeal to a wide variety of people and persuade them that certain ideas are in the best interest of the country. Even though he was ill and weak, he set himself the grueling task of crossing the country and giving 32 addresses in 33 days. But his health failed on September 25, 1919, in Pueblo, Colorado. He was rushed back to Washington, D.C., but suffered a debilitating stroke a few days later. As the Senate prepared to vote on the treaty, Wilson lay close to death, barely able to speak.
The United States Fails to Approve Treaty of Versailles In November 1919, one year after the war ended, a treaty revised to eliminate the complaints of the reservationists reached the Senate for a vote. Wilson would not compromise and told his Democratic supporters to vote with the irreconcilables against it. They did, and it was defeated. Next, the Senate voted on the treaty without any changes. The Democrats voted for it, but the combined strength of the irreconcilables and reservationists defeated it. Once more it was voted on, this time with only modest changes. Again, Wilson told his followers to vote against it. Although
B DRAW CONCLUSIONS
What was the principal argument of the irreconcilables against the Treaty of Versailles?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Evaluate Arguments Explain the reasoning behind President Wilson’s concept of “peace without victory.” Do you think it was a viable idea? Explain why or why not.
2.	Apply Concepts What opposition did President Wilson’s ideas face among Allied nations as well as within the United States?
3.	Generate Explanations Explain how European and Middle Eastern nations adjusted to peace after the Paris Peace Conference.
4.	Describe the impact of the Great Influenza pandemic after World War I.
5.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain why the United States failed to approve the Treaty of Versailles, and discuss how this impacted the future of world relations.
The Postwar Economy Booms
Postwar Issues
But in 1918, the victory was bittersweet. The flu pandemic still raged, and it would end up killing far more Americans than had died in the war.
2.D, 6.A, 6.B, 15.D, 16.A, 27.A, 27.C, 28.A, 28.C
» Objectives
Describe the economic problems America faced after World War I.
Explain the economic growth and prosperity of the 1920s, including how Henry Ford and the automobile industry helped spark the boom.
Analyze the consumer revolution and the bull market of the 1920s.
Compare the different effects of the economic boom on urban, suburban, and rural America.
[The ¥ear]1918 has gone: a year momentous as the termination of the most cruel war in the annals of the human race; a year which marked the end, at least for a time, of man’s destruction of man; unfortunately a year in which developed a most fatal infectious disease causing the death of hundreds of thousands of human beings.
—-Journal of the American Medical Association, December 28, 1918
The flu faded out in 1919. The next year, an American public tired of world affairs and problems at home, elected a new president. Republican Warren G. Harding easily defeated the Democratic nominee, Governor James M. Cox of Ohio. Harding campaigned on a slogan that captured perfectly the American spirit of the time:
» Key Terms
Henry Ford mass production Model T scientific
management assembly lines consumer revolution installment buying bull market buying on margin inflation creditor nation
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
251
World War I and the 1920s	250
4.3 The End of World War I
“Return to Normalcy,” meaning a return to normal life as it was in prewar times. Yet the election itself was not “normal.” For the first time, women voted in a presidential election. For the first time, election returns were reported by radio. A return to “normalcy” in a rapidly changing world would prove elusive.
Women and African Americans Confront New Realities Women and African Americans had made significant advances during the war. However, the end of the war also spelled the end of wartime economic opportunities for both groups. A postwar recession, or economic slowdown, created a competitive job market. By 1920, there were fewer women in the workforce than there had been in 1910.
In northern industrial cities, African American workers vied with returning soldiers for jobs and housing, causing tense race relations. During the hot summer of 1919, race riots erupted in cities throughout the country. The worst, in Chicago, was triggered by the drowning of a young African American man by whites, and went on for 13 days. In 1921, violence erupted in Tulsa, Oklahoma, when armed African American men—many of them returning veterans— tried to protect a young African American man from lynching. By the time the Tulsa race riots were over, at least 10 whites and 26 African Americans were dead.
» Rioters burned the homes of African Americans in Tulsa, Oklahoma, during race riots in 1921.
In one African American neighborhood, white rioters burned 35 city blocks to the ground.
Inflation and Labor Unrest During the war, inflation, or rising prices, had been held in check. After the conflict, Americans rushed to buy consumer goods rather than war bonds. The scarcity of these goods, coupled with widespread demand, caused inflation. On the other hand, during the war, the price of corn, wheat, cotton, cattle, and other agricultural goods had risen, with help from Hoover’s policies. After the war, prices fell sharply, making it difficult for farmers to pay their mortgages or buy what they needed for the next growing season. This began a long period of tough times for farmers.
Another economic effect of the postwar inflation was felt by industrial workers when their wages did not buy as much as they had during the war. In 1919, more than 4 million workers, or 20 percent of the workforce, went on strike at one time or another. Demanding rewards for their wartime patriotism, workers struck for higher wages and shorter workdays. In Boston, even the police force struck.
The workers won some of the strikes, but they lost far more. When some strikes turned violent, the promanagement press blamed the presence of radicals among the strike leaders.
The United States Grows as a World Power
Despite Harding’s election and some Americans’ desire to return to what life was like before the war, the United States did not plan to totally withdraw from world affairs. By 1920, even with postwar economic problems, the United States was an economic giant. It was the richest, most industrialized country in the world. Even before the war, America led all other nations in industrial output. The war was a turning point for the nation economically. Now, British and French demands for American goods created an immense trade imbalance. Europeans had to borrow money from American bankers and obtain lines of credit with American business firms to pay for the goods.
This situation fundamentally changed America’s economic standing in the world. The United States was now the largest creditor nation in the world, meaning that other countries owed the United States more money than the United States owed them. World War I shifted the economic center of the world from London to New York City. The United States embraced its new role as a quiet giant. A world without America playing
World War I and the 1920s
252	44 The Postwar Economy Booms
i ,.
a major economic role had become simply impossible to conceive.
B RECALL
What was a significant cause of inflation after the war?
The Impact of Henry Ford and the Automobile
In the decade after World War I, the American economy experienced tremendous growth. Using revolutionary mass production techniques, American workers produced more goods in less time than ever before. The boom fundamentally changed the lives of millions of people and helped create the modern consumer economy.
The decade got off to a rocky start, however. There was a mild recession in 1918 to 1919 and a more serious one in 1920 to 1921. These were partly due to converting wartime production back to domestic production and the return of soldiers into the workforce. Once the economy did take off, the prosperity was not shared by everyone. Still, there is no doubt that the U.S. economy in the 1920s roared.
Rarely, if ever, has the nation enjoyed such an economic boom as it did during this decade. The recession that had followed World War I quickly ended. All signs pointed to economic growth. Stock prices rose rapidly. Factories produced more and more goods and, with wages on the rise, more and more people could afford to buy them.
Much of this explosive growth was sparked by a single business: the automobile industry. Carmaker Henry Ford introduced a series of technological and management innvoations to his fledgling automobile business. Ford’s methods and ideas revolutionized production, wages, working conditions, and daily life.
Ford, Mass Production, and the Model T Ford did not originate the idea of mass production, the rapid manufacture of large numbers of identical products. It had been used, for example, to make sewing machines and typewriters. But such products involved only hundreds of parts—not the thousands that go into the production of cars. Ford brought mass production to new heights.
Early in the century, only wealthy city dwellers could afford cars. The automobile was often seen as a symbol of the class divisions in the country. City drivers who ventured out onto country roads frightened horses and cows, coated crops with dust, and rutted dirt roads. "To the countryman,” said Woodrow Wilson in 1906, cars “are a picture of the arrogance of wealth.”
» Entrepreneurs like Henry Ford, pictured with his son Edsel, ushered in the age of the automobile and helped create an economic boom after the war.

Interactive Illustration
Ransom Olds had introduced a less expensive car, the Oldsmobile, in 1901. But it was Henry Ford who truly brought the automobile to the people. In 1908, he introduced the Model T, a reliable car the average American could afford. The first Model T sold for $850. Soon after, Ford opened a new plant on the Detroit River. The Detroit location gave Ford easy access to steel, glass, oil, and rubber manufactured in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.
Ford hired scientific management experts to improve his mass-production techniques. Scientific management was a relatively new method of improving efficiency, in which experts looked at every step of a manufacturing process to find ways to reduce time, effort, and expense. Studying a process to minimize the time it takes to do a task is called time-study analysis. Studying a process to minimize the motion it takes to do a task is called motion-study analysis. Together, they are often known as “time and motion study.” The idea was pioneered by Frederick Winslow Taylor in his book, The Principles of Scientific Management. Scientific management is sometimes called Taylorism.
Ford also studied the techniques of Chicago meatpacking houses, where beef carcasses were moved on chains past a series of meat cutters, each of whom cut off a specific part of the carcass. Ford reversed the process. He put his cars on moving
World War I and the 1920s	253	4.4 The Postwar Economy Booms
assembly lines. At each step, a worker added something to construct the automobile. In two years, the application of assembly line techniques showed huge productivity enhancements, reducing the time it took to manufacture a Model T from more than 12 hours to just 90 minutes.
The efficiency of the assembly line allowed Ford to keep dropping the sale price. The cost of a Model T fell to $350 by 1916 and to $290 by 1927. It was slow, dull, and available only in black. But the Model T was the first car that ordinary people could afford. In 1919, only 10 percent of American families owned an automobile. By 1927, 56 percent did.
When it came to managing the men who made up his labor force, Ford also proved that he was not afraid of innovation. In 1914, he more than doubled the wages of a large number of his workers, from $2.35 to $5 a day. He also reduced their workday from 9 hours to 8 hours. In 1926, he became the first major industrialist to give his workers Saturday and Sunday off. Before Ford, the idea of a "weekend” hardly existed. Ford shrewdly realized that if workers made more money and had more leisure time, they would become potential customers for his automobiles. The combination of the Model T and the “five-dollar day, forty-hour week” made Ford not only a very rich man but also one of the shapers of the modern world.
The Automobile Changes America The boom in the automotive industry, caused in part by Ford’s production efficiencies, caused economic growth in other industries related to car manufacture or use. The steel, glass, rubber, asphalt, wood, petroleum, insurance, and road-construction industries all benefited. For example, one seventh of all steel output was used to make automobiles. The need for gasoline prompted a nationwide search for petroleum deposits. Oil discoveries in California, Texas, New Mexico, and Oklahoma brought vast numbers workers and money to the Southwest. Petroleum-based industries boomed, increasing employment and tax revenues. Thus, energy in the form of gasoline had a major impact on the American way of life.
Road construction also boomed, especially when the federal government introduced the system of numbered highways in 1926. The millions of cars on American roads led to the rapid appearance of thousands of service stations, diners, and motor hotels (a term later shortened to motels). The growth in all these industries created new and often better-paying jobs, spurring national prosperity.
The automobile caused additional economic effects. Other forms of ground transportation, such as railroads and trolleys, suffered a decline in use. With cars, people could go where they wanted, when they wanted. They did not have to travel along set tracks on set schedules.
» Analyze Maps How did the creation of an affordable car affect the development of roads in the United States?
World War I and the 1920s ; 254	4.4 The Postwar Economy Booms
The automobile prompted a new sense of freedom and prosperity. Never had Americans been so mobile. Entire families crowded into their cars for cross-country vacations or Sunday drives to the country. Ownership of an automobile came to symbolize participation in the American dream of success and high standard of living.
Finally automobiles altered residential patterns. The ability to drive to work permitted people to live farther from their places of employment. This led to the development of suburban communities linked to cities by arteries of highways and roads. Los Angeles, one of the first cities whose growth was influenced by the automobile, developed in a sprawling, haphazard fashion. It became, according to one observer, “a series of suburbs in search of a city.”
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What effect did increased automobile production have on other industries?
Economic Growth in the 1920s
The 1920s saw what has been called a consumer revolution, in which a flood of new, affordable goods became available to the public. The widespread availability of electrical power supported the consumer revolution. Electric washing machines, vacuum cleaners, and irons made housekeeping easier and less time-consuming. Accessible electricity also contributed to radio and refrigerator sales.
Advertising and Installment Buying The growing advertising industry also played its part. Using new “scientific” techniques and psychological research, advertisers were able to sell more products to more Americans than ever before. Magazine and newspaper ads often focused on the desires and fears of Americans more than on what people really needed.
Advertisers celebrated consumption as an end in itself, convincing people that they could be the person they wanted to be just by buying the right products. From Kleenex to Listerine, Americans bought products that years earlier they could never have imagined they needed.
Finally, new ways of buying fueled the consumer revolution. People who did not have enough ready cash could buy what they wanted on credit. Installment buying, in which a consumer would make a small down payment and then pay off the rest of the debt in regular monthly payments, allowed Americans to own
There's golden Goodness in these crisp, crunchy comflafees/
SO
TEMPTING-those golden Kellogg’s Corn Flakes, bobbing in cold milk or cream... or served with bananas or other fruits. So good they are! Good to eat and good for you. Easily digested and very nutritious. Kiddies love them—so does the whole family. And they’re no bother to serve, no cooking required. Just pour from the packet! Get a packet today and treat them to a surprise breakfast tomorrow! You’ll find them so popular that you’ll serve them for tea and supper, too!
j&ttkySP
CORN FLAKES
» With the U.S. economy growing again, companies began to use advertisements to target consumers based on their desires rather than their needs.
KELLOGC COMPANY
et CHEAT BRITAIN, LU. 32». HMtfoam.LnMlM.W.C.1 and
products they might otherwise have had to save up for years in order to buy.
The Bull Market Consumers were not the only Americans buying and selling in a big way. During the 1920s, the stock market enjoyed a dizzying bull market, a period of rising stock prices. More and more Americans put their money into stocks in an effort to get rich quick. By 1929, around 4 million Americans owned stocks.
The desire to strike it rich often led investors to ignore financial risks. As the market soared, people began buying on margin—another form of buying on credit. By purchasing stock on margin, a buyer paid as little as 10 percent of the stock price upfront to a broker. The buyer then paid the broker for the rest of the stock over a period of months. The stock served as collateral, or security, for the broker’s loan. As long as the price of the stock rose, the buyer had no trouble paying off the loan and making a profit. But if the price fell, the buyer still had to pay off the loan. Buyers gambled that they would be able to sell the stock at a profit long before the loan came due. Buying stocks on the hope that their price will rise is called stock market speculation.
In truth, this big bull market stood on very shaky ground. But most people ignored the dangers. By the
World War I and the 1920s	255	4.4 The Postwar Economy Booms
» The economic prosperity Americans experienced during the 1920s prompted large investments in urban construction. Here riveters worked on New York City’s Empire State Building in 1931.
» Rapidly rising stock prices created a daily frenzy of activity in the New York Stock Exchange, where the majority of U.S. stocks were traded.
middle of 1929, economic authorities proclaimed that America and the stock market had entered a new era." Stock prices would continue their march upward, they said, while boom-and-bust economics would become a thing of the past.
Science, Technology, and the Free Enterprise System Science, technology, and the free enterprise system combined to boost the economic development of the United States in the 1920s. The science was not just in scientific management, but in the growing knowledge of many aspects of the world. Scientists conducted research on everything from rubber plants to electronics. This scientific knowledge enabled engineers to create the technologies—automobiles, for example, or radios—that were useful to people.
These new technologies would not have been widespread without the free enterprise system. The profit motive gave business owners a reason to turn technology into products to sell. Competitive markets encouraged innovation. The free enterprise system also created the jobs that provided workers with the money to purchase the many new products that came to market. Thus, the prosperity of the 1920s was boosted by a mix scientific advances, inventive technologies, and the free enterprise system.
Id DEFINE How would you define installment buying!
Urban, Suburban, and Rural Areas
The economic boom did not affect all parts of the nation equally. While urban and suburban areas prospered, rural Americans faced hardships.
People Migrate to Cities In the 1920s, the movement of people was toward cities. Immigrants settled in cities. Farmers left their fields for cities. The direction of the African American Great Migration was toward northern cities. Many Mexicans crossing the border relocated to southwestern cities.
As in the late nineteenth century, cities grew and changed shape. In addition, the adoption of skyscraper technology caused cities to stretch skyward. Steelframed skyscrapers with light coverings of masonry and glass began to dominate the skylines of the nation’s cities. New York’s Empire State Building, finished in 1931, symbolized the power and majesty of the United States.
Suburbs Expand Improved mass transportation and the widespread use of automobiles caused cities to
World War I and the 1920s
256	4.4 The Postwar Economy Booms
expand outward. More urban workers moved to the suburbs. Western and southern cities, developed after the automobile revolution, encompassed suburban areas as well as inner cities. Suburbs mushroomed, growing much faster than inner cities.
Slowly at first, but more rapidly as the century progressed, suburbs drained people and resources from the cities, causing the demographic patterns of both types of places to change. Catering to middle-and upper-class residents, suburbs tended to be more conservative and Republican. Meanwhile, one effect of this migration was that the inner cities at the heart of older urban areas began a slow but steady decline.
Many Americans Face Challenges In the cities and suburbs, Americans enjoyed prosperity and the fruits of growth. They participated in the consumer economy and in the joys of automobile ownership. The wealthiest urban residents—owners and managers of businesses—reaped fabulous rewards, which they often pumped back into the bull market. But there were problems looming ahead. America’s wealth was poorly distributed. Industrial wages rose at a much slower rate than corporate salaries.
Even worse, farm incomes declined during the decade. Many people living in the country did not participate in the consumer benefits and economic gains of the decade. They formed part of another America—poorer and outside the economic boom. In particular, farmers suffered from growing debt and falling farm prices. A protest song of 1928 expressed their frustration:
» As more families could afford automobiles, they moved away from the city to nearby suburbs. Hypothesize Why would many Americans want to move from cities to suburbs?

Interactive Gallery
last sentence. Write down what you think the word means. Work in pairs and listen to your partner’s definition. Revise what you wrote to add ideas or details from your partner’s definition.
’Leven-cent cotton, forty-cent meat,
ASSESSMENT
How in the world can a poor man eat?
Mule’s in the barn, no crop’s laid by,
Corncrib empty and the cow’s gone dry.
—Bob Miller and Emma Dermer, “Eleven Cent Cotton”
If the wealthy believed that the country had entered an age of permanent prosperity, the “other Americans” saw things differently.
Id IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS What general
migration patterns existed in the 1920s?
1.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how women and African Americans were affected by the postwar economy.
2.	Generate Explanations Explain how the U.S. position as a world power changed after World War I.
3.	Identify Central Issues Discuss the innovations and techniques that Henry Ford used in order to make automobiles more affordable.
4.	Identify Patterns Discuss the impact of the automobile industry on residential patterns.
5.	Draw Conclusions Describe important changes that affected the consumer experience during the 1920s, and discuss their impact.
ELPS
ELPS LISTENING 2.C.4
Read the section titled People Migrate to Cities. Look at the word symbolized in the World War I and the 1920s	257
4.4 The Postwar Economy Booms
Calvin Coolidge, shown here on the left en route to his inauguration, promised to enact policies that promoted business. He believed that the creation of wealth benefited the entire society.
|tol Interactive Flipped Video~^B
Woodrow Wilson hoped that the presidential election of 1920 would prove that Americans supported both the League of Nations and his vision of the role the United States should play in the world. He suggested that electing Democratic presidential candidate James M. Cox of Ohio would show support for the League. However, the election of Republican candidate Warren G. Harding of Ohio would serve as a final rejection of U.S. support for the League.
» Objectives
Analyze how the policies of Presidents Harding and Coolidge encouraged economic growth and prosperity in the 1920s.
Discuss the effects of political scandals, including Teapot Dome, on Harding’s presidency.
Explain the role that the United States played in the world during the 1920s.
» Key Terms
Andrew Mellon Herbert Hoover Teapot Dome
scandal
Calvin Coolidge Washington Naval
Disarmament
Conference
Kellogg-Briand Pact Dawes Plan Warren G. Harding
Government in the 1920s
The Harding Administration
Harding had a different view of the presidential race. He knew that national elections seldom turned on a single issue. Harding campaigned for a rejection of Wilsonian idealism. He was tired of Progressive reforms and foreign crusades, and he was betting the American public was, too. Harding won in a landslide, and Republicans won control of Congress, as well. Americans had decisively rejected Wilson’s ideas.
What exactly did Harding’s election signal? Some interpret it as Americans’ desire to retreat from involvement in world affairs, others as a rejection of Progressive reform efforts or a swing back to laissez-faire economics. No matter how it was interpreted, however, it was clear that Harding and his successor, Calvin Coolidge, favored conservative policies that aided the growth of business rather than pursuing reform as the Progressives had done. This pattern—a period of activism followed by a more laissez-faire approach—would repeat itself in the 1950s and 1980s.
Harding’s Economic Policies Encourage Growth Harding signaled the economic direction of his administration by naming wealthy banker Andrew Mellon Secretary of the Treasury. Mellon
PEARSON 1
Bai realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
| Access your Digital Lesson.
258
believed that prudent economic policy meant supporting legislation that advanced business interests. He disliked the relatively new income tax, favoring instead low taxes on individuals and corporations. Mellon also cut the fat from the budget. By 1925, Congress had reduced spending from a wartime high of $18 billion to $3 billion. Instead of sinking deeper into debt, the Treasury actually showed a surplus.
Harding signed a bill raising protective tariff rates by about 25 percent. The tax on imports made it easier for American producers to sell goods at home. However, in retaliation, European nations also hiked tariffs, making American goods harder to sell overseas. This tariff war weakened the world economy and would have ramifications in the 1930s.
Under the Progressive leadership of Roosevelt and Wilson, the federal government had passed laws to break up monopolies, protect workers, and restrict the absolute freedom of business leaders. By contrast, Harding favored a return to a more traditional laissez-faire approach. He and Mellon worked to reduce government regulation of business. Harding’s Return to Normalcy, including reducing taxes and reducing government regulation, helped to cause the economic growth and prosperity of the 1920s.
Still, the Harding administration did not abandon social goals. Harding’s thoughtful and energetic Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover worked with business and labor leaders to achieve voluntary advancements.
What the Progressives hoped to achieve through legislation, Hoover attempted to attain with the
cooperation of interest groups. He enjoyed great successes at getting people to work together instead of battling one another.
Some Officials Betray the Public Trust Harding was a kind, likable man, but he was not especially intelligent. Perhaps no President was friendlier, and few had less sense of what was expected of a President. Faced with a tax issue, Harding lamented, “I listen to one side and they seem right ... I talk to the other side, and they seem just as right, and here I am where I started. . . . What a job!”
Rather than struggle to master the complexities of the job, Harding trusted others to make decisions. Many were his close friends, men he enjoyed relaxing and gambling with at late-night poker games. Known as the Ohio Gang, they were not honest public servants like Mellon and Hoover. They were mostly greedy, small-minded men who saw government service as a chance to get rich at the expense of the very citizens they were supposed to serve.
Charles Forbes, head of the Veterans’ Bureau, practiced graft on an immense scale and wasted hundreds of millions of taxpayers’ dollars. For example, his department bought $70,000 worth of floor cleaner— enough to last 100 years—at more than 24 times the fair price. Another Harding pal, Attorney General Harry Daugherty, used his position to accept money from criminals.
The Teapot Dome Scandal Comes to Light The
worst scandal involved Secretary of the Interior Albert
Leaders of Business Deregulation
PRESIDENT WARREN G. HARDING AND VICE PRESIDENT CALVIN COOLIDGE
SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY ANDREW MELLON
•	Wanted a conservative government that benefited business
•	Promoted the policy of laissez faire for business
•	Named commissioners who favored government deregulation of business
•	Assigned business leaders to government positions
•	Turned the Federal Reserve Board and Interstate Commerce Commission into pro-business agencies
i	■—	......——
•	Wanted a conservative government that benefited business
•	Promoted the policy of laissez faire for business
•	Sponsored the Mellon Plan, which reduced taxes for businesses
•	Lowered taxes for the wealthy (often business owners)
» Analyze Charts How were Harding and Coolidge’s plans to stimulate economic production similar to Mellon's plans? How were they different?
World War I and the 1920s	259	4.5 Government in the 1920s
Fall. In 1921, Fall arranged to transfer oil reserves in Elk Hills, California, and Teapot Dome, Wyoming, from the Navy Department to the Interior Department. The oil reserves were intended for the navy’s use in times of emergency. Harding signed the transfer.
Once Fall had control of the oil, he forgot about the needs of the navy He leased the properties to private oilmen in return for “loans”—which were actually bribes. Rumors of the deal led to a Senate investigation, and, by 1924, the entire sordid affair was revealed to the public. Later, the oil reserves were returned to the government. Fall was sentenced to a year in prison, but those accused of bribing him were acquitted.
Harding himself never saw the full extent of the Teapot Dome scandal. In fact, he only had a growing suspicion that his friends were up to no good. But that was enough, as he said, to keep him “walking the floor nights.” In July 1923, he visited Alaska during a speaking tour. On his return voyage, he suffered a heart attack and died on August 2. Americans mourned Harding as they had mourned no other President since Lincoln. When the full extent of the scandals emerged, however, the public formed a different opinion of him. The Teapot Dome scandal hurt U.S. citizens’ trust in the federal government and its leaders, especially the Executive Branch. But the calm and assured manner in
» Secretary of the Interior, Albert Fall, sits on a rock, sipping tea. Analyze Political Cartoons What does this cartoon suggest about Fall’s role during the Teapot Dome scandal?
which Harding’s successor, Calvin Coolidge, eliminated corrupt elements from the government restored most Americans’ faith. Coolidge was reelected in a landslide the next year.
H RECALL
What policies did Andrew Mellon pursue when he became Secretary of the Treasury?
Economic Prosperity Under Coolidge
News of Harding’s death reached Vice President Calvin Coolidge during a visit to his father’s Vermont farm. Almost immediately, the elder Coolidge, a justice of the peace, used the family Bible to swear in his son as President.
In personality, Coolidge was far different from the outgoing, back-slapping Harding. Known as Silent Cal, he was quiet, honest, and frugal—a man who measured his words carefully. He placed his trust in business and put his administration in the hands of men who held to the simple virtues of an older America. Political sharpies out to make a quick buck had no place in the Coolidge administration. Neither did Progressives who believed in an activist government bent on sweeping reforms.
Business Leaders Have the Support of the White House Coolidge admired productive business leaders. “The man who builds a factory,” Coolidge once said, “builds a temple.” He believed that the creation of wealth benefited the nation as a whole. In 1925, he expressed this view in his best-known speech:
The chief business of the American people is business. They are profoundly concerned with producing, buying, selling, investing, and prospering in the world. . . .We make no concealment of the fact that we want wealth, but there are many other things that we want very much more. We want peace and honor, and that charity which is so strong an element of all civilization. The chief ideal of the American people is idealism.
-—Calvin Coolidge, speech to the American Society of
Newspaper Editors
Hl I Interactive Cartoon
World War I and the 1920s	260	4.5 Government in the 1920s
Source: Cato Institute
INCOME TAX RATES
inthe 1920s ?OT tS^cket J SHfiEI 0F T0TfiL INC0ME TflXES PSn) W fflC0ME ™ KEY
1920	1922
1924
1926
1928
» Analyze Charts How did tax rates change for top earners in the 1920s? How did the share of taxes paid by the top income earners change?
Coolidge’s statement of values and principles has often been oversimplified as “the business of America is business.” However, in his approach to the economy, Coolidge continued to follow the goals of Secretary of the Treasury Mellon by reducing the national debt, trimming the federal budget, and lowering taxes to give incentives for businesses. Collectively referred to as the “Mellon Income Tax Cuts,” the Revenue Acts of 1921, 1924, and 1926 successively lowered marginal tax rates on individuals and corporations. Although tax rates on high-income earners were significantly reduced, the total amount paid by those earners increased as incomes rose. In response to the Revenue Acts as well as other factors, the unemployment rate fell from over 6 percent to approximately 3 percent between 1922 and 1929, benefiting workers in all income brackets.
Coolidge thus oversaw increasing tax revenues and a spectacular boom in the national economy. For almost six years, the economy soared, generating industrial profits, spectacular growth in the stock market, and general prosperity, especially for urban Americans.
Some Problems Remain Yet, there were grave problems breeding in the nation. Farmers struggled to keep their land as the prices of their goods fell.
Labor unions demanded higher wages and better working conditions. African Americans faced severe discrimination, especially in the South, where Jim Crow laws made enforced segregation a way of life. African
American leaders urged Congress to pass an antilynching law. In the Southwest, Mexican Americans confronted shamefully low wages and efforts to force them to return to Mexico.
To all of these concerns, Silent Cal remained silent. Like Harding, he mistrusted the use of legislation to achieve social change. Unlike Progressive Presidents, he believed that it was beyond the federal government’s role to help create an ideal nation.
DESCRIBE
What was the purpose of the Revenue Acts of 1921, 1924, and 1926? America’s Place in a
Changed World
World War I had caused sweeping changes around the globe. An old order five hundred years in the making had collapsed in just a few years. It was as if the world’s compass was out of whack and no one knew where to turn for directions. German and Russian monarchies toppled, and new forms of government were created. The Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires ceased to exist. Britain and France emerged from the war victorious but economically and politically weakened. In contrast, the victorious United States came out of the war strong, confident, and prosperous.
World War I and the 1920s
261	4.5 Government in the 1920s
Seeking Stability After World War I While World War I was a turning point for the United States in the realm of foreign affairs, the nation was still unsure of the requirements of its new status. Could America retreat from the political affairs of other countries yet continue to expand its economic reach across the globe? Under both Harding and Coolidge, America continued to play an increasingly important role in world business and trade. Beyond economic interests, U.S. foreign policy was largely shaped by reaction to World War I. No previous war had been as deadly. Citizens of all nations agreed: It must never happen again. But how could this goal be achieved?
One solution was to avoid another arms race, such as the naval rivalry between Germany and Britain that had contributed to the outbreak of the war. In 1921 and 1922, diplomats gathered in Washington, D.C., to halt another naval arms race before it got out of control. World leaders agreed to limit construction of large warships and hammered out a settlement on several problems between Japan and the West. This Washington Naval Disarmament Conference did not end the world’s naval problems, but it raised hopes that nations could solve disagreements without resorting to war.
A later attempt to prevent war was the Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg and French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand (bree ahn) drew up a treaty to "outlaw” war "as an instrument of national policy.” Eventually, 62 nations ratified the pact. But, in reality, the pact was unenforceable. Kellogg knew it, Briand knew it, and so did the rest of the diplomats. No sooner was the ink dry than everyone involved forgot about it.
Although Congress applauded the useless Kellogg-Briand Pact, it refused to join the World Court, an international body which at least promised to help mediate international disputes. As much as possible, most American leaders in the 1920s hoped to avoid another war by keeping the rest of the world at arm’s length.
Collecting Reparations After the War Money issues were another matter. The United States insisted that Britain and France repay their huge war debts to the United States. For this to happen, though, Germany had to make the reparation payments to Britain and France imposed by the Treaty of Versailles. The complex financial issue threatened to undermine the international economy. Some statesmen suggested reducing or even canceling both war debts and reparations. But the frugal Coolidge insisted that a debt was a debt and had to be paid.
In 1924, an agreement known as the Dawes Plan arranged U.S. loans to Germany. By enabling Germany to make reparation payments to Britain and France, the Dawes Plan helped Britain and France to repay their debts to the United States. Of course, the entire scheme was financed by U.S. money.
After the stock market crash of 1929, however, the well of U.S. money went dry. Germany stopped reparation payments, and Britain and France ended war-debt payments to the United States.
In the end, the war-debt situation damaged America’s reputation in the eyes of the world. People from Britain and France thought that it was heartless for American bankers and politicians to insist on repayment of debts and not to take into account the
Washington Naval Disarmament Conference, 1921
FOUR-POWER PACT
FIVE-POWER NAVAL LIMITATION TREATY
NINE-POWER PACT
United States, Britain, France, and Japan
Any disagreement between two countries regarding territorial possessions in the Pacific would be discussed by all four countries before any action was to be taken.
United States, Britain, France, Japan, and Italy
These countries hoped to reduce the number of warships in their possession by placing tonnage limits on ships.
United States, China, Britain, France, Japan, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Portugal
China was to open its doors equally to all countries wishing to do business there, and all other countries were to recognize China's independence and territorial integrity.
» Analyze Charts How did the Washington Naval Disarmament Conference try to reduce the potential for major wars?
World War I and the 1920s | 262 ? 4.5 Government in the 1920s
The United States in International Affairs, 1920-1929
development	GOAL	U.S. ACTION
League of Nations, 1920	To prevent war and settle disputes between nations	U.S. membership favored by Wilson; rejected by Senate
World Court, 1920	To make judgments in international disputes	U.S. participation favored by Harding; rejected by Senate
Dawes Plan, 1924	To arrange Germany's reparations payments following World War I	U.S. headed a committee to oversee the collection of war debts.
Kellogg-Briand Pact, 1928	To "outlaw war... as an instrument of national policy"	U.S. agreed with many other nations to renounce war as a means of settling international disputes.
Policy of Non-Recognition, 1917-1933	To undermine the growing power of the Soviet Union	U.S. refused to recognize the Soviet government.
Nicaragua, 1927-1932 L		 		To restore peace and protect American citizens	U.S. sent marines to Nicaragua to crush the rebellion.
» Analyze Charts What international organizations or agreements did the United States take part in? Which did it pass on? Why do you think U.S. leaders chose not to take part in those organizations or agreements?
ELPS
human costs of the war. In the next war, the United States would take a more flexible approach to war loans.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What was the purpose of the Dawes Plan?
ELPS LISTENING 2.D.1
Read aloud a paragraph from the text, and have your partner try to summarize what you said. Then listen to your partner read aloud a different paragraph, and try to summarize what he or she said. What was easy or difficult for you to understand?
ASSESSMENT
1. Generate Explanations Discuss the corruption that existed within the Harding administration, and explain how it impacted the American public.
2.	Identify Central Issues Summarize the main components of President Coolidge’s economic philosophy.
3.	Describe the social and economic problems that existed during the Coolidge administration, and explain why President Coolidge did not address them.
4.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the international attempts that were made to prevent another world war, and consider why they were unsuccessful.
5.	Classify Explain the importance of the United States’ role in the international collection of reparations after World War I.
World War I and the 1920s i 263 }
4.5 Government in the 1920s
The temperance movement partially
achieved its mission with the ratification of the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919. When Prohibition began, federal agents like these destroyed millions of gallons of alcohol.
In the 1920s, while many city dwellers enjoyed a rising standard of living, most farmers suffered through hard times. Conflicting visions of what the nation should be heightened the urban-rural division. Some of these issues, such as immigration policy and teaching the theory of evolution, still divide Americans today.
Hr
n!

ih
KOI
Interactive Flipped Video 5.A, 6.A, 6.B, 15.C
An Unsettled Society
» Objectives
Compare economic and cultural life in rural America to that in urban America.
Analyze how foreign events after World War I and nativism contributed to the first Red Scare.
Analyze the causes and effects of changes in U.S. immigration policy in the 1920s.
Describe the goals and motives of the Ku Klux Kian in the 1920s.
Analyze the intended and unintended effects of Prohibition.
» Key Terms
modernism fundamentalism Scopes Trial Clarence Darrow quota system Ku Klux Kian Prohibition Eighteenth
Amendment Volstead Act Bootlegger Red Scare
Palmer Raids Bartolomeo Vanzetti William Jennings
Bryan
Nicola Sacco eugenics
Americans Debate New Ideas and Values
The 1920 census reported that, for the first time in American history, more people lived in urban areas than in rural regions. This simple fact had profound consequences. The nation had been divided before, but usually along north-south or east-west lines. In the 1920s, however, the split was between urban America and rural America. On virtually every important social and cultural issue, the two groups differed.
Urban Americans enjoyed new consumer products and a wide array of leisure activities. They generally showed an openness toward social change and the new discoveries of science. The growing trend to emphasize science and secular values over traditional religious beliefs became known as modernism.
By contrast, rural Americans did not participate fully in the consumer bonanzas, and they missed out on many of the new forms of leisure. People in the country generally embraced a more traditional view of religion, science, and culture.
An Evolving Job Market Emphasizes Education Rural and urban Americans differed in their attitudes toward formal education. In rural America, prolonged formal education had not seemed vital. Farmers expected their children to master the “Three R’s”—reading, writing,
PEARSONl
realize
I www.PearsonTexas.com
[Access your Digital Lesson.
264
and arithmetic. But beyond that, having a formal education was not vital to the many farm tasks that needed to be done. Muscle, endurance, and knowledge of crops and animals seemed more important to farmers than abstract knowledge learned from books.
Formal education took on more importance in urban America. Mental ability, not muscular fitness, was seen as the essential ingredient for success. Mastery of mathematics and language could spell the difference between a low-paying, unskilled job and a higherpaying position as an office worker. By 1930, more American teens were graduating from high school, and more Americans than ever before went to college.
Some Embrace Religious Fundamentalism In
the 1920s, many devout Americans believed that Christianity was under siege throughout the world. They pointed to Soviet communist attacks on the Orthodox Church in Russia and to the Mexican revolutionary assaults on the Roman Catholic Church in Mexico.
At home, a growing number of Christians were upset by what they saw as secular trends in religion and culture. They reaffirmed their belief in the fundamental, or basic, truths of their religion. This approach, often called fundamentalism emphasized Protestant teachings and the belief that every word in the Christian Bible was literal truth. Fundamentalists believed that the answer to every important moral and scientific question could be found in the Bible. Their ideas took root all over the country but were especially strong in rural America.
Bryan and Darrow Clash Over Evolution
Fundamentalism and modernism clashed head-on in the Scopes Trial of 1925. At issue was the theory of evolution, developed by English scientist Charles Darwin. Darwin believed that complex forms of life, such as human beings, had developed gradually from simpler forms of life. According to fundamentalists, this theory clashed with the description of creation in their Bible.
In 1925, Tennessee passed a law making it illegal to teach Darwin’s theory in the state’s public schools. The American Civil Liberties Union convinced John Scopes, a high school biology teacher in Dayton, Tennessee, to challenge the law. When Scopes taught evolution in his classroom, he was promptly arrested.
The Scopes Trial drew nationwide attention. Journalists flocked to Dayton to cover the emotionally charged event, which many dubbed the “Monkey Trial” because of the mistaken belief that Darwin claimed that human beings descended from monkeys.
» The rise of modernism, with its emphasis on urbanism, intellectualism, and individualism, threatened traditionalists who believed America’s social foundations were deteriorating.
» Clarence Darrow (left) and William Jennings Bryan have a conversation during the Scopes Trial.
World War I and the 1920s	265	4.6 An Unsettled Society
Clarence Darrow, the most celebrated defense attorney in America, traveled from his home in Chicago to defend Scopes. Darrow was well-known for defending labor union leaders like Eugene V. Debs and William Haywood, in addition to other famous cases. A talented speaker, he did not always win his cases, but he often revealed key issues to the public during the well-publicized trials. Three-time presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan, a long-time defender of rural values, served as an expert for the prosecution. Bryan, considered one of the greatest orators of his day, was charged with defending what many fundamentalists thought of as the literal truth of divine creation found in their Bible.
Both men had a significant impact on the trial by drawing national attention to it. The highlight of the trial came when Darrow called Bryan to the stand as an expert on the Bible. Bryan affirmed that the Bible stated the literal truth. He testified that he believed that God created Adam and Eve and that Joshua made the sun stand still. Darrow tried to use science to cast doubt on such beliefs, but Bryan firmly stated, "I accept the Bible absolutely.”
Scopes was found guilty of breaking the law—a fact that was never in question—and fined $100. The public, however, was paying closer attention to a more essential issue. The trial was a public confrontation between fundamentalism and modernity, between a literal and a liberal interpretation of scripture. While the Scopes Trial showcased a major cultural and religious division, it did not heal the conflict or answer its central questions. When the trial was over, each side
still believed in the truth of its position. The conflict over evolution continues today.
H rfcall How does modernism contrast with more traditional ideas about religion?
The Red Scare
As Americans continued to grapple with the ideas of modernity, the emergence of the Soviet Union as a communist nation challenged other essential U.S ideals. In contrast to capitalism and the free enterprise systems, which emphasized the right to own private property, communist ideology called for public ownership of property and an international workers’ revolution as a prelude to the death of capitalism. To this end, Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin encouraged and supported revolutions outside of his country. In Central and Eastern Europe, a series of communist revolts did break out, making it seem like the worldwide revolution was starting.
Fear of a Potential Revolution This revolutionary activity abroad, coupled with labor strikes across the United States following the end of World War I, caused the first American Red Scare, a wave of widespread fear of suspected communists and radicals thought to be plotting revolution within the United States. Real revolutionary activity inside America gave substance to the scare. Authorities discovered bombs mailed to important industrialists and government officials, including Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer. Suspected anarchists, members of a radical political movement, exploded bombs in cities across America,
The Scopes Trial: How Did They Differ?
THE PROSECUTION: WILLIAM JENNINGS BRYAN THE DEFENSE: DUDLEY FIELD MALONE (WITNESS CALLED BY DEFENSE ATTORNEY, CLARENCE DARROW)
"It is high time for the people who believe in religion to make their protest against the teaching of irreligion in the public schools under the guise of science and philosophy."	"We are ready to tell the truth as we understand it and we do not fear all the truth that they can present as facts."
» Analyze Charts Based on the quotes given in the chart, how did the Scopes trial reveal divisions within U.S. society?
World War I and the 1920s	266	4.6 An Unsettled Society
including one that killed about 40 people on Wall Street in 1920.
As the leading law-enforcement official, Palmer mounted a broad offensive against radicals in the United States in 1919 and 1920. In a series of raids in early 1920, known as the Palmer Raids, police arrested thousands of people, some who were radicals and some who were simply immigrants from southern or Eastern Europe. Most were never charged or tried for a crime. The government then deported hundreds of radicals or suspected radicals.
To many, these actions seemed to have the effect of attacking the liberties that Americans held most dear. A group of people in New York City formed the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) in 1920 to protect these liberties. The ACLU tried to do this by becoming involved in important court cases. To this end, the ACLU became involved in one of America’s most controversial court cases: the trial of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti.
A
Questionable Conviction Nicola Sacco (sah koh) and Bartolomeo Vanzetti(van zeht ee) were Italian immigrants and known anarchists. They were charged with shooting and killing two men during a holdup at a shoe factory in a town near Boston. Eyewitnesses of the event said the robbers “looked Italian.” Sacco and Vanzetti were arrested and charged with the crime. Even though the ACLU provided defense counsel, the two men were found guilty in a swift and decisive trial, despite the fact that there was little hard evidence against them. Some prominent legal scholars, intellectuals, and liberal politicians charged that the convictions were based more on Sacco and Vanzetti’s ethnicity and political beliefs than on the facts of the crime. Nevertheless, on August 23, 1927, the two men were put to death in the electric chair. At its worst, hysteria accompanied by violence characterized the Red Scare. Mobs attacked suspected radicals, abused immigrants, and committed crimes in the name of justice. By the summer of 1920, the height of the Red Scare had ended. Americans saw that democracy and capitalism were more powerful in the United States than Lenin’s call for worldwide revolution. But, as shown by the Sacco and Vanzetti trial, the effects of the great fear would linger throughout the 1920s in negative feelings towards immigrants, labor unions, and, to some extent, the reforms pushed by Progressives before World War I.
Id RECALL What was the Red Scare?
ELPS LISTENING 2.D.2
Read the section titled A Questionable Conviction with a partner. Discuss your opinions about what you read. Each time your partner
ELPS
» Lenin’s support for revolutions of working class people everywhere against the system of capitalism led leaders to fear just such an uprising within the United States.
» In New York City, thousands of people protested against the verdict in the Sacco and Vanzetti trial. Many felt government prosecutors were unjustly targeting immigrants without sufficient evidence.
World War I and the 1920s	267	4.6 An Unsettled Society
speaks, ask a question to help you better understand what he or she said. Then share your thoughts.
Immigration in the 1920s
As the trial of Italian immigrants Sacco and Vanzetti came to a close, another social issue involved the ongoing boom in immigration continued. As in the past, nativists, or those who preferred native-born Americans to immigrants, argued that the new arrivals took jobs away from native-born workers and threatened American religious, political, and cultural traditions.
Eugenics and Social Darwinism Influence the Perception of Immigrants Although nativist politicians had been able to restrict immigration from China in 1882, they had failed to push through laws to restrict immigration from southern and eastern Europe. On the eve of U.S. entry into World War I, however, Congress did pass a law requiring immigrants to take a literacy test.
Immigrants who could not read or write their own language were prohibited from entering the United States. President Wilson vetoed the law, but Congress overrode Wilson’s veto. Immigration dropped during
» The rise of nativism within the United States led to increased restrictions on immigration, such as the rejection of immigrants who could not read and write in their own language.
the war, worsening labor shortage problems during the war.
During the postwar Red Scare, fear that communists and socialists from eastern Europe were traveling to the United States with their revolutionary doctrines caused the debate to heat up once again. On one side were nativists who disagreed with traditional immigration policy. On the other side were many Americans who viewed the immigration experience as part of what made an American an American. Nearly all Americans who could trace their ancestry back far enough discovered foreign origins.
Nativists were concerned that immigrants would diminish America’s political and economic power. They believed that many immigrants had undesirable physical and social traits and would therefore be unproductive members of society.
These views were partly based on eugenics, the since-discredited idea that intelligence and other favorable social traits were inheritable characteristics passed on by one’s parents and more frequently found in some races than others. Eugenics was related to Social Darwinism, the idea that life was a competition in which only the fittest survive. The rise of both Social Darwinism and eugenics was caused in part by Charles Darwin’s theory of natural selection. Both were also motivated by ethnic or racial prejudice to some degree. Those who believed in both theories wanted the United States to be that fittest nation that survived, and to ensure that it was, sought to exclude those they thought of as weaker and undesirable.
Many nativists who believed in eugenics thought the human race could be improved by controlling which people had children. Therefore, they thought it best to restrict immigration to those whom they deemed to have desirable traits that would in turn be passed on to future generations of Americans.
Congressional Legislation Restricts Immigration
In addition to eugenics and Social Darwinism, other events such as World War I, the Russian Revolution, and the Red Scare strengthened the nativist position and affected congressional legislation. Two subsequent laws— the Emergency Quota Act of 1921 and the National Origins Act of 1924— established a quota system to govern immigration from specific countries.
The National Origins Act set up a simple formula: The number of immigrants of a given nationality each year could not exceed 2 percent of the number of people of that nationality living in the United States in 1890. The year 1890 was chosen because it was before the great wave of immigration from southern and eastern Europe. For example, the act permitted about 65,721 immigrants from England and Northern Ireland to
World War I and the 1920s	268	4.6 An Unsettled Society
Effects of Quotas on Immigration
SOURCE:
Historical Statistics of the United States L............................... —_------------.----:----------:----:--------------;-----;........................,....................„j
» Analyze Charts What effect did the Emergency Quota Act of 1921 and the National Origins Act of 1924 have on immigration to the United States?
©
Interactive Timeline
come to America every year, but it allowed only about 5,802 immigrants from Italy. The act also continued to exclude most Asian immigrants. The effect of eugenics, Social Darwinism, and nativist sentiment in general was that America closed its "golden door” to many of the people trying to enter.
More Mexicans Arrive for Economic Opportunity
The quota system did not apply to Mexico, which was still reeling from the 1910 revolution. Settling in sparsely populated regions of the Southwest, Mexican immigrants made significant contributions to local economies. Many found work harvesting crops in California and Texas. A smaller number sought jobs in the factories and farms of the North or Midwest.
Many Mexican immigrants faced discrimination and hostility in their new homes. They often competed with native-born Americans for jobs and were frequently subjected to brutality and violence.
Id RECALL What was the purpose of the National
Origins Act?
The Ku Klux Kian in the Early 1900s
Immigration restriction was an attempt to turn back the clock to what many saw as a simpler, better time. Many lashed out against symbols of change. Some even turned to organizations that supported doctrines of hate and employed violence and terror to achieve their ends.
The Kian Reorganizes In 1915, on Stone Mountain in Georgia, a revived Ku Klux Kian was formally organized. The original Kian had been formed in the South during Reconstruction largely to terrorize African Americans who sought to vote. Although the new Kian continued to promote hatred of African Americans, it was also aimed at the new America taking shape in the cities. It targeted Jews, Catholics, and immigrants. In the wake of postwar labor unrest, the Kian opposed labor unions—especially because many union members were immigrants or political radicals. The Kian also claimed to stand against lawbreaking and immorality.
At its height, the Kian’s “Invisible Empire” had perhaps 4 to 5 million members. Most were in the South, but there were also branches in the Midwest, Northeast, and West—in both rural areas and in small industrial cities. One center of Kian strength was Indiana, where Kian leader David Stephenson ruled
World War I and the 1920s	269 t 4.6 An Unsettled Society
with an iron fist and controlled numerous politicians. There were special women’s branches of the Kian as well. However, some male Kian leaders were strongly opposed to women taking an active role in politics.
Kian members boycotted businesses owned by anyone who was Jewish, Catholic, or African American. The Kian terrorized citizens in the night, often by burning crosses outside their homes. Klansmen usually wore masks to conceal their identities, met to wave flags and preach hate, and followed leaders with such titles as Grand Dragon and Imperial Wizard. But behind the Kian’s confident facade were Americans fearful of change.
Many Americans Oppose the Kian’s Values
Organizations such as the NAACP and the Jewish Anti-Defamation League, battled against the Kian and its values. The NAACP continued its anti-lynching crusade, supporting legislation in 1922 that passed in the House of Representatives but not in the Senate. The Anti-Defamation League worked to reduce anti-Semitic slurs in newspapers and break down barriers in higher education and the job market. Individuals also embraced the idea of racial, ethnic, religious, and cultural diversity. For them, the notion of the “melting pot” was as old as America itself, and they drew strength from American traditions and saw hope in the American future. Journalist William Allen White noted:
» A group photo of the twentieth annual session of the NAACP in Cleveland, Ohio in 1929.
To make a case against a birthplace, a religion, or a race is wickedly un-American and cowardly. The whole trouble with the Ku Klux Kian is that it is based upon such deep foolishness that it is bound to be a menace to good government in any community.
—William Allen White, letter to the editor of the New
York YVorlck 1921
The Kian itself became thoroughly corrupt.
Its leaders bribed politicians, stole from its members’
dues, and lied to its members. Stephenson ended up going to prison for assault and second-degree murder. By the late 1920s, the Kian stood exposed. Although the organization never disappeared, it became less significant.
H
What actions did Kian members take to accomplish their goals?
Prohibition Divides
Americans
Another divisive issue was Prohibition, the banning of alcohol use. Since the early 1800s, temperance reformers had crusaded against alcohol. Temperance was a cause held dear by many Progressives. By 1917, some 75 percent of Americans lived in “dry” counties that had banned liquor. World War I increased support for temperance. It seemed unpatriotic to use corn, wheat, and barley to make alcohol when soldiers overseas needed bread.
The Eighteenth Amendment Bans Alcohol In 1919, the states ratified the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution. It forbade the manufacture, distribution, and sale of alcohol anywhere in the United States. The amendment had been passed largely on the strength of rural votes. Many Progressives felt that its passage was one of the greatest impacts of the whole Progressive reform movement. Congress then passed the Volstead Act, a law that officially enforced the amendment.
Advocates of Prohibition, known as “drys," called it a “noble experiment.” They argued that the impact of Prohibition would be improved individuals, strengthened families, and better societies. In fact, drinking—as well as alcoholism and liver disease caused by drinking—did decline during the first years of Prohibition but soon rose again to near pre-Prohibition levels.
World War I and the 1920s	270	4.6 An Unsettled Society
THE IMPACT
PROHIBITION U.S. INDUSTRY PEOPLE NUMBER OF CRIME STATISTICS
BREWERIES MMM MB ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
		o	Arrests for		2
	1916	1926	violating Prohibition laws		1.75
					1.5
			Arrests for		1.25
NUMBER OF
drunkenness and 5 WINERIES			disorderly conduct	C	1
	1914	1925	Arrests for	•5 Q.	0.75
			drunk driving		0.5
GOVERNMENT REVENUE FROM ALCOHOL
Federal prison 0.25 1919			population		0
1925					1910	1915	1920	1925	1930
» Analyze Charts Summarize the effects of Prohibition on American society.
Interactive Gallery
3
HP
Opponents of Prohibition, dubbed “wets,” countered that the ban on alcohol did not stop people from drinking. Instead, they argued, Prohibition’s impact was to help create an atmosphere of hypocrisy and increased organized crime.
Many Americans Ignore the Volstead Act As the
wets noted, the Volstead Act did not stop Americans from drinking, but it did prevent them from purchasing drinks legally. The gap between the law and individual desires was filled by a large illegal network. People made alcohol in homemade stills or smuggled it in from other countries.
Bootleggers sold illegal alcohol to consumers. In cities, secret drinking establishments, known as speakeasies, attracted eager customers.
Government agents worked tirelessly to stop the flow of illegal liquor. However, they were short-handed, and the demand for alcohol was too great. There were millions of dollars to be made by both organized and unorganized criminals. Particularly in cities, policemen and politicians tended to look the other way when liquor was involved. They rationalized their actions by saying that if people wanted to drink, they would drink.
A1
Capone, a Chicago gang leader, was the most famous criminal of the Prohibition era. He defended his illegal actions: I make my money from supplying a public demand. If I break the law, my customers, who number hundreds of the best people in Chicago, are as guilty as I am. The only difference between us is that I sell and they buy. Everybody calls me a racketeer. I call myself a businessman.
—A1 Capone, quoted in Era of Excess (Sinclair)
The problem was that under the guise of providing a glass of beer or scotch, organized crime spread into other areas of society. Capone’s other “businesses” included prostitution, drugs, robbery, and murder. Thus, one effect of Prohibition was to contribute to the growth of organized crime in America.
The Constitution Is Amended Again By the mid-1920s, most city politicians clamored for the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment. But to many rural Americans, liquor and crime were tied to other divisive cultural issues of the day. Thus, like immigration and evolution, the debate over Prohibition became part of a battle over the future of America.
In the culturally divided 1920s, Americans could not reach a satisfactory settlement on the issue. However, illegal economies that thrived on the production
I
World War I and the 1920s	271	4.6 An Unsettled Society
and distribution of alcohol continued to thrive and legal enforcement of Prohibition was oftentimes lax. As popular dissatisfaction with the Eighteenth Amendment grew, Congress finally repealed Prohibition with the passage of the Twenty-First Amendment in 1933. It was ratified by the states later that same year.
» Protesters in 1932 were led by New York City Mayor Jimmy Walker. Draw Conclusions Looking at the banners, what reason were the marchers using to advocate the repeal of Prohibition?
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why was the Volstead Act passed? ASSESSMENT
1.	Make Generalizations Explain how the lifestyles of urban and rural Americans differed during the 1920s.
2.	Generate Explanations Explain how the Scopes Trial illustrated the conflict between modernism and fundamentalism.
3.	Apply Concepts Identify the flaws of the trial of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti.
4.	Distinguish Between Fact and Opinion Discuss the main ideas of eugenics, and explain why it is no longer a prominent belief in the United States.
5.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how Prohibition contributed to the growth of organized crime in the United States.
World War I and the 1920s
272	4.6 An Unsettled Society
The automobile reshaped American culture, creating new forms of recreation and making it easier for people to travel. Other factors also contributed to changing ways of daily life. Americans listened to the radio, went to the movies, and followed the exploits of sports heroes. In the process, a new mass culture emerged—one whose shape and character closely resemble our own.
Interactive Flipped Video

The Roaring
Twenties
Popular American Culture in the 1920s
The 1920s was in many respects the first decade of our modern era. Even as cultural issues divided Americans from different regions or economic levels, technology was beginning to break down other barriers. Nowhere is this more evident than in the leisure interests of the American people.
Americans Enjoy More Leisure Time The growth of cities changed leisure patterns. On farms, people worked from dawn to dusk, with little time to spare. In the evenings, a farm family might play games, read, or sing together around the piano. Occasionally, they joined other farm families and townsfolk for picnics or a game of baseball. They did not have the time or the money for more extensive leisure pursuits.
City life was different. The average workweek in all industries fell from 70 hours in 1850 to 55 in 1910 to 45 by 1930. The workweek itself also changed from seven days a week to six and at last to five. At the same time, salaries and wages were on the rise.
6.A, 6.B, 25.A, 25.B, 25.C, 26.C
» Objectives
Describe how increased leisure time and technological innovations led to a widespread shared popular culture in the 1920s.
Analyze the changing role of women in the 1920s.
Describe how the concept of modernism shown in art and literature reflected postwar disillusionment.
» Key Terms
Charlie Chaplin The Jazz Singer Babe Ruth Charles Lindbergh flapper
Sigmund Freud “Lost Generation”
F.
Scott Fitzgerald Ernest Hemingway www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
273
Innovation in the Motion Picture Industry
With more free time and disposable income, urban and suburban Americans looked to new sources of entertainment. Motion pictures helped supply that demand.
The technology to make motion pictures had been around for a generation, but the movie industry rose to new heights in the 1920s. A handful of huge studios in Hollywood, California, established monopolies that controlled the production, distribution, and exhibition of movies. During the 1920s, from 60 to 100 million Americans went to the movies each week. Ornate movie palaces or small local theaters became America’s cultural classrooms.
For most of the decade, the studios made silent pictures. They were an ideal entertainment at a time when millions of immigrants spoke little English. Motion pictures transcended languages and even literacy, treating universal themes in familiar ways that allowed any viewer to follow the stories. Motion pictures became America’s democratic art. Unlike theatrical productions or classical concerts, movies were available to anyone with a few cents to spare. In addition, the fact that movies were silent made it easier for them to cut across geographical boundaries. Hollywood’s biggest movies and stars became nearly as popular in far corners of the globe as they were at home. By 1926, Hollywood movies accounted for a majority of the British and French film markets. Film was one of
the first mediums to diffuse popular American culture to the rest of the world.
Many stars of the silent era portrayed ordinary folks, and films often portrayed the social issues and characteristics of the time in which they were made. Comedian Charlie Chaplin, the most popular silent film star, played the Little Tramp in many films. In The Immigrant, Chaplin played a penniless immigrant on a voyage across the Atlantic to the United States. Although the film belonged to the genre of comedy, it depicted some of the challenges and uncertainties that many immigrants of the time faced as they made their own way to America’s shores. Chaplin’s character was equal parts hobo, dreamer, and poet but an eternal optimist in his ability to charm his audience and continually reinvent himself. Other stars played more romantic types. Adorable Mary Pickford was known as “America’s Sweetheart” for her girlish roles in light romances. Douglas Fairbanks played handsome, athletic adventurers. In the western genre, William S. Hart was a steely-eyed cowboy who came into town to restore law and order.
In 1927, film history changed, suddenly and forever, with the release of The Jazz Singer, the first movie with sound synchronized to the action. Audiences were amazed when A1 Jolson said—not pantomimed—“You ain’t heard nothin’ yet” and then launched into a song. Silent pictures quickly faded out, replaced by “talkies.” But whether silent or with sound, movies spoke directly
INNOVATIONS CHANGE
how PEOPLE LIVE HOUSEHOLDS WITH
RADIO SETS
(THOUSANDS)
1922160 19231400 192411,250
1925	■ 2,750
1926	HI 4,000
1927	■■■6,750
1928	■■■ 8,000
1929	■■■■! 10,250
1930	■■■■■ 13,000
16,700
18,450
AVERAGE WEEKLY MOVIE ATTENDANCE
rpFRinn pfopi a
Source: Blockbusting
HOUSEHOLD EXPENDITURES
on TECHNOLOGY 
By the mid-1920s, 50% of U.S. households had
ELECTRICITY.
By the mid-1930s, 50% of U.S. households had
AN ELECTRIC
STOVE.
19331 1934 1
Source: Gold Eagle
19,250
20,400
By the mid-1940s, 50% of U.S. households had
A REFRIGERATOR & A TELEPHONE.
Source: The Atlantic
» Analyze Graphs Why do you think there was a significant increase in movie attendance in 1930?
SSll Interactive Illustration
4.7 The Roaring Twenties
World War I and the 1920s
to the desires, needs, fears, and fantasies of millions of people in the United States and around the world.
The Radio Impacts American Society Like the movies, the phonograph and the radio also became powerful instruments of mass popular culture. Each was the result of both technological advances and business enterprise. Millions of radios and phonographs (as well as phonograph records) were marketed in the 1920s. On a deeper level, the phonograph and radio helped produce a standardized culture. Americans in the East and West and North and South listened to the same songs, learned the same dances, and shared the same popular culture as they never had before.
The radio, or wireless, was developed in the 1890s by Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi. Before the 1920s, the radio was an innovation used by a small group of military technicians, telephone operators, and amateur “wireless” operators. Then, in 1920, an executive of the Westinghouse company started radio station KDKA in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. It was an immediate success. Within three years, there were almost 600 licensed stations broadcasting to more than 600,000 radio sets. Americans listened to music, educational lectures and religious sermons, and news and weather reports. They also heard commercials for a wide variety of consumer products.
Radios brought distant events into millions of homes in a way unmatched by newspapers or magazines. In 1927, much of America listened to a championship boxing match between Gene Tunney and Jack Dempsey. That night, theaters and movie houses played to empty seats as Americans huddled next to their sets. Even the men on death row at Sing Sing prison listened to the broadcast. Before the 1920s, such coverage of an event had been impossible. Although radio programs and music occasionally broadcast racial or cultural stereotypes as well, such as the radio show Amos 'n Andy in the 1920s, the radio allowed Americans to keep up with current events around the country as they occurred.
Americans Share Music With the Phonograph
The phonograph allowed people to listen to the same music they heard on the radio, but whenever they wanted. Early phonographs employed difficult-to-use wax cylinders and suffered from poor sound quality. In the 1920s, grooved disc recordings and superior sound reproduction improved the sound of the earlier machines, and production of phonographs rose to approximately five million in 1929. There was also a corresponding rise in record sales. The first country-western album to sell over one million copies was produced in 1924.
‘CITY
UGHTt
V. U;T US'
IHkfcL I LU & PRODUCED CHARLESZCHAPLIN
» Before “talkies,” or movies with synchronized sound, Americans went to the movies to see silent pictures. Charlie Chaplin was perhaps the most famous of all silent film actors.
» The invention of the phonograph and grooved disc record stimulated the growth of the music industry. By the 1920s, records had one song on each side and rotated at 78 revolutions per minute (rpm).
il !
World War I and the 1920s	275	4.7 The Roaring Twenties
As the popularity of country-western music rose, one positive impact was that the uniquely American symbol of the cowboy and life on the the western frontier was mythologized throughout the country. A negative impact was that stereotypes of westerners and country-dwellers sometimes also spread. Recordings helped bring country and western music from the South and West to the North and East, while pop tunes from New York City’s Tin Pan Alley traveled in the other direction, creating national markets for different genres of music. As they listened to the same songs, Americans also learned the same fashionable dances, from the fox trot to the Charleston.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
How did films like The Immigrant reflect the social issues of the time?
American Role Models
Hollywood’s chief rivals for the creation of heroes were the nation’s baseball parks, football fields, and boxing rings. Before the 1920s, there were relatively few nationally famous athletes, such as boxer John L. Sullivan and all-around athlete Jim Thorpe. Most sports stars were local heroes. This changed by the 1920s, often called the Golden Age of Sports.
» With the help of increased newspaper readership and radio coverage, sports figures like Babe Ruth became national heroes and symbols of American culture.
Media Coverage Creates Sports Heroes Thanks to increased newspaper readership and the rise of radio coverage, every major sport boasted nationally famous performers. Perhaps the leading sports hero was baseball home-run king Babe Ruth. Others included Red Grange in football, Jack Dempsey in boxing, Bobby Jones in golf, and Bill Tilden in tennis. Women athletes, too, contributed to the hero culture, from tennis player Helen Wills to Gertrude Ederle, the first woman to swim the English Channel.
Why did athletes reach such heights of popularity? Part of the answer is that the Golden Age of Sports was also the Golden Age of the Sportswriter. Such journalists as Damon Runyon and Grantland Rice captured the excitement of sports events in their colorful prose. Turning the finest athletes into seemingly immortal gods, the sportswriters nicknamed Babe Ruth the Sultan of Swat and dubbed Notre Dame's football backfield the Four Horsemen.
The other part of the answer is that the decade needed heroes. World War I had shattered many Americans’ faith in progress, making the world seem cheap and flawed. Athletic heroes reassured Americans that people were capable of great feats and lofty dreams. If in our heroes we see our idealized selves, the sports heroes of the 1920s gave Americans a sense of hope.
A
Transatlantic Flight Even the biggest sports stars could not match the adoration given to aviators. In the 1920s, the airline industry was in its infancy. Flying aces had played a role in World War I, and a few small domestic airlines carried mail and passengers. But airplanes were still a novel sight to most Americans. The pilot became a new breed of hero, a romantic daredevil who risked death with every flight. As aviation technology improved by leaps and bounds in the early twentieth century, many dreamed of flying across the Atlantic Ocean. These dreams were made possible by innovators such as Glenn Curtiss, who designed an aircraft engine capable of just such a flight. As flight crews were successfully flying longer distances across the Atlantic, daring aviators wondered if they could accomplish the same feat alone.
Then aviator Charles Lindbergh attempted the long journey alone. In May 1927, he took off from Long Island, New York, in his tiny single-engine plane, the Spirit of St. Louis, and headed east— to Paris, France. Other pilots had flown across the Atlantic Ocean before, but Lindbergh was the first to do it solo and non-stop. The flight took more than 33 hours, and the lone pilot had to stay awake the entire time. He also recalled, "In the daytime I knew where I was going, but
World War I and the 1920s
276	47 The Roaring Twenties
in the evening and at night it was largely a matter of guesswork.”
When Lindbergh landed in Paris, he became an instant media celebrity, dubbed Lucky Lindy and the Lone Eagle. The radio reported on his landing, and movie newsreels showed his triumphant return home. The modest young man from the Midwest made an impact as the greatest hero of his time.
H IDENTIFY
For what accomplishment was Charles Lindbergh known?
The Role of Women
Changes
In a 1931 book, Only Yesterday, journalist Frederick Lewis Allen attempted to make sense of the fads, heroes, and problems of the 1920s. Featured prominently was the New Woman. During the decade, many women challenged political, economic, social, and educational boundaries to prove that their role was as vital outside the home as inside it. Women’s roles began to change in many ways, caused by the overall changes that society was undergoing, as well as the passage of the Nineteeth Amendment in 1920. The effect of these changes was that women made more and more contributions to shape American culture.
Flappers Push Back Against Expectations During the Victorian Age of the late 1800s and early 1900s, middle-class women had been expected to center their lives on the home and family. The New Woman of the 1920s, noted Allen, was more liberated. She wore dresses with shorter hemlines, put on more makeup, danced to the latest crazes, and generally assumed that she had the same political and social rights as any man.
Popular magazines, sociological studies, novels, and movies all echoed Allen’s observations. The rejection of Victorian morality seemed so total and the New Woman so novel that the change amounted to a “revolution in manners and morals.” The symbol of all these changes was the flapper, a young woman with short skirts and rouged cheeks who had her hair cropped close in a style known as a bob.
There was only a germ of truth in the various observations. The Victorian code of separate spheres for men and women was disappearing but not as rapidly or as completely as Allen indicated. The flapper was undoubtedly more publicized than imitated. Still, the image of the flapper underscores an important aspect of the decade. Not all women aspired to be flappers, but many wanted more control over their lives and got it.
» The individualism and modernism of the early 1920s prompted many women to see themselves as equals to men, deserving the same political and social rights.
Women’s Political Rights The great fight for suffrage had been won with the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. Soon women looked for a way to use their political rights to make an impact. But what was the next step? Some groups, such as the National American Woman Suffrage Association, called on women to work in reform movements, run for office, or fight for laws to protect women and children in the workplace. Some women had success in public life. In 1925, Nellie Tayloe Ross of Wyoming and Miriam Ferguson of Texas became the first women to take office as elected state governors.
The National Women’s Party took a more militant position, demanding complete economic, social, and political equality with men. Their primary goal was the passage of an Equal Rights Amendment. Many women, though, believed that a new constitutional amendment was premature. They set more achievable goals and made significant strides in employment. The efforts of these political organizations and women elected to public office redefined the role of women in American culture and opened doors through which others would walk in the decades to come. Although most working women continued to toil in domestic service and manufacturing, others moved into clerical, sales, and management positions. Women also won
World War I and the 1920s	277	4.7 The Roaring Twenties
jobs in journalism, aviation, banking, and the legal and medical professions.
Life at Home Changes Perhaps the most widespread revolution taking place in women’s lives was a quiet one. During the decade, women tended to live longer, marry later, and have fewer children, freeing their time to pursue other interests. Some entered the workforce, others devoted more time to charitable work, and still others joined clubs that discussed books and ideas. All these pursuits enlarged the intellectual world of women.
The consumer economy of the 1920s benefited women. Electric vacuum cleaners and irons took some of the labor and drudgery out of household chores. Of course, not all women shared in the blessings of technology. Many homes in rural America had no access to electricity. For women in these regions, household labor continued to involve intense, even painful, work. They drew and carried water from wells, heated irons on stoves, and washed clothes by hand. Here again, the split between urban and rural Americans was distinct.
H RECALL
Why would many who advocated for women’s political equality have thought 1925 was a significant year?
» Modernist painters like Edward Hopper expressed their reservations about the progress of civilization. Evaluate Sources What themes does Hopper’s 1927 painting “Automat” express?
Interactive Chart
Social Issues Are Reflected in Art and Literature
No area of American life, however, reflected the impact of World War I more than literature and the arts. The war altered the way writers and artists viewed the world, changed the way they approached their craft, and inspired them to experiment with new forms and fresh ideas.
Postwar Uncertainty During the Victorian era, most poets and novelists had expressed a belief in progress, placing boundless faith in human potential. But World War I called the notion of progress into question.
How could a society ruled by the idea of progress embark on a war that killed millions of people, destroyed monuments of civilization, and left survivors hungry, homeless, and hopeless? This was not an action of a rational people, a new generation of writers argued, but the irrational exploits of civilization without a sense of direction.
This pessimistic, skeptical worldview sparked an artistic movement known as modernism. Modernism in both art and literature to some extent also reflected some of the issues and characteristics of American society in the 1920s, from the renewed interest in new technology to the uncertainty of many in a rapidly changing world.
The theories of Jewish-Austrian psychologist Sigmund Freud(siHG muhnd froid) also contributed to literary and artistic modernism. Freud argued that much of human behavior is driven not by rational thought but by unconscious desires. To live in society, people learn to suppress these desires. But the tension between outward behavior and the subconscious, said Freud, could lead to mental and even physical illness. Freud’s theories led writers and artists to explore the subconscious mind.
Modern Art Moves in New Directions Modernism clashed head-on with traditionalism most dramatically in the field of modern art. Since the late 1800s, European painters had led the way in seeking a fresh visual idiom, or language. They moved away from representational paintings that simply reproduced real life and experimented with more abstract styles.
Most Americans got their first real glimpse of the new European approach at a major art show at New York's 69th Infantry Regimental Armory in 1913. Traditionalists were outraged by the Armory Show, and Theodore Roosevelt said that most of it represented the “lunatic fringe” of the art world. But many American painters and sculptors were inspired by the bold new styles. They began their own search for artistic
World War I and the 1920s
4.7 The Roaring Twenties
honesty in abstract patterns. In the 1920s, paintings by Edward Hopper, Man Ray, Joseph Stella, and Georgia O’Keeffe demonstrated the richness and varied styles of American artists. At the same time, the works of artists such as Archibald Motley and William H. Johnson portrayed African American perspectives on modern life.
Postwar American Literature Flowers American writers of the 1920s are often referred to as the “Lost Generation” because they no longer had faith in the cultural guideposts of the Victorian era. But many were inspired by their “lost” condition to search for new truths and fresh ways of expressing those truths. Never in American history had one decade seen the emergence of so many great literary talents. A list of writers who rose to distinction in the 1920s includes F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingway, Edith Wharton, Sinclair Lewis, William Faulkner, Gertrude Stein, Eugene O’Neill, and T. S. Eliot. Each of these writers remains today on any list of distinguished American authors.
Novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald explored the reality of the American dream of wealth, success, and emotional fulfillment. In This Side of Paradise, he wrote that his generation had “grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, and all faiths in man shaken.” In The Great Gatsby(1925), his most accomplished work, Fitzgerald showed the American dream ending in nightmare.
In the novel, through hard work and careful planning, James Gatz re-creates himself as Jay Gatsby, a successful tycoon. Gatsby fills his home with wild parties, dancing, bootleg liquor, and endless activity:
In the main hall a bar with a real brass rail was set up, and stocked with gins and liquors and with cordials so long forgotten that most of his female guests were too young to know one from another. By seven o’clock the orchestra had arrived, no thin five-piece affair, but a whole pitful of oboes and trombones and saxophones. . . .People were not invited—-they went there. They got into automobiles which bore them out to Long Island, and somehow they ended up at Gatsby’s door.
-—F, Scott Fitzgerald.	Op, , ’ r'-'h
» American writers F. Scott Fitzgerald and his wife Zelda, visited the French Riviera often in the 1920s. In many ways, their turbulent life together mirrored Fitzgerald’s stories of striving and tragedy.
But in the end, Gatsby is destroyed by the very things he hoped to achieve. His lofty dreams end in a violent, meaningless death.
Fitzgerald’s fellow novelist and good friend Ernest Hemingway explored similar themes but in a new idiom. Hemingway felt betrayed, not only by the American dream, but also by literary language itself. In A Fareweil to Arms, his 1929 novel about World War I, Hemingway’s narrator says:
1 was always embarrassed by the words sacred, glorious, and sacrifice.
. . .1 had seen nothing sacred, and the things that were glorious had no glory and the sacrifices were like the stockyards at Chicago if nothing was done with the meat except to bury it. .
. .Abstract words such as glory, honor, courage, or hallow were obscene beside the concrete names of villages, the numbers of roads, the names of
World War I and the 1920s	279
4.7 The Roaring Twenties
/t&WllMSKr ★^fe^COCHIlAN...
Present ---------

Paul RDBESDN
FROM THE STAGE PLAY BY...
» The Emperor Jones was Eugene O’Neill’s initial attempt at expressionism. Starring Paul Robeson, it was the first play on Broadway with a racially integrated cast.
EUGENE
ONEILL
ASSESSMENT
rivers, the numbers of regiments and the dates.
..-.Ernest Hemn 19way '	, u \ Em
In his short stories and novels, Hemingway worked to develop a writing style that reflected his insights. He wrote in unadorned sentences, stripped of vague adjectives and adverbs. He created a style that was as concrete and as powerful as a rifle shot.
Influenced by Freud, other writers explored the subconscious mind. Playwright Eugene O’Neill experimented with techniques that put the subconscious right on stage. In The Emperor Jones, the title character gets lost in a jungle and is attacked by imaginary beings called Little Formless Fears. In Strange Interlude, characters turn away from their conversations with other people on stage and speak their thoughts directly to the audience.
Certainly, many poets and novelists of the decade were disillusioned. Like Hemingway and Fitzgerald, they wrestled with the meaning of the war and life itself. But in the end, their efforts resulted in the creation of literary masterpieces, not worthless products of aimless despair.
Q CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What themes did F. Scott Fitzgerald include in many of his stories?
1.	Draw Conclusions Explain why silent pictures were an ideal form of entertainment during the 1920s.
2.	Make Generalizations Explain why sports heroes became popular during the 1920s.
3.	Identify Central Issues Explain how modernist literature related to the prominent issues and ideas of the 1920s.
4.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how World War I led to the rise of modernism.
5.	Draw Conclusions Explain how the flapper related to the lives of most American women.
World War I and the 1920s	280
4.7 The Roaring Twenties
V
As a result of World War I and the Great Migration, millions of African Americans relocated from the rural South to the urban North. This mass migration continued through the 1920s and contributed to a flowering of music and literature. Jazz and the Harlem Renaissance made a lasting impact, not only on African Americans but on the culture all Americans share.
The Harlem
Renaissance
Support for Black Nationalism in Urban Areas
Like the immigrants who traveled from Europe and Asia, African Americans who left the South dreamed of a better future. They had heard stories of economic opportunity, social advancement, and greater political rights. The South, they reasoned, was a dead end. Locked into low-paying rural jobs, barred from decent schools, faced with the reality of Jim Crow oppression and the threat of lynching, they pointed their compasses north.
Migration Creates Opportunities and Challenges Most African American migrants to the north probably found a better life. Wages in a Detroit auto plant or a Pittsburgh steel mill were far better than what a sharecropper earned in the South. In such cities as New York, Chicago, Pittsburgh, and Cleveland, African Americans had a growing political voice. In those towns, there also existed black middle and upper classes. African American ministers, physicians, lawyers, teachers, and journalists practiced their professions and served as role models to the younger generation.
6.B, 25.A, 25.B, 26.C
» Objectives
Analyze how the Great Migration and the philosophies of Marcus Garvey affected African Americans in the 1920s.
Trace the development of jazz and its impact on American society and the rest of the world.
Discuss the themes explored by writers and artists of the Harlem Renaissance.
» Key Terms
Marcus Garvey jazz
Louis Armstrong Bessie Smith Harlem Renaissance Claude McKay Langston Hughes Zora Neale Hurston
PEARSON1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
281
» Marcus Garvey, an African American nationalist, promoted the idea that African Americans should separate themselves from whites and support their own communities.
» The African American population of Harlem, New York continued to grow after World War I and in the 1920s.
But in coming North, African Americans had certainly not escaped racism and oppression. On average, they were forced to live in the worst housing and labor in the lowest paying jobs. In addition, as the race riots of the summer of 1919 demonstrated, violence was a threat to African Americans north as well as south of the Mason-Dixon line. After World War I, African Americans increased their demand for a real solution to the country’s racial problems.
New York City’s Harlem became the focal point for the aspirations of hundreds of thousands of African Americans. Some 200,000 blacks settled in Harlem. Migrants from the South mixed with recently arrived immigrants from Caribbean islands, such as Jamaica. This dynamic blend of different cultures and traditions bred new ideas.
The Impact of Marcus Garvey The most prominent new African American leader to emerge in the 1920s was Marcus Garvey. Born in Jamaica, Garvey traveled widely before immigrating to Harlem in 1916. From his travels, Garvey drew one important conclusion: Blacks were exploited everywhere. To combat the problem, he promoted the idea of universal black nationalism and organized a “Back to Africa” movement. Unlike Booker T. Washington or W.E.B. Du Bois, Garvey did not call for blacks and whites to work together to improve America. Instead, Garvey advocated the separation of the races.
Garvey’s message found willing converts in American cities. By the mid-1920s, his Universal Negro Improvement Association boasted almost 2.5 million members and sympathizers. His advocacy of black pride and black support of black-run businesses won considerable support.
Garvey’s movement fell apart in the second half of the decade. The federal government sent him to prison for mail fraud and then deported him to Jamaica. Without his powerful leadership, the Universal Negro Improvement Association lost its focus and appeal.
Although Garvey’s movement died, his ideas did not fade. The nationalist and separatist aspects of the Nation of Islam and the Black Power movement in the 1960s borrowed from Garvey’s ideas. So, too, did later appeals to black pride, self-reliance, and cultural ties to Africa. Harlem’s major newspaper, the Amsterdam News, later wrote, “In a world where black is despised, he taught [African Americans] to admire and praise black things and black people.”
U DESCRIBE
What challenges did many African American migrants face as they moved north?
World War I and the 1920s	282
4.8 The Harlem Renaissance
The Evolution of Jazz
» Analyze Charts How is the development of jazz related to modern musical genres such as hip-hop and rap?
The Jazz Age
It was F. Scott Fitzgerald who called the 1920s the “Jazz Age.” However, it was African Americans who contributed the jazz. A truly indigenous American musical form, jazz is a musical form based on improvisation. Jazz musicians creatively recombine different forms of music, including African American blues and ragtime, and European-based popular music. Jazz music was fast, free, loud, rebellious, and fun, so in many ways, it reflected the characteristics and issues of the 1920s.
A
Unique Musical Style Jazz emerged in the South and Midwest, particularly New Orleans, where different cultures and traditions came together and influenced each other. Early jazz artists won fame playing in Storyville, a section of New Orleans known for its night life. From the South, it spread north with the Great Migration of African Americans. Trumpet player Louis Armstrong became the unofficial ambassador of jazz. After playing with King Oliver’s band in New Orleans and Chicago and with Fletcher Henderson’s orchestra in New York, Armstrong began to organize his own groups. His ability to play the trumpet and his subtle sense of improvisation made him a legend and influenced the development of jazz. After Armstrong, all jazz bands featured soloists.
Many also began to feature vocal soloists, such as Bessie Smith, the “Empress of the Blues.”
Jazz Wins Worldwide Popularity Jazz was more than a musical style. It was also a symbol of the Roaring Twenties.
It was part of the Prohibition era, played in speakeasies and nightspots in New York, Chicago, St. Louis, and Los Angeles. It was the sound of the Cotton Club, one of Harlem’s most famous attractions, where African Americans played African American music to all-white audiences. Phonograph records and radio spread the influence of jazz across the country and beyond. By the end of the decade, the popularity of jazz had spread to Europe as well.
But jazz was still more. It was a demonstration of the depth and richness of African American culture. Many musicians, such as Armstrong, introduced rhythms and themes with clear African roots into their music to better convey the African American cultural experience. Gerald Early, a modern scholar of English and African American studies, predicted that, in the future, America will be best remembered for three great contributions—the Constitution, baseball, and jazz. All three enriched lives, opened windows to new possibilities, and lifted the human spirit. Jazz announced that the United States was a land of shared cultures and traditions, a place where people came
World War I and the 1920s	283	4.8 The Harlem Renaissance
» Duke Ellington’s music integrated “big-band” and jazz sounds and increased the popularity of jazz orchestras.
together and created something greater than their parts.
The jazz movement was then a reflection of an evolving African American identity born of shared historical experience, including the contemporary experiences of the Great Migration and continuing troubled race relations.
Jazz quickly bridged the races. Trumpeter Bix Beiderbecke (Bi der behk) became the first white musician to contribute to the styles and popularity of jazz. Jazz sounds influenced such white songwriters and composers as Cole Porter, Irving Berlin, and George Gershwin, whose jazz-inspired orchestral work Rhapsody in Blue premiered in 1924. The title of a song by African American bandleader Duke Ellington best captures how jazz changed popular music: “It Don’t Mean a Thing If It Ain’t Got That Swing.”
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What effect did the Great Migration have on the popularity of jazz?

» African American music legends, including Duke Ellington and Cab Calloway, played regularly at Harlem’s many nightclubs.
The Harlem Renaissance
Jazz and blues were expressions of the African American experience. The pain of the African American experience can be heard in the blues, and the joy of that experience in the soaring notes of jazz. The range of such African American musicians as Duke Ellington and Cab Calloway speaks to the varieties of African American life. But in the 1920s, there were other expressions of African American culture. Novelists, poets, and artists celebrated their culture and explored questions of race in America. This flowering of African American culture became known as the Harlem Renaissance. The Harlem Renaissance helped give a new vocabulary and dynamic to race relations in the United States.
Cultural Movements in Literature and Art In the
1920s, the term the “New Negro” entered the American vocabulary. It suggested a radical break with the past. No longer would African Americans silently endure the old ways of exploitation and discrimination. The new mood was most vividly expressed in Harlem, which attracted African American artists and writers from all over the country and beyond. In their work, these artists and writers explored the pains and joys of being black in America, leaving a legacy that spoke to all Americans of all times.
Artists such as Aaron Douglas created paintings with stylized art that reflected African Americans’ racial pride and collective historical experience, while other artists such as Jacob Lawrence and Archibald J.
World War I and the 1920s	284
4.8 The Harlem Renaissance

Motley, Jr., expressed similar sentiment in their colorful paintings of urban life.
Many writers communicated the same themes. Jean Toomer's Cane (1923) set the literary tone for the Harlem Renaissance. A collection of short stories, poems, and sketches, Cane presented African American life and folk culture in all its richness. It was not a blueprint for where African Americans needed to move politically in the future, but a plea to remember and preserve the past.
Soon, other African American writers joined Toomer at the forefront of the Harlem Renaissance. Jamaican immigrant Claude McKay was the most militant of these writers. In his novels and poems, McKay showed ordinary African Americans struggling for dignity and advancement in the face of discrimination and economic hardships. A poem that McKay wrote after Chicago was stricken by violent race riots captured his sense of anger and militancy:
If we must die—let it not be like hogs,
hunted and penned in an inglorious spot.
While round us bark the mad and hungry dogs,
Making their mock at our accursed lot.
What though before us lies the open grave?
Like men we will face the murderous, cowardly pack,
Pressed to the wall, dying but fighting back!
—Claude McKay, "If We Must Die”
McKay represented the political and ideological left wing of the Harlem Renaissance. More in the center was Langston Hughes, probably the most powerful African American literary voice of his time. For Hughes, the force of the movement was not politics but a celebration of African American culture and life. In more than 50 works of fiction, poetry, journalism, and criticism, he captured the remarkable diversity of
» The writer Jean Toomer’s works appealed to African Americans to remember their pasts. Infer Why would Toomer emphasize this theme in his works?
» Langston Hughes, shown here in he 1950s, emphasized the celebration of the unique aspects of African American culture and history and promoted his vision of a racially integrated, but just, society.
Interactive Gallery
World War I and the 1920s	285
4.8 The Harlem Renaissance

» Zora Neale Hurston’s works voiced many women’s desire, both African American and white, for greater independence, and it explored the rich cultural heritage of African Americans.
everyday African American life. In the last line of his autobiography The Big Sea, Hughes wrote, “Literature is a big sea full of many fish. I let down my nets and pulled. I’m still pulling.”
Another powerful voice was Zora Neale Hurston. Hurston traveled the rural back roads of her native Florida, collecting folk tales in books such as Mules and Men. But Hurston also looked to the future. Her 1937 novel Their Eyes Were Watching Godexpressed the new longing for independence felt by many women, black and white.
The Lasting Impact of the Harlem Renaissance
The Harlem Renaissance gave a voice to African American culture, just as jazz and blues gave it a tune. It altered the way many white Americans viewed African American culture, and even the way African Americans viewed themselves. James Weldon Johnson, poet and secretary of the NAACP, noted:
A great deal has been accomplished in this decade of ‘renaissance’. . .
.Today, one may see undesirable stories, but one may also read stories
about Negro singers, Negro actors,
Negro authors, Negro poets. The connotations of the very word Negro have changed. A generation ago many Negroes were half or wholly ashamed of the term.
Today, they have every reason to be proud of it.
—James Weldon Johnson, article in Harpersmagazine, 1928
The movement was not, however, without its critics. Some, for example, dismissed the quality of literature produced during the period. Others, such as Langston Hughes, expressed a degree of disillusionment with the movement’s inability to improve the political status and economic opportunities of African Americans throughout the country. However, the artistic forms and cultural debates associated with the Harlem Renaissance continue even today.
Although the Harlem Renaissance came to a close as the nation fell into economic difficulty in the late 1920s, the sense of group identity and African American solidarity that it created would become part of the bedrock on which the later civil rights movement would be constructed.
El IDENTIFY What themes did Langston Hughes and
Zora Neale Hurston explore?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare Describe how the ways in which African Americans migrated during the Great Migration were similar to the immigrants who arrived from other countries in the early 1900s.
2.	Summarize Discuss the benefits and the downfalls of African American life in the North.
3.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the collapse of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, and describe its lasting legacy in American culture.
4.	Generate Explanations Explain why the “Jazz Age” represented an important transition for American society.
5.	Apply Concepts Analyze the importance of Langston Hughes’ writing during the Harlem Renaissance.
World War I and the 1920s	286
4.8 The Harlem Renaissance
k
1.	Analyze Impact of Technological Innovations on the Western Front Analyze the impact of significant technological innovations in World War I that resulted in the stalemate on the Western Front. Use the chart below and lesson information to write a paragraph describing how trench warfare and machine guns led to a stalemate and the effectiveness of poison gas, airplanes, and tanks in breaking the stalemate. 4.E
Deadly Technology of World War I
TECHNOLOGY I APPLICATION
POISON GAS
Gases such as chlorine, phosgene, and mustard gas couid kill, blind, or burn their victims. MACHINE GUNS
Improved machine guns could fire 600 bullets per minute. FLAMETHROWER A
new technology, flamethrowers consisted of a backpack and a gun that could shoot flames as far as 60 feet. ARTILLERY FIELD GUNS
These long-range cannons caused more casualties than any other type of weapon. TANKS AND ARMORED CARS
Both sides tried to develop vehicles that could go over rough ground and barbed-wire no, with limited success. AIRPLANES
Planes were used for reconnaissance, bombing, and fighting but did not prove decisive. SUBMARINES
German U-boats, or submarines, used torpedoes as well as on-deck guns to sink ships. 2.	Identify Causes of World War I Identify the causes of World War I. Write a paragraph identifying the roles played by nationalism, militarism, alliances, and assassination. 4.C
3.	Explain Technological Innovations in the Military Explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in the military. Write a paragraph describing why both sides in World War I tried to develop tanks and armored cars. Explain why these technological innovations were needed and describe their effectiveness. 27.B
4.	Analyze Issues of U.S. Involvement in World
War I Analyze major issues raised by U.S. involvement in World War I. Write a paragraph analyzing how Americans felt about World War I and United States involvement. Answer the following questions: Why were Americans divided over which side to support? What event solidified U.S. support for the Allied Powers?
What three positions on U.S. involvement in the war eventually developed? 4.F
5.	Explain Constitutional Issues Explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I. Write a paragraph explaining the constitutional issue surrounding the treatment of conscientious objectors during the war. Explain what a conscientious objector is, what problems existed in their treatment, and why this was a constitutional issue. 19.B
6.	Explain United States As a World Power Explain why significant individuals moved the United States into the position of a world power. Write a paragraph explaining Henry Cabot Lodge’s position on the United States as a world power. Consider what view Lodge is expressing in the quotation below and how this view differs from Wilson’s view of America’s place in the world. 4.A
I can never be anything else but an American, and I must think of the United States first, and when I think of the United States first. .
. I am thinking of what is best for the world, for if the United States fails, the best hopes of mankind fail with it.
—Henry Cabot Lodge, letter to President Woodrow Wilson, 1919
7.	Explain World War I As Turning Point Explain the significance of the World War I years of 1914-1918 as a turning point for the women’s suffrage movement, and evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. Write a paragraph explaining how World War I contributed to passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. Consider how women contributed to the war effort and how these efforts contributed to passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. 2.D, 5.A
8.	Describe Economic Effects of World War I Describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including World War I, on the United States. Write
a paragraph describing how the U.S. government managed the economy during World War I and the economic effects of that management. Consider the roles of the War Industries Board (WIB) and the Food Administration and what the graphs below indicate about the effectiveness of the management efforts. 15.D
RISING PRODUCTION GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
° -5 Si > re -Si
In 1916, agricultural output did not increase above the 1914 levels.
/ \
World War I and the 1920s t 287 *
i
I
TEKS ASSESSMENT
9.	Evaluate Impact of W. E. B. Du Bois Evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as W. E. B. Du Bois on American society. Write a paragraph explaining W. E. B. Du Bois’s support for World War I and the military contributions of African Americans to the war effort. 5.B
10.	Understand Contributions of the AEF Understand the contributions of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) led by General John J. Pershing. Write a paragraph discussing the contributions of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF), under the command of General John J. Pershing. Consider when the AEF arrived in Europe, about how many Americans served overseas in the AEF, and how the AEF contributed to the fighting. 4.D
11.	Discuss Significance of Alvin York Discuss the importance of Congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders, such as Alvin York. Write a paragraph to describe the heroics that earned Alvin York a Congressional Medal of Honor. Explain the battlefield situation York was in and describe the actions he took that led to his Medal. 26.F
12.	Analyze Battle of Argonne Forest Analyze significant events, such as the Battle of Argonne Forest. Write a paragraph analyzing the significance of the Battle of Argonne Forest. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What was the Meuse-Argonne campaign? What part did the American Expeditionary Forces play in the campaign? Why was the Battle of Argonne Forest significant? 4.G
13.	Analyze and Identify Changes in Political Boundaries Identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries, such as those resulting from international conflicts. Write a paragraph identifying and explaining boundary changes produced by the Paris Peace Conference following World War I. Consider the issue of national self-determination and identify and explain examples of political boundaries that ignored ethnic considerations. 12.B
14.	Describe Qualities of Leadership Describe qualities of effective leadership. Write a paragraph describing how President Wilson did and did not show effective leadership in trying to win ratification of the Treaty of Versailles. Consider Wilson’s effectiveness in dealing with the public and with the Senate. 24.A
15.	Use Decision-Making Process Evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international treaties by using a decision-making process to identify a
situation that requires one to make a decision, gather information, identify options, predict consequences, and take action to implement a decision. Write a paragraph describing the decision-making process a senator might use to decide whether to support the Treaty of Versailles or reject it. Use the decision-making process described. Also, consider the pros and cons of the options, and indicate what you would have done if the decision was yours to make. 19.E, 32.B
16.	Analyze Return to Normalcy Analyze causes of economic growth and prosperity in the 1920s, including Warren Harding’s Return to Normalcy. Write a paragraph analyzing what Warren G. Harding meant by a “Return to Normalcy” and the transition in the economy immediately after World War I. Consider when Harding introduced the slogan; why the slogan was appealing to the American public; and how the return to a normal, civilian economy led to growth. 16.A
17.	Analyze Impact of Henry Ford Analyze the impact of significant individuals such as Henry Ford, and understand the impact of technological and management innovations on business and labor. Write a paragraph analyzing how Henry Ford used technological and management innovations to revolutionize the production of automobiles. Consider how Ford revolutionized production, why he located his production plant in Detroit, and what management innovations he applied to his labor force and why. 6.B, 27.C
18.	Compare Impact of Energy Over Time Compare impact of energy on the American way of life over time, and analyze how technological innovations improve the standard of living in the United States. Write a paragraph comparing how the increasing availability of electricity improved the standard of living for many women over time. Consider how consumer goods that used electricity improved the standard of living for women, and why rural women did not enjoy the same improvements in their standard of living. 10.C, 28.A
19.	Explain Economic Development Explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as steel production and petroleum-based products on the economic development of the United States. Write a paragraph explaining how the growth of the automobile industry stimulated growth in the steel
and petroleum industries. Consider why automobile production impacted the steel industry and how the popularity of the automobile impacted the petroleum industry and the economic effect of that impact. 27.A
World War I and the 1920s	288
THE IMPACT
of PROHIBITION U.S. INDUSTRY
^ZZ PEOPLE
NUMBER OF
BREWERIES • ’
1916	1926
NUMBER OF
WINERIES
1914	1925
GOVERNMENT REVENUE FROM ALCOHOL
1919
1925
CRIME STATISTICS
Arrests for violating Prohibition laws
Arrests for drunkenness and disorderly conduct
Arrests for drunk driving
Federal prison population
2
1.75
1.5
1 125 1 1 I w
0.5
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
A
\A
0.25
0
1910	1915	1920	1925	1930
20.	Analyze the Application of Science and Technology
Analyze how the application by the free-enterprise system of scientific discoveries and technological innovations, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing how the free-enterprise system contributed to the application of the scientific discoveries and technological innovations that made new products available to consumers. Consider the role of science and technology in the economic growth of the 1920s and the role of free enterprise in spurring the innovation that led to such consumer products as automobiles and radios. 28.A
21.	Identify Impact of Tariffs Identify the causes of the Great Depression, including the impact of tariffs on world trade, and analyze information by making predictions. Write a paragraph identifying why President Harding signed a tariff bill, and predicting the ramifications the tariff will have in the 1930s. Describe the tariff and its purpose, identify how European nations reacted, and predict the impact of the tariff in the 1930s. 16.B, 29.B
22.	Describe Effects of Teapot Dome Scandal Describe the effects of political scandals, including Teapot Dome, on the views of U.S. citizens concerning trust in the federal government and its leaders. Write a paragraph describing the effects of the Teapot Dome scandal on public trust. Describe what actions led to the scandal, what role President Harding played in the scandal, and how the public reacted to the scandal. 19.C
23.	Analyze Impact of Darrow and Bryan Analyze the impact of significant individuals such as Clarence Darrow and William Jennings Bryan. Write a paragraph describing the roles Clarence Darrow and William Jennings Bryan played in the Scopes Trial of 1925. Explain what the trial was about, the roles they played in the trial, and why their participation was significant. 6.B
24.	Analyze Causes and Effects of Nativism Analyze causes and effects of social issues such as nativism, including immigration quotas. Write a paragraph analyzing why nativists renewed their calls for immigration restrictions following World War I and how Congress responded. Consider the social factors that contributed to nativist demands to limit immigration, how Congress responded, and the effect of Congress’s actions. 6.A, 15.C
25.	Evaluate Impact of Eighteenth Amendment Evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment; analyze effects of events such as Prohibition; and discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended. Write a paragraph evaluating the impact of Prohibition and the Eighteenth Amendment. Consider how people got around the Volstead Act, what the graphs above indicate about the effects of Prohibition, and how Congress eventually dealt with the Eighteenth Amendment. 5.A, 6.A, 21.B
World War I and the 1920s	\ 289
TEKS ASSESSMENT
26.	Describe Efforts to Promote Rights Describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American civil rights movements, and explain actions taken by people to expand political rights, including those for religious minorities, in American society. Write a paragraph describing how organizations fought back against the Ku Klux Kian and discrimination. Explain efforts by the NAACP and Jewish Anti-Defamation League. 9.B, 26.A
27.	Analyze Global Diffusion of American
Culture Analyze the global diffusion of American culture through the entertainment industry via various media. Write a paragraph analyzing how films helped spread American culture around the world. Consider what evidence there is that Hollywood films were popular outside of the United States and how this popularity would help spread American culture. 25.D
28.	Analyze Changing Roles of Women Analyze causes and effects of social issues such as the changing role of women. Write a paragraph about the changing role of women in the 1920s. Consider what the term New Woman means, and what group of women came to symbolize the New Woman; how the New Woman was different from Victorian women; and in what ways the lives of middle-class women were changing in the
1920s and what this meant for the roles they played in society. 6.A
29.	Describe Reflections of U.S. History in Literature Create an oral presentation describing how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of literature, using historical evidence to support your point of view. Create an oral presentation describing how the major themes in postwar novels reflected events in U.S. history and the changes and divisions in the postwar society. Use evidence from the chart below to support your point of view. 25.A, 29.G, 30.A
American Postwar Novelists
NOVELIST MAJOR THEMES REPRESENTATIVE WORK
W1LLACATHER (1873-1947)	Frontier fife on the Great Plains	My Antonia (1918) depicts the passing of the American frontier through the life of an immigrant girl in Nebraska.
WILLIAM FAULKNER
(1897-1962) Life in the South; inner workings of mind The Sound and the Fury (1929) uses different narrators to tell the story of the complex inner workings of a Southern family. F. SCOTT FITZGERALD
(1896-1940) The Jazz Age The Great Gatsby (1925) shows the emptiness of the Jazz-Age world of flappers and bootleggers. ERNEST HEMINGWAY
(1899-1961) Disillusionment of postwar generation A Farewell to Arms (1929) tells the story of doomed love between a cynical American ambulance driver and a nurse during World War L SINCLAIR LEWIS
(1885-1951) Smail-town life in the Midwest Main Street (1920) paints a satirical portrait of smalt-minded people in an American town. EDITH WHARTON
(1862-1937) Life among the rich in New York The Age of Innocence (1920) depicts a wealthy young man prevented by social conventions from marrying the woman he loves. 30.	Describe Reflections of U.S. History in Art Describe how the issues and characteristics in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art. Write a paragraph describing how art in the 1920s reflected characteristics and issues in American society. Describe how modernism in art differed from traditionalism, how the reactions of traditionalists to the Armory Show reflected 1920s society, and the impact of modernism on art in the 1920s. 25.A
31.	Analyze Causes and Effects of Great Migration Analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including the Great Migration. Write a paragraph analyzing the causes and effects of African Americans migrating from the South to urban areas
in the North during the Great Migration. Consider why African Americans migrated to the North, the effects of that migration on African Americans, and the demographic effects of that migration on New York City’s Harlem. 13.A
32.	Explain Contributions to American Culture Explain how the contributions of people of various racial groups shape American culture. Write a paragraph explaining the contributions Louis Armstrong made to American culture. Explain who Louis Armstrong was and how he contributed to the development of jazz. 26.C
33.	Describe Global Impact of American
Culture Identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest of the world over time. Write a paragraph identifying the international appeal of jazz music and its impact on other forms of music around the globe. Describe the spread of jazz beyond America’s borders in the 1920s. 25.C
34.	Describe Impacts of Harlem Renaissance Describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art and literature, such as the Harlem Renaissance, on American society. Write a paragraph describing the positive and negative impacts of the Harlem Renaissance. Describe what the Harlem Renaissance was, what positive impact the Harlem Renaissance had on the civil rights movement, and what critics charged about the movement. 25.B
35.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: How should we handle conflict? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
World War I and the 1920s	290
Jil
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE
World War I and the 1920s	\ 291
Imperialism
Militarism
1 What option below best completes the concept web above? A Nationalism B U.S. involvement C Economic sanctions D Technological advances
2	Which outcome of Henry Ford’s accomplishments had the greatest impact on the ordinary American in 1930?
F
Ford’s use of time and motion studies revolutionized not only the industrial workplace but the family farm as well. G
Ford’s assembly lines became so efficient that the cost of a car fell to less than $300, a price many Americans could afford. H
Higher wages and a shorter work week gave Ford’s employees more money to spend and more leisure time in which to spend it. J
The growth of Ford’s advertising department employed many professional writers and artists, leading to a growth of creative job opportunities. World War I and the 1920s	' 292
Access additional practice questions
3	As far as the U.S. Congress was concerned, the most controversial political issue raised by the Treaty of Versailles after World War I involved whether—
A ethnic populations across the globe had the right to establish their own national boundaries
B participation in international organizations would draw the United States into unnecessary conflict
C the President of the United States had the right to negotiate a treaty to end an international conflict
D
Democrats and Republicans were willing to compromise in order to reach the optimum agreement for all 
4	Which statement best describes the effect of the Teapot Dome scandal on the American public as illustrated by this political cartoon?
F
Citizens began to realize that petroleum reserves for the military were of extreme importance. G
Citizens recognized the importance of strong government regulation to control the petroleum industry. H
Citizens became aware of the interrelationships among industries including petroleum and agricultural products. J
Citizens lost trust in the executive branch of government due to corrupt and inappropriate use of petroleum reserves. If you have trouble with...				
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	4.1	4.4	4.3	4.5
TEKS 4.C 6.B 4.F 19.C
World War I and the 1920s	293 '
3 What additional effect did the Red Scare have that still plays an important role for citizens of the United States?
A
The public response to the anarchist threat encouraged Congress to pass strict laws against public protests of any kind. B
The unnecessary deportation of innocent immigrants caused Congress to establish more lenient immigration policies that are still in force. C
The quick growth of communist sentiment among Eastern Europeans caused Congress to prohibit any additional immigration from that region. D
The assault on the liberties of innocent people prompted the establishment of the American Civil Liberties Union, which became an active voice for individual rights. 6	Which statement describes a policy promoted by Marcus Garvey that had a significant impact on race relations in the United States?
F
Garvey promoted the ideal of universal black nationalism and the separation of races. G
Garvey encouraged black people to work together with white people to improve racial relations. H
Garvey called for protests and militant actions to assure political equality for African Americans. J
Garvey established the “Back to Africa” movement to counter the effects of the Great Migration. World War I and the 1920s	294
urea Access additional practice questions J1
7	Despite the different methods these African American leaders supported, they both had the shared goal of—
A prosecuting crimes against African Americans B securing access to trades for African Americans C promoting religious education for African Americans D securing social and political equality for African Americans
8	The intended effect of the United States’ Open Door Policy with China was to—
F eliminate the militarist actions of the Boxer societies in China G establish free and equal trade privileges for the United States in China H create a system with European powers to control Chinese production and trade J establish a precedent for setting up new American colonies in Chinese territories
If you have trouble with...				
Question		6	7	8
See Lesson	4.4	4.8	3.3	3.7
TEKS 6.A 6.B 5.B 6.B
World War I and the 1920s	•_ 295
TOPIC 5 TEKS Mastery ____
The Great Depression and the New Deal
In this Topic, you will learn about the years of the Great Depression and the New Deal. You will also find lots of interesting ways to master the TEKS associated with this Topic.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
2.D, 11.F, 12.A, 13.A, 14.A, 14.B, 14.C, 15.B, 16.B, 16.C,
16.D, 16.E, 19.A, 19.B, 20.B, 21.B, 24.A, 25.A, 25.B, 26.A,
26.D, 29.A, 29.B, 29.E, 29.H, 30.A, 30.B, 31 .B, 32.A
•	Connect
•	Connect with this Topic by watching a video
: about a fascinating person or situation related to : this Topic. You can think about how this Topic : connects to your own life. And you’ll encounter ; an intriguing Essential Question: What should ; governments do?
= Begin your study by trying the = following:
NBC LEARN
Watch My Story Video: ; Dorothea Lange, A Visual Life
Launch your Document-Based Question:
• Opposition to the New Deal
LESSON OUTLINE
5.1: Causes of the Depression 2.D, 16.B 5.2: Americans Suffer 12.A, 14.A, 16.C,
31.B
5.3: Two Presidents Respond 16.D, 16.E 5.4: The New Deal Expands 16.E, 19.B,
20.B
5.5: Effects of the New Deal 19.A, 26.D 5.6: Culture During the Depression 25.A,
25.B, 29.B
296
•	Investigate
: The Lesson Outline lists all the : lessons you will investigate in : this Topic. As you read and : interact with key content, the ; story of the Great Depression : and New Deal will come to :: life. Read the texts; try the ; interactivities. Investigate ; the fascinating story of this ; economic crisis and the legacy ; of the New Deal.
•	And keep working on your
•	Document-Based Question to : help build your mastery of the i Topic TEKS.
Introduction and Instructions
Roosevelt’s Leadership
LEADERSHIP
QUALITIES
• Synthesize
O
First hundred days O Fireside chats O A
“bank holiday” O TheCCC O The Black Cabinet O Social Security O
Frances Perkins's appointment O “Court packing” Start Over
Show Solution
1 of 4	>
» Digital interactivity from the online course
'■ You will get a chance to pull together everything you have
: learned by thinking again about : the Essential Question. How would : you answer the question now: What • should governments do?
9 Demonstrate
: Now you will get to show what : you know. You will get a chance : to complete the TEKS Review and : Assessment pages, answering : questions about every TEKS for : this Topic. Or you can write an : essay, take part in a discussion,
: or share your Project. No matter : which you do, it will be a real-world : demonstration of the things you now • understand about the Topic.«
TEKS in Topic 5	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 5	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
2.D	2	21.B	20
11.F	13	24.A	7
12. A	5	25.A	22,24
13. A	1	25.B	23
14. A	6	26.A	17
14.B	19	26.D	16
14.C	11,14	29.A	24
15.B	18	29.B	22
16.B	3,4	29.E	9
16.C	21	29.H	11
16.D	9	30.A	13
16.E	8	30.B	3
19. A	10	31.B	1
19.B	15,20	32.A	13
20.B	12		
297
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
What should governments do? 5 The Great Depression and the New Deal

Dorothea Lange's photo “Migrant Mother"
*

Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
2.D, 11.F, 12.A, 13.A, 14.A, 14.B, 14.C, 15.B, 15.E, 16.B,
16.C, 16.D, 16.E, 19.A, 19.B, 20.B, 21.B, 24.A, 25.A,
25.B, 26.A, 26.D, 29.A, 29.B, 29.E, 29.H, 30.A, 31.B,
32.A
Enduring Understandings
•	The crash of the stock market, debt of farmers, uneven distribution of wealth, and easy credit all contributed to the Great Depression.
•	Unemployment, poverty, and hunger were widespread during the Great Depression.
•	The Dust Bowl in the Great Plains destroyed crops and livestock, forcing many to leave the region.
•	President Franklin D. Roosevelt sponsored many new programs in response to the Great Depression.
•	The New Deal programs greatly increased the size of the federal government.
•	The 1930s were a golden age of American culture, reflecting and providing escape from the conditions of the time.
'N !
to learn about the impact of Dorothea
Lange’s photography
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry * Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com

299
During the Roaring Twenties, many Americans enjoyed what seemed like limitless prosperity. Then, in October 1929, the mighty bull market crashed. As production fell and unemployment rose, the U.S. economy lurched into a period of dramatic decline.
2.D, 16.B
» Objectives
Identify how weaknesses in the economy in the 1920s caused the Great Depression.
Explain why the stock market crashed in 1929 and the crash’s effect on the economy.
Describe how the Great Depression deepened in the United States and spread overseas.
Identify the causes of the Great Depression and discuss how historians’ differ about them.
» Key Terms
Herbert Hoover speculation Black Tuesday Great Depression Hawley-Smoot Tariff business cycle
Causes of the
Depression
Hidden Economic Problems in the Roaring Twenties
At first, some Americans saw this contraction as a regular contraction of the nation’s business cycle, which explains the periodic growth and contraction of the economy. It most certainly was not regular. Production, employment, and income will normally expand, contract, and expand again over time in a cyclical way. However, a number of factors combined in the 1920s to turn the normal, cyclical expansions and contractions of the nation’s economy into an economic collapse in the 1930s. Millions of Americans suffered hardships and despair as a result.
For most of the 1920s, however, Republican leaders exuded confidence about both their party and their country. The Roaring Twenties had been a Republican decade. In 1920, Americans sent Warren G. Harding to the White House, and four years after that, they sent Calvin Coolidge. Neither election had been close.
Once in office, both Presidents watched the country grow increasingly prosperous. As the decade passed, consumption went up, the gross national product went up, and the stock market went up.
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
300
J
No matter what index an economist chose to consult, the conclusion was always the same: Times were good in America and they were getting better. Republicans took credit for the bullish economy, and most Americans heartily agreed.
Hoover Sweeps to Victory When the Republicans met at their 1928 nominating convention, they chose Herbert Hoover—an accomplished public servant— to run for the White House. Born in Iowa, Hoover was orphaned as a child. But he overcame this personal tragedy and eventually graduated from Stanford University with a degree in geology. He became a mining engineer and worked all over the world. By 1914, after amassing a vast fortune, he retired from engineering and devoted himself to public service.
Herbert Hoover came to the attention of Americans during World War I, first as the brilliant coordinator of the Belgium relief program and then as head of the Food Administration. During the Harding and Coolidge administrations, Hoover served as Secretary of Commerce. His philosophy was simple but effective.
He stressed the importance of competition, but he also believed in voluntary cooperation between labor and management. American greatness showed itself, Hoover maintained, when owners, workers, and government officials converged on common goals.
With a solid record of accomplishments behind him and seemingly endless prosperity in front of him, Hoover was a formidable presidential candidate in 1928. While his campaign ads noted how Republicans had “put the proverbial ‘chicken in every pot,”' Hoover spoke glowingly of ending poverty in America:
By adherence to the principles of decentralized self-government, ordered liberty, equal opportunity, and freedom, to the individual, our American experiment in human welfare has yielded a degree of well-being unparalleled in all the world. It has come nearer to the abolition of poverty, to the abolition of fear of want, than humanity has ever reached before.
—Herbert Hoover, campaign speech, 1928
Hoover’s contest with Democratic nominee Alfred E. Smith of New York was, in the end, no contest at all. Americans voted overwhelmingly for Hoover, prosperity, and the continuation of Republican government. When the new President took office in March 1929, America was awash in a sea of confidence. Few imagined that
» An affluent middle-class family poses for a portrait in 1924. Many families bought their first automobile and radio during the 1920s as mass-produced consumer products became more affordable.
» During his 1928 campaign, Herbert Hoover emphasized his belief that competition was vital to ensure robust economic growth.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 301	5.1 Causes of the Depression
» Mechanized farm equipment became more common during the 1920s, but many farmers still used basic equipment such as this horse-drawn plow.
» The gap between rich and poor widened in the 1920s; the wealthy built large homes and began to fill them with lavish furnishings.
an economic disaster lay just seven months in the future.
But even as Hoover delivered his victory speeches, economic troubles were beginning to worry some Americans. The prosperity of the 1920s was not as deep or as sturdy as Hoover claimed. Throughout the U.S. economy, there were troubling signs.
Farmers Face Challenges After World War I
American farmers faced difficult times during the 1920s. Farmers made up one fourth of the American workforce during the decade.
To meet the unprecedented crop demands created by World War I, they had increased harvest yields and bought more land to put under the plow. They also bought costly tractors and other mechanized farm equipment to help them meet demand. Farmers amassed huge debts doing this, and the additional mortgage payments followed them into the 1920s.
After the war, the demand for American crops fell sharply. Despite this drop, postwar production remained high because of increasingly mechanized farm equipment and more intensive farming methods. Farms were getting bigger and yielding bumper crops at harvest. However, farmers were failing to sell off their huge crop surpluses and to pay the debts they owed banks and other institutions.
The result was a rural depression that affected millions of Americans. Hard-pressed to pay their debts, forced to sell their goods in a glutted and competitive world market, and confronted by several natural disasters, farmers did not share in the boom times of the 1920s. They did not have the cash to buy the new consumer goods produced by American industries.
They lived largely on credit from month to month, often teetering on the brink of financial ruin. Any downward slide in the economy was likely to hit America’s struggling farmers first and hardest.
A
Significant Gap Between the Rich and the Poor Unlike farmers, industrial workers participated in the great national success story. During the 1920s, their wages rose steadily, as did their disposable income. Many purchased Model T Fords along with a variety of other consumer products. Though they were certainly not wealthy, industrial laborers were in a better financial position than their fathers had been a generation before. But the problem was that while wages rose gradually worker productivity increased astronomically. Between 1923 and 1929, output per person-hour jumped 32 percent, but workers’ wages inched up only 8 percent. During that same period, corporate profits from worker output skyrocketed 65 percent. All these figures
The Great Depression and the New Deal
5.1 Causes of the Depression
Income Distribution, 1929
» Analyze Graphs Based on the information in the pie chart, what share of total income earned in 1929 did the top 5 percent of income earners account for?
pointed to the fact that during the 1920s, the rich became much, much richer, while industrial workers simply became less poor.
In few periods of the country's history have so small a number of rich Americans dominated such a large percentage of the country's total wealth. In 1929, for example, the wealthiest 1 percent of the population earned about the same amount of money as the bottom 42 percent.
Uneven Distribution of Wealth Creates Problems
This uneven distribution of the nation’s wealth created economic problems. More than 60 percent of all American families had yearly incomes of less than $2,000 per year. In contrast, 24,000 of the country’s wealthiest families enjoyed annual incomes of more than $100,000, which was 50 times more than what most families were earning. But these wealthy families did not eat 50 times more food than lower-income families. The wealthiest households did not purchase 50 times more automobiles or radios or ovens. The rich undoubtedly spent a lot on consumer products. The problem was that the wealthiest few could not buy enough to keep the economy booming.
A healthy economy needs more people to buy more products, which in turn creates even more wealth. In this way, a healthy economy avoids underconsumption that can limit economic growth. The uneven distribution of wealth in the 1920s pointed to an uncertain future for the American economy.
From the overproduction of the struggling farmer to the underconsumption of the lower-income industrial worker, deep-seated problems created economic instability. Too many Americans did not have enough money to buy what they needed or wanted.
Americans Rely on Credit For a time, the expansion of credit partially hid this problem. Americans bought automobiles, appliances, radios, and other goods on credit. Using the installment plan, they paid a small percentage down and the rest over a period of months or years. By the end of the decade, 80 percent of radios and 60 percent of cars were purchased on installment credit. Americans even bought stock on credit, making such stock purchases on margin. Every year, Americans accumulated more debt. In the past, they had feared debt and put off buying goods until they had all of the cash to pay for those items.
Easy credit changed this behavior during the 1920s. But the growing credit burden could mask the problem of Americans living beyond their means for only so long before the economy imploded.
U RECALL
What problem did farmers face following World War I?
ELPS LISTENING 2.E.3
Describe the financial position of 1920s farmers to a partner. Whenever you use a difficult word, explain what it means. Then listen to your partner do the same as he or she describes the position of industrial workers.
'V ELPS
The Great Depression and the New Deal 303	5.1 Causes of the Depression
» Dazed investors gathered outside the New York Stock Exchange as the stock market crashed on October 29, 1929.
» Despair gripped many Americans following the stock market crash. Some people who were hardest hit by the crash had to sell their belongings just to pay their bills.

The Stock Market Hits Bottom
By 1929, some economists were observing that soaring stock prices were based on little more than confidence. The prices had no basis in reality. Although other experts disagreed, it became clear that too much money was being poured into stock speculation, as investors gambled (often with money they did not even have) on high-risk stocks in hopes of turning a quick profit. If the market’s upward climb suddenly reversed course, many investors would face economic devastation.
On September 3, 1929, the stock market began to sputter and fall. Prices peaked and then slid downward in an uneven way. At the end of October, however, the slide gave way to a free fall.
After the Dow Jones average dropped 21 points in one hour on October 23, many investors concluded that the boom was over. They had lost confidence—the very thing that had kept the market up for so long.
The next day, October 24, came to be known as Black Thursday. With confidence in the stock market failing, nervous investors started to sell. Stock in General Electric that once sold at $400 a share plunged to $283. Across the United States, investors raced to pull their money out of the stock market. On October 29, Black Tuesday, the bottom fell out. More than 16 million shares were sold as the stock market collapsed in the Great Crash. Billions of dollars were lost. Whole fortunes were wiped out in hours. Many speculators who had bought stock on margin lost everything they had. President Hoover tried to soothe Americans by insisting that the “business of the country is on a sound and prosperous basis.” But by November 13, the Dow Jones average had dropped like a brick from its September high of 381 to 198.7. The Great Crash represented a rare extreme in the nation’s business cycle and a turning point for the American economy. feJI IDENTIFY What is stock speculation?
The Great Depression Begins
The stock market crash marked the beginning of the Great Depression, a period lasting from 1929 to 1941 in which the economy faltered and unemployment soared. Though it did not start the depression by itself, the crash sparked a chain of events that quickened the collapse of the U.S. economy.
Bank Failures Occur Across the Nation One of the
first institutions to feel the effects of the stock market
The Great Depression and the New Deal 304
5.1 Causes of the Depression
ECONOMIC TRENDS THE GREAT DEPRESSION DECLINE IN E

BANK
FeTI BUSINESS &
FAILURES
INCOME
PER CAPITA
&
SPENDING
(BILLIONS OF 2011 DOLLARS)
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
| 659
| 1,352
j 2,294
| 1,456
I 4,004
23,000
26,000
28,000
32,000
20,000
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
$705 $6341
$625
$567
$531 $487 ■
$374 $3641
$103.1
$90.4
$75.8
Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2012
» Analyze Graphs According to the Per Capita Income and Spending graph were Americans as a whole going into debt during the depression, or were they “just getting by”?
§1 Interactive Chart
crash was the country's banking system. The crisis in confidence continued as frightened depositors feared for their money and tried to withdraw it from their banks. Few banks could survive a sustained “run” of requests by depositors for their money. In 1929, some 641 commercial banks failed. A year later, 1,350 failed. And a year after that, 1,700 went under. By 1932, many Americans feared that no banks would be left standing.
Another cause of many bank failures was misguided monetary policy by the Federal Reserve. During the 1920s, the Federal Reserve, which regulates the amount of money in circulation, cut interest rates to stimulate economic growth. But in 1929, worried about investors speculating too much with borrowed money, the “Fed” limited the money supply to discourage lending. As a result, there was too little money in circulation to help the economy after the stock market crash. When plummeting stock prices sent investors to the banks to secure whatever hard money they had left, the banks were cleaned out of currency and forced to close.
Decreasing Demand Proves Challenging for Businesses Banks were not the only institutions to face the harsh financial realities of the depression. The collapse of stock prices, combined with reduced consumer spending, spelled trouble for American business. Business leaders believed that the survival
of their companies depended on production cutbacks, to maintain price levels, and layoffs, to reduce payroll. While their stocks were still falling, companies began closing plants and forcing workers onto the growing ranks of the unemployed. In August 1931, Henry Ford closed several of his Detroit automobile factories, putting nearly 75,000 people out of work.
Like a snowball rolling downhill, the problem of production cuts kept getting bigger and bigger. As businesses closed plants and fired workers to save money, consumers spent less. So businesses cut production even more, closing more plants and firing more workers. By 1933, nearly 25 percent of all American workers had lost their jobs.
The Impact of Tariffs New tariffs compounded the nation’s woes and helped to spread the depression. Intending to reverse the downward slide, the government moved to protect American products from foreign competition by raising tariffs, the taxes on goods imported from other countries. In June 1930, Congress passed the Hawley-Smoot Tariff. President Hoover signed the bill into law. The Hawley-Smoot Tariff raised taxes on foreign imports to such a level that the foreign goods could not compete in the American market. The tariff inspired European countries to retaliate and enact protective tariffs of their own.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 305	5.1 Causes of the Depression
Far from solving the problems of the depression, the Hawley-Smoot Tariff added to them. At a time when American manufacturers and farms had a glut of unsold products, the international move toward high protective tariffs closed markets. This closure was not just harmful to American producers. It was equally disastrous to the global economy. The ripple effect caused by the Hawley-Smoot Tariff helped to damage international trade.
Other Nations Endure Economic Hardship
The Hawley-Smoot Tariff was one of the causes of a depression spreading across the globe. As we saw earlier, the European problems of reparation payments, war debt payments, and international imbalance of trade had already created a shaky economic structure. In the early 1930s, the structure collapsed. Germany ceased their reparation payments, and the United States agreed to suspend France and Britain’s war debt payments. The international economy had largely been funded by American loans to Europe, but the crisis in the United States drastically curtailed those loans. As a result, European nations experienced the same cycle of business failures, bank collapses, and high
BROOKLYN DAILY EAGLE
LATE NEWS
ViiSS'V * ★ WALL ST. IN PANIC AS STOCKS CRASH
Attempt Made to Kill Italy's Crown Prince^ So m MIT Hollywood Fire ” ’ F£«fl5?PE8ISHE8 PIECE Of PUNE High Duty Group ;!KX> IMISMOB; Destroys Films INUKEMlCHIgWi: LIKEDITENWN'5 Gave $700,000 to L ~ P8IN&EUNHU8T; Worth Millions FERHY SME IS FOUND IT SEA Coolidge Drivel
MCIEME
WEfi’Sm ^OFPAIDAIHEETES HALTE8BUUTB £ R0USESGBLLE8ES, PUMMIlSsf-H? WA80E8S0U6HT SOMERS NAMED ’J
TOKEEPSEATRIPJISHEJI08FNEW ? EXSHMffiEMWS
unemployment as the United States. The depression had become a global nightmare.
B DESCRIBE
As the Great Depression progressed, how did one wave of job losses lead to further job losses?
The Causes of the Great Depression
Historians and economists struggle to identify the exact causes of the Great Depression. Some have stressed a single root cause in their explanations of the financial crisis. The economist Milton Friedman believed that the depression resulted from the contraction in the money supply. The twin events of the stock market crash in 1929 and the run of bank failures in 1930, added to the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy decisions, left too little money in circulation for the nation’s economic needs.
John Maynard Keynes was one of the most influential economists of the depression. He argued that the lack of government interference in the economy led to the depression. Critical problems in money supply, distribution of wealth, stock speculation, consumer spending, productivity, and employment could have been controlled, he said, by proactive government policies.
Keynes’s work points to a fundamental difference between many economists regarding the depression. While Keynes recommended that governments spend more money to keep people employed when the economy slows, other noted economists like Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek criticized centralized economic planning and management.
There will never be a fully accepted answer to the question of what caused the Great Depression. But clearly, problems in consumption contributed heavily to it. Economic hardships before 1929 in Europe and rural America, coupled with an uneven distribution of wealth and over-speculation in the stock market, created dangerous economic conditions. When this was combined with poor or misinformed economic decisions by Congress and President Hoover, the Great Depression resulted.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What factors contributed to the Great Depression?
» The Brooklyn Daily Eagle ran a front-page headline that described the fear and panic that spread immediately after the stock market crashed in late 1929.
Interactive Chart

The Great Depression and the New Deal 306	5.1 Causes of the Depression
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the philosophies that led Herbert Hoover to a presidential victory in 1928.
2.	Contrast the experiences of farmers with those of urban workers during the economic boom of the 1920s.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain how an uneven distribution of wealth weakened the U.S economy.
4.	Apply Concepts Identify the role of confidence in both the boom and the crash of the U.S. economy.
5.	Check Understanding Explain how the Great Depression extended beyond the United States and became an international problem.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 307	5.1 Causes of the Depression

12.A, 14.A, 16.C
» Objectives
Examine the spread of unemployment in America’s cities.
Analyze the effects of the Great Depression on farmers.
Analyze the impact of human and geographical factors that created the Dust Bowl.
Describe how the Great Depression affected family life and the lives of African Americans and Mexican Americans.
» Key Terms
bread line Hooverville tenant farmer Dust Bowl Okies repatriation
PEARSON 1
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
The stock market crash signaled the end of boom times and the beginning of hard times. As investors mourned their losses, Americans watched the economy stagger into the Great Depression. In the cities and on the farms, desperate poverty gripped the nation. Even after prosperity returned, those who lived through the crisis would remember the pain and worries of the depression. Tested by extreme hardship, this generation of Americans forged a character and will strong enough to overcome economic ruin and restore prosperity.
Americans Suffer
Economic Hardship Shakes the Cities
The Great Depression had a deep and lasting impact on the lives of the people who lived through it.
Few Americans grasped the underlying problems of the 1920s economy or the subtle reasons for the stock market crash. Fewer still comprehended how the crash led to the Great Depression. But they did understand the effects of the economic crisis. Workers understood having a job one day and being unemployed the next. Whole families knew the fear and shame of losing their homes.
The Great Depression touched most Americans because many Americans either experienced or knew someone who experienced the hardships and loss caused by the economic catastrophe. For many, their lives were never the same again.
Unemployment Leaves Families Struggling The threat of widespread unemployment and destitution effected workers in cities and towns across the United States. Between 1921 and 1929, annual average unemployment rates had never risen above 3.7 percent. But then the depression hit, and the rate shot up. By 1933, it had climbed to a shocking 24.9 percent.
308
Despite this high rate, millions of workers were able to keep their jobs. However, most had their wages or hours cut. Many workers brought home paychecks that were 10, 20, sometimes 30 percent less than their predepression checks.
Yet statistics tell only part of the story. The human drama of unemployment unfolded over and over again, in city after city across the nation. For a man employed as a factory worker, the 1920s had promised a chance at upward economic mobility. He had been able to provide for his family, enjoy a decent standard of living, and save something for retirement. Then the depression hit. The man saw his hours cut and his workweek shortened. Eventually, he was laid off. Looking for another job, he trudged from one factory to the next. “No help wanted here” or “We don’t need nobody” greeted him at every turn. The man’s clothes began to look worn. His collars and cuffs became frayed, and his pants became shiny at the knees. He said less, stared more, and moved slower.
Maybe his wife was able to find work washing and ironing clothes or laboring as a maid. But those jobs were hard to find, too. At home, children ate smaller meals. Water replaced milk. Meat disappeared from the table.
Hunger lurked about the home like an unwanted guest. Sometimes the parents and children received free meals in public soup kitchens. Often the only place for the family to get a free scrap of food was in a bread line, where people lined up for handouts from charities or public agencies.
Poverty Becomes a Reality for Many Men like the factory worker just described moved from unemployed to unemployable. Whole families descended into hunger and homelessness. Their dreams of success and prosperity turned into nightmares of failure and poverty.
The Challenges of Homelessness As Americans lost their jobs and ran through their savings, they had to scrounge wherever they could to keep from going hungry. They sold furniture, pawned jewelry, and moved to cheaper lodgings—anything to keep their pantries stocked and rents paid. In many cities, they ran out of money, were evicted from their homes, and ended up on the streets.
Homeless people slept on park benches, in empty railway cars, or in cardboard boxes. Many grouped together in Hoovervilles, makeshift shantytowns of tents and shacks built on public land or vacant lots. Homeless people, some of whom had worked as skilled carpenters before the crisis, cobbled houses together out of lumber scraps, tar paper, tin, and glass. One of
» Unemployed men gathered outside a busy New York City unemployment office during the 1930s. New York police officers stood guard. Draw Conclusions Why do you think this unemployment office required guarding?
» Struggling Americans built temporary shelters called “Hoovervilles” like this in one Washington, D.C. This encampment was home to war veterans, who were lobbying the government for help.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 309	5.2 Americans Suffer
the largest Hoovervilles in the country sprang up in the middle of Central Park in New York City. There, the homeless covered themselves with newspapers, called Hoover blankets, to stay warm at night. They walked around looking for jobs with their empty pants pockets turned inside out, a sign of poverty known as Hoover flags.
Despite the difficulties of life during the depression, many Americans did what they could to boost morale and help their neighbors. During a New York City newspaper strike, Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia read comic strips to children over the radio. In Reading, Pennsylvania, members of the Taxpayers Protection League staged nonviolent protests to thwart evictions. Nevertheless, thousands of other Americans found no such escapes from their misery.
U IDENTIFY
What was a Hooverville? Rural America Struggles with Poverty
In cities and towns across the nation, Americans faced a terrible plight. The numbers of the unemployed, homeless, and hopeless increased like a casualty list in some great war. In rural America, people fared no
better. In fact, sometimes their condition was even worse. Farmers had been suffering even before the Great Depression. Falling commodity prices and accumulating debt had made it a struggle for farmers to keep their heads above water. Many failed to stay afloat and sank so deep that they lost their farms.
Crop Prices Fall But then the bottom fell out of the economy and the depression added more woes. Crop prices fell even further, and new debts were added to old debts. To make matters even worse, the Great Plains was suffering through a choking drought, an ecological disaster that lasted for years. As a result, many more farmers lost their farms and moved. They traveled about the country, looking for work and fighting for survival.
The basic reality of farm life was the low prices paid to farmers for crops they grew for market. In 1919, a bushel of wheat sold for $2.16; in 1932, it sold for 38 cents. A pound of cotton fetched 35.34 cents in 1919; the same pound fetched 6.52 cents in 1932. The sharp fall in prices was evident with other farm products— corn and beans, cattle and hogs. The income farmers generated was not enough to allow them to continue farming. They could not pay their debts, purchase more seed, repair equipment, and buy what their families needed to survive. Overburdened by the diminishing returns for their labor, some farmers buckled under the stress.
» Draw Conclusions Why did commodity prices fall after 1919, even though the Great Depression was years away?
The Great Depression and the New Deal 310 .	5.2 Americans Suffer
1
i!!
In Sioux City, Iowa, in 1932, the Sioux City Milk Producers Association threatened to strike if its members did not see higher profits for their milk. When the association’s threats were ignored by local storeowners, farmers dumped 1,000 gallons of milk on a road outside the city. Despite such a drastic—and for many Americans unthinkable—action, farmers everywhere feared losing everything.
Losing the Family Farm Between 1930 and 1934, nearly one million farmers failed to pay their mortgages and lost their farms. Banks foreclosed on their lands and houses and repossessed their farming equipment. The bankers sold what they could at public auctions. Some farmers remained on the land as tenant farmers, working for bigger landowners rather than for themselves. But another effect was that many people drifted away from their rural communities, and migrated to cities to look for some other kind of work.
Cesar Chavez, who later became a well-known labor organizer, recalled the troubles his proud father had during the depression. A California bank repossessed his father’s small ranch, and the family was evicted from their house. Chavez remembered how it felt to lose his home:
We had been poor, but we knew every night there was a bed there, and this was our room. . . . But that all of a sudden changed. When you're small, you can’t figure these things out. You know something’s not right and you don’t like it, but you don't . . . let that get you down.
You sort of just continue to move.
—Cesar Chavez
Like the Chavez family, other farmers moved on after their losses. But for those who remained, Mother Nature dealt a cruel blow to already cruel times.
The Dust Bowl Farmers who survived the tumble in prices were still not safe. Through the mid-1930s, a drought in the Great Plains added to their problems. Water was a constant problem in the region. Normal rainfall seldom exceeded the 20 inches a year that traditional American agricultural practices demanded. As a result, droughts on the Great Plains were often more devastating than those in the East and Midwest. In the years before America’s western rivers were
» Dairy farmers poured out their milk as part of a 1932 protest. Infer What can you infer about the price farmers received for milk in 1932?
ii
I
» Many American farmers struggled to keep their farms during the Great Depression. In time, falling prices and rising debt forced many, like this Oregon farmer, to sell or abandon their farms.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 311	5.2 Americans Suffer
dammed and irrigation practices became widespread, there were few answers to the drought threat.
New farming methods made drought conditions worse. Intensive farming came to prominence throughout the region in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Farmers then had moved onto the plains and plowed under much of the natural grasses in order to plant oceans of winter wheat. And after 1909, there were many more farmers, too. In that year, the federal government expanded the acreage allotted in the Homestead Act to 320 acres per settler. So a new wave of transplants decided to try farming on the often marginal lands that were still available on the Great Plains. All this intensive farming reduced the amount of grassland available to graze livestock, causing overgrazing on what was left. In addition, new tractor-pulled disk plows pulverized the soil, making it more vulnerable to wind erosion. Population growth and shifts in population distribution, along with new methods of farming, tipped the ecological balance of the region. In the past, plains grasses prevented the topsoil from blowing away during periods of drought. By the early 1930s, that dwindling grassy safety net could no longer do the job.
In 1932, the combination of the human geographic factor of loose topsoil caused by overfarming and grazing and the physical geographic factors of drought
and high winds resulted in disaster on the Great Plains. The winds kicked up towering dust storms that began to blow east.
These gigantic clouds of dust and dirt could rise from ground level to a height of 8,000 feet. The dust storms moved as fast as 100 miles per hour and blotted out the sun, plunging daylight into darkness.
Most of the dust storms started in the southern Great Plains, especially the high plains regions of Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, New Mexico, and Colorado. This swath of parched earth became known as the Dust Bowl. For people living in these hardest hit regions, depression and dust storms defined the misery of the "dirty thirties.”
Those unfortunate enough to be caught in a dust storm were temporarily choked and blinded by the swirling dirt. The storms killed cattle and birds, blanketed rivers, and suffocated fish. Dirt seeped into houses, covering everything with a thick coat of grime. Some dust clouds blew east as far as the Atlantic coast, dumping acres of dirt on Boston, New York, and Washington, D.C. Altogether, dust storms displaced twice as much dirt as Americans had scooped out to build the Panama Canal.
Moving Wherever Work Can Be Found Many farm families trapped in the Dust Bowl had little choice but to leave the region. They had lost their farms to
The Dust Bowl
400 mi
KEY
ME
Severe wind erosion PH Slight wind erosion Population movement — Dust Bowl • Destination of migrants
» Analyze Maps Which two states appear to have been hardest hit by erosion? What is unusual about California’s location compared to other destinations?
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Interactive Gallery


The Great Depression and the New Deal 312	5.2 Americans Suffer
the banks and had nowhere to live. Dust storms had destroyed most remaining opportunities in their locale. They were low on everything except despair. Although only some came from Oklahoma, Dust Bowl refugees were generally referred to as Okies, regardless of their states of origin.
Okie families packed onto rickety trucks and headed toward California or Oregon or Washington, any place where a job might be found. Before the pace slowed, 800,000 people migrated out of Missouri, Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Texas alone.
The collapse of agriculture and the Great Plains Dust Bowl caused millions of other Americans to leave the midwestern and southern regions where they were born. Many migrated to California, lured by the promise of jobs, but were crushed when that promise too often proved empty. In reality, the migrants faced fierce competition from Mexican American, Filipino, and other farm laborers who were also seeking work. Many of them gave up farming and headed for nearby cities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, and San Diego, hoping to find factory work or to join the military.
Other farm families headed north or east to the cities of the Northeast and Midwest, again looking for jobs, shelter, and relief. One of the irreversible effects of this massive migration—some 2.5 million people left the Plains states alone—was that rural states lost population while states with large cities gained population. It was one of the largest migrations in the nation’s history, once again changing the nation’s demographic patterns.
The Dust Bowl had other effects as well. The farmers best able to survive the Great Depression were the ones with the biggest operations. They often bought repossessed land at rock-bottom prices and expanded their holdings into large commercial farms. The Dust Bowl also motivated the government to help Great Plains farmers. After the initial crisis, immense federal projects dammed western rivers. Dams eventually provided irrigation that made farm profits possible on the Great Plains.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did some farmers become tenant farmers?
Hard Times Hit Most
Americans
One of the ironies of the depression was the word itself. In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, an economic slump was called a “panic” or a “crisis. President Hoover used the word depression to describe the state of affairs because he thought it sounded less
» Large clouds of dust engulfed farmhouses like these in Stratford, Texas, in 1935. The intensity of Dust Bowl storms caused many to lose their farms to the banks and forced families to migrate.
A
Missouri family headed west to look for work in 1937. Make Predictions What types of opportunities were available to farmers forced to migrate westward? The Great Depression and the New Deal 313	5.2 Americans Suffer
severe than the other terms. But before long, Hoover’s “depression” gave way to the “Depression” and then the “Great Depression.” The term described not only a state of mind, but also an economic reality. It showed a despondent America, filled with people overwhelmed by seemingly inescapable poverty. Not only did the depression make victims of the men and women who lost jobs, it also was an economic and emotional crisis that profoundly affected U.S. society.
Families Suffer During the Depression For millions of Americans, the depression was an intensely personal affair. Men who lost their jobs and could not find other work often felt that they had betrayed their families. They had been the "breadwinners,” the providers, the ones whose paychecks fed and clothed the family and kept a roof over everyone’s head. The loss of a job meant a reduction in status. Different men reacted differently to unemployment. Many labored tirelessly to find a new job, while others sank into shame and despair. Some even deserted their families.
The unemployed were not the only ones who suffered. Men lucky enough to have jobs lived in constant fear that the next paycheck would be their last. They often felt guilty for being employed while so many of their relatives and friends were suffering. Few Americans were spared from the crisis.
» Mothers like this one struggled during the Great Depression to find ways to earn additional income, while trying to ensure their children had enough to eat.

Interactive Gallery
Wives and children experienced the pain of their husbands and fathers. Birthrates plummeted to the lowest levels in American history—a sure sign of family distress. Mothers worked constantly to stretch meager family incomes.
They sewed clothes, searched for odd jobs, and valiantly tried to meet their families’ needs. With both parents preoccupied with making something out of nothing, family discipline often declined. Some children quit school. Others ran away from home. Families coped with the depression as best they could. Some huddled together, working to survive the hard times. Others broke apart, making those times even harder and lonelier.
Poor Minorities Suffer Disproportionately The
depression affected everyone, but it did not affect them equally. Americans on the bottom rung of the economic ladder—the poorest of the poor, often minorities with no financial resources—felt the sting of the depression the keenest. A Howard University sociologist noted early in the crisis that African Americans were “the last to be hired and the first to be fired." In the South, landowners threw African American sharecroppers off the plots they had been farming. Many of these workers migrated to northern cities, but there were no jobs waiting there. Only more poverty greeted them. In 1932, unemployment among African Americans hovered around 50 percent, nearly double the national rate.
However, African Americans had long stood firm against the challenges of poverty. They relied on the emotional resources of family and religion to cope with grim times. During his interview with a depression historian, an African American man explained what the depression meant to African Americans:
The Negro was born in depression.
It didn’t mean too much to him, The
Great American Depression, as you call it. There was no such thing. The best he could be was a janitor or a porter or shoeshine boy. It only became official when it hit the white man.
—Clifford Burke, quoted in Hard Tunes , 1970
Hard times came upon Mexican Americans and others as well. As more Okies headed west out of the Dust Bowl, the competition for jobs between those migrants and Mexican American and Asian American farmworkers in states like California heated up. A flood tide of workers struggled to find and keep farm jobs. Often, Mexican Americans and Asian Americans
The Great Depression and the New Deal 314	5.2 Americans Suffer
faced the additional burden of discrimination when competing with white farmhands for those jobs.
In the Southwest, many white Americans clamored for Asian American and Mexican American repatriation. Repatriation involved efforts by local, state, and federal governments to encourage or coerce immigrants and their naturalized children to return to their country of origin. Hundreds of thousands of people of Mexican ancestry—many of them U.S. citizens—were pushed out of the United States. Some were deported, others pressured to leave voluntarily. Even so, many more remained. By the end of the 1930s, Mexican Americans were working in most economic sectors of the Southwest, including farming, ranching, and industry.
Compared to the exit of Mexican Americans, the number of Europeans departing was small. Still, nearly 200,000 European immigrants left the United States between 1931 and 1934, the peak years of repatriation. How many of these departures were involuntary is impossible to know.
What is known, however, is that the United States severely restricted all immigration during the depression. Tragically, this policy included denying
entrance to thousands of German Jews who were fleeing Nazi persecution in their homeland.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did the Great Depression affect minority groups more severely?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Explain how urban society changed as a result of job loss during the Great Depression.
2.	Describe the ways in which farmers dealt with the hardships of the Great Depression.
3.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how the invention of new farming methods contributed to the Dust Bowl.
4.	Identify Patterns Discuss the migrations that occurred during the Dust Bowl.
5.	Compare and Contrast Compare the experiences of African Americans with those of white Americans during the Great Depression.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 315
5.2 Americans Suffer
During his campaign, Franklin D. Roosevelt met repeatedly with struggling Americans.	Why did Roosevelt make
personal visits to impoverished areas in the run-up to the 1932 election?
From big cities to farms and small towns, the Great Depression spread misery far and wide across America. The unemployed and the homeless crowded into shantytowns. Giant dust storms swallowed the Great Plains. As the crisis deepened, Herbert Hoover struggled to respond to the nation's problems. In 1932, as a result of Hoover’s cautious and failed response, Americans would turn to a new leader who called for increased government intervention to try to stop the depression.
Interactive Flipped Video
15.E, 16.D, 16.E
» Objectives
Evaluate Hoover’s approaches to resolving the Great Depression and how Americans reacted to them.
Contrast Hoover’s approach to the economic crisis with Franklin D. Roosevelt’s approach.
Describe the programs that were part of the first New Deal and their immediate effect on Americans’ lives.
» Key Terms
localism
Reconstruction
Finance
Corporation (RFC) trickle-down
economics Hoover Dam Bonus Army Douglas MacArthur Franklin D. Roosevelt Eleanor Roosevelt New Deal fireside chats Federal Deposit
Insurance
Corporation (FDIC)
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)
National Recovery Administration (NRA)
Public Works Administration (PWA)
Charles Coughlin Huey Long
Two Presidents
Respond
Hoover's Response Fails
Hoover did not cause the Great Depression. But Americans looked to him as their President to solve the crisis. He tried. Hoover was an intelligent man, familiar with business methods and economic theory. He labored long hours, consulted a wide range of experts, and tried to marshal the resources of the country to solve the problems of the depression. As the effects of the Great Depression on the U.S. economy worsened, he tried several different approaches. In the end, although he failed to discover the right formula, it was not because of a lack of effort.
At the start of the economic downturn, Hoover followed a hands-off policy. Like most economists of the day, Hoover viewed the upswings and downswings of business cycles as natural occurrences. He felt that government should not interfere with such events. Periodic depressions were like storms. They could not be avoided, but strong businesses could weather them without the support of the government.
Relying on Volunteerism A policy of doing nothing, however, was no policy at all. Hoover soon recognized this fact and turned to a policy he had used in the past. As Secretary of Commerce during the
PEARSONl
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
316
1920s, Hoover had encouraged business and labor to voluntarily work toward common goals. To address the current crisis, he asked business and industrial leaders to keep employment, wages, and prices at current levels. He simultaneously called for the government to reduce taxes, lower interest rates, and create public-works programs. The plan was to put more money into the hands of businesses and individuals to encourage more production and consumption. This, Hoover said, would reverse the cycle that led to the depression.
Lastly, Hoover requested that wealthier individuals give more money to charity. Millions of Americans did give money, clothing, and food to private and religious charities, which then distributed the goods to those in need. The idea was for all Americans to voluntarily join forces to combat the depression.
Voluntary Cooperation Fails Although the plan was well-intentioned, Hoover’s program relied too much on voluntary cooperation. The President believed he could persuade Americans to act in the best interests of the country as a whole, rather than in their own best interests. He took care to encourage, not legislate, America’s recovery. But volunteerism did not work. Businesses cut wages and laid off workers because business owners thought they had to do so to keep their businesses afloat. Farmers boosted production because they thought that producing more crops would help them keep their family farms. Most Americans followed individual, not cooperative, courses.
Hoover had also asked state and local governments to provide more jobs and relief measures. He had faith in localism, the policy whereby problems could best be solved at local and state levels. However, in this severe situation, towns and states simply did not have the financial or human resources to successfully combat the crisis. Making matters worse, the President strongly resisted using federal resources to provide direct relief to individuals. Believing it to be unconstitutional, Hoover opposed public assistance and instead favored “rugged individualism” which allowed people to better themselves through their own efforts. Yet as the months wore on, unemployment increased, charities ran low on money, and local and state governments could no longer plug the leaks in the economy. Some critics began to argue that the crisis demanded decisive federal action.
Hoover Reverses Course With Hoovervilles and homelessness on the rise, it became evident that the President’s policies were not working. Poor Americans called trucks pulled by horse or mule “Hoover wagons, campfires “Hoover heaters,” and cardboard boxes “Hoover houses.” The association of the Presidents
» Two young residents of a shantytown in Washington, D.C. Determine Point of View What do the signs in the photo tell you about how the poor perceived the government’s role in the economic crisis?
» Analyze Political Cartoons What does this cartoon say about the difference between President Hoover’s perception of the depression and the reality many Americans faced?
The Great Depression
and the New Deal 317	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
name with suffering and want indicated Americans’ negative feelings about their leader and his failed policies.
Faced with growing and increasingly harsh criticism, Hoover finally decided to reverse course and use federal resources to battle the depression. Believing the economy suffered from a lack of credit, he urged Congress to create the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC). Created by Congress in early 1932, the RFC gave more than a billion dollars of government loans to railroads and large businesses. The agency also lent money to banks so that they could extend more loans to struggling businesses. Hoover believed that if the government lent money to bankers, they would lend it in turn to businesses. Companies would then hire workers, production and consumption would increase, and the depression would end. This theory, known as trickle-down economics, held that money poured into the top of the economic pyramid will trickle down to the base.
Although the RFC put the federal government at the center of economic life, it did not work well under Hoover’s guidance. The RFC lent out billions, but all too often bankers did not increase their loans to businesses. Additionally, businesses often did not use the loans they received to hire more workers. In the end, the money did not trickle down to the people who needed it the most.
Despite the failings of the RFC, Hoover succeeded with one project that made a difference. During the 1920s, Secretary of Commerce Hoover had called for the construction of a dam on the Colorado River. By the time Hoover became President in 1929, Congress had approved the project as part of a massive public-works program. Workers broke ground on Boulder Dam (later renamed Hoover Dam) in 1930. Construction brought much-needed employment to the Southwest during the early 1930s.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why was Hoover’s faith in localism as a response to the depression misplaced?
Challenging Economic Times Lead to Protest
From the Oval Office, Hoover worked hard to end the depression. But to many out-of-work Americans, the President became a symbol of failure. Some people blamed capitalism, while others questioned the responsiveness of democracy. Many believed the American system was due for an overhaul.
Calls for Radical Change Some Americans thought the answer to the country’s problems was
SOURCE:
Harvard Kennedy School » Analyze Charts Supply-side or “trickle-down” economics is a theory that plays out differently based on economic circumstances. In theory, how would “trickle-down economics” generate economic growth?
The Great Depression and the New Deal | 318	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
the rejection of capitalism and the acceptance of socialism or communism. They argued that capitalism created great inequities of wealth and an unhealthy atmosphere of competition in society. In fact, they saw the depression as a sign that capitalism was about to collapse. Looking at the Soviet Union, they maintained that a state-run economy was the only avenue out of the depression. However, even during the worst of the crisis, most Americans were unmoved by communist calls for revolution. Communism’s appeal proved no match for Americans’ guarantees of individual freedom and dreams of progress and opportunity.
Fascist appeals from the political right also failed to hold any attraction. Economic troubles in Europe contributed to the rise to power of fascist leaders like Benito Mussolini in Italy and Adolf Hitler in Germany. Despite this political shift abroad, fascists failed to gain power in the United States. Although some questioned the ability of America’s capitalistic and democratic institutions to overcome the crisis, most Americans never lost faith in their country.
The Bonus Army Marches on Washington Although most Americans did not want a revolution, many did desire substantial changes. In 1932, thousands of World War I veterans marched on Washington, D.C., demanding a solution to their particular problem. They became known as the Bonus Army.
In 1924, Congress had passed the Adjusted Compensation Act, which provided for a lump-sum payment to veterans of World War I in 1945. But in 1931, many veteran groups began to call for an early payment of the bonus, arguing that out-of-work vets needed the money to support their families. In May and June of 1932, almost twenty thousand veterans arrived in the capital, setting up camps and occupying empty government buildings. The House of Representatives agreed with their aims and passed a bill to provide early payment of the bonuses. However, the bill was defeated in the Senate in mid-June.
Some of the Bonus Army marchers left, discouraged. Others stayed to continue to lobby for the bill. A riot broke out in July when police tried to evict the marchers from government buildings.
The Protests End Badly Although President Hoover sympathized with the marchers, he called for General Douglas MacArthur and federal troops to "[sjurround the affected area and clear it without delay.” MacArthur exceeded his order, deciding to move the marchers out of the city altogether. He ordered his troops to ready tear gas and fix bayonets.
The Army force that pushed the marchers out included not only MacArthur but also the future World
» Over 2,000 veterans held a vigil on the'U.S. Capitol lawn after Congress failed to approve a bill to provide veterans with early bonus pay for their past services.
War II generals Dwight Eisenhower and George Patton. While Eisenhower regretted the use of the Army to solve a political problem, Patton ordered his troops to brandish their sabers in a show of force. Force was exactly what MacArthur used. More than one thousand marchers were tear-gassed, and many were injured, some very badly.
After the removal, MacArthur said that the marchers were a gang of revolutionaries bent on taking over the government:
They had come to the conclusion, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that they were about to take over . , . direct control of the government. ... It is my opinion that had the President let it go on another week the institutions of our government would have been very severely threatened.
—Douglas MacArthur, 1932
Hoover had not ordered the use of such force against the veterans. Nevertheless, photographs of American troops marching with fixed bayonets against ragged veterans shocked the nation. Evalyn McLean, a
The Great Depression and the New Deal 319	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
Washington, D.C., resident, remembered the army's actions:
I saw in a news reel the tanks, the
cavalry, and the gas-bomb throwers
running those wretched Americans out
of our capital, I was so raging mad. . . .
—Evalyn McLean, Washington, D.C*., resident in the summer of 1932
Any chance that Hoover had for winning reelection in November ended after the summer of 1932.
RECALL
What argument was made by some in favor of turning to socialism or communism in the face of the depression?
Americans Turn to Roosevelt
In 1928, Herbert Hoover had almost no chance of losing his bid for the presidency. In 1932 however, he had almost no chance of winning reelection. With unemployment nearing 25 percent, people’s savings wiped out by bank failures, long lines at soup kitchens,
» General Douglas MacArthur (left) confers with Colonel Dwight Eisenhower (right) as they prepare to clear out the Bonus Army marchers in Washington, D.C.
stomachs grumbling from hunger, and the number of homeless increasing every day, the depression had taken its toll. Most Americans felt that their President had failed completely, and they were ready for a change. In July of 1932, the governor of New York, Franklin D. Roosevelt accepted the Democratic Party’s nomination for President.
Political Success and Personal Challenge
Strangely enough, Democrats had chosen a presidential candidate who had never known economic hardship. As a child, Franklin Delano Roosevelt had enjoyed all the privileges of an upper-class upbringing, including education at elite schools and colleges. From his parents and teachers, FDR gained a great deal of self-confidence and a belief that public service was a noble calling.
In 1905, Franklin married his distant cousin Eleanor Roosevelt. President Theodore Roosevelt, Eleanor’s uncle and Franklin’s fifth cousin gave the bride away. In time, Eleanor would also become deeply involved in public affairs.
Like Teddy Roosevelt, Franklin rose quickly through the political ranks. After election to the New York State Senate, he served as Woodrow Wilson’s Assistant Secretary of the Navy. In 1920, Roosevelt was the Democratic Party’s vice presidential candidate. Although the Democrats lost the election, many considered him the rising star of the party. Then, in the summer of 1921, tragedy struck.
While vacationing, FDR slipped off his boat into the chilly waters of the North Atlantic. That evening, he awoke with a high fever and severe pains in his back and legs. Two weeks later, Roosevelt was diagnosed with polio, a dreaded disease that at the time had no treatment. He never fully recovered the use of his legs.
FDR did not allow his physical disability to break his spirit. With Eleanor’s encouragement, he made a political comeback. In 1928, he was elected governor of New York and earned a reputation as a reformer. In 1932, he became the Democrats’ presidential candidate, pledging “a new deal for the American people.”
Roosevelt Becomes President When FDR pledged a “New Deal,” he had only a vague idea of how he intended to combat the depression. Believing that the federal government needed to play an active role in promoting recovery and providing relief to Americans, he experimented with different approaches to see which ones worked best.
The country needs, and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands, bold, persistent
w.
320	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
The Great Depression and the New Deal
1932 Presidential Election
iQHs
hJAbbi
	Electoral	Popular	% Electoral
Candidate (Party)	Vote	Vote	Vote
■ Roosevelt (D)	472	22,821,857	89
H
Hoover (R) V 59 15,761,841 11 (^‘Socialist and Communist candidates i won 1,160,615 votes, or 3 percent I of the popular vote, yet earned no electoral votes.
» Analyze Maps Why is an election such as the 1932 Presidential election referred to as a “landslide victory"?
experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and to try it.
If it fails, admit it frankly and try
another. But above all, try something!
D.
Roosevelt, speech at Oglethorpe University, May 22, 1932 The 1932 election campaign pitted Roosevelt against President Hoover. The two men advocated very different approaches to the problems of the Great Depression. Hoover believed that depression relief should come from state and local governments and private agencies. Roosevelt believed that the depression required strong action and leadership by the federal government. As Hoover correctly noted, “This campaign is more than a contest between two men. ... It is a contest between two philosophies of government.”
Hoover’s popularity declined as the Great Depression worsened. Even longtime Republicans deserted him. FDR—with the support of those who embraced his ideas as well as those who opposed Hoover’s approach—won a landslide victory, winning the electoral votes of all but six states.
Americans had to wait four long months between Roosevelt’s election, in November 1932, and his inauguration, in March 1933. Meanwhile, they watched
helplessly as thousands of banks collapsed and unemployment soared. What would Roosevelt do to combat the depression? Even the experts did not know what to expect.
Forming the Brain Trust To help him plan the New Deal, FDR sought the advice of a diverse group of men and women. Among the most influential was a group of professionals and academics whom the press nicknamed the “Brain Trust.” Roosevelt, a Democrat, displayed his bipartisan openness by nominating two Republicans, Henry Wallace and Harold Ickes (ihk uhs), to serve as his Secretary of Agriculture and Secretary of Interior. Roosevelt also nominated Frances Perkins, a social worker, to serve as his Secretary of Labor. She became the first woman Cabinet member in U.S. history.
Throughout his presidency, FDR depended heavily on his wife, Eleanor. She traveled widely, interacting with the American people and serving as FDR’s “eyes and ears.” For example, in 1933, the Bonus Army, which had marched on Washington, D.C.,
in 1932, returned to the capital, once again seeking an early payment of its bonus for World War I service. Like Hoover, FDR informed the marchers that the government could not afford to pay them their bonus. But unlike Hoover, who had sent the army to evict the Bonus Army, FDR sent Eleanor. She sang songs with
The Great Depression and the New Deal 321	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
the veterans and made them feel that the government cared.
U CHECK UNDERSTANDING
In your own words, explain what Hoover meant when he said the 1932 presidential election was “a contest between two philosophies of government.”
The New Deal Begins
During his first hundred days in office, which became known as the Hundred Days, Roosevelt proposed and Congress passed 15 major bills. These measures had three goals: relief, recovery, and reform. Roosevelt wanted to provide relief from the immediate hardships of the depression and achieve a long-term economic recovery. He also instituted reforms to prevent future depressions.
Restoring the Nation’s Confidence Roosevelt wasted no time dealing with the nation’s number one crisis. Late in 1932, banks had begun to fail in great numbers. A banking panic gripped the nation as frightened depositors lined up outside banks, trying to withdraw their savings.
» President Roosevelt talked directly to the American public through his “fireside” radio broadcasts. He used these broadcasts as an opportunity to calm the fears of the American people.
The day after his inauguration, Roosevelt called Congress into a special session and convinced them to pass laws to shore up the nation’s banking system. The Emergency Banking Bill gave the President broad powers—including the power to declare a four-day bank “holiday.” Banks all over the country were ordered to close. The closings gave banks time to get their accounts in order before they reopened for business.
Eight days after becoming President, Roosevelt delivered an informal radio speech to the American people. This was the first of many presidential fireside chats. They became an important way for Roosevelt to communicate with the American people. In the first fireside chat, FDR explained the measures he had taken to stem the run on banks. His calming words reassured the American people. When the bank holiday ended, Americans did not rush to their banks to withdraw their funds. Roosevelt had convinced them that the banks were a safe place to keep their money.
Reforming the Financial System A number of Roosevelt's proposals sought to reform the nation’s financial institutions.
One act created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which insured bank deposits up to $5,000. In the following year, Congress established the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to regulate the stock market and make it a safer place for investments.
These financial reforms helped restore confidence in the economy. Runs on banks ended, largely because Americans now had confidence that they would not lose their lifetime savings if a bank failed. Therefore, more Americans trusted their money to a bank, where it could be lended out to individuals and businesses, helping to ensure an adequate money supply. The stock markets also stabilized as regulated trading practices reassured investors. Today, both organizations continue to affect the lives of U.S. citizens. The FDIC continues to insure bank deposits so Americans can trust their money to banks. The SEC continues to regulate trading practices so Americans feel comfortable investing in the stock market.
To further solve the banking crisis, FDR took action to combat the currency shortage. In April 1933, Roosevelt ordered individuals and businesses to turn in any gold they owned worth more than $100 to the Federal Reserve and stopped U.S. banks from exporting and redeeming gold. The Federal Reserve began to accumulate and hold on to gold reserves, which it pegged to a certain value. Then in June 1933, a joint resolution of Congress cut the tie between gold and paper money. Americans could no longer redeem their paper money for its value in gold. With these actions,
Interactive Timeline
The Great Depression and the New Deal 322	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
The Tennessee Valley Authority
» Analyze Maps Use the map and the text to describe specifically the number and	i "'
nature of TVA projects, what states benefited, and how they benefited.
KEY
I j Region served by TVA — Dam «A Power plant
-..A..
Interactive Gallery
3	100 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
FDR’s administration took another step in the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money, or money that is not backed by gold or silver, only a government decree. The move had the advantage of making the money supply more flexible and controllable. However, many experts, even some of Roosevelt’s advisers, believed that devaluing the dollar was risky and dangerous and would have long-term negative effects.
Reforming Agriculture A number of New Deal programs were aimed at easing the desperate plight of American farmers. For years, the supply of crops grown by American farmers had far exceeded demand. Prices dropped to the point where it was no longer profitable to grow some crops. To counter this, Congress passed the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), which sought to end overproduction and raise crop prices. To accomplish these goals, the AAA provided financial aid, paying farmers subsidies to cut production and forego planting on some of their land. Some farmers Plowed under crops and killed off excess livestock. Many Americans believed it was immoral to kill livestock or destroy crops while people went hungry. By 1934, however, farm prices began to rise.
These governmental actions to help farmers proved a mixed blessing for the nation, however. Some farmers didn’t qualify for the program.
The increase in farm prices also raised the price of food. In addition, the AAA left many tenant farmers unemployed when large landowners took the land they were farming out of production.
Creating the TVA Americans living in the Tennessee River valley of the rural South were among the poorest in the nation. Few had electricity, running water, or proper sewage systems. In 1933, Congress responded by creating a government agency called the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). The TVA built a series of dams in the Tennessee River valley to control floods and to generate electric power. The agency also replanted forests and built fertilizer plants. These projects created jobs and attracted industry with the promise of cheap power.
Despite its accomplishments, the TVA attracted a host of critics. Some labeled it “socialist,” because it gave government direct control of an industry. Private power companies complained that they could not compete with the TVA, because the agency paid no taxes. However, the TVA’s successes in improving life in the Tennessee Valley have ensured its survival to the present.
Relief and Recovery During the Hundred Days, Roosevelt proposed and Congress enacted numerous other relief measures. To counter the depression’s
The Great Depression
and the New Deal 323	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
devastating impact on young men, FDR created the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC). The CCC
provided jobs for more than 2 million young men. They replanted forests, built trails, dug irrigation ditches, and fought forest fires. As time went on, programs such as the CCC became more inclusive, extending work and training to Mexican American and other minority youth, as well as to whites. FDR called the CCC his favorite New Deal program.
Congress passed a number of other relief acts. The Federal Emergency Relief Act (FERA) granted federal funds to state and local agencies to help the unemployed. The short-lived Civil Works Administration (CWA) provided jobs on public-works projects. On another front, Congress created the Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC), which loaned money at low interest rates to homeowners who could not meet mortgage payments. The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) insured bank loans used for building and repairing homes.
These New Deal measures marked a clear break from the policies of the Hoover administration, which had avoided direct relief to individuals. The $500 million appropriated for FERA represented the largest peacetime expenditure by the federal government to that time.
The centerpiece of the early New Deal’s recovery program was the National Industrial Recovery
» Analyze Political Cartoons Cite evidence from the cartoon that supports the conclusion that New Deal programs had negative effects on the American public.
Act, which established the National Recovery Administration (NRA). Roosevelt called the NRA “the most important and far-reaching legislation ever enacted by the American Congress." Working with business and labor leaders, the NRA developed codes of fair competition to govern whole industries. These codes established minimum wages for workers and minimum prices for the goods that businesses sold. The idea behind these codes was to increase the wages of workers so they could buy more goods and raise prices so companies could make a profit.
Another major piece of New Deal legislation was the Public Works Administration (PWA), which built bridges, dams, power plants, and government buildings. The PWA was responsible for building many important structures that are still in use today, such as New York City’s Triborough Bridge, the Overseas Highway linking Miami and Key West, Florida, and the Bonneville Dam on the Columbia River in the Pacific Northwest. These public-works projects improved the nation’s infrastructure and created millions of new jobs for workers.
id RECALL What was the purpose of FDR’s fireside
chats?
Critics of the New Deal
While Roosevelt had little difficulty gaining support from Congress for his proposals, a minority of Americans expressed their opposition to the New Deal. Critics on the political right thought the changes the New Deal brought were too radical. Critics on the left thought that they were not radical enough. Several of FDR’s critics attracted mass followings and made plans to challenge him for the presidency in 1936.
Too Much or Not Enough? The chief complaint of conservatives against the New Deal was that it made the federal government too powerful. Critics contended that the government was telling business how to operate, spending large sums of money, and piling up a huge national debt.
To many conservatives, the New Deal was destroying free enterprise and undermining individualism. In a 1934 book entitled The Challenge to Liberty, former President Herbert Hoover described the New Deal as “the most stupendous invasion of the whole spirit of liberty” in the nation’s history. Robert Taft, the son of former President William Howard Taft and a leading Republican in Congress, believed that Roosevelt’s programs threatened individual freedom.
In 1934, these critics formed the American Liberty League. Supporters included prominent business
The Great Depression and the New Deal 324	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
leaders, such as Alfred Sloan and William Knudsen of General Motors. Leading Democrats, such as John W. Davis, the Democrats’ presidential nominee in 1924, and A1 Smith, the nominee in 1928, joined the Liberty League because they felt Roosevelt had deserted the Democratic Party’s principles of a limited federal government.
While conservatives accused FDR of supporting socialism, some leading socialists charged that the New Deal did not do enough to end the depression. Norman Thomas, the Socialist Party’s presidential candidate, claimed that FDR’s only concern was saving the banking system and ensuring profits for big business. The American Communist Party described the New Deal as a “capitalist ruse.”
Populist Critics Gain a Following The most significant criticism of FDR came from a cluster of figures whose roots were in the Populist movement. They saw themselves as spokesmen for poor Americans, challenging the power of the elite. Roosevelt’s strongest and most popular critics were Francis Townsend, Father Charles Coughlin, and Huey Long.
Townsend, a doctor from California, had a simple approach to resolving the economic effects of the Great Depression. It called for the federal government to provide $200 a month to all citizens over the age of 60. These funds, he argued, would filter out to the rest of society and produce an economic recovery. To promote this plan, he established “Townsend Clubs" and held meetings that resembled old-time church revivals.
Father Charles Coughlin presented an even bigger challenge to FDR. Coughlin, a Roman Catholic priest, had attracted millions of listeners to his weekly radio show.
At first, Coughlin supported the New Deal, but in time he broke with FDR, accusing him of not doing enough to fight the depression. Coughlin said that Roosevelt had “out-Hoovered Hoover” and called the New Deal “the raw deal.”
Coughlin mixed calls for the nationalization of industry with anti-Semitic remarks and attacks on “communists” who, he charged, were running the country. By the early 1940s, Coughlin’s views became so extreme that Roman Catholic officials forced him to end his broadcasts.
Canadian by birth, Coughlin could not run against FDR in the 1936 election. However, he threatened to throw his support behind an even more popular New Deal critic, Senator Huey Long of Louisiana. Long was an expert performer whose folksy speeches delighted audiences. Long’s approach to solving the depression was his "Share Our Wealth” program that proposed
» Louisiana Senator Huey Long drew attention for his sharp criticism of New Deal programs and his belief that income should be redistributed from the wealthy to the poor through taxes.
high taxes on the wealthy and large corporations, and the redistribution of their income to poor Americans.
God invited us all to come and eat and drink all we wanted. He smiled on our land and we grew crops of plenty to eat and wear. . . . [But then] Rockefeller, Morgan, and their crowd stepped up and took enough for 120,000,000 people and left only enough for 5,000,000 for all the other 125,000,000 to eat. And so the millions must go hungry and without those good things God gave us unless we call on them to put some of it back.
■—Huey Long radio broadcast, 1934
Roosevelt viewed Long as a serious political threat. Indeed, a poll taken in 1935 estimated that, under the right circumstances, Long could have attracted up to 4 million votes in the 1936 presidential election. Although not enough votes to win the election, his candidacy could have drawn votes from Roosevelt,
The Great Depression and the New Deal 325	5.3 Two Presidents Respond
damaging the President’s chances. But Long never got that opportunity.
For years he had ruled Louisiana as if he owned the state, wresting control of nearly every facet of governance from local and other state officials. On his way to achieving this dominance, he made many enemies. In 1935, a political enemy assassinated Long, ending the most serious threat to Roosevelt’s presidency.
H IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why were many conservatives opposed to New Deal programs?
ASSESSMENT
2.	Compare and Contrast the political philosophies of Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt regarding economic relief during the Great Depression.
3.	Draw Conclusions Explain how changing power structures in Europe influenced U.S. politics during the Great Depression.
4.	Compare Points of View Explain why the Tennessee Valley Authority received support from some Americans and criticism from others.
5.	Identify Central Ideas Discuss the significance of the Hundred Days.
1. Generate Explanations Explain why Herbert Hoover had no chance of winning reelection in 1932.
The Great Depression and the New Deal
5.3 Two Presidents Respond
FDR’s goals for the first phases of the New Deal were relief, recovery, and reform. Progress had been made, but there still was a long way to go. Beginning in early 1935, Roosevelt launched an aggressive campaign to find solutions to the ongoing problems caused by the Great Depression. This campaign, sometimes known as the Second New Deal, created Social Security and other programs that continue to have a profound impact on the everyday lives of Americans.
The New Deal
Expands
Expanding New Deal Programs
In his fireside chats, press conferences, and major addresses, Roosevelt explained the challenges facing the nation. He said that the complexities of the modern world compelled the federal government to “promote the general welfare" and to intervene to protect citizens’ rights. Roosevelt used legislation passed during the second phase of the New Deal to try to accomplish these goals. This second wave of legislation addressed the problems of the elderly, the poor, and the unemployed; created new public-works projects; helped farmers; and enacted measures to protect workers’ rights. It still focused on relief, recovery, and reform, but with more of a longer-term focus. It was during this period that the first serious challenges to the New Deal emerged.
New Jobs Programs In the spring of 1935, Congress appropriated $5 billion for new jobs and created the Works Progress Administration (WPA) to administer the program. Roosevelt placed his longtime associate, Harry Hopkins, in charge. The WPA built or improved a good part of the nation’s highways, dredged rivers and harbors, and promoted soil and water conservation.
16.E, 19.B, 20.B
» Objectives
Analyze ways that the New Deal promoted social and economic reform and its long-term effects.
Explain how New Deal legislation affected the growth of organized labor.
Evaluate the impact of Roosevelt’s plan to increase the number of U.S. Supreme Court justices on the course of the New Deal.
» Key Terms
Works Progress	sit-down strike
Administration	court packing
(WPA)
John Maynard Keynes
pump priming
Social Security Act
Wagner Act
collective bargaining
Fair Labor Standards Act
Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO)
PEARSON I
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
327
The WPA even provided programs in the arts for displaced artists, writers, and actors. As Hopkins explained, artists “have to eat just like other people.”
By 1943, the WPA had employed more than 8 million people and spent about $11 billion. Its workers built more than 650,000 miles of highways and 125,000 public buildings. Among the most famous projects funded by the WPA were the San Antonio River Walk and parts of the Appalachian Trail.
All of these programs were expensive, and the government paid for them by spending money it did not have. The federal deficit—$461 million in 1932— grew to $4.4 billion in 1936. The enormous expenditures and growing debt led many to criticize the government’s public-works projects as wasteful. Some economists disagreed. British economist John Maynard Keynes argued that deficit spending was needed to end the depression. According to Keynes, putting people to work on public projects put money into the hands of consumers who would buy more goods, stimulating the economy.
Keynes called this theory pump priming. Critics also argued that FDR was using the program to build voter loyalty to the Democratic party.
» Social Security was established to help retirees. Retired bookkeeper Ida Fuller of Ludlow, Vermont, displayed her monthly check here. It was for $41.30.
Aiding Older Americans The United States was one of the few industrialized nations in the world that did not have some form of pension system for the elderly. During the depression, many elderly people had lost their homes and their life savings and were living in poverty. On January 17, 1935, President Roosevelt unveiled his plans for Social Security.
The Social Security Act, passed by Congress in 1935, established a pension system for retirees. It also established unemployment insurance for workers who lost their jobs. In addition, the law created insurance for victims of work-related accidents and provided aid for poverty-stricken mothers and children, the blind, and the disabled. It was funded by a payroll tax on employers and workers.
The Social Security Act had many flaws. At first, it did not apply to domestic workers or farmworkers. Since African Americans were disproportionately employed in these fields, they were not eligible for many of the benefits of Social Security. Widows received smaller benefits than widowers, because people presumed that elderly women could manage on less money than elderly men. Despite these shortcomings, Social Security proved the most popular and significant of the New Deal programs.
Social Security continues today to provide basic economic security to millions of Americans. Its programs act as a safety net for senior citizens, the poor, and others in financial need. Popular support for Social Security continues, although concern mounts over the program’s long-term funding and ability to keep making payments.
Supporting American Farms Another New Deal program that passed in 1935 included further help for farmers. When the depression began, only 10 percent of all farms had electricity, largely because utility companies did not find it profitable to run electric lines to communities with small populations. To bring farmers into the light, Congress established the Rural Electrification Administration (REA). The REA loaned money to electric utilities to build power lines, bringing electricity to isolated rural areas. This program had a tremendous, beneficial effect on rural communities. The REA was so successful that by 1950, about 80 percent of American farms had electricity.
New Deal programs changed the relationship of the federal government to the American farmer. The government was now committed to providing price supports, or subsidies, for agriculture. Critics attacked price supports for undermining the free market. Others observed that large farms, not small farmers, benefited most from federal farm programs. Even during the 1930s, many noticed that tenant farmers
The Great Depression and the New Deal j
5.4 The New Deal Expands
r "
&
1933
AGRICULTURE & THE NEW DEAL
AGRICULTURAL ADJUSTMENT ACT
1933 • Congress set price supports to • Taxes were levied against food offset falling prices by controlling processors to pay for subsidies.
COTTON ACREAGE
TAKEN OUT OF PRODUCTION
■MMMMWaaWM
FARMER
AGREEMENTS SIGNED
the supply and demand for farm products.
> Farmers were paid to reduce acreage farmed.
1 The Supreme Court later declared the Act unconstitutional and it was amended.
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture
FARM FORECLOSURES
IN THE COTTON BELT STATES (PER
1,000 FARMS) 1925-1930 1931-1933 ARKANSAS |
LOUISIANA MISSISSIPPI U.S. |
Source: National Bureau of Economic Research
17.3
15.8
16.1
17.1
10,487,991
927.812	| ARKANSAS |	99,808
454,230 | LOUISIANA | 108,533
931.813	| MISSISSIPPI | 62,130 U.S.
Source: The Second Great Emancipation; National Bureau of Economic Research
1,031,549
3»©O
?	4, DAIRY	4. GRAINS	4,COTTON AND	4.	MEAT	A
f	I PRICES	I PRICES	I COTTONSEED	T	PRICES	T
I 44%	I 200%	I PRICES 100%	I	50%	I
WHEAT
PRICES
120%
Source: The Agricultural Outlook for 1935
» Analyze Data How do the data on farm foreclosures point to a need for the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933? Did the reduction of cotton acreage have its desired effect on prices?
and sharecroppers, often African Americans, did not fully share in the federal programs. Yet farm prices stabilized, and agriculture remained a productive sector of the economy.
Water for an Expanding West Many of the New Deal public-works water projects had an enormous impact on the development of the American West. The government funded the complex Central Valley irrigation system in California. The massive Bonneville Dam in the Pacific Northwest controlled flooding and provided electricity to a vast number of citizens.
U DESCRIBE
Why was it necessary to establish the Rural Electrification Administration in order to bring electricity to farmers?
Labor Unions Thrive
Even before the Great Depression, most industrial workers labored long hours for little pay. Few belonged to labor unions. During the Great Depression, however, there was an upsurge in union activity. New unions enlisted millions of workers from the mining and automobile industries.
A
New Relationship Between Workers and Business Owners Roosevelt believed that the success of the New Deal depended on raising the standard of living for American industrial workers. This, he believed, would improve the entire economy. The National Labor Relations Act was the most important piece of New Deal labor legislation.
Also called the Wagner Act, it recognized the right of employees to join labor unions and gave workers the right to collective bargaining. Collective bargaining meant that employers had to negotiate with unions about hours, wages, and other working conditions. The law created the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to look into workers’ complaints.
The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 provided workers with additional rights. It established a minimum wage, initially at 25 cents per hour, and a maximum workweek of 44 hours. It also outlawed child labor. The minimum wage remains one of the New Deal’s most controversial legacies. In the years ahead, the minimum wage would be gradually raised. Today, whenever a raise in the minimum wage is proposed, economists and political leaders debate the wisdom of such an increase. Supporters say such raises are necessary for low-paid workers to keep pace with the rising cost of living. Opponents counter that some producers will pass the wage increases on to consumers in the form of higher prices. They also fear that minimum wage increases will increase
The Great Depression and the New Deal 329	5.4 The New Deal Expands
unemployment if some employers cut jobs to keep their labor costs the same.
Workers Organize for Gains The upsurge in union activity came at the same time as a bitter feud within the major labor federation, the American Federation of Labor (AFL). The AFL represented skilled workers— such as plumbers, carpenters, and electricians—who joined trade or craft unions. Few workers in the major industries belonged to the AFL, and the AFL made little effort to organize them.
Fed up with the AFL’s reluctance to organize these workers, John L. Lewis, the president of the United Mine Workers, and a number of other labor leaders established the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO). The workers targeted by the ClO-organizing campaigns tended to be lower paid and ethnically more diverse than those workers represented by the AFL.
In December 1936, members of the CIO’s newly formed United Automobile Workers (UAW) union staged a sit-down strike, occupying one of General Motors’s most important plants in Flint, Michigan. In a sit-down strike, workers refuse to leave the workplace until a settlement is reached. When the police and state militia threatened to remove them by force, the workers
informed Michigan governor Frank Murphy that they would not leave.
We fully expect that if a violent
effort is made to oust us many of us
will be killed and we take this means
of making it known to our wives, to our
children, to the people of the State of
Michigan and the country, that if this
result follows from the attempt to eject
us, you are the one who must be held
responsible for our deaths!
—Auto workers sit-down committee, Flint, Michigan, January 1936
The strike lasted for 44 days until General Motors, then the largest company in the world, agreed to recognize the UAW. This union success led to others.
By 1940, 9 million workers belonged to unions, twice the number of members in 1930. Just as important, union members gained better wages and working conditions.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did workers such as miners and automobile workers feel the need to split away from the AFL and start the CIO?
» Analyze Data The real minimum wage is the constant dollar value of the minimum wage, adjusted for inflation. Using the graph, describe how the real minimum wage has changed since 1938.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 330	5.4 The New Deal Expands
» Analyze Graphs What explains the increase in union membership after 1930?
Opposition to the New Deal
Franklin Roosevelt won an overwhelming victory in the presidential election of 1936. He received 61 percent of the vote, compared to just 37 percent for his Republican challenger, Alfred M. Landon. Roosevelt carried every state but Maine and Vermont. FDR entered his second term determined to challenge the group that he considered the main enemy of the New Deal—a Supreme Court that had struck down many of his programs.
Some New Deal Policies Face Judicial Scrutiny
A year before the 1936 election, the Supreme Court had overturned one of the key laws of Roosevelt's first hundred days. In the case of Schechter Poultry v. United States, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that since the President has no power to regulate interstate commerce, the National Industrial Recovery Act was unconstitutional. The power to regulate interstate commerce rests with Congress and cannot be delegated to the Executive branch.
One pro-New Deal newspaper captured the mood of many Democrats: “AMERICA STUNNED; ROOSEVELT’S TWO YEARS’ WORK KILLED IN TWENTY MINUTES.”
Not long afterward, the Court ruled a key part of the Agricultural Adjustment Act unconstitutional. Roosevelt charged that the Court had taken the nation back to “horse-and-buggy” days. He expected the Court
to strike down other New Deal measures, limiting his ability to enact new reforms.
Roosevelt’s Court-Packing Scheme On February 5, 1937, in a special address to Congress, FDR unveiled a plan that would dilute the power of the sitting Justices of the Supreme Court. He called for adding up to six new Justices to the nine-member Court. He justified his proposal by noting that the Constitution did not specify the number of judges on the Court. He added that many of the Justices were elderly and overworked. Critics, recognizing that Roosevelt’s new appointees would most likely be New Deal supporters, called his plan court packing. They accused him of trying to increase presidential power and upsetting the delicate balance between the three branches of the federal government.
Some critics urged Americans to speak out.
If the American people accept this last audacity of the President without letting out a yell to high heaven, they have ceased to be jealous of their liberties and are ripe for ruin.
—Dorothy Thompson, newspaper columnist, 1937
Given Roosevelt’s enormous popularity, he might have convinced Congress to enact his plan but he did not have to because the Court began to turn his way. On March 29, 1937, the Court ruled 5 to 4 in favor of a
The Great Depression and the New Deal 331	5.4 The New Deal Expands
minimum wage law. Two weeks later, again by a vote of 5 to 4, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Wagner Act. In both cases, Justice Owen J. Roberts provided the deciding vote. Pundits called it the “switch in time to save nine,” because Roberts had previously voted against several New Deal programs. Roberts’s two votes in support of the New Deal removed FDR’s main reason for packing the Court.
Shortly after this switch, Judge Willis Van Devanter, who had helped strike down several New Deal programs, resigned from the Court. This enabled FDR to nominate a Justice friendlier to the New Deal. With more retirements, Roosevelt nominated a number of other new Justices, including Felix Frankfurter, one of his top advisers.
Indeed, 1937 marked a turning point in the history of the Court. For years to come, the Court more willingly accepted a larger role for the federal government. Yet the court-packing incident had the impact of weakening FDR politically. Before the courtpacking plan, FDR’s popularity prevented critics from challenging him. FDR’s attempt to force a change to the relationship among the executive and judicial branches of government was off-putting to many Americans, even those who had supported him since 1932. Now that Roosevelt had lost momentum, critics felt free to take him on. And even though after 1937 the Court did not strike down any more laws, Roosevelt found the
public much less willing to support further New Deal legislation.
Economic Setbacks Help Conservative Candidates The turmoil over the Supreme Court had barely faded when the Roosevelt administration faced another crisis.
During 1935 and 1936, economic conditions had begun to improve. Unemployment had fallen 10 percent in four years. With the economy doing better, FDR cut back on federal spending in order to reduce the rising deficit. But he miscalculated.
While Roosevelt reduced federal spending, the Federal Reserve Board raised interest rates, making it more difficult for businesses to expand and for consumers to borrow to buy new goods. Suddenly, the economy was in another tailspin. Unemployment soared to more than 20 percent. Nearly all of the gains in employment and production were wiped out.
Largely because of the downturn, the Democrats suffered a setback in the 1938 congressional elections. Republicans picked up 7 Senate and 75 House seats. Although Democrats still maintained a majority in both houses of Congress, Roosevelt’s power base was seriously weakened because many southern Democrats already were only lukewarm supporters of the New Deal. Needing their support for his foreign policies, FDR chose not to try to force any more reforms through Congress. In addition, the President’s attention was
Unemployment, 1933-1941
15
12
E 9 c
Q.
O
a>
a.
1933	1934	1935	1936
SOURCE:
Historical Statistics of the United States 1937	1938	1939	1940	1941
» Analyze Graphs How did Roosevelt's cutback on federal spending in 1937 affect	i—
the unemployment rate?	I®
Interactive Timeline

The Great Depression and the New Deal 332	5.4 The New Deal Expands
increasingly drawn to events in Europe and Asia that would in 1939 lead to the outbreak of World War II.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did Roosevelt’s critics see his attempt to expand the Supreme Court as a challenge to the balance of power in U.S. government?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare and Contrast Discuss the similarities and differences between the first phase of the New Deal and the second phase.
2.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how the second phase of the New Deal affected farmers and changed their relationship with the federal government.
3.	Describe the New Deal’s impact on the American West.
4.	Evaluate Arguments Discuss the effectiveness of strategies used by the United Automobile Workers’ Union to protest General Motors.
5.	Generate Explanations Explain how the passage of labor reform legislation in 1937 marked a turning point in the history of the Supreme Court.
» Analyze Political Cartoons In this cartoon, what does the artist suggest is the relationship of the new Supreme Court Justices to President Roosevelt? What does Uncle Sam’s reaction suggest?
Interactive Chart
The Great Depression and the New Deal 333	5.4 The New Deal Expands
As the first African American female to head a federal agency and special adviser on minority affairs, Mary McLeod Bethune worked to promote educational opportunities for African Americans.
The New Deal provided desperately needed relief from the depression and enacted reforms that guarded against economic catastrophe. It did not end the depression. World War II, with its massive military spending, would do that. Yet, the New Deal mattered enormously because it brought fundamental changes to the nation. It changed the role of the federal government in the economy, the power of the presidency, and the relationship of the American people to their government.
!
Interactive Flipped Video
19.A, 26.D
» Objectives
Identify the social and political contributions of Eleanor Roosevelt, Frances Perkins, and other women involved in New Deal programs.
Explain how the New Deal expanded economic opportunities for racial and ethnic minorities.
Analyze how the New Deal changed the shape of American party politics and lessened ethnic and social divisions within American society.
Evaluate the effect of the New Deal on the historical role of the federal government and Franklin D. Roosevelt on the presidency.
» Key Terms
Black Cabinet Mary McLeod
Bethune Indian New Deal New Deal coalition welfare state
Effects of the New Deal
Women Play Increasingly
Significant Political Roles
The New Deal provided some women with the opportunity to increase their political influence and to promote women's rights. Foremost among them was Eleanor Roosevelt, who transformed the office of First Lady from a largely ceremonial role to a position of action and deep involvement in the political process. In fact, her more prominent role would set a precedent of increasing involvement in social and political affairs that many subsequent First Ladies would follow. Eleanor Roosevelt made numerous political, social, and economic contributions to American society. Representing the President, she toured the nation. She visited farms and Indian reservations and traveled deep into a coal mine. She helped FDR on his campaigns and offered advice on policy issues. In her newspaper column, “My Day, she called on Americans to live up to the political and social goal of equal justice for all.
Eleanor Roosevelt is the First Lady of Main Street,” explained magazine writer Margaret Marshall. "She occupies the highest social position in the land. Yet she makes friends on a plane or a train even as you and I.” Mrs. Roosevelt’s causes included advancing public health
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
334
and education, promoting the arts in rural areas, and even addressing flood control. She exhibited boundless energy, traveling more than 60,000 miles in two years.
Molly Dewson, head of the Women’s Division of the Democratic Party, observed that Eleanor Roosevelt provided women with an unprecedented access to the President. “When I wanted help on some definite point, Mrs. Roosevelt gave [me] the opportunity to sit by the President at dinner and the matter was settled before we finished our soup.”
The Roosevelt Administration included the first female Cabinet member, Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins. She played a leading role in establishing Social Security. Perkins also helped win approval of the Fair Labor Standards Act, which ended child labor and established a minimum wage.
However, the New Deal did not fight to end gender discrimination in the workplace. Indeed, some historians have argued that a number of New Deal programs reinforced traditional gender differences. The WPA and other relief programs employed women but made a much greater effort to provide work to men first. For example, women were not eligible to work for the CCC. Domestic workers, a category of jobs held primarily by women, were exempted from Social Security and the Fair Labor Standards Act.
H DESCRIBE
What role did Eleanor Roosevelt play during her husband’s presidency? A
Stronger Political Voice for African Americans When the depression hit, African American workers were often the first to lose their jobs. By 1934, the unemployment rate for African Americans was almost 50 percent, more than twice the national average. Eleanor Roosevelt and others urged the President to improve the situation of African Americans.
As the New Deal progressed, Eleanor Roosevelt increasingly used her position to protest against racial discrimination. At a meeting held by the Southern Conference on Human Welfare, a biracial group that sought to promote racial reforms, the First Lady sat with the black delegates—a daring move in segregated Birmingham, Alabama. When a white police officer told her that she was violating local segregation laws, Mrs. Roosevelt moved her chair to the space between the black and white sides. She then delivered a rousing and provocative keynote address in favor of racial reform.
We are the leading democracy of the world and as such must prove to the
» Eleanor Roosevelt visited an Ohio coal mine in one of her many trips around the country. Her outreach changed the role of First Lady, After Eleanor, First Ladies were often expected to be deeply involved in the nation’s affairs.
» Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins, here shaking hands with steel workers, helped secure the passage of key programs that ended child labor and established a minimum wage.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 335	5.5 Effects of the New Deal
world that democracy is possible and capable of living up to the principles upon which it was founded. The eyes of the world are upon us, and often we find they are not too friendly eyes.
—Eleanor Roosevelt, November 22, 1938
The President invited many African American leaders to advise him. These unofficial advisers became known as the Black Cabinet. They included Robert Weaver and William Hastie, Harvard University graduates who rose to high positions within the Department of the Interior. Hastie later served as a federal judge, and Weaver became the first African American Cabinet member in the 1960s.
Mary McLeod Bethune was another member of the Black Cabinet. The founder of what came to be known as Bethune Cookman College, she was a powerful champion of racial equality. In her view, the New Deal had created a “new day” for African Americans. She noted that African Americans gained unprecedented access to the White House and positions within the government during Roosevelt’s presidency.
Nevertheless, Roosevelt did not always follow the advice of his Black Cabinet. Racial discrimination and injustice continued to plague African Americans.
» The New Deal benefited Native Americans as well as other minority groups. It provided funds for the Navajo to open a new hospital in Fort Defiance, Arizona in 1938.
When the NAACP launched an energetic campaign in favor of a federal antilynching law, the President refused to support it. FDR told black leaders that he could not support an antilynching law, because if he did, southern Democrats “would block every bill I ask Congress to pass.” Hence, no civil rights reforms became law during the 1930s.
Several New Deal measures also unintentionally hurt African Americans. Federal payments to farmers to produce fewer crops led white landowners to evict unneeded black sharecroppers from their farms. Even though they benefited from the WPA and other relief measures, African Americans often did not receive equal wages. Social Security and the Fair Labor Standards Act exempted domestic workers and farm laborers, two occupations in which African Americans were employed in great numbers.
bi RECALL What role did the Black Cabinet play in the
Roosevelt Administration?
New Deal Legislation for Native Americans
Attempting to improve the lives of Native Americans, the Roosevelt administration made major changes in long-standing policies. The 1887 Dawes Act had divided tribal lands into smaller plots. By the early 1930s, it was clear that the act had worsened the condition of the people it was designed to help. Of the original 138 million acres American Indians had owned in 1887, only 48 million remained in American Indian hands, and much of it was too arid to farm. John Collier, the New Deal’s Commissioner of Indian Affairs, warned that the Dawes Act was resulting in “total landlessness for the Indians."
To prevent further loss of land and improve living conditions for Native Americans, Collier developed the Indian New Deal, a program that gave Indians economic assistance and greater control over their own affairs. Collier got funding from New Deal agencies for the construction of new schools and hospitals and to create an Indian Civilian Conservation Corps. In addition, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, in a reversal of previous policies, encouraged the practice of Indian religions, native languages, and traditional customs. Collier also convinced Congress to pass the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, considered the centerpiece of the Indian New Deal. This law restored tribal control over Native American land.
Although it did not immediately improve their standard of living, the Indian Reorganization Act gave Native Americans greater control over their destiny.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 336	5.5 Effects of the New Deal
The African American Vote by Party Affiliation, 1932-2012
» Analyze Graphs How would you describe the changes in African American voting behavior from 1932 to 2012?
But some New Deal measures actually hurt Native Americans. For example, federal authorities determined that large herds of sheep tended by the Navajos were causing soil erosion on the Colorado Plateau.
As a result, the federal government enacted a Navajo Livestock Reduction program, which mandated that the Navajo sell or kill thousands of sheep. The Navajo deeply resented this act. They did not believe that their sheep threatened the soil and they did not trust the motives of government agents.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What was the purpose of the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934?
A
New Political Coalition Emerges By the time he died in 1945, Roosevelt had been elected to four terms as President. His legendary political skills had united an unlikely alliance of Americans into a strong political force called the New Deal coalition. This coalition brought together southern whites, northern blue-collar workers—especially those with immigrant roots—poor midwestern farmers, and African Americans.
African American voting patterns show the importance of the New Deal coalition. Before the New
Deal, most African Americans voted Republican, the party of Abraham Lincoln. Responding to the efforts of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt, African Americans began to vote Democratic during the 1930s. This trend was strongest in the West and the North. For example, in 1934, Arthur W. Mitchell, an African American Democrat, defeated Oscar De Priest, an African American Republican, to represent the largely black south side of Chicago. Mitchell became the first African American Democrat elected to Congress.
The New Deal coalition gave the Democratic Party a sizable majority in both houses of Congress. Before FDR’s election, the Democrats had been the minority party in the House of Representatives for all but eight years since 1895. But from 1932 to 1995, the Democrats controlled the majority of seats in the House of Representatives for all but four years. The coalition that elected Roosevelt in 1932 went on to secure the White House for the Democrats in six of the next eight presidential elections.
Besides forging a powerful political coalition, Roosevelt and the New Deal helped to unify the nation. Social and ethnic divisions, so much a part of the 1920s, diminished significantly during the 1930s. Immigrant communities, in particular, gained a greater sense of belonging to the mainstream. Programs such as the CCC and WPA allowed individuals of varied backgrounds to get to know one another, breaking
The Great Depression and the New Deal 337	5.5 Effects of the New Deal
down regional and ethnic prejudices. As one CCC worker observed:
The Civilian Conservation Corps is a smaller melting pot within the big one. We are thrown together in such a way that we have to get acquainted whether or not we want to. . . .
Different races and nationalities look each other in the face, work and eat together for the first time. And it is a safe bet, we think, that this process many times results in the elimination of traditional prejudices based on ignorance and misinformation.
W.
Kirkpatrick, CCC worker El CHECK UNDERSTANDING How did the New Deal
coalition affect the balance of power in the House of Representatives and the Executive branch?
New Deal Legislation Expands the Historical Role of Government
New Deal programs greatly increased the size and scope of the federal government. “For the first time for many Americans,” writes historian William Leuchtenburg, “the federal government became an institution that was directly experienced. More than the state and local governments, it came to be the government.” Moreover, the government began to do things it had never done before, from withdrawing taxes directly from workers’ paychecks to distributing benefits to the elderly.
Though the New Deal did not end the depression, it did help restore the American economy. It created the foundation for sustained and stable growth. According to Pulitzer Prize-winning historian David Kennedy, “the unparalleled economic vitality of the post-1940 decades was attributable to many factors. But the [economic expansion] . .. owed much to the New Deal.”
An Increasingly Significant Role Promoting Economic Growth With the New Deal, the federal government broke from the tradition of laissez-faire, or leaving the economy alone, which had characterized most of American history. This changed the relationship
New Deal Legislation Passed After 1935
PROGRAM I
EFFECTS
Created a "safety net" in the form of a pension system and unemployment insurance; provided payments to workers injured on the job, the poor, the elderly, and people with disabilities
Employed millions of people on government projects ranging from highway construction to arts programs
Provided loans to electric companies to build power lines, bringing electricity to isolated rural areas
Outlawed unfair labor practices; granted workers the right to organize unions and to bargain collectively; created the National Labor Relations Board
Provided young Americans between 16 and 25 with jobs and counseling; tied to the WPA
Finalized the creation of the FDIC and made insurance for bank deposits permanent; created a board to regulate the nation's money supply and interest rates on loans
Remedied ineffectual early efforts by the federal government to provide housing for lower income families by assisting individual homebuyers; led to the 1937 passing of the United States Housing Act, which subsidized construction of low-cost public housing by providing federal loans
Expanded the federal government's reach by establishing nationwide compulsory regulation of wages and hours; banned child labor, established a minimum wage of 25 cents per hour, and set the workweek at 44 hours Prohibited the mislabeling of food, drugs, and cosmetics, and ensured the safety and purity of these products
>> Analyze Charts The New Deal is considered, by some to be a reform movement. Explain whether or not this view can be justified, using specific examples from the chart.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 338	5.5 Effects of the New Deal
between government and private business. Instead of being hands-off, now the federal government accepted responsibility for spurring economic growth, or pump priming. For the first time, the government had acted as an employer of the unemployed and a sponsor of work projects. FDR accepted the idea that the federal government had to do something to get the economy going again, and Democrats and many Republicans agreed.
FDR’s rejection of laissez-faire policies led a number of New Deal critics to accuse him of promoting socialism. However, many New Deal measures actually strengthened capitalism and helped make possible the economic boom of the post-World War II era.
The FDIC and SEC restored Americans’ trust in banks and the stock market, and the significant gap between the rich and the poor remained relatively lower for several decades. The Federal Housing Authority (FHA) provided low-interest loans, increasing home ownership.
The New Deal affected millions of individual workers and their families. The Wagner Act boosted union membership, which continued to grow after World War II. Minimum wage increases improved the purchasing power of minorities and those at the bottom rung of the economic ladder. New Deal legislation created child labor laws, workers’ compensation laws, and unemployment insurance, programs that had important and enduring impacts on the U.S. economy.
The New Deal had a great impact on rural Americans. Regional public-works projects, such as the TVA and Bonneville Dam, reduced flooding and provided water for irrigation. Along with the Rural Electrification Administration, these dams brought electricity to farmers in the Southeast and the Northwest. Rose Dudley Scearce of Shelby, Kentucky, recalled what the REA meant to her farm family:
The first benefit we received from the REA was light, and aren’t lights grand? My little boy expressed my sentiments when he said, ‘Mother, I didn’t realize how dark our house was until we got electric lights.’ . . . Like the rest of the people, we changed our storage-battery radio into an electric radio. . . . Next we bought an electric refrigerator. . . . The next benefit we received from the current was our electric stove. . . . Now with a vacuum cleaner, I can even dust the furniture
» Men working on the Arkansas River flood control project funded by the Works Progress Administration (WPA).
Interactive Map
before I clean the carpet, the carpet
gets clean, and I stay in good humor.
—Rose Dudley Scearce, “What the REA Service Means to Our Farm House”
A
Federal Safety Net for Those in Need “We are going to make a country in which no one is left out,” Franklin Roosevelt once told Frances Perkins. The many programs he enacted to realize this goal led to the rise of a welfare state in the United States, a government that assumes responsibility for providing for the welfare of children and the poor, elderly, sick, disabled, and unemployed.
The creation of the American welfare state was a major change in government policy. With the exception of military veterans, most Americans had never received any direct benefits from the federal government. State and local governments, private charities, and families had long served as the safety net for needy Americans. True, the New Deal did not achieve FDR’s goal of “a country in which no one is left out,” because it exempted many Americans from Social Security and other programs. Still, New Deal legislation changed the historical roles of state and federal governments. It established the principle that the federal government, not state or local government,
The Great Depression and the New Deal 339	5.5 Effects of the New Deal
J1'
was responsible for the welfare of all Americans. In the latter half of the twentieth century, the reach of federal government programs would grow greatly.
New Deal reforms provided the framework for the debate over the proper role of the federal government in the private lives of Americans. It energized liberals who would push for an even greater role for the federal government in future years. But it troubled conservatives who would argue that the expansion of the federal government limited American rights. For example, many argued that New Deal legislation increasing the strength of unions and raising the minimum wage infringed on the rights of business owners and limited job creation and economic growth. Many also did not support federal welfare programs, because they felt that the federal government was assuming responsibilities that were otherwise granted to the states by the Tenth Amendment. Indeed, this very debate over the role of the federal government in the lives of its citizens divides liberals and conservatives to this day.
Conservation Efforts Produce Mixed Results
Reared in New York State’s beautiful Hudson River valley, Franklin Roosevelt had a great love of nature. As a child, FDR also loved outdoor sports and became an expert swimmer and sailor. A number of his New Deal programs, such as the CCC, aimed at restoring forests and preserving the environment.
Other federal agencies started soil conservation efforts. Perhaps most visibly, New Dealers worked hard to end the Dust Bowl, a symbol of the degraded state of the land at the beginning of the depression.
Franklin Roosevelt also continued the conservation work of his cousin, President Theodore Roosevelt. Although funds were short, the government set aside about 12 million acres of land for new national parks, including Shenandoah National Park in Virginia, Kings Canyon National Park in California, and Olympic National Park in Washington State.
However, not all New Deal programs helped the environment. Several of the large public-works projects, such as the TVA and the string of dams along the Columbia River, had a mixed impact. The dams controlled floods, generated electric power, and provided irrigation, but they also upset the natural habitats of some aquatic life. Massive reservoirs created by these projects also displaced some people and destroyed some traditional Native American burial, hunting, and fishing grounds.
An Expansion of Executive Power In no area did FDR have a greater impact than on the office of the President itself. The expanding role of the government, including the creation of many new federal agencies, gave the executive branch much more power. New Deal administrators, such as Harry Hopkins, head of the WPA, commanded large bureaucracies with massive budgets and little supervision by Congress. Their authority increased Roosevelt’s influence. Indeed, some commentators even began to speak of the rise of an imperial presidency, an unflattering comparison to the power exercised in the past by rulers of great empires.
FDR also affected the style of the presidency. His mastery of the radio captivated Americans. His close relations with the press assured a generally popular
FDR'S EFFECT ON THE PRESIDENCY
•	Increased power of the President and the executive branch
•	Made mass media, such as radiol, an essential tool in advertising and promoting policies
•	Expanded role of the President in managing the economy
•	Expanded role of the President in developing social policy
•	Won third and fourth terms, leading to passage of Twenty-second Amendment, which limited Presidents to two consecutive terms
•	Expanded White House staff to include experts and advisers on domestic and foreign policy
•	Shaped the President's image as caretaker of the American people
•	Increased the power and involvement of the federal government in American life
*---------------------------—...........- ■
>> Analyze Charts How did FDR’s policies affect the role of the executive branch?
la
The Great Depression and the New Deal 340
5.5 Effects of the New Deal
response to his projects from the major media. Because he served for such a long time and was such an outstanding communicator, FDR set a standard that future Presidents had a hard time fulfilling.
Later, during World War II, FDR’s presidential power grew even greater. As commander in chief of the nation’s armed forces, he exercised enormous authority over many aspects of life.
Most Americans accepted the President’s increased authority as a necessary condition of wartime. But after the war, they sought to protect the delicate balance between the different branches of government and between the federal and state governments. The debate over the increasing power of the Executive branch relative to other branches is another New Deal legacy that lives on today.
One way that Americans sought to guard against the growing power of the President was by amending the Constitution. When Roosevelt ran for an unprecedented third term in 1940, he knew that he had broken an unwritten rule, established by George Washington, that Presidents should serve only two terms. He won that election and then ran and won again in 1944. But after Roosevelt’s death in 1945, there was a growing call for limiting a President’s term in office. In 1951, the Twenty-second Amendment was ratified, limiting the President to two consecutive terms.
» President Roosevelt, here having lunch with CCC recruits, set the standard for all future presidential hopefuls with his ability to relate to and communicate with the American public and press.
Interactive Chart
©
Ell DEFINE How would you define a welfare state?
ASSESSMENT
1. Support a Point of View with Evidence Explain why some people argue that the New Deal reinforced traditional gender differences.
2.	Identify Central Issues Explain how Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt affected the civil rights of African Americans.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain how the New Deal helped to unify people within United States.
4.	Describe major changes in government policy that occurred during Roosevelt’s presidency.
5.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss the environmental impact of New Deal programs.
■i
■ 341 i 5.5 Effects of the New Deal
1. *1
The Great Depression and the New Deal
5.6
Dorothea Lange’s “Migrant Mother” was in fact, Florence Owens Thompson, who settled in California where she raised her ten children and passed away in 1983.
Mass entertainment flourished during the New Deal years as Americans sought escape from the worries of the depression. And, for the first time, the government played an active role in the arts, creating programs that put artists to work. It was a golden age for entertainment, and the movies, music, and works of literature produced during this era hold a unique place in American culture.
Interactive Flipped Video
25.A, 25.B
» Objectives
Trace the growth of radio and the movies in the 1930s and how both mediums reflected to the characteristics and issues of their.
Explain the relationship between the New Deal and the arts.
Describe the major themes of literature in the Depression era.
» Key Terms
Frank Capra Federal Art Project mural
Dorothea Lange John Steinbeck Lillian Heilman
Culture During the Depression
A
New Age in American Entertainment
Entertainment became big business during the 1930s. Large radio networks, such as NBC and CBS, were broadcasting giants while j a cluster of film companies—including MGM, Warner Brothers, j Twentieth Century Fox, and Paramount—dominated the silver screen.
By 1935, two in three homes owned a radio; by the end of the decade, i about nine in ten did. In 1939, nearly two thirds of all Americans ; attended at least one movie a week. Stars in both industries made I fortunes and attracted loyal followings. Glossy fan magazines tracked [ the stars’ personal and professional lives.
Temporary Relief From the Challenges of the Depression
Above all, when Americans went to the movies during the Great 1 Depression, they did so as a means of escapism. They sought relief from their concerns through a good laugh, a good cry, a lyrical song, or by seeing good triumph over evil. The Wizard ofOz, one of the most memorable depression-era films, delivered all four. It promised weary audiences that their dreams really would come true.
PEARSON I
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
342
The big movie studios churned out the popular genres of musicals, romantic comedies, and gangster films. Children marveled at the colorful animation of Walt Disney’s Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. For a good scare, teens and young adults flocked to Frankenstein. Adults watched dancers Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers glide effortlessly across the ballroom floor in Top Hat. And millions wept as they watched the stormy love affair between characters played by Clark Gable and Vivien Leigh in the Civil War epic Gone With the Wind.
Depression-Era Films Reflect Social Issues In the
early 1930s, many films reflected the public’s distrust of big business and government. Gangster movies, such as Public Enemy starring James Cagney, were very popular. These films showed a declining faith in government and law enforcement, with characters turning to crime to survive the depression. But as the New Deal restored confidence, the government regained its glow, and movies began portraying government officials as heroes. In 1935, Cagney portrayed an FBI agent who captured the bad guys in G-Men.
Other films reflected the struggle against hardship that many Americans were waging by focuing on the strength of average Americans. Director Frank Capra was a leader of this genre. The characters in his films were everyday people struggling with the hardships of the time. In Capra’s Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, actor James Stewart plays a junior senator who fights against the greed and corruption he finds in the nation’s capital. Depression-era audiences cheered Capra’s films, which celebrate American idealism and the triumph of the common man over the forces of adversity.
Radio’s Increasing Popularity The success of the movie industry was matched by that of radio. The national radio networks broadcast popular shows starring comedians such as Bob Hope and Jack Benny. Americans avidly followed soap operas, variety shows, and humorists, such as Will Rogers. Dramatic shows were also popular. The Lone Ranger started its run in 1933 and ran for more than 20 years. The detective serial The Shadow began each thrilling episode with the haunting line, “Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men?”
In addition to providing entertainment, the family radio provided information. FDR used his fireside chats to explain and promote his New Deal programs. Newscasters delivered the daily news and political commentary.
On at least one occasion, radio listeners had a hard time recognizing the difference between news and
fA
» Even as the depression continued, Americans flocked to the movies. Adjusted for inflation, the 1939 epic Gone With the Wind is the largest grossing movie of all time.
» The advent of radio was not simply a way for Americans to listen to music. As the film industry exploded, so did radio shows, such as comedian Bob Hope’s variety show.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 343	5.6 Culture During the Depression
entertainment. It happened on the night of October 30, 1938, when millions of Americans tuned in to a drama called War of the Worlds, directed by Orson Welles. The Mercury Theatre broadcast was so realistic that many people believed that Martians were actually invading. Panic gripped areas of the country until announcers insisted that it was all make-believe.
The Sounds of an Era Like films and radio shows, various genres of music provided a diversion from hard times. Whether listening to the radio at home or dancing in nightclubs, Americans enjoyed the popular music of the day. "Swing” music played by “big bands” topped the charts. Duke Ellington, Benny Goodman, Artie Shaw, Glenn Miller, and Jimmy and Tommy Dorsey were some of the top swing musicians, a term probably derived from Ellington’s tune “It Don’t Mean a Thing If It Ain't Got That Swing.” Your Hit Parade and Make Believe Ballroom—the program that introduced disc jockeys—were just two of the radio shows that brought the latest tunes to listeners. The most popular vocalist of the era was Bing Crosby.
Latin music was very popular. The rhythms of the rumba and the samba had a special appeal for dancers, and Latin bands were prominently featured in films and on the radio.
» Not all popular music in the 1930s described happier days. American blues musician Huddie Ledbetter, better known as “Leadbelly,” played music that reflected the harsh experiences of African Americans.
Some genres of music were more somber, reflecting the issues of the time, including folk and ethnic music. Black singers focused on the harsh conditions faced by African Americans.
Huddie Ledbetter, a folk singer known as “Leadbelly,” described experiences of African Americans with the songs “Cotton Fields” and “The Midnight Special.” Folk singer Woody Guthrie wrote ballads about the Okies, farmers who fled Dust Bowl states and headed to California. Guthrie’s song “Dust Bowl Refugee” helped listeners understand the Okies’s plight.
U CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why were many of Frank Capra’s films so popular with many Americans?
Increased Funding for the Arts
During the New Deal, the federal government provided funding for the arts for the first time in American history. Recognizing that many artists and writers faced dire circumstances, WPA administrator Harry Hopkins established a special branch of the WPA to provide artists with work. Programs such as the Federal Art Project, the Federal Writers’ Project, and the Federal Theatre Project offered a variety of job opportunities to artists.
In federally funded theaters, musicians and actors staged performances that were often free to the public. In a series of new state guidebooks, WPA writers recorded the history and folklore of the nation.
Artists painted huge, dramatic murals on public buildings across the nation. These paintings celebrated the accomplishments of the workers who helped build the nation. Many of the murals can still be seen in public buildings today.
Photographers also benefited from federal arts programs. The Resettlement and Farm Security Administration (FSA) sought to document the plight of America’s farmers. Roosevelt’s top aide, Rexford Tugwell, told the head of the FSA, "Show the city people what it’s like to live on the farm.” Walker Evans and Dorothea Lange were among the FSA photographers who created powerful images of impoverished farmers and migrant workers, including Lange’s famous photo “Migrant Mother."
When Dorothea took that picture that was the ultimate. She never surpassed it. . . . She has all the suffering of mankind in her but all the
The Great Depression and the New Deal 344
5.6 Culture During the Depression
perseverance too. A restraint and a strange courage.
—Roy Stryker, FSA, on Dorothea Lange’s “Migrant Mother"
Some members of Congress warned of negative impacts of the Federal Art, Writers’ and Theatre programs, fearing that they promoted radical values. Congressman J. Parnell Thomas described the Federal Writers’ and Theatre projects as “a hotbed for Communists.” Eleanor Roosevelt and others defended the programs on the grounds that they did not “believe in censoring anything.” Nonetheless, congressional support for the programs declined. Although the Federal Art, Writers’ and Theatre programs ceased to exist in the late 1930s and early 1940s, they set a precedent for further federal funding of the arts and humanities in the 1960s.
H DESCRIBE
What was the purpose of the Federal Art Project?
The Depression Era
Reflected in Literature
The literature of the 1920s, from authors such as F. Scott Fitzgerald and Ernest Hemingway, sometimes overshadows the literature of the 1930s. Still, the depression era produced some memorable works in multiple genres of literature that reflected some of the issues and characteristics of their unique time.
American Society Under the Microscope During the depression, many writers drifted to the left and crafted novels featuring working-class heroes. They believed that the American economic system no longer worked and they blamed this failure on political and business leaders. Many artists of the 1930s saw “ordinary Americans” as the best hope for a better day.
The most famous novel of the 1930s was John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath. Steinbeck follows the fictional Joad family from their home in Oklahoma, which has been ravaged by Dust Bowl conditions, to California, where they hope to build a better life. But instead of the Promised Land, the Joads encounter exploitation, disease, hunger, and political corruption.
African American writers captured the special plight of blacks, facing both the depression and continuing prejudice. Richard Wright’s Native Son explored racial prejudice in a northern urban setting. Wright was an outspoken critic of racial discrimination.
» The Federal Art Project employed artists to create colorful murals—such as this one at the Coit Tower, in San Francisco, California—in buildings throughout the nation.
» Like many other authors of the 1930s, John Steinbeck, author of The Grapes of Wrath and Of Mice and Men, wrote works that focused on the struggles of America’s poor and working class.
The Great Depression and the New Deal 345	5.6 Culture During the Depression
» Although comic books were not new, the 1930s saw the birth of the “superhero" comic. The exploits of Superman thrilled comic-book fans in the 1930s.
Playwrights Champion Women and the Working Class In New York, some important playwrights had their first successes during the New Deal period. Lillian Heilman, a New Orleans native, wrote several plays featuring strong roles for women. Heilman’s plays The Children's Hour, The Little Foxes, and Watch on the Rhine are also notable for their socially conscious subject matter that reflected some controversial issues of the time.
Clifford Odets was another dramatist who achieved prominence in the 1930s. His plays Waiting for Lefty and Awake and Sing! chronicle the struggles of the working class during the Great Depression.
Comics Entertain and Inspire On a lighter note, many Americans devoured comic strips and comic books during the 1930s. Among the most popular comic strips were Flash Gordon, a science-fiction saga; Dick Tracy, a detective story; and Superman, the first great “superhero" comic. The success of Superman, which began in 1938, quickly led to a radio show and later to a popular television series and several feature films. Superman reassured Americans that ordinary citizens, like mild-mannered Clark Kent, could overcome evil.
H RECALL
What were some themes common to Depression-era literature?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Explain how music helped to unify people during the Great Depression.
2.	Apply Concepts Discuss the relationship between escapism and American entertainment during the 1930s.
3.	Compare Points of View Explain why some people criticized the New Deal’s federal arts programs while others defended them.
4.	Draw Conclusions Explain how the U.S. entertainment industry changed during the 1930s.
5.	Make Generalizations Explain why John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath achieved so much success during the 1930s.
The Great Depression and the New Deal
5.6 Culture During the Depression
The Dust Bowl
Analyze Causes and Effects of Changing Demographic Patterns Analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including rural to urban, by posing and answering questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on a map. Discuss what caused farm families to leave rural areas in the Great Plains and migrate to cities, and the effects of that migration. Then pose and answer questions about the distributions and patterns you see on the map above. In your questions and answers, consider what the map shows about migration, why people left rural areas in the Great Plains, why many rural migrants settled in cities, and what the effect of this massive migration was on rural and urban demographic patterns. 13.A, 31.B
Explain Significance of 1929 Explain the significance of the following year as a turning point: 1929 (the Great Depression begins). Write a paragraph explaining why 1929 was a significant date in the Great Depression. Explain what happened to the stock market in 1929, identify the timeline of events, and explain why this was a turning point. 2.D
Identify Impact of Stock Market Speculation on Great Depression Use correct social studies terminology while identifying the causes of the Great Depression, including stock market speculation. Write a paragraph identifying how stock market speculation led to the Great Crash that marked the beginning of the Great Depression. Identify what stock market speculation is and how stock market speculation contributed to the Great Crash. 16.B, 30.B
4.	Identify Impact of Tariffs on the Great Depression Identify the causes of the Great Depression, including the impact of tariffs on world trade. Write a paragraph identifying how tariffs contributed to the Great Depression by affecting world trade. Identify what the Hawley-Smoot Tariff was, why Congress passed the tariff, how European countries reacted to the tariff, and how these actions affected American producers and international trade. 16.B
5.	Analyze Impact of Geographic Factors on the Dust Bowl Analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the Dust Bowl. Write a paragraph analyzing how human factors and the physical characteristics of the Great Plains worked together
to produce the Dust Bowl. Consider the physical characteristics of the Great Plains that contributed to the Dust Bowl and how farming and cattle grazing contributed to the Dust Bowl. 12.A
6.	Identify Effects of Population Growth and Distribution Identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment. Write a paragraph identifying how the growth and distribution of the farming population on the Great Plains affected the physical environment. Identify why farmers moved to the Great Plains in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, how the farmers who moved to the Great Plains after 1909 affected population distribution, and how these population changes affected the physical environment of the Great Plains. 14.A
The Great Depression and the New Deal
347
TEKS ASSESSMENT
7.	Describe Qualities of Effective Leadership Describe qualities of effective leadership. Write a paragraph comparing the leadership qualities of Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt in dealing with the Great Depression. Describe each President’s approach to resolving the problems created by the Great Depression and evaluate the two approaches in terms of effective leadership. 24.A
8.	Describe Continued Effect of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Describe how various New Deal agencies and programs, including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, continue to affect the lives of U.S. citizens. Write a paragraph describing the effect of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) during the Great Depression and today. Describe why the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was created and why the FDIC is still important today. 16.E
9.	Evaluate a Source Compare the New Deal policies and its opponents’ approaches to resolving the economic effects of the Great Depression by evaluating a source. Select one of the following primary sources:
Alf Landon’s speech, “I Will Not Promise the Moon”;
Paul W. Ward’s newspaper article, “Nothing Red but the Tape”; or Mordecai Ezekiel’s newspaper article,
“Farm Aid—Fourth Stage.” After reading the primary source, write a paragraph evaluating the source's validity based on the following criteria: language; corroboration with other sources; and information about the author, including points of view, frames of reference, and historical context. 16.D, 29.E
10.	Evaluate Historical Roles of State and Federal Government Evaluate'the impact of New Deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government. Write a paragraph evaluating how the New Deal changed the historical roles of the federal and state governments when it came to providing a safety net for citizens. Consider the following questions: Who was responsible for people’s welfare before the New Deal? According to the quotation below and the lessons, how did the establishment of the welfare state under the New Deal change these traditional roles? 19. A
For the first time for many Americans, the federal government became an institution that was directly experienced. More than the state and local governments, it came to be the government.
—William Leuchtenburg, Historian
11.	Understand Effects of Government Actions on Communities Understand the effects of governmental actions on communities, in part by using appropriate skills to analyze and interpret social studies information such as maps. Write a paragraph discussing how creation of the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) affected rural communities in the Tennessee River valley, including their property rights. Consider why Congress created the Tennessee Valley Authority, consider what the map below and the text indicate about how the TVA benefited rural communities, and infer how building the structures shown on the map might have affected the property rights of those living in the valley. 14.C, 29.H
The Tennessee Valley Authority
The Great Depression and the New Deal ; 348
12.	Evaluate Roosevelt’s Plan to Increase Number of Supreme Court Justices Evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government, including Franklin D. Roosevelt’s attempt to increase the number of U.S. Supreme Court justices. Write a paragraph evaluating Roosevelt’s proposed plan to add justices to the Supreme Court. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What was Roosevelt’s plan, and how did he justify it? What does the political cartoon below illustrate about the goal of Roosevelt’s plan? What did critics argue that Roosevelt’s plan would do to the balance between the three branches of the federal government? Why did Roosevelt not carry out his plan? What does the expression “switch in time to save nine” imply about the votes cast by Justice Owen J. Roberts? 20.B
13.	Discuss Solvency of Social Security Create a written presentation of social studies information by using a problem-solving process to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution related to the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social Security. Create a written presentation that discusses the long-term solvency of Social Security and evaluates possible solutions.
Be sure to identify the problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, and propose and evaluate possible solutions. 11 .F, 30.A, 32.A
14.	Understand Effects of Government Actions on Individuals Understand the effects of governmental actions on individuals, including the impact of New Deal programs on farmers’ property. Write a paragraph discussing the effects of the Agricultural Adjustment Act on individual farmers, including how they used their land. Consider what problems the Agricultural Adjustment Act was meant to address and how the act sought to address the problems and infer how the act affected how farmers used their land. 14.C
15.	Explain Constitutional Issues During Great Depression Explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including the Great Depression. Write a paragraph describing the Supreme Court decision
in Schechter Poultry v. United States. Explain which New Deal act was involved in the litigation and what reason the Supreme Court gave for declaring the act unconstitutional. 19.B
16.	Identify Contributions of Eleanor Roosevelt Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Eleanor Roosevelt to American society. Write a paragraph identifying how Eleanor Roosevelt contributed to American society as First Lady. Consider the effect she had on the role of First Lady, how she helped President Roosevelt politically, and the role she played in promoting social and economic causes. 26.D
17.	Explain Actions to Expand Economic Opportunities of Native Americans Explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities, including those for racial minorities, in American society. Write a paragraph evaluating the overall effectiveness of the Indian New Deal. Consider the purpose of the Indian New Deal and its centerpiece legislation, the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, and how some parts of the Indian New Deal helped Native Americans, while other measures harmed them. 26.A
18.	Describe Changing Relationship Between Federal Government and Business Describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire. Write a paragraph describing the different views President Hoover and President Roosevelt had about the costs and benefits of laissez-faire during the Great Depression. Consider how President Hoover relied on the traditional benefits of laissez-faire to address the economic downturn and how President Roosevelt’s actions indicate that he believed that the costs of supporting the tradition of laissez-faire were too great in the economic climate of the 1930s. 15.B
The Great Depression and the New Deal
349
19.	Identify Roles in Managing the Environment Identify the roles of governmental entities and private
citizens in managing the environment, such as the establishment of the National Park System. Write a paragraph identifying the role the government played in expanding the National Park System and managing the environment during the Great Depression. Identify how much land was set aside for national parks and the government’s mixed results in managing the environment. 14.B
20.	Explain Constitutional Issues Explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War II, and discuss historical reasons why the Constitution has been amended. Write a paragraph explaining
how Americans reacted to Roosevelt’s growing presidential power during World War II and how the Constitution was amended following Roosevelt’s death and why. 19.B, 21.B
21.	Analyze Effects of Great Depression Analyze the effects of the Great Depression on the U.S. economy and society. Write a paragraph analyzing how the Works Progress Administration (WPA) addressed the economic needs of artists, writers, musicians, and actors during the Great Depression and how the WPA projects contributed to society. 16.C
22.	Describe Positive and Negative Impacts of Music Describe how the characteristics in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of music by analyzing information by drawing inferences. Write a paragraph inferring how some genres of depression-era music served as escapes from the harsh realities of the times, while other forms reminded Americans of how some groups in society were suffering. Consider the effects of swing, Latin music, and folk. 25.A, 29.B
23.	Describe Positive and Negative Impacts of
Art Describe the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art. Write a paragraph describing how opponents and supporters of the Federal Art, Writers’, and Theatre programs held different views about their impact. Describe why some members of Congress thought the programs had a negative impact and how supporters of the program responded to this criticism. 25.B
24.	Describe Characteristics and Issues of Great Depression Reflected in Art Describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art by using a variety of primary and secondary valid sources to acquire information to analyze and answer historical questions. Use the photograph below, a secondary source quotation about the photograph, and at least one other Lange photograph and secondary source about that photograph, and the information from the lessons in this topic to write a paragraph answering the following question: How did Lange’s photographs capture the characteristics and issues of the Great Depression. Consider why the Resettlement and Farm Security Administration (FSA) hired photographers like Lange, what you can determine about the lives of farmers and migrant workers from Lange’s photographs and from the secondary sources about Lange’s work, and how the photographs reflect the characteristics and issues of the Great Depression. 25.A, 29.A
25.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What should governments do? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
The Great Depression and the New Deal
I
I
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE

The Great Depression and the New Deal
351
1 What is the main significance of the year 1929 in United States history?
A
The Republicans gained control of both houses of Congress. B
The Dust Bowl intensified farming difficulties on the Great Plains. C
Industrial workers set up labor unions in response to lowered wages. D The Great Depression began with the collapse of the stock market. 2	What statement below best describes what caused the Dust Bowl event pictured in this photograph?
F
Irrigation systems failed during the Great Depression, leaving the land dry and subject to heavy topsoil erosion during windstorms. G
Unusually high winds pulled up prairie grasses on unfarmed land and blew the soil beneath them in clouds across the level lands of the Great Plains. H
Because of the economic situation, farmers refused to plant winter wheat, and this left the topsoil exposed to harsh winds from the Rocky Mountains. J
Farmers plowed up the deep-rooted prairie grasses to plant wheat, so when drought came and the land dried up, there was nothing to keep the topsoil from blowing away. The Great Depression and the New Deal f. 352 '
Access additional practice questions
3	The main purpose of this map is to show the—
A physical consequences of the farming recession B limitations of the effects of the Great Depression C major regions that gained population in the 1930s D extent of migration from areas affected by erosion
4	Which statement describes a remaining effect of the Social Security Act of 1935? F A pension system provides economic support to retired workers.
G
Payroll taxes are decreased for certain employers and their workers. H
Widows with families receive larger benefits than widowers with families. J
Farm workers and domestic workers have to secure their own insurance. If you have trouble with...				
Question	1	2	! 3	4
See Lesson	5.1	5.2	5.2	5.4
teks	2.D	12.A	|	12.A, 29.H	16.E
The Great Depression and the New Deal
5	In what way was Eleanor Roosevelt’s approach to her role as First Lady most significant to American society as a whole?
A
Her role as a public figure reflected well upon the President. B
She established a link between the public and the President. C
Her actions helped to promote the political influence of women. D
She created a powerful position for a woman to take as First Lady. When Dorothea took that picture that was the ultimate. She never surpassed it. . . . She has all the suffering of mankind in her but all the perseverance too. A restraint and a strange courage.
—Floy Stryker, FSA, on Dorothea Lange’s “Migrant Mother”
Based on the quotation above, how did funding for arts such as photography help preserve the history and character of Americans during the Great Depression?
F
It allowed artists to celebrate the success of Depression recovery programs. G
It required artists to capture current events that newspapers and radio reports had ignored. H
It allowed artists to make a living as they recorded the suffering and the great character of the American people. J
It controlled what artists could paint and photograph, allowing the government to paint a rosy picture of economic recovery. The Great Depression and the New Deal 354
7 What major factors caused the Great Migration of African Americans in the decade between 1910 and 1920?
A
Many African Americans became disillusioned with conditions in northern factories and moved to the south where they established large farms. B
Many African Americans fled discrimination and failing farms in the south and moved to northern cities for a range of economic opportunities. C
Many African Americans lost their livelihoods in the south when the boll weevil ruined the cotton crop, so they moved north to farm corn and wheat. D
Many African Americans migrated west to California to become farmers in the Imperial Valley, but many later moved to Los Angeles to work in factories. 8	Which statement best describes both the positive and negative effects of country and western music on American society during the 1920s?
F
Millions of country and western music albums were sold, but the price of the albums denied ordinary workers the privilege of purchase. G
Country and western lyrics allowed people in the North and East to experience life on the frontier, but this fostered envy for Western lifestyles. H
Country and western music spread the symbol of the American cowboy throughout the nation, but the lyrics perpetuated myths about frontier life. J
Country and western music became popular throughout the country, but it monopolized listeners so that other forms of music received decreasing recognition. If you have trouble with...				
Question	j	5	6	7	8
See Lesson j	5.5	5.6	4.4	4.7
TEKS T 26.D 25.A 13.A 5.A
The Great Depression and the New Deal
4 TOPIC 6 TEKS Master
World War II
In this Topic, you will learn about the events of World War II. You will also find lots of ways to investigate the ideas of this Topic and to master the TEKS.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
2.D, 7.A, 7.B, 7.C, 7.D, 7.E, 7.F, 7.G, 9.B, 10.D, 11.C, 12.B, 13.A, 17.A, 17.C, 17.E, 19.B, 19.E, 26.D, 26.F, 27.B, 29.B, 29.D, 29.H
9 Connect
: My Story Video and Topic Essential Question—
: see how they connect to your past experience or : to what you have already learned. The Essential : Question for this Topic is: When is war justified?
\ Begin your study by trying the i following:
a^&NBC LEARN Watch My Story Video:
: Murray Gittleman, World War II Veteran
Launch your Project:
• Build a World War II Website
LESSON OUTLINE
6.1: Rise of Aggressive Dictators 7.A 6.2: America Debates Involvement 2.D,
7.B, 29.H
6.3: America Enters World War II 2.D, 7.A, 7.B, 7.E, 7.F, 7.G, 17.A
A
War on Two Fronts 7.B, 7.E, 7.F, 7.G 6.5: The Home Front 7.C, 7.D, 7.G, 9.B, 13.A, 17.A, 19.B
6.6: The Allies Win World War II 2.D, 7.B, 7.D, 7.E, 7.F, 7.G, 26.F, 27.B
6.7: The Holocaust 7.D, 7.E
6.8: Impact of World War II 2.D, 7.B, 11.C,
17.E, 19.B, 19.E
• Investigate
: A group of lessons will help : you investigate the Topic : further. Each lesson has : interesting text readings and : fascinating interactivities.
: Together, they will bring the : Topic to life and help you ; master the TEKS for this Topic
: And keep working on your ; Project. You’re almost ready ; to show what you have ; accomplished by expressing ; your position using the t evidence you have gathered.
o
» Digital interactivity from the online course
*	Synthesize
: You’ll see that this Topic is about : more than fascinating texts and : fun interactivities. It’s really about : how those things help you think : about big ideas, like the Essential
•	Question for this Topic.
9 Demonstrate
: Completing this Topic is like ; practicing all your soccer skills or : rehearsing the scenes in a play.
: Now you get a chance to pull it all ; together for the final game or the : live performance. You can do this on : the Topic Review and Assessment : pages. Or you can complete work : on your Project, Build a World War II • Website..................
TEKS in Topic 6	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 6	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
2.D	4	13. A	9
7.A	1,2	17. A	5,6
7.B	13	17.C	21
7.C	7	17.E	18
7.D	8	19.B	10
7.E	15, 22	19.E	19
7.F	22	26.D	20
7.G	3,5	26.F	14
9.B	11	27.B	16
10.D	12	29.B	6
11.C	19	29.D	19
12.B	17	29.H	1
357
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
When is war justified? I
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
Enduring Understandings
•	World War II began when aggressive dictators tried to expand their empires.
•	The United States hesitated to become involved, but the attack on Pearl Harbor drew the country into the war.
•	The United States played a crucial role in winning the war, both through its military contributions and its great production capacity.
•	Millions were killed during the war, including 6 million Jews and 5 million others murdered by the Nazis in the Holocaust.
• World War II ended the Great Depression in the United States and increased the nation’s importance as a player on the world stage.
Hitler was a powerful speaker who attracted masses of people with promises of “Germany Over All.”
Why would mass meetings and marches be important in a totalitarian state?
|roj Interactive Flipped Video
The effects of World War I and the Great Depression touched almost every corner of the world. In some countries, these upheavals led to the rise of a new kind of brutal dictatorship—the totalitarian state. These states were led by absolute dictators, leaders willing to use acts of aggression to invade other nations in order to enhance their own power. Their actions would destroy the peace established after World War I and spark a new, even deadlier, global conflict.
» Objectives
Explain the rise of dictatorships in the Soviet Union, Italy, Germany, and Japan in the 1930s.
Rise of Aggressive Dictators
Peace Dissolves
Summarize acts of aggression by Italy, Germany, and Japan.
Analyze the responses of Britain, France, and the United States to the aggressive regimes.
» Key Terms
aggression totalitarianism Joseph Stalin Benito Mussolini Spanish Civil War General Francisco
Franco
appeasement Franklin D.
Roosevelt Anschluss Neville Chamberlain Munich Pact fascism Adolf Hitler anti-Semitic
In November 1918, World War I ended when Germany surrendered to the Allies. In 1919, delegates from 27 nations met in Versailles to hammer out a peace agreement, but only Britain, France, and the United States had a real say in most of the important decisions. Germany and Russia were not even present. From the first, many Germans resented the resulting Treaty of Versailles. Other nations also grumbled over the peace settlements.
Italy and Japan, both World War I Allies, had expected far more land for their sacrifices. The war that American President Woodrow Wilson had called “a war to end all wars" had left behind a mountain of bitterness, anger, frustration, and despair, often capped by a burning desire for revenge.
During the 1920s many nations, new and old, moved steadily toward democracy and freedom. Others, however, took the opposite direction, embracing repressive dictatorships and totalitarianism, a government in which a single party or leader controls the economic, social, and cultural lives of its people. Throughout history there have been dictatorships, countries ruled by one person or small groups of people. But totalitarianism, emerging as a twentieth-century
.	PEARSON 1
\ 91 realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
360
phenomenon, controls all aspects of life. It is more extreme than a simple dictatorship. At the head of the government is a strong, charismatic leader who uses terror, spies, and police force to impose the will of the state upon the citizens. Unlike democracies, people living in totalitarian states have no individual rights. The government controls the media and uses propaganda to indoctrinate people. Schools and youth organizations foster the state ideology. The government crushes opposition and censors any political rivals or divergent ideas.
Why did totalitarian regimes take hold in the years leading up to World War II? Historians lay much of the blame on the destruction and bitterness left behind by World War I and the desperation caused by the Great Depression.
B PREDICT CONSEQUENCES
How do you think totalitarian regimes will affect the peace following World War I?
Strict Regimes in the
Soviet Union and Italy
The 1917 communist revolution in Russia inaugurated the first totalitarian state. The communist leader Vladimir Lenin created the beginnings of a totalitarian system of control to maintain power. His programs resulted in civil war, starvation, famine, and the death of millions of Russians.
Stalin Rules the Soviet Union After Lenin’s death in 1924, Joseph Stalin took Lenin's place as the head of the Communist Party. In Russian, Stalin means "man of steel,” and it is an apt description of the dictator’s personality. Stalin was suspicious, cruel, ruthless, and tyrannical. He did not think twice about killing rivals or sentencing innocent people to death. His efforts to transform the Soviet Union into an industrial power and form state-run collective farms resulted in the deaths of at least 10 million people.
In what became known as the Great Terror, Stalin purged the Communist Party of real or suspected traitors in the 1930s, ordering the deaths or imprisonment of up to a million people. The purge also included most of the higher officers of the Red Army, among many others. Political prisoners and criminals were sent to dreaded forced labor camps, known as the Gulag.
A combination of fear and massive propaganda kept Stalin in power. Publicity about Stalin was designed to create an idol, encouraging a cult of personality in which he was credited for all good things. In newspapers, billboards, and schools, the public was
» The Paris Peace Conference met at the Palace of Versailles and lasted a year. The crowds of delegates from participating nations wrote a series of treaties.
ii
I
» Displaying the totalitarian traits of discipline and militarism, Japanese students march past representatives of Japan, Germany, and Italy.
Interactive Gallery

World War II 361	6.1 Rise of Aggressive Dictators
» Shown in a typical pose, Mussolini often spoke of restoring Italian pride. His arrogant stance matched his message.
» In this staged photo, a fatherly Stalin poses with a young girl. Years later, his government sent her to the Gulag. Apply Concepts How is this photo an example of propaganda?
fed a constant diet of communist success. Soviet art was censored; only positive images of Stalin and soviet life were permitted. Images showing Stalin as a kindly father figure masked the reality of labor camps and the consequences of any resistance to his rule.
Mussolini Establishes an Italian Dictatorship
Italian totalitarianism was in many ways a direct result of World War I and the peace treaties that ended it.
Although Italy was on the winning side, it did not get the land along the Adriatic coast it had hoped to obtain from the division of Austria-Hungary. Added to this frustration, the postwar economic depression made it difficult for returning veterans to find jobs. The country began to tumble into chaos. The communist movement grew. Peasants began seizing land and workers went on strike or took over control of factories. Trade declined and taxes increased. New immigration laws limited immigration to the United States. Law and order broke down as competing groups fought each other in the streets. The government, weak and inept, was unable to restore stability.
It was during this period that Benito Mussolini entered the world stage. In 1919, Mussolini founded the Fasci di Combattimento (fah shee dee kohm ba tee MEHN toh), or Fascist Party, a right-wing organization that promised to restore efficiency and order and make Italy great again. Fascism appealed to many looking for strong leadership and restored national pride. Followers of Mussolini, known as Black Shirts, fought in the streets against socialists and communists.
Fearing revolution, in 1922 Italian King Victor Emmanuel III asked Mussolini to form a government. Calling himself II Duce (ihl DOO chay), or “the leader," Mussolini consolidated his control over the government and the army within a few years. He outlawed political parties, took over the press, created a secret police, organized youth groups to indoctrinate the young, and suppressed strikes. He opposed liberalism and socialism. Still, his hold over Italy was never as powerful as Stalin’s grip on the Soviet Union.
H COMPARE AND CONTRAST
What did Stalin and Mussolini have in common? In what ways did they differ?
Germany and Japan Change Leadership
After World War I, Germany became a democracy. The Weimar (vi mahr) Republic (named after the town of Weimar where the government was created) struggled throughout the 1920s to establish a functional
World War II 362	6.1 Rise of Aggressive Dictators
democracy. However, Germany was beset by severe economic troubles in the 1920s, including runaway inflation. Anger over the Treaty of Versailles and internal disunity also plagued the young government. The Weimar Republic’s ship of state was slowly sinking.
Emergence of Nazis In the early 1930s, the worldwide Great Depression hit the Weimar Republic hard, worsening the problems that already existed. Increasingly, antidemocratic parties on the right, especially the National Socialist German Workers’ Party, or Nazi (naht see) Party, threatened the republic.
Regardless of the party's name, Nazis were not socialists. They bitterly opposed socialism, communism, or any other ism that promoted class interests or workers’ rights above German ethnic solidarity. Adolf Hitler led the Nazi Party. The son of a minor Austrian civil servant, Hitler was a failed artist, a wounded and decorated World War I soldier, and a person who teetered on the brink of madness.
Hitler joined the small Nazi Party after the war and soon gained control of it. While in prison after the party attempted a rebellion, Hitler dictated the book Mein Kampf (“My Struggle”), in which he stated his explanations for the problems facing Germany. He criticized many people, political programs, and ideologies, but his sharpest assaults were against communists and Jews. Hitler was violently anti-Semitic, or prejudiced against Jewish people.
Anti-Semitism had troubled Europe for centuries, mainly motivated by religious intolerance and economic resentment. In the late nineteenth century, new pseudo-scientific theories about Jews as a race, along with the rise of nationalism, caused Jews to be marginalized as ethnic outsiders. Hitler believed and spread this type of thinking. He preached that the greatest threat confronting Germany was the Jewish people who lived there. In Mein Kampf, which quickly became a national bestseller, Hitler presented a blueprint of his hatreds and plans for world domination.
Hitler Rules a German Dictatorship The
shattered German economy—with its widespread unemployment, homelessness, and hunger—played into the Nazis’ hands as they promised that Germany would rise again from the quagmire of reparations and the economic depression. Recognizing the power of Hitler’s party, in January 1933 the president of the Weimar Republic appointed Hitler chancellor of Germany. Over the next two years, Hitler became president as well as chancellor, consolidated his power, and ruled unchecked by the Reichstag (riks tahg), or the German parliament.
» Inflation ruined the Weimar Republic. Presses ran day and night printing paper money. By 1923, one dollar was equal to one trillion Marks. Here children play with stacks of worthless money.
» Both civilians and military personnel welcomed Hitler to a rally in Nuremberg, 1933. Rallies were held yearly as grand propaganda events lasting several days.
Interactive Gallery
World War II 363	6.1 Rise of Aggressive Dictators
By 1935, the democratic institutions of the Weimar Republic were silenced, and Hitler spoke alone as the voice of Germany. Like Stalin and Mussolini, Hitler was the symbol of his totalitarian regime. Aided by a secret police that crushed all opposition, a state-controlled press that praised his accomplishments, and a state-controlled educational system that indoctrinated the young, Hitler assumed a godlike aura.
By the late 1930s, Hitler’s economic policies, including rearmament and massive public-works projects, had ended the depression in Germany. Many Germans followed his lead and cheered for him at Nazi rallies. For many, his promises came true. "Once Hitler came to power, it was wonderful. Everybody had a job and there weren't any more unemployed people,” remembered one German citizen.
However, Hitler’s leadership had dark undertones of oppression, based on extreme anti-Semitism and the rejection of democracy. Hitler maintained his power by alternately brainwashing the public with lies and propaganda drives or terrifying them into silence through ruthless violence.
He openly attacked Jewish people, communists, and socialists. Hitler rejected freedom for the people and defined his rule like so in a speech in 1937:
» Girls experienced military life by marching in formation. Students were taught obedience and self-sacrifice for the good of the nation.
For everyone has to obey orders. We have obeyed orders. . . . And I must demand this of every German: You, too, must be able to obey orders, . . .
We shall educate our People to do this and ignore the obstinacy or stupidity of individuals. Bend or break—one or the other. We cannot permit this authority, the authority of the German People, to be challenged...
—Adolf Hitler, May 1, 1937
Militarism Gains Support in Japan In Japan, as in Germany, the 1920s was a period of increased democracy and peaceful change. The Japanese government reduced the power of the military, passed laws to give all men the right to vote, legalized trade unions, and allowed several diverse political parties to be established. This period ended when the Great Depression discredited Japan’s civilian leaders in the 1930s.
Reasserting their traditional powers, military leaders argued that expansion throughout Asia would gain natural resources and new markets. This would solve Japan’s economic troubles and guarantee future security. Throughout the 1930s, the military played a significant role in shaping Japanese civilian and military policy. Japan, however, did not become a true totalitarian dictatorship. No charismatic leader like Stalin or Hitler emerged. Japan continued as a nominal constitutional monarchy headed by a mainly aloof emperor, but with the military high command assuming dictatorship-like powers over the masses. As with Germany and Italy, Japanese military leaders had strong control over the life of the people and ended many democratic freedoms. Opposition was suppressed, media was censored, and schools instilled obedience to the nation.
The Japanese Empire Expands As the power shifted toward military control, Japan started on a course of aggressive military expansion. Extreme nationalists encouraged Japanese domination of the region. In 1931, Japan attacked Manchuria (man CHUR ee uh), a region in northeastern China, and established a puppet state. The new nation was named Manchukuo (man choo kwoh). Japan controlled its domestic and foreign policies, as well as its abundant natural resources. In 1937, Japan moved against China, gaining control over major Chinese railroad links and coastal areas. In the then capital city of Nanjing, Japanese soldiers acted
World War II 364
6.1 Rise of Aggressive Dictators
Aggression and Appeasement
AGGRESSIVE ACTION
DATE I WORLD REACTION
japan invades Manchuria. 1931 League of Nations condemns the action; Japan withdraws from League. Italy invades Ethiopia.	1935	League of Nations endorses sanctions against Italy but does not enforce them.
Germany sends troops into Rhineland.	1936	League of Nations denounces the move as a violation of the Treaty of Versailles, but takes no action.
Germany and Italy support fascists in Spanish Civil War.	1936- 1939	France, Great Britain, and United States refuse to get involved or to provide weapons to democratic Republican forces. League of Nations remains neutral.
Japan invades China.	1937	Japan is criticized for violating peace treaty, but no action taken to stop aggression.
Germany annexes Austria.	1938	World powers take no action to stop violation of the Treaty of Versailles.
Germany demands Sudeteniand.	1938	Munich Pact is signed and Germany gains the Czech territory.
» Analyze Charts What was the world reaction to these aggressive actions? What was the effect of this reaction on the aggressors?
Interactive Map

with such brutality—murdering more than 200,000 residents and burning a large section of the city—that the incident became known as the “Rape of Nanjing.”
B IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
How did the Great Depression affect political life in Germany and Japan?
Dictators Move to Gain Territory
In the 1930s, the Italian and German dictatorships resorted to acts of aggression similar to those of Japan in Asia. Throughout the decade, neither the League of Nations nor democratic nations succeeded in stopping the aggression. It was a time that recalled a line from Irish poet William Butler Yeats: "The best lack all conviction and the worst are full of passionate intensity.”
Weakness of the League of Nations In many ways, the League of Nations never recovered from America’s refusal to join it. The League was also handicapped by its own charter.
It had no standing army and no real power to enforce its decrees. It was only as strong as its members’ resolve, and during the worldwide depression of the 1930s, those members lacked resolve. When aggressive
nations began to test the League, they discovered that the organization was long on words and short on action.
Hitler and Mussolini Challenge the Peace From the first, Hitler focused on restoring Germany’s strength and nullifying the provisions of the Treaty of Versailles. From 1933 to 1936, he rebuilt the German economy and dramatically enlarged the army, navy, and air force in direct defiance of the Treaty of Versailles. In the mid-1930s, Hitler began to move toward his goal of reunifying all Germanic people into one Reich, or state. He spoke often of the need for Germany to expand to gain Lebensraum (lay buhns rowm), or living space, for its people. In 1935, he reclaimed the Saar (sahr) region from French control.
In 1936, in another direct challenge to the League, Hitler sent German troops into the Rhineland. This region was part of western Germany and under German political control.
However, under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, it was demilitarized; Germany was forbidden to have troops in the region. Reoccupation was a test. Would France or the League defend the terms of the Treaty? The answer was no. To all these actions, the League failed to respond.
Meanwhile, Mussolini commenced his own imperial plans. In 1935, Italy invaded Ethiopia, an independent country in east Africa. Its emperor, Haile Selassie (Hi
World War II 365	6.1 Rise of Aggressive Dictators
» Spanish government troops fought fascist-supported rebels.
» Analyze Political Cartoon Who do the small men represent? What point do you think the cartoon was making with this image?
luh suh lah see), appealed to the League of Nations for support. The organization did almost nothing, and Ethiopia fell.
Dictators Support War in Spain Fascists were also victorious in a bloody conflict that raged from 1936 until 1939, know as the Spanish Civil War. The Nationalists, who had fascist tendencies, rebelled against Spain’s democratic Republican government.
Both Hitler and Mussolini sent military and economic aid to the Nationalist leader, General Francisco Franco, using the conflict to test some of their new military technology. Though the Soviet Union provided some support for the Republican side, France, Britain, and the United States remained largely on the sidelines, deploring the bloodshed but refusing to provide weapons to the Republican forces.
H EXPRESS PROBLEMS CLEARLY
Why did the League of Nations fail to halt German and Italian aggression?
Aggression Meets
Appeasement
The policy that France and Britain pursued against aggressive nations during the 1930s is known as appeasement. It is a policy of granting concessions to a potential enemy in the hope that peace can be maintained. Unfortunately, appeasement only spurred the fascist leaders to become more bold, adventurous, and aggressive.
Why did France and Britain appease the fascist powers? There were a number of reasons. World War I was so horrible that some leaders vowed never to allow another such war to break out. Other leaders believed that the Soviet Union posed a greater threat than Nazi Germany. They maintained that a strong Germany would provide a buffer against the Soviet menace. Still other leaders questioned the resolve of their own people and their allies—particularly the United States.
The United States played an important role in this appeasement policy. Worried about the rise of dictatorships in Europe and Asia, Franklin D. Roosevelt wanted to mend fences with America’s neighbors. In the 1930s, he pursued a Good Neighbor policy with Latin American nations. The program emphasized trade and cooperation, not military force, as the basis for a stable relationship with Latin American nations. The United States withdrew troops from several nations. It agreed not to intervene in Latin America and to consult with other nations if faced with danger. Roosevelt also improved relations with
World War II 366
6.1 Rise of Aggressive Dictators
the Soviet Union by restoring diplomatic relations with the Soviet government, although he remained wary about allying too closely with the communist nation. However, he did not take a forceful line against German aggression. Instead, the country concerned itself with its own economic troubles and embraced a policy of isolationism.
Hitler took advantage of the lack of commitment and unity among France, Britain, and the United States. In the spring of 1938, he brought Austria into his Reich.
Austria was given little choice but to accept this union, called the Anschluss (ahn shloos). In the fall, Hitler turned toward the Sudetenland, a portion of western Czechoslovakia that was largely populated by ethnic Germans.
Many people expected the conflict over the Sudetenland to lead to a general war. But once again, Britain and France appeased Germany. At the Munich Conference with Hitler, British prime minister Neville Chamberlain and French premier Edouard Daladier sacrificed the Sudetenland to preserve the peace. On his return to London, Chamberlain told a cheering crowd that the Munich Pact (myoo nihk), the agreement reached at the conference, had preserved "peace for our time.’’ He was wrong. It merely postponed the war for 11 months.
B IDENTIFY EFFECTS
Did the appeasement policy of Britain, France, and the United States have the intended effect? Explain your answer.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Central Issues What economic conditions led to the rise of totalitarianism in Europe and Asia?
2.	Generate Explanations How Hitler and Mussolini use the Spanish Civil war to their advantage?
» Returning with the signed Munich Pact, Chamberlain announced confidently that it would maintain peace. Instead it was a turning point in the path to war and later became a symbol of failure.
3.	Support Ideas with Examples Was the policy of appeasement successful against Hitler and Germany? Explain your answer.
4.	Identify Patterns What was Franklin Roosevelt’s Good Neighbor policy?
5.	Identify Central Issues In what way did the Anschluss present a challenge to the United States and its allies?
6.1 Rise of Aggressive Dictators
World War II


h.

1 1

* 2 C



5 V.
Many interventionists wanted to repeal the early Neutrality Acts of 1935 to 1937. This rally, organized by labor unions, is urging stronger U.S. involvement in the conflict.
Interactive Flipped Video
While Britain and France appeased the dictator in Germany at Munich, American President Franklin Roosevelt condemned aggression in Asia but did little to stop it. As war exploded in Europe, it became increasingly difficult for the United States to maintain its neutrality.
Once again, Americans would have to decide what role they were willing to play in shaping world events.
2.D, 7.B
» Objectives
Understand the course of the early years of World War II in Europe.
Describe Franklin Roosevelt’s foreign policy in the mid-1930s and the great debate between interventionists and isolationists.
Explain how the United States became more involved in the conflict.
» Key Terms
blitzkrieg Axis Powers Allies
Winston Churchill Neutrality Act of
1939
Tripartite Pact President Franklin
Roosevelt Charles Lindbergh Lend-Lease Act Atlantic Charter
America Debates
Involvement
Roosevelt Criticizes Acts of War
The unrestrained, violence of the 1937 Japanese attack on China shocked Americans, even before the notorious Rape of Nanjing in December 1937. Japan attacked without a declaration of war. Its planes rained terror on Chinese cities, especially Shanghai and Nanjing. The Japanese had even killed three American sailors when Japanese warplanes sank the United States gunboat Panay on the Chang River.
In the midst of these bloody events, President Franklin Roosevelt criticized Japan’s aggression in a speech in Chicago on October 5,1937. He lamented the “reign of terror and international lawlessness,” the bombing of civilian populations, and the horrible acts of cruelty. Speaking in a city where American isolationist sentiments were strong, Roosevelt suggested that no part of the world was truly isolated from the rest of the world. He warned:
When an epidemic of physical disease starts to spread, the community approves and joins in a quarantine of the patients in order to protect the health of the community against the spread
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
368
of the disease. . . . War is a contagion,
whether it be declared or undeclared. It
can engulf states and peoples remote
from the original scene of hostilities.
We are determined to keep out of war,
yet we cannot insure ourselves against
the disastrous effects of war and the
dangers of involvement.
—President Franklin Roosevelt, Quarantine speech, October 5, 1937
Roosevelt’s solution for stopping aggression involved an informal alliance of the peace-loving nations, but he did not suggest what steps the peaceful nations should take in quarantining the aggressive ones. Americans, unhappy with the failure of World War I to make the “world safe for democracy,” were not ready for another attempt at peacekeeping in Europe.
Roosevelt’s speech was widely criticized, and for a time, the President backed away from his more interventionist stance. “It’s a terrible thing to look over your shoulder when you are trying to lead—and find no one there.” Roosevelt remarked to a speechwriter. The speech did, however, alert some Americans to the threat Japan posed to the United States.
INTERPRET
Why do you think Roosevelt compared war to a disease in his Quarantine speech?
War Breaks Out in Europe
Roosevelt’s words failed to prevent Japan from extending its control over much of China. Similarly, France and Britain’s efforts to appease Hitler in Europe failed to limit the dictator’s expansionist plans. By the end of 1938, even the leaders of France and Britain realized that Hitler’s armed aggression could only be halted by a firm, armed defense. The urgency of the situation grew in the spring of 1939 when Hitler violated the Munich Pact by absorbing the remainder of Czechoslovakia into his German Reich.
Hitler was open about his view of war and conquest. He believed that there was no morality in war, only victory and defeat. Just one month before the attack on Poland, he instructed his generals to be ruthless and merciless. “When starting and waging a war it is not right that matters, but victory. Close your hearts to pity. Act brutally. Eighty million people [Germans] must obtain what is their right. . . . The stronger man is right.”
» Japanese planes frequently bombed China during the invasion in 1937. The Chinese army lacked the equipment and training needed to defend the country.
» President Roosevelt addressed the nation about the world political situation, which he said had “been growing progressively worse." He did not specifically mention the aggressor states, but they were known to be Germany, Italy, and Japan.
World War II 369	6.2 America Debates Involvement
Poland Falls to German Blitzkrieg Finally, British and French leaders saw the need to take action. They vowed not to let Hitler take over another country without consequences. Poland seemed the next likely target for Hitler, so Britain and France signed an alliance with Poland, guaranteeing aid to the Poles if Hitler attacked.
Hitler, however, was more concerned about war with the Soviet Union than with Britain and France. Not wanting to fight a war on two fronts, Germany signed the Nazi-Soviet Nonaggression Pact with the Soviets on August 23, 1939. The two former rivals publicly promised not to attack one another. Secretly, they agreed to invade and divide Poland and recognize each other’s territorial ambitions. The public agreement alone shocked the West and guaranteed a German offensive against Poland.
A new world war that would be a turning point in world history came to Europe in the early hours of September 1,1939, when a massive German blitzkrieg (blihts kreeg), or sudden attack, hit Poland by surprise from three directions. Blitzkrieg means "lightning war.”
It was a relatively new style of warfare that emphasized the use of speed and firepower to penetrate deep into the enemy’s territory. The newest military technologies made it devastatingly effective. Using a coordinated assault by tanks and planes, followed
by motorized vehicles and infantry, Germany broke through Poland’s defenses and destroyed its air force.
The situation became even more hopeless on September 17 when the Soviet Union invaded Poland from the east, taking control of the Baltic nations of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania soon after. Although France and Britain declared war against Germany, they did nothing to help save Poland. By the end of the month, a devastated Poland fell in defeat.
Axis Powers Overwhelm Western Europe Europe was at war, just as it had been 21 years earlier. The Axis Powers eventually included Germany, Italy, Japan, and several other nations. The Allies included Britain, France, and eventually many other nations, including the Soviet Union, the United States, and China.
But after the Polish campaign, the war entered an eight-month period of relative quiet, known in Britain as the “phony war.” Things would not remain quiet for long, however.
The next storm erupted with raging fury in the spring of 1940. Germany’s nonaggression pact with the Soviet Union freed Hitler to send his army west. On April 9,1940, Germany attacked Denmark and Norway. The two countries fell almost immediately. On May 10, he sent his blitzkrieg forces into the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg. The small nations fell like
Military Expenditures
» In the 1930s, dictators built their power on nationalism and militarism. Analyze Charts Which nations were most likely preparing for war in 1937? Why did military spending for the United States and Britain increase so much more than for the Soviet Union between 1940 and 1943?
World War II 370	6.2 America Debates Involvement
tumbling dominoes. Hitler seemed invincible; his army unstoppable.
France Falls Hitler next set his sights on France. France had prepared for Germany’s invasion by constructing an interconnected series of fortresses known as the Maginot Line along its border with Germany. Additionally, France had stationed its finest armies along its border with Belgium—the route that Germany had used to attack France in 1914. In between the Maginot Line and Belgium lay the Ardennes, a hilly, forested area that military experts considered invasion proof.
But once again the military experts were wrong. In early May 1940, German tanks rolled through the Ardennes, ripped a hole in the thin French line there, and raced north toward the English Channel. The German plan involved attacking the French and British forces from the front and the rear and trapping them against the channel. It almost worked. Only a few tactical German mistakes gave Britain enough time to evacuate its forces from the French port of Dunkirk. Some 338,000 British and French troops escaped to Britain. Had they not escaped, it is doubtful if Britain, with 70 percent of its troops at Dunkirk, could have remained in the war.
The Miracle of Dunkirk was a proud moment for Britain, but as the new prime minister Winston Churchill cautioned Parliament, “wars are not won by evacuations.” Although the British army escaped, the Germans took Paris and forced the French to surrender in the same railway car that the French had used for the German surrender in 1918. France was then divided into two sections: a larger northern section controlled by the Germans and known as Occupied France, and a smaller southern section administered by the French and known as Unoccupied France, or Vichy France, after its capital city. Although Vichy France was officially neutral, it collaborated with the Nazis.
Air Forces Fight Battle of Britain France had fallen to Hitler in just 35 days. Hitler next turned his fury on Britain. After the evacuation at Dunkirk, Churchill made it clear that he had no intention of continuing the policy of appeasement. He told his nation:
We shall go on to the end. We shall fight in France, we shall fight on the seas and oceans, we shall fight with growing confidence and growing strength in the air, we shall defend our island, whatever the cost may be, we shall fight on the beaches, we shall
» Speed and massive power contributed to the success of the blitzkrieg.
» British and French troops maintained a disciplined and orderly retreat, even under enemy attack. An assortment of private and military vessels rescued soldiers who would go on to fight again.
World War II 371	6.2 America Debates Involvement
» Winston Churchill succeeded Neville Chamberlain as prime minister in May 1940. He toured London even during intense bombings, inspiring the British to continue the fight.
fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills; we shall never surrender.
—Winston Churchill, June 4, 1940
Churchill's words stirred his nation as the British readied themselves for battle.
Hitler’s plan to invade Britain, codenamed Operation Sea Lion, depended upon Germany’s Luftwaffe, or air force, destroying the British Royal Air Force and gaining control over the skies above the English Channel. The Battle of Britain, then, was an air battle, fought over the English Channel and Great Britain. It began in July 1940. The British lost nearly 1,000 planes, the Germans more than 1,700. Germany bombed civilian as well as military targets, destroying houses, factories, and churches and conducted a months-long bombing campaign against London itself, known as "the blitz.” But the British held on and, sensing failure, Hitler made a tactical decision to postpone the invasion of Britain indefinitely.
H SUMMARIZE
Which side seemed to be winning the war at the end of 1940?
» German bombers attacked Britain nightly for months, hoping to break British morale. The planes first attacked airfields and military factories, but then switched to bombing cities and civilians. Londoners took refuge in the city’s subways, which were used as air raid shelters.
Interactive Gallery
American Reaction Is Divided
Winston Churchill referred to the United States in many of his speeches during the crisis in France and the Battle of Britain. The fight against Hitler, Churchill implied, was more than simply a European struggle. Nazi aggression threatened the freedoms and rights cherished by democratic nations everywhere. The contest was between ideologies as well as nations.
Public Opinion Supports Isolation President Roosevelt shared Churchill’s concerns, but at the beginning of the war in Europe he understood that the majority of Americans opposed U.S. intervention.
The severe economic crisis of the Great Depression had served to pin the nation’s attention firmly on domestic affairs throughout the 1930s. In addition, many believed that U.S. involvement in World War I had been a deadly, expensive mistake. The rise of fascism in Europe made the sacrifices of World War I seem even more pointless.
In the 1930s, numerous books and articles presented a new theory about why the United States had become involved in World War I that disturbed many Americans. The theory held that big business had conspired to
World War II
372	6.2 America Debates Involvement
enter the war in order to make huge fortunes selling weapons. In 1934, a senate committee chaired by Gerald Nye of South Dakota looked into the question. Although the Nye Committee discovered little hard evidence, its findings suggested that “merchants of death”—American bankers and arms manufacturers— had indeed pulled the United States into World War I. The committee’s findings further reinforced isolationist sentiments.
In order to avoid making the "mistakes” that had led to U.S. involvement in World War I, Congress passed the Neutrality Acts of 1935, 1936, and 1937. The acts imposed certain restrictions on Americans during times of war. For example, Americans were prohibited from sailing on ships owned by belligerents or nations at war. The acts also prevented Americans from making loans to belligerents or selling them arms and munitions. The acts did not distinguish between aggressors like Germany and Italy and victims like Poland, or their allies, France and Britain.
Interventionists Press for Aid to Allies Once war began in Europe, Roosevelt felt confined by the limitations of the Neutrality Acts. Though he issued a proclamation of American neutrality, he was firmly anti-Nazi and wanted to aid the democracies of Europe. In the end, Congress agreed and passed the Neutrality Act of 1939, which included a cash-and-carry provision. This provision allowed belligerent nations to buy goods and arms in the United States if they paid cash and carried the merchandise on their own ships. Since the British navy controlled the seas, cash-and-carry in effect aided the Allies.
Many Americans disagreed with Roosevelt’s openly pro-Allies position. They argued that FDR’s policies violated American neutrality and threatened to push the United States into the war. Between early 1940 and late 1941, a great debate raged in America between isolationists and interventionists. The debate became particularly heated after the fall of France left Britain standing by itself in Europe against Germany. Interventionist organizations such as the Committee to Defend America by Aiding the Allies claimed that Britain was fighting for free countries everywhere. Sending aid to Britain was a way for America to stay out of the conflict.
Isolationists Plead to Remain Neutral Isolationists countered by claiming that giving aid to the Allies was automatically harming the Axis and would culminate with the United States entering the conflict. They argued that the only way to keep America safe was to follow a policy of complete neutrality. The America First Committee, an isolationist group, held rallies and
» Analyze Political Cartoons Do you think this cartoon is arguing for a policy of isolation or intervention? Explain your answer.
sponsored speeches that criticized Roosevelt’s openly pro-British policies. Charles Lindbergh became the leading isolationist voice.
Lindbergh believed that the real threats to America were the Soviet Union and Japan, and he did not want to see his country weaken itself fighting in Western Europe to save Britain. “We must band together to prevent the loss of more American lives in these internal struggles of Europe. . . . Our safety does not lie in fighting European wars. It lies in our own internal strength, in the character of the American people and of American institutions.” Lindbergh’s addresses were measured and clear. He appealed to Americans’ minds but not their hearts.
Roosevelt Shifts Closer to Involvement Events in Europe shocked Americans out of strict neutrality. Reports by Edward R. Murrow, a CBS reporter stationed in London, during the blitz brought the war into American living rooms. His frequent live radio reports, which began with the words "This is London,” emphasized that the Germans were bombing not armies or military sites but civilians—grandparents, parents, and children.
These reports and the turn of events in Europe against the Allies convinced many Americans that
World War II 373	6.2 America Debates Involvement
» With the fall of France, more Americans began to accept the inevitability of U.S. involvement in the war. There was little public resistance to the first peacetime draft.
the United States needed to at least prepare to defend itself.
Shortly after the fall of France in September 1940, Germany, Italy, and Japan signed the Tripartite Pact and became allies. In that same month, after a heated debate between isolationists and interventionists, Congress passed a Selective Service Act—a peacetime draft—providing for the military training of 1.2 million troops and 800,000 reserve troops each year.
At the same time, President Roosevelt took an additional step to strengthen Britain. He gave Britain fifty World War I-era destroyers in exchange for eight British defense bases. Britain needed the ships to convoy goods across the Atlantic. Believing the act to be an emergency measure, Roosevelt made the transfer without the consent of Congress.
The American people evaluated FDR’s leadership the next month in the presidential election. Roosevelt ran for an unprecedented third term against Republican nominee Wendell L. Willkie of Indiana. Willkie was critical of FDR’s handling of both the economy and foreign affairs but not of the President’s basic positions on either.
Given such little differences between candidates, Americans voted overwhelmingly not to change leaders in the middle of a crisis.
BUY WAR BONDS
» Inspired by Roosevelt's speech, the illustrator Norman Rockwell created four paintings, each illustrating one of the Four Freedoms. In Freedom of Speech, Rockwell shows a man speaking at a town meeting.
Interactive Gallery
IDENTIFY CENTRAL ISSUES
What were the main arguments in the debate between isolationists and interventionists?
America Moves Closer Toward War
Once safely reelected, President Roosevelt increased his support of Britain. When Britain began to run short on funds to purchase cash-and-carry goods in the United States, FDR took the opportunity to address Congress. On January 6, 1941, he spoke about “four freedoms"—freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear—that were threatened by Nazi and Japanese militarism. Roosevelt believed that the best way to stay out of the conflict with Germany was to aid Britain.
The United States Helps the Allies With the Lend-Lease Act Roosevelt compared America’s situation to the scenario of a fire in a neighbor's home. If a neighbor asked to borrow your fire hose to put out the fire, you would not debate the issue or try to sell the hose. Extending help was both being a good neighbor and acting to keep the fire from spreading to your own home.
World War II
6.2 America Debates Involvement
Lend-Lease Aid Given by the United States
Source: British War Economy, W.K. Hancock and M.M. Gowing
» Analyze Charts How much Lend-Lease aid did the United States give the Allies by the end of 1941? Why did the United States give more aid to the British Empire than to the Soviet Union?
Britain, Roosevelt said, needed American aid, and it had run out of money to pay for it. The President called for America to become "the great arsenal for democracy.” Once again, America answered Britain’s plea for help. In March 1941, Congress approved the Lend-Lease Act, symbolically numbered 1776, after another heated debate between isolationists and interventionists.
The act authorized Roosevelt to “sell, transfer title to, exchange, lease, lend, or otherwise dispose of, to any such government any defense article" whenever he thought it was “necessary in the interests of the defense of the United States." By 1945, the United States had sent more than $40 billion of Lend-Lease aid to the Allies, including the Soviet Union. The Lend-Lease Act was nothing less than an economic declaration of war against Germany and the Axis Powers.
The Atlantic Charter Outlines Mutual Goals In
August 1941, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill met secretly on a warship off the misty coast of Newfoundland.
They discussed their mutual war aims, the first being strategy: Their priority was the defeat of Germany, then Japan. They talked not only about Britain’s problems in the war but also about their hopes for the world after Hitler’s defeat. There would be no conquests made in subjugated territories. On board the ship they signed the Atlantic Charter, a document
that endorsed national self-determination and an international system of “general security.”
The signing of the Atlantic Charter signaled the deepening alliance between the two nations and the full moral support of United States to Britain. The meeting with Churchill and the Atlantic Charter showed Roosevelt’s international leadership in coordinating the U.S. relationship with its allies. The charter also cast the conflict in moral terms with the Allies dedicated to freedom in contrast to domination by totalitarian dictatorships.
U.S,
Navy Battles German U-Boats Hitler was not blind to America’s actions in support of the Allies. Nor did he fail to notice the fact that the United States had begun to escort arms shipments to Iceland, where the British picked them up and transported them to England. In the fall of 1941, he ordered his German U-boats, or submarines, to attack American ships. The U-boats shot at the USS Greer, hit the USS Kearny, and sunk the USS Reuben James, killing more than a hundred sailors. The attacks shocked and angered Americans, moving them closer to declaring war on Germany. Though the United States was still officially a neutral nation, Roosevelt gave orders to the navy to attack German U-boats on sight. In June 1941, Germany had gone to
World War II 375	6.2 America Debates Involvement
» In this photo, German Admiral Doenitz reviewed sailors standing aboard passing U-boats. The U-boats attacked merchant ships, preventing supplies from reaching Britain. By 1940, they were traveling in “wolf packs."
war against the Soviet Union, and by November, war against the United States seemed inevitable.
H CATEGORIZE
Would you categorize President Roosevelt as an isolationist or an interventionist? Give two reasons for your answer.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Draw Conclusions Did most Americans support President Roosevelt when he condemned Japanese aggression in Asia?
2.	Generate Explanations Why did Germany sign a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union?
3.	Describe Describe Germany’s successes at the beginning of World War II.
4.	Identify Patterns Why did most Americans support isolationism at the beginning of the war?
5.	Support Ideas with Examples After war began in Europe did Roosevelt follow an interventionist or isolationist policy? Support your answer with examples.
World War II
376
6.2 America Debates Involvement
In the beginning of December 1941, the United States had engaged in warlike activity but had yet to commit itself to fighting with either side. A surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, an American naval base in Hawaii, ended all debate and brought the United States into the war. The participation of the United States in this war, as in World War I, would decide the struggle’s conclusion.
Interactive Flipped Video
The United States Enters World War II
Japan Attacks the United States
Although Japan and the United States had been allies in World War I, conflict over power in Asia and the Pacific had been brewing between the two nations for decades prior to 1941. Japan, as the area’s industrial and economic leader, resented any threats to its authority in the region. The presence of the United States in Guam and the Philippines posed such a threat. The United States also supported China in its ongoing struggle with Japan by sending aid and providing military advice. Still Japan relied on trade with the United States to supply much-needed natural resources.
U.S.
Involvement in the Pacific Grows As war broke out in Europe, the Japanese Empire continued to grow in China and began to move into Indochina. In July of 1940, President Roosevelt tried to stop this expansion by placing an embargo on important naval and aviation supplies to Japan, such as oil, iron ore, fuel, steel, and rubber. After Japan signed the Tripartite Pact in September of 1940 with Germany and Italy, FDR instituted a more extensive embargo. The embargo slowed, but did not stop, Japanese expansion as the Japanese
2.D, 7.A, 7.B, 7.E, 7.F, 7.G, 17.A
» Objectives
Explain why Japan decided to attack Pearl Harbor, and describe the attack itself.
Outline how the United States mobilized for war after the attack on Pearl Harbor.
Summarize the course of the war in the Pacific through the summer of 1942.
» Key Terms
Hideki Tojo Pearl Harbor George Marshall Women’s Army
Corps (WAC) Douglas MacArthur Bataan Death March Battle of Coral Sea
i
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
377
I saw more planes coming in, passing over Battleship Row dropping bombs. I remember very clearly what looked like a dive-bomber coming in over the Arizona and dropping a bomb.
I saw that bomb go down through what looked like a stack, and almost instantly it cracked the bottom of the Arizona, blowing the whole bow loose. It rose out of the water and settled.
I could see flames, fire, and smoke coming out of that ship, and I saw two men flying through the air and the fire, screaming as they went.
—Corpsman James F. Anderson, aboard the hospital ship USS Solace in Pearl Harbor
» The USS Arizona sank during the attack. Nearly 1,200 sailors and marines died aboard this ship, which still lies at the bottom of the harbor.
Interactive Map
©
were able to secure the resources they needed within their new possessions.
In 1941, General Hideki Tojo (hi dehk ee toh joh) became the Japanese prime minister. Known as “the Razor” for his sharp mind, he focused intently on military expansion but sought to keep the United States neutral. Throughout the summer of 1941, Japan and the United States attempted to negotiate an end to their disagreement, but with little success. Japan was bent on further expansion, and the United States was firmly against it. Finally, in late November 1941, Cordell Hull, the U.S. Secretary of State, rejected Japan’s latest demands.
Diplomatic relations continued for the next week, but Tojo had given up on peace. By early December he had made the decision to deliver a decisive first blow against the United States.
The Attack on Pearl Harbor As
Japanese diplomats wrangled in the U.S. capital, Japan’s navy sailed for Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, the site of the United States Navy’s main Pacific base. The forces that Tojo sent from Japan under the command of Vice Admiral Chuichi Nagumo (joo ee chee nah goo moh) included 6 aircraft carriers, 360 airplanes, an assortment of battleships and cruisers, and a number of submarines. Their mission was to eradicate the American naval and air presence in the Pacific with a surprise attack. Such a blow would prevent Americans from mounting a strong resistance to Japanese expansion.
The attackers struck with devastating power, taking the American forces completely by surprise.
The Aftermath of the Attack The
Americans suffered heavy losses: nearly 2,500 people killed, 8 battleships severely damaged, 3 destroyers left unusable, 3 light cruisers damaged, and 160 aircraft destroyed and 128 more damaged. The U.S. battle fleet was out of commission for nearly six months, allowing the Japanese to access the raw materials of their newly-conquered territories, just as they had planned.
World War II 378	6.3 The United States Enters World War II
Despite these losses, the situation was not as bad as it could have been. The most important ships—aircraft carriers—were out at sea at the time of the attack and survived untouched. In addition, seven heavy cruisers were also out at sea. Of the battleships in Pearl Harbor, only three—the USS Arizona, the USS Oklahoma, and the USS Utah —suffered irreparable damage. American submarine bases also survived the morning, as did important fuel supplies and maintenance facilities.
In the final analysis, Nagumo proved too conservative. He canceled a third wave of bombers and refused to seek out the aircraft carriers. The American Pacific Fleet survived.
Roosevelt Declares War The attack on Pearl Harbor was a turning point for the United States. The Japanese dictatorship’s aggression, culminating in the attack on Pearl Harbor, was a compelling reason for the United States to enter the war.
As the news spread across the nation and FDR prepared to address Congress, Americans rallied together. Many did not know what to expect, but they anticipated monumental changes. Journalist Marquis Child recalled thinking, “Nothing will ever be the same," and added, “it never was the same.”
The smoke rising from Pearl Harbor left little doubt in anyone's mind about the necessity of declaring war on Japan. Earlier in 1941, further qualms about supporting the Allies had risen when Stalin’s Soviet Union joined their ranks. The Soviet Union became one of the Allies when Germany went back on the Nazi-Soviet Nonaggression Pact and invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941. Although the alliance with the Soviet Union would continue to be an uneasy one, Pearl Harbor finally ended the political divisions between isolationists and interventionists.
On December 8, President Roosevelt gave a speech to Congress asking for a declaration of war:
Yesterday, December 7, 1941—a date which will live in infamy— the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan. . . . The facts of yesterday speak for themselves. The people of the United States have already formed their opinions and well understand the implications to the very life and safety of our nation. . . . No matter how long it may take us to overcome this
» In late 1941, the prime minister of Japan, Hideki Tojo, planned a surprise attack on American forces.
Japanese aircraft carrier Hiryu. Determine Point of View Who do you think took this picture? Why would that person have wanted to document this event?
World War II 379	6.3 The United States Enters World War II
» To inspire the war effort, this poster shows a battered American flag and a quote from Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address. Connect Why did the poster’s creator recall the Gettysburg Address?
premeditated invasion, the American
people in their righteous might will
win through to absolute victory.
—President Franklin Roosevelt, Message Asking for War Against Japan, December 8. 1941
After President Roosevelt’s speech, the House voted 388 to 1 to declare war against Japan, and the Senate joined them unanimously. True to their military commitments with Japan, Germany and Italy declared war on the United States. Congress in turn declared war on Germany and Italy.
The United States became a full ally with Britain, France, and the Soviet Union against the Axis Powers. Democrats and Republicans put aside their political differences to unify the nation as it faced the task of winning a war on multiple fronts.
H IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
How did Pearl Harbor change American opinion about the war?
» Young men waited in line to volunteer for the United States Navy on December 8, 1941. The draft was already in place, but many young men volunteered before being drafted.
Interactive Gallery
Patriotism Inspires Rapid Mobilization
Following the Japanese attack, a spirit of patriotism and service swept across the country, inspiring exceptional actions by military personnel and civilians alike. Americans searched for ways to contribute to the war effort. They joined the military, volunteered with the Red Cross and other organizations, and moved into new jobs to help.
High Levels of Enlistment in the Military The
military draft was already in place under the Selective Service Act of 1940. After Pearl Harbor, however, men rushed to volunteer for the various branches of the armed forces. In all, 38.8 percent of those who served in the military volunteered, with the remaining 61.2 percent responding to the draft.
Organizing and prioritizing the needs of the military was a massive job. As army chief of staff, General George Marshall directed the military buildup, from coordinating and training troops to overseeing the manufacturing and delivery of all the necessary supplies.
During the course of the war, more than 16 million Americans served in the military. From 1941 to 1942 alone, the army grew from about 1.4 million to more than 3 million, the navy increased from under 300,000 to more than 600,000, and the marines expanded from about 54,000 to almost 150,000.
Americans from all ethnic and racial backgrounds joined the fight. Approximately 300,000 Mexican
World War II 380	6.3 The United States Enters World War II
Americans and 25,000 Native Americans served in integrated units. Nearly one million African Americans also joined the military. At first, they were limited to supporting roles. However, the casualties mounted, and about 50,000 African Americans eventually served in combat units. In addition, many of those in service and support units played vital, dangerous roles in military operations such as the D-Day invasion and the Battle of the Bulge. A small number of African Americans eventually served in integrated units, but the military was not officially desegregated until after the war.
Despite the obstacles facing them, African Americans served patriotically and with distinction during the war.
Women Join the Fight Over 350,000 women also responded to the call. In 1941, Congresswoman Edith Nourse Rogers introduced a bill to establish a Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps. This group became the Women’s Army Corps (WAC) in 1943. The WAC was part of the regular army, not an auxiliary attachment, and women who served in it received the same benefits as men. More than 150,000 women volunteered for the service.
The WACs fulfilled important functions as clerical workers, truck drivers, instructors, and lab technicians for the United States Army. Over the course of the war, 15,000 WACs served abroad and over 600 received medals for their service. Around 100,000 American women joined the navy’s female corps and tens of thousands more joined similar marine and Coast Guard groups. More than 57,000 nurses served in the Army Nurse Corps, putting themselves in danger to care for the wounded in Europe and the Pacific.
FDR
Leads Domestic Industry’s Rapid Mobilization From the start, Roosevelt and the other Allied leaders knew that American production would play a key role in helping the Allies win the war. Although America’s industry had started to mobilize in response to the Lend-Lease Act, American production still needed to churn out war materials faster. In January 1942, FDR created the War Production Board (WPB) to oversee the conversion of peacetime industry to war industry. In his annual message to Congress, FDR encouraged the nation to meet high levels of production, saying “this production of ours in the United States must be raised far above its present levels . . . Let no man say it cannot be done. It must be done—and we have undertaken to do it." The WPB called for factories to convert to airplane, tank, or bomb production. Conversions started immediately, although the competing demands
» Mexican Americans served in integrated units during World War II. Some units, like this one, were mostly Mexican American because they were recruited from Mexican American communities.
» This poster shows (left to right) women in the Marines, Navy, Army, and Coast Guard. Interpret What strikes you about their appearance? Why did the artist portray them like that?
World War II 381	6.3 The United States Enters World War II
» The Liberty Ship Robert E. Peary was built in four days. Kaiser’s shipyards welded rather than riveted prefabricated parts, cutting the time it took to make these cargo ships by one third.
» Workers at Chrysler’s Detroit Tank Arsenal assemble M-3 Medium tanks. Nicknamed the “General Grant," these tanks arrived just in time to help the British hold North Africa.
of different industries and agencies for scarce resources caused much confusion.
Next, FDR and Congress created a host of other agencies that worked together to organize the production effort. Together, the agencies allocated scarce materials into the proper industries, regulated the production of civilian goods, established production contracts, negotiated with organized labor, and controlled inflation. The Office of War Mobilization (OWM) supervised all of these efforts.
FDR also reached out to business leaders, who as a group had often opposed his New Deal programs, to get their expertise at leading or advising several of these agencies. Called “Dollar-a-Year-Men,” many executives were paid little or nothing to come to Washington to help in the war effort.
The Production Miracle Under the direction of the government, Americans worked to create a “production miracle.” The massive defense spending finally ended the Great Depression. The unemployment rate fell from 19 percent in 1938 to just 1.2 percent in 1944. For the first time in more than a decade there was a job for almost every worker. Each year of the war, the United States raised its production goals for military materials, and each year it met these goals.
The Ford Motor Company poured all of its resources into war production, building over 8,000 B-24 Liberator bombers. Using an innovative assembly process, Henry J. Kaiser’s shipyards produced large merchant “Liberty Ships” in as little as three and a half days. In 1944, American production levels were double those of all the Axis nations put together. The success of American domestic industry’s rapid mobilization thus gave the Allies a crucial advantage, strengthening America and Roosevelt’s relationship with its allies. In a toast at a wartime conference, Allied leader Joseph Stalin praised American production: “To American production, without which the war would have been lost.”
U CLASSIFY
Which was more important, military or industrial mobilization? Give two reasons for your answer.
The Early War in the Pacific
After Pearl Harbor, the Japanese knew they had to move fast to gain important footholds in Asia and the Pacific. Although Japan’s population was smaller than that of the United States, the Japanese did have military advantages, including advanced weapons and a well-
World War II 382	6.3 The United States Enters World War II
The Bataan Death March
» The march from Bataan is notorious for the inhumane way the Allied prisoners of war were treated. Analyze Maps Which parts of the march were by foot? Which parts were by rail?
trained and highly motivated military. At the start of the Pacific war, the outlook was grim for America.
Losses in the Philippines In December 1941, General Douglas MacArthur, commander of United States Army forces in East Asia, struggled to hold the U.S. positions in the Philippines with little support. The task grew even more daunting when the Japanese destroyed half of the army’s fighter planes in the region and rapidly took Guam (gwahm), Wake Island, and Hong Kong. The main land attack came on December 22.
With Japanese forces advancing on two sides, MacArthur and his troops fell back from Manila to the Bataan (buh tan) Peninsula and a fortification on Corregidor (kuh rehg uh dor) Island, where they dug in for a long siege. Trapped, the Allies suffered greatly, lacking necessary supplies and living on half and quarter rations.
Realizing that it was only a matter of time before the Allies were forced to surrender, Roosevelt ordered MacArthur to leave to take command of the army in the Southwest Pacific. MacArthur famously promised, "I shall return.” After MacArthur left on March 11, the remaining Allied forces held out on the Bataan Peninsula until early April, when about 70,000 troops surrendered.
Japanese troops forced the sick and malnourished prisoners of war to march more than 60 miles inland. More than 7,000 American and Filipino troops died on the grueling journey, which is known as the Bataan Death March. In early May 1942, the Allies lost the Philippines when the citadel on Corregidor surrendered. The long fight had slowed part of the Japanese advance for five months.
The Bataan Death March was against the rules set out in the Geneva Convention and other international agreements about the treatment of prisoners of war and wounded soldiers. It was not the first time that humane standards for the treatment of prisoners had been violated during the conflict, and it was far from the last.
Japan Advances Throughout the Pacific, Japanese forces attacked and conquered. These advances secured important oil and rubber supplies for Japan and brought Southeast Asia and the western Pacific securely under Japanese control. By the summer of 1942, Japan appeared ready to dominate the Indian Ocean, Australia, New Zealand, and the central Pacific. Japan’s strategy was to take over so much of the Pacific region that the Allies would be too discouraged to fight back. In May 1942, the Allies needed to regroup quickly to have any hope of victory in the Pacific.
World War II f 383 1 6.3 The United States Enters World War II
A B-25
bomber plane takes off from the aircraft carrier USS Hornet on April 18, 1942. This plane and its five crewmembers, along with 15 other planes, made a daring raid on Tokyo. » Pilots from the famous Flying Tigers flew planes painted with their trademark tiger shark faces.
The United States Strikes Back After Pearl Harbor, FDR wanted the United States to retaliate against Japan. American military leaders devised a plan for a nighttime bombing raid from the deck of the aircraft carrier USS Hornet, led by Colonel James Doolittle. While still 800 miles away from mainland Japan, the Hornet was detected, so rather than wait for night, Doolittle led a force of 16 B-25 bombers against Tokyo. They delivered their payload on the Japanese capital just after noon.
The raid killed 50 Japanese people and damaged 100 buildings. The pilots then flew to China, where they crash-landed. Doolittle’s Raid proved a minimal military gain, but it bolstered American morale for the long fight ahead.
Another group that contributed bravely to the American cause was the American Volunteer Group, known as the Flying Tigers. Led by retired army captain Claire Chennault, the pilots volunteered to fight the Japanese in the Pacific in 1941, flying their missions out of Burma. Between December 1941 and July 1942, the Flying Tigers destroyed 296 Japanese aircraft in China and Burma.
The Battle of Coral Sea Halts the Advance The Battle of Coral Sea also helped to kindle hope for the American military in the Pacific. In early May 1942, the Japanese moved to take Port Moresby in New Guinea. From that position they could threaten Australia and protect their important military bases at Rabaul (also in New Guinea). To counter Japan's move, the United States sent two aircraft carriers, the USS Lexington and USS Yorktown, along with support vessels. On May 7 and 8, in the middle of a Pacific storm, Japanese and U.S. aircraft carriers engaged in battle. It was the first sea fight in which enemy warships never sighted one another. Instead, U.S. airplanes attacked Japanese ships and vice versa.
Although technically the Battle of Coral Sea proved a draw, strategically it was a victory for the United States because it forced the Japanese to call off their attack on New Guinea. It marked a shift in momentum toward the Americans. From that day on, the Pacific theater of battle would be won or lost on the strength of aircraft carriers and planes. Here the productive capacity of the United States gave Americans a marked advantage over their adversaries. The war would last three more years, but the dark days of early 1942 were over.
bi SEQUENCE EVENTS What happened in the Pacific
theater from December 1941 through May 1942?
World War II 384	6.3 The United States Enters World War II
Japanese Aggression, December 1941-June 1942
» By mid-1942, the Japanese controlled much of Southeast Asia and the Pacific. Analyze Maps Summarize the position of the Allies in the Pacific in June 1942.
Extent of Japanese control, Dec 1941 □ Extent of Japanese control, June 1942 Areas under Japanese control, 1942 Japanese advance, December 1941
Japanese advance, January-May 1942 Battle
Interactive Map

ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Central Issues Why did having the Soviet Union as an ally contradict one of the reasons for United States involvement in the war?
2,	Compare and Contrast the contributions of Generals George Marshall and Douglas MacArthur during the first months of the war.
3.	Support Ideas with Examples What actions did Americans take to show their patriotism after Pearl Harbor?
4.	Identify Patterns What about the nature of warfare during World War II made the ability to produce war material so important?
5.	Make Predictions What did the Bataan Death March foreshadow about the war in the Pacific?
World War II
6.3 The United States Enters World War II
6.4
The attack on Pearl Harbor brought America into World War II on the Allied side. By June 1942, the Allies were battered but still fighting. British pilots had fought off a Nazi invasion of their island, while at the Battle of Coral Sea, the U.S. Navy had frustrated Japanese plans to extend their domination in the Pacific. Though years of fighting lay ahead, the Allies spied signs of hope.
7.B, 7.E, 7.F, 7.G
A
War on Two Fronts » Objectives
Analyze the reasons for and impact of the Allies’ “Europe First” strategy.
Explain why the battles of Stalingrad and Midway were major turning points in the war.
Discuss how the Allies put increasing pressure on the Axis in North Africa and Europe.
» Key Terms
Dwight Eisenhower George S. Patton,
Jr.
unconditional
surrender
saturation bombing strategic bombing Tuskegee Airmen Chester Nimitz Battle of Midway Omar Bradley
Allied Strategy
The Axis Powers never had a coordinated strategy to defeat the Allies. Germany, Italy, and Japan shared common enemies but had strategies that reflected their individual political and military goals. Hitler wanted to dominate Europe and eliminate “inferior” peoples. Mussolini had dreams of an Italian empire stretching from the eastern Adriatic to East Africa. Tojo sought Japanese control of the Western Pacific and Asia.
The Allies shared more unified goals, although they did not completely trust one another. Roosevelt and Churchill feared that Stalin wanted to dominate Europe.
Stalin believed that the West wanted to destroy communism. None of the Allies wanted to risk a breakdown in their alliance, however. Roosevelt worked closely with Churchill to manage the relationship with their powerful but problematic ally, Stalin.
Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin considered Germany the most dangerous enemy. None felt Japan or Italy posed a serious long-term threat. Only Germany had the resources to simultaneously bomb Britain, fight U.S. and British navies on the Atlantic, and invade the Soviet Union across a 1,200-mile front. Thus, although their ultimate goal was to fight and win a two-front war, Roosevelt and the other Allied leaders agreed to pursue a “Europe First” strategy. They would
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
386
focus on finishing the war in Europe before trying to end the war in Asia.
BlNFERWhydo you think Churchill and Stalin favored
a Europe First strategy?
The European Front
The first blow America struck against the Axis was by fulfilling Roosevelt’s promise to be the “arsenal of democracy.” American factories turned out millions of tons of guns, tanks, and other supplies—enough to keep the Soviets and British battling Germany for years. The problem was delivering the weapons, food, and medical supplies that fueled the Allied war machine.
War in the Atlantic Hitler was determined to cut the supply lines between the United States and Europe before American aid could make a difference. German U-boats patrolled the Atlantic and Caribbean, sinking more than 3,500 merchant ships and killing tens of thousands of Allied seamen. "The only thing that ever really frightened me during the war was the U-boat peril,” Churchill wrote.
Finally, in mid-1943, the Allies began to win the war in the North Atlantic. As in World War I, convoys of escort carriers protected Allied shipping.
A new invention, radar, helped Allied vessels locate U-boats on the surface at night. Bombers and underwater depth charges allowed Allied forces to sink U-boats faster than Germany could manufacture them.
Soviets and Nazis Battle for Stalingrad Germany had attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941, sending one army north toward Leningrad, a second east toward Moscow, and a third south toward Stalingrad. Although Hitler’s forces pushed deep into Soviet territory, killing or capturing millions of soldiers and civilians, they did not achieve their main objective of conquering the Soviet Union. Soviet resistance and brutal winter weather stopped the German advance.
In 1942, Hitler narrowed his sights and concentrated his armies in the southern Soviet Union. His goal this time was to control the rich Caucasus oil fields. To achieve this objective, he would have to capture the city of Stalingrad.
The struggle for Stalingrad was especially ferocious. German troops advanced slowly, fighting bitter block-by-block, house-by-house battles in the bombed-out buildings and rubble.
Soviet troops then counterattacked, trapping the German forces. Yet Hitler refused to allow his army
» German troops march through Berlin, Germany, to mark the surrender of France in 1940. Interpret What does this photo suggest about the power of the Axis armies during the early years of the war?
German U-boat, 1944. A few minutes after this photo was taken, the U-boat was sunk.
Interactive Gallery
©
World War II 387	6.4 A War on Two Fronts
» Soviet troops fought in the ruins of buildings in Stalingrad in 1942.
» Airplanes played a key role during the war in North Africa, bombing enemy troops and carrying supplies to war zones. Here, a U.S. cargo plane flies over pyramids in Egypt.
to retreat. Starving, sick, and suffering from frostbite, the surviving German troops finally surrendered on January 31, 1943.
The battle of Stalingrad was the true turning point of the war in Europe, ending any realistic plans Hitler had of dominating the entire continent. Nazi armies were forced to retreat westward back toward Germany. Instead, it was the Soviet Union that now went on the offensive.
War in North Africa Meanwhile, another important campaign was taking place in the deserts and mountains of North Africa, where the British had been fighting the Germans and Italians since 1940. Several goals motivated the Allied campaign in North Africa. Stalin had wanted America and Britain to open a second front against Germany in Western Europe, which would help relieve German pressure on the Soviet Union.
Roosevelt and Churchill felt they did not have the resources to prepare for an invasion of mainland Europe. An invasion of North Africa, however, required less planning and fewer supplies. In addition, forcing Germany out of North Africa would pave the way for an Allied invasion of Italy.
Allied soldiers had to fight in many different types of terrain during the war. But the Sahara of North Africa—the world’s largest desert—presented special challenges. In hot, dry weather, sandstorms choked and blinded troops. Tanks kicked up enormous dust clouds that were visible miles away, making it difficult for troops to move without being seen. Furthermore, most supplies for Allied troops in North Africa had to be brought in by sea, where transport ships faced German attacks.
In November 1942, the British won a major victory at El Alamein (ehl al uh mayn ) in Egypt and began to push westward. The victory prevented Germany from gaining access to the Suez Canal and oil fields in the Middle East.
About the same time, Allied troops landed in Morocco and Algeria and began to move east toward key German positions. An energetic American officer, General Dwight Eisenhower —known as Ike-commanded the Allied invasion of North Africa.
In February 1943, German general Erwin Rommel (known as the Desert Fox) led his Afrika Korps against the Americans at the Kasserine Pass in Tunisia. Rommel broke through the American lines in an attempt to reach the Allied supply base at Tebessa in Algeria. Finally, American soldiers stopped the assault. Lack of supplies then forced Rommel to retreat.
Interactive Gallery
World War II
A
War on Two Fronts Allies Take Over North Africa The fighting at the Kasserine Pass taught American leaders valuable lessons. They needed aggressive officers and troops better trained for desert fighting. To that end, Eisenhower put American forces in North Africa under the command of George S. Patton, Jr., an innovative tank commander.
A single-minded general known as Blood and Guts, Patton told his junior officers:
You usually will know where the front is by the sound of gunfire, and that’s the direction you should proceed. Now, suppose you lose a hand or an ear is shot off, or perhaps a piece of your nose, and you think you should walk back to get first aid. If I see you, it will be the last . . . walk you’ll ever take.
S.
Patton, Jr., 1943 Serving under Patton was another able general, Omar Bradley, who took command of Patton’s group in March 1943 when Patton moved on to plan the next Allied move. American forces advanced east toward Tunisia with increasing confidence. Simultaneously, the British pressed westward from Egypt, trapping Axis forces in a continually shrinking pocket in Tunisia. Rommel escaped, but his army did not. In May 1943, the remaining German and Italian forces in North Africa—some 240,000 troops—surrendered.
El IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT How did
geographic factors affect the war on the North Atlantic, at Stalingrad, and in North Africa?
Axis Powers on the
Defensive
Germany was now on the defensive, and the Allies planned to keep it that way. In January 1943, Roosevelt and Churchill met in Casablanca, Morocco, to plan their next move. The conference resulted in two important decisions. First, the Allies decided to increase bombing of Germany and invade Italy. Second, Roosevelt announced that the Allies would accept only unconditional surrender, or giving up completely without any concessions. Hitler, Mussolini, and Tojo could not hope to stay in power through a peace agreement.
» General George Patton was one of the most famous American military leaders during World War II. He led American troops to victory in North Africa.
Italy Surrenders The Allies next eyed Italy. The island of Sicily was the obvious target for an invasion, as it was situated across the Mediterranean from Tunisia and only two miles from the Italian mainland. The Allies could invade Sicily without great risk from U-boats and under the protection of Allied aircraft. In July 1943, British and American armies made separate landings in Sicily and began to advance across the island before joining forces in the north. Once again, Eisenhower commanded the joint American-British forces, with Patton and Bradley both leading significant American forces.
Eisenhower hoped to trap Axis forces on Sicily, but they escaped to the Italian mainland. Still, the 38-day campaign achieved important results: It gave the Allies complete control of the western Mediterranean, paved the way for an invasion of Italy, and ended the rule of Benito Mussolini. On September 3, 1943, Italy surrendered to the Allies and five weeks later declared war on Germany.
But Hitler was not through with Italy. After a small German airborne force rescued Mussolini from a mountaintop fortress, Hitler installed him as head of a puppet state in northern Italy. In the south, German military forces continued the fight against the Allies.
World War II
A
War on Two Fronts The invasion of Italy was a slow, grinding slog. Italy was crisscrossed with mountains and rivers. Heavy rains and mountain snows made combat difficult. Soldiers fought in ankle-deep mud. In the mountains, where tanks and heavy artillery were useless, Allied forces depended on mules to haul supplies up slippery and steep roads. To make matters worse, the Germans occupied the best defensive positions. Fighting continued into 1945. The Allies won battles, but none were important enough to end the war in Italy.
Allied Bombers Attack Germany Stalin continued his demand that Roosevelt and Churchill open a second front in France. While the Allies did not launch a massive invasion of France until 1944, they did open a second front of another kind in early 1942. From bases in England, Allied bombers launched nonstop attacks against Germany.
Flying by night in order to avoid being shot down in large numbers, British planes dropped massive amounts of bombs on German cities, including civilian targets. The goal of this saturation bombing was to inflict maximum damage.
By day, American bombers targeted Germany’s key political and industrial centers. The goal of this campaign of strategic bombing was to destroy Germany’s capacity to make war. A Nazi official later
commented that “the fleets of bombers might appear at any time over any large German city or important factory.”
The bravery and contributions of an African American fighter squadron known as the Tuskegee Airmen played a key role in the campaign, escorting bombers and protecting them from enemy fighter pilots. In more than 1,500 missions over enemy territory in Europe, the Tuskegee Airmen did not lose a single bomber.
Overall, though, the bombing missions cost the Allies dearly. Bomber crews suffered an incredibly high 20 percent casualty rate. But they successfully carried the war into Germany, day after day and night after night. This second front in the sky did indeed relieve some of the pressure on the Soviet armies on the Eastern Front and helped pave the way for an all-out Allied offensive.
U PARAPHRASE
What was the situation in Italy after September 1943?
» The B-24 Liberator, shown here in a cross-section, was the king of American bombers during the war, faster than previous planes and able to fly on longer missions while carrying more bombs.
Sil Interactive 3-D Model,
World War II 390 , 6.4 A War on Two Fronts
Battle of Midway
SOVIET UNION
■ T7 ' ' ' -
CANADA
UNITED
STATES
I___|
Extent of Japanese control, June 1942
I | United States and territories Japanese advance Allied advance
♦ Battle
0__________800 mi
0	800 km
Plate Carree Projection
» Analyze Maps Why was the location of Midway Island so significant? Make Predictions What impact would a Japanese victory at Midway have on the war in the Pacific?
Turning Points in the
Pacific
While the Allies pursued their "Europe First” strategy, they did not ignore the Pacific. Through May 1942, Japanese forces continued to advance with seemingly unstoppable momentum. They had attacked American, British, and Dutch colonies, winning control of the Philippines, Malaya, Dutch East Indies, Hong Kong, Wake Island, Guam, and Burma. Then, the United States struck back. The American success at the Battle of Coral Sea in May 1942 served as a warning that the war in the Pacific was about to change.
Americans Triumph at Midway Admiral Yamamoto, commander of Japanese forces in the Pacific, knew that the United States Navy was a powerful threat. Before the Americans could retaliate for Pearl Harbor, Yamamoto sought to destroy American aircraft carriers in the Pacific. He turned his attention to Midway, an American naval base in the Central Pacific that was vital to the defense of Hawaii. Losing Midway would force American defenses back to the California coast. Yamamoto’s ambitious plan entailed taking Midway and establishing a military presence in the Aleutians, a string of islands off the coast of Alaska.
What Yamamoto did not realize was that Admiral Chester Nimitz, commander of the United States Navy in the Pacific, knew the Japanese plans. U.S. Navy code breakers had intercepted Japanese messages. To meet the expected assault, Nimitz sent his only available aircraft carriers to Midway. The Japanese navy was stretched out across more than a thousand miles, from the Aleutians to well west of Midway. American forces were all concentrated near Midway.
The Japanese began their attack on June 4, 1942. In the Battle of Midway, the most important naval battle of World War II, the United States dealt Japan a decisive defeat. American torpedo planes and dive bombers sank four Japanese aircraft carriers, along with all 250 aircraft on board and many of Japan’s most experienced pilots. America lost only one aircraft carrier.
Midway was the turning point of the war in the Pacific, ending the seemingly unstoppable Japanese advance. Japan still had a powerful navy, committed troops, and fortified positions. But Japanese forces would never again threaten Hawaii or dominate the Pacific. Japan was now on the defensive.
Americans Take the Offensive The first American offensive in the Pacific took place in August 1942, with
World War II I 391 1 6.4 A War on Two Fronts
an assault on the island of Guadalcanal. One marine described fighting on Guadalcanal:
It was beautiful, but beneath the loveliness . . . Guadalcanal was a mass of slops and stinks and pestilence; of scum-crusted lagoons and vile swamps inhabited by giant crocodiles ... of ants that bite like fire, of tree leeches that fall, fasten and suck; of scorpions
of centipedes whose foul scurrying
across human skin leaves a track of
inflamed flesh, of snakes and land
crabs, rats and bats and carrion birds
and of a myriad of stinging insects.
-—Robert Leckie, Delivered From Evil: The Saga of World War II
Guadalcanal was part of a U.S. strategy to approach Japan from both the southwest Pacific and the central Pacific. The logic behind the offensives was to force Japan to fight a two-front war and to capture bases from which to attack Japan. In jungles and on coral reefs, under torrential monsoons and the blistering sun, American servicemen began their slow, painful trek toward Japan.
H IDENTIFY CENTRAL ISSUES
Why was the Battle of Midway the turning point in the Pacific?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Central Issues Why did Roosevelt support a “Europe First” strategy even though it had been Japan that had first attacked the United States?
2.	Draw Conclusions Why was the Battle of Stalingrad a turning point in the European war?
3.	Describe What was Germany’s response to Italy’s surrender to the Allies?
4.	Compare and Contrast British and American bombing strategies in Europe.
5.	Apply Concepts How does the Battle of Midway illustrate the importance of intelligence gathering and espionage in modern warfare?
World War II
A
War on Two Fronts While fathers, sons, husbands, and brothers served overseas, their families served on the home front. Every American, regardless of age or background, was expected to help boost morale and make sacrifices to shoulder the cost of the war. The war effort stirred patriotism and caused ordinary citizens to take exceptional actions.
The Home Front
7.C, 7.D, 7.G, 9.B, 13.A, 17.A, 19.B
Patriotism on the Home Front
The war also promoted economic recovery and spurred a massive movement of people around the country. And, while wartime fears and tensions tested civil liberties, new opportunities for women and minorities would spur stronger efforts to ensure equal rights after the war was over.
The Financial Cost of the War The war eventually cost Americans $330 billion, which was double the total amount of federal expenditures since the founding of the nation. In six years, the national debt skyrocketed from $42 billion to $269 billion. To help raise funds, Congress levied a 5 percent tax on all working Americans.
In addition, millions of Americans bought war bonds. In a war bond, citizens lend the government money in order to help fund the war. They bought the bonds at face value, say $25, and then received a certain amount of interest after ten years. The bonds allowed Americans both to save income and invest in the war effort. The government reminded Americans that every dollar spent on war bonds meant another bullet or bomb and another step closer to victory.
Controlling Shortages With factories converting to make goods needed for the war, consumer products soon became scarce. As shortages led to price increases, many feared that inflation would run
» Objectives
Examine how the need to support the war effort changed American lives.
Analyze the effects of the war on civil liberties for Japanese Americans and others.
Explain how World War II increased opportunities for women and minorities.
Describe how World War II caused migration within the United States and the effects of that migration.
» Key Terms
A.
Philip Randolph Executive Order 8802
bracero program internment 442nd Regimental
Combat Team rationing Office of War
Information (OWI) war bond Demographics
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
h
393
©
wild. To manage this problem, FDR created the Office of Price Administration, which had the authority to control wages and set maximum prices.
Another form of economic control was rationing. Americans were issued coupon books that limited the amount of certain goods that they could buy. Rationing ensured that raw materials such as rubber and gasoline found their way into war production. Also, rationing of food items, such as butter, sugar, milk, canned goods, and meat, ensured that fighting troops would have enough food.
Rationing of food and raw materials created shortages that Americans could not help but notice. To help with these shortages, people carpooled to work, recycled tires, and grew their own food in "victory gardens” planted in vacant lots or in their backyards. By 1943, more than 20 million victory gardens had been planted, from tiny household plots to public areas like Copley Square in Boston. Although most Americans accepted the need for wartime controls, others resented the restrictions. Unscrupulous profiteers manipulated the ration coupon system to create a “black market,” an illegal underground network for the sale of restricted goods.
Your own vegetables
» In this poster, people on the home front are urged to grow vegetables for victory. Determine Point of View Why would the idea of a victory garden have appealed to Americans?
Labor Unrest The government also restricted job mobility to ensure constant production. In some places, wages lagged behind rising prices and profits, and working conditions were less than ideal. Some workers also opposed sharing the workplace with women and African Americans. In 1940 and 1941, strikes were common throughout the country. The nation’s labor unions worked with the National War Labor Board to resolve most issues, however, and the strikes never seriously impacted production. Americans created a powerful industrial network that contributed to victory.
Raising Morale Worry about family and friends fighting overseas and sacrifices on the home front took a toll on morale. The federal Office of War Information (OWI) worked closely with the media to encourage support of the war effort. The OWI tried to spotlight common needs, minimize racial and economic divisions, and downplay problems of poverty and crime. Under the OWI’s guidance, the radio, print, and film industries reminded Americans that they were in a struggle between dictatorship and democracy.
Hollywood proved a capable and willing ally in this cause. Documentaries like Frank Capra’s Why We Fight series highlighted the need to defeat fascism. Fiction films showed patriotic Americans pitching in overseas or on the home front and stirred hatred of the enemy with stereotypical portrayals of treacherous Japanese and brutal Germans. Movie stars and popular singers volunteered their time to sell war bonds and entertain the troops. Through the United Service Organizations (USO), volunteers boosted the morale of those who were fighting the war. At the USO’s Hollywood Canteen in Los Angeles, a soldier could get a hot meal served by a celebrity or dance with his favorite movie star.
Encouraged by government and media, Americans voluntarily contributed to the war effort in dozens of large and small ways. They took new jobs and worked overtime at them. Retired citizens went back to work to help out. Americans bought war bonds and paid higher taxes. They volunteered for the Red Cross, manning blood banks, rolling bandages, and sending millions of care packages to soldiers overseas. They collected paper, scrap metal, and cooking fat to recycle for the effort. Instead of buying new, many people followed the motto “Use it up, wear it out, make it do, or do without.”
H SUMMARIZE
How did the federal government control resources needed for the war effort?
World War II 394	6.5 The Home Front
Japanese Internment
During World War II
Not all Americans were included in the spirit of unity. The attack on Pearl Harbor also spread fear across America. The federal government began drafting policies aimed toward immigrants and aliens from the Axis nations. Aliens are foreign citizens living in the United States. All resident “enemy aliens” were required to register with the government, submit to fingerprinting, and list their organizational affiliations.
Executive Order 9066 Originally, laws made no distinction among nationalities. German, Italian, and Japanese aliens were subject to arrest or deportation if deemed dangerous to national security. Some 11,000 German immigrants and hundreds of Italian immigrants were held in camps; others faced curfews or travel restrictions. Federal orders also forced all three groups to vacate the West Coast temporarily in the winter of 1942. Once public fears subsided, FDR removed Germans and Italians from the enemy aliens list.
Japanese aliens and Japanese American citizens received no such respite. Believing people of Japanese ancestry to be inherently disloyal, West Coast leaders pressed FDR to address the “threat.” In February 1942, the President issued Executive Order 9066, designating certain areas as war zones from which anyone might be removed for any reason.
By September, the government evacuated more than 100,000 Japanese Americans on the West Coast. Evacuees—including both Issei, Japanese immigrants, and Nisei, native-born American citizens of Japanese descent—were forced to sell their property at a loss and allowed to take only necessary items.
Why did Japanese Americans generally face harsher treatment than Italian or German Americans? Several factors help explain the difference: racism, the smaller numbers of Japanese Americans, their lack of political clout, and their relative isolation from other Americans. In Hawaii, where Japanese Americans comprised one third of a multiracial society, they escaped a similar fate.
Japanese Americans Are Interned The first orders stipulated only that Japanese Americans must leave designated military zones, but leaders in interior states objected. The governor of Arizona insisted his state did not want to become a “dumping ground for enemy aliens.” The War Department then initiated a policy of internment, or temporary imprisonment of members of a specific group. Japanese American men, women, and children were transported to camps
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OP JUSTICE
NOTICE
TO ALIENS OF ENEMY NATIONALITIES
★ The United States Government requires all aliens of German, Italian, or Japanese nationality to apply at post offices nearest to their place of residence for a Certificate of Identification. Applications must be filed between the period February 9 through February 28,1942. Go to your postmaster today for printed directions.
FRANCIS BIDDLE,
EARL G. HARRISON,
Attorney Generel. Spocia/ A99i9tont to the Attorney Gonorol.
AVVISO
Il Governo degli Stati Uniti ordina a tutti gli stranieri di nazionalite Tedesca, Italiana e Giap-ponese di fare richiesta all' Ufficio Postale piii prossimo al loro luogo di residenza per ottenere un Certificate d’IdentiU. Le richieste devono essere fatte entro il periodo che decorre tra il 9 Febbraio e il 28 Febbraio, 1942.
Andate oggi dal vostro Capo d’Ufficio Postale (.Postmaster) per ricevere le istrusioni scritte.

» All German, Italian, and Japanese citizens in the United States had to register with the U.S. government. Identify Supporting Details Why was this notice printed in four languages?
» This family from Washington state was sent to an internment camp in California. Express Problems Clearly What constitutional issues were raised by these evacuations?
Interactive Gallery
World War II 395	6.5 The Home Front
» The Japanese American owner of this store had to sell his goods quickly and at a loss before he relocated. Few Japanese Americans were able to recover their property after the war.
» Veterans of the 442nd Regimental Combat Team gather in Honolulu for the seventieth anniversary of Pearl Harbor. The group had been awarded the Congressional Gold Medal the month before.
in isolated locations such as Poston, Arizona, and Jerome, Arkansas. With few exceptions, Nisei and Issei remained in the camps for the duration of the war.
Families huddled into stark one-room shacks, while single people were herded into drafty bunkhouses. Camp schools were hopelessly underfunded. Internees often suffered from food shortages and substandard medical care. The psychological effects could be just as severe.
The resettlement center is actually a jail—armed guards in towers with spotlights and deadly tommy guns, fifteen feet of barbed-wire fences, everyone confined to quarters at nine.
What really hurts [is being called] ‘Japs.’ ‘Japs’ are the guys we are fighting.
—Ted Nakashima, The New Republic, June 5, 1942
Japanese Americans Fight for Rights Since many of those interned in the camps were American citizens, the federal government's policy of internment raised constitutional issues. Some Japanese Americans went to court to seek their rights. In two cases, Hirabayashi v. United States (1943) and Korematsu v. United States (1944), the Supreme Court upheld the government's wartime internment policy. Not until 1988 did the government offer an apology and $20,000 payments to surviving internees.
Japanese Americans also faced another form of discrimination. At first, they were not accepted into the armed forces. But after the government lifted the ban in early 1943, many eagerly enlisted. The all-Nisei 442nd Regimental Combat Team fought in the Italian campaign and became the most decorated military unit in American history.
The 442nd helped counter the notion that Japanese Americans were not loyal citizens.
Id CONSTRUCT Why were Japanese Americans
interned during World War II?
World War II 396
6.5 The Home Front
Increased Opportunities in Employment
All over the United States, American industry quickly converted to war production to meet the nation’s military needs. As the economic effects of World War II brought the Great Depression to an end, the millions of unemployed men who had been such a common sight during the 1930s seemed to vanish overnight. They either joined the military, worked to produce food for the world on the nation’s rich farms, or labored in factories producing war materiel. Soon, factories needed to hire workers outside of their usual pool of mostly white men. To keep production going, more women and more African Americans found opportunity in defense industries, although they still faced significant obstacles to gaining and succeeding in those jobs.
Women Work in Defense Industries Government and industry launched an all-out publicity campaign urging women to do their part to meet wartime production quotas. The image of a strong, determined female worker, hair tucked under a kerchief, graced countless magazines and posters. The name "Rosie the Riveter” was first used in a 1942 song, and several real-life Rosies won national publicity. But “Rosie” was really a symbol for an army of women who made artillery shells, sewed uniforms, and welded planes.
Years later, one of them spoke about the contribution that women had made:
Our war effort ... it was a good success and a good thing that we did it. It’s a good thing that the women went in. It’s a good thing that they showed the world that they can do things too. ‘Oh, it’s dirty work.’ Well, making a pie can be dirty work.
—Meda Montana Hallyburton Brendall, Veterans
History Project, Library of Congress
Despite the government’s encouragement, there were still obstacles to women working in war industry. They were generally paid less than men for the same or similar work. Some new workers also faced hostility in their new workplaces. Still, by the end of the war, women made up more than one third of the wartime workforce.
A woman working outside the home was nothing new, but wartime pressures created two sharp breaks from the past. Many women found jobs, especially in heavy industry, that fell outside the traditional realm of women’s work. The need for labor also weakened
» Posters like this one sought to motivate women to take jobs in the defense industry. Evaluate Sources How does the artist convey the message that women should work for the war effort?
the common practice that a woman quit her job once she married. Three fourths of women working in war industries were married, and 60 percent were older than 35 years.
Wartime Work Changes Women’s Lives Although the image of Rosie the Riveter working in a factory was widespread, women labored in both blue-collar and white-collar jobs. Most factory owners expected women to step aside once men returned home at war’s end. In white-collar settings, however, the war accelerated long-term trends toward increased employment. During the 1940s, the number of women employed in secretarial and clerical work increased fivefold.
With fathers in the military and mothers in the workplace, children’s lives began to change. The federal government spent $50 million building day-care centers for children of working mothers. Still, only about 130,000 kids ended up in day-care centers and most were not filled to capacity. Many parents preferred to leave their children in the care of neighbors or relatives.
Wartime work helped women move closer to achieving the American Dream, gaining success through hard work and initiative. They benefited from the experience in several ways. They earned paychecks, some for the first time, formed new and
World War II 397	6.5 The Home Front
A.
Philip Randolph was a leader in the campaign for civil rights for African Americans for decades. He was one of the key voices behind the influential March on Washington in 1963. » This cartoon is from 1943, two years after Executive Order 8802. Analyze Political Cartoons Who is the figure in the middle? Why do you think this cartoon was necessary in 1943?
different relationships, and gained organizational experience. “I decided that if I could learn to weld like a man,” noted one laborer, “I could do anything it took to make a living.” The confidence and knowledge women developed enriched their postwar experiences and helped create opportunities for their daughters in the years ahead.
African Americans Seek Employment Opportunities Many African American leaders hoped that the war might provide jobs and alleviate their dismal economic situations. However, few found meaningful employment with national defense employers before Pearl Harbor. Out of 100,000 Americans working in the aircraft industry in 1940, for example, only 240 were African Americans. Even jobs provided by the government and military remained segregated.
African American leaders stressed the need for a "Double V” campaign—victory against fascism abroad and victory against discrimination at home. The charismatic and savvy labor leader A. Philip Randolph asserted that African Americans would no longer accept second-class citizenship. "We loyal Negro American citizens demand the right to work and fight for our country,” he proclaimed.
In June 1941, Randolph presented President Roosevelt a list of demands, including the end of discriminatory practices in government-funded training, employment, and the armed services. He also took steps to organize a massive protest march on Washington, D.C.
Roosevelt Issues Executive Order 8802 FDR had
hoped to put civil rights reform on the back burner while war raged in Europe and Asia. But Randolph persisted in his plans. With the United States nearing involvement in the war, Roosevelt feared that the sight of a huge protest march on the nation’s capital would undermine unity and fuel enemy propaganda. So, under pressure, he issued Executive Order 8802. This measure assured fair hiring practices in any job funded with government money and established the Fair Employment Practices Committee to enforce these requirements. By 1944, nearly 2 million African Americans worked in defense industries, although racist practices were still common.
Such victories encouraged African Americans to join organizations dedicated to promoting equal rights. The NAACP grew to 500,000 members. In 1942, civil rights leaders founded the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), an organization that sought to apply nonviolent protest as a means of fighting segregation. Although segregation still prevailed in the military, the South, and other parts of the nation, wartime developments
6.5 The Home Front
helped set the agenda for the civil rights struggles of the coming decades.
COMPARE AND CONTRAST
How were the employment experiences for women and African Americans the same? How did they differ?
Migration During World War II
Wartime needs encouraged migration. People from rural areas, whites and African Americans, moved north to industrial cities and west to California. They sought jobs in wartime industries or near military bases. Farmers looked for creative ways to keep their farms producing necessary food. The moving population and new jobs invigorated Americans but the effects of changing demographics also led to strain and unrest in some areas.
Workers on the Move During World War II, California alone gained 2 million new residents seeking work in shipyards and other industries related to the war. The South lost residents in its rural areas, but grew by a million new people as a whole. Older industrial cities in the North, such as Detroit and Chicago, also boomed. Movement of people fostered long-term changes in the country’s demographic patterns.
Demographics are statistics that show human characteristics of a population. After receiving billions of dollars to fund industry and build military bases, the South and Southwest became a growing economic and political force.
Population shifts affected Native Americans, too. As Native Americans left reservations to work in defense industries, they had the opportunity to learn new skills and had greater contacts with non-Indians. Many of these people, as well as Native American veterans, never returned to the reservations after the war.
Migration Changes Farming Meanwhile, American farmers faced a challenge. They needed to produce more food than ever before to power both the American war effort and send to Allies abroad. However, more and more people left farms for the military or jobs in the cities. Farmers developed new farming methods, including more efficient machinery and better fertilizers, to improve yields with fewer workers.
They also found several solutions to alleviate the rural population drain. First, teenagers too young to enlist helped out more.
Also, tens of thousands of Axis prisoners of war were paid to work on farms, which was allowed
» In this photo, a group protests segregation in the military in early 1948. Identify Cause and Effect How might wartime experiences have strengthened the will to fight a Jim Crow military?
» This Mexican family heads to the United States to help fill jobs under the bracero program, which continued into the 1960s.

World War II 399	6.5 The Home Front
» Los Angeles police arrest a group of young Mexican Americans in 1943. Some of them, like the second prisoner from the right, wear the flashy zoot suits that gave the incident its name.
under the Geneva Convention. Finally, the United States partnered with Mexico to operate the bracero program, bringing laborers from Mexico to work on American farms especially in the West. During the war years, several hundred thousand braceros embraced this opportunity and migrated to the United States. In the long term, the bracero program initiated decades of migratory labor in the West.
Conflict Springs From Migration In the summer of 1943, migration led to racial violence in some cities. The worst occurred in Detroit, where conflict rose over the construction of housing for black workers drawn north to defense plants. Some 100,000 whites and
blacks broke into scattered fights at a city park. By the next morning, full-scale riots erupted in which 34 people were killed. Federal troops ended the violence, but the city’s problems were never resolved. Mexican Americans had long dealt with similar obstacles.
Few had mastered the English language, and many languished in slums while struggling to find work. A violent incident highlighted the problems. In the Los Angeles area, many Mexican and Mexican American youths dressed in stylish “zoot suits” with baggy pants and long jackets. In June 1943, mobs of off-duty sailors roamed through the Mexican sections of Los Angeles, attacking “zooters.” When the fighting ended, police arrested the zoot-suited victims, not their attackers.
After the riots, an indignant Governor Earl Warren formed a committee to investigate the causes of the outbreak and demanded that the guilty parties be punished. Although the committee blamed the lack of sufficient recreation for the violence, long-brewing racial tensions acted as the true spark.
H DEFINE
What was the bracero program? ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Central Issues What were some positive effects of the war on the U.S. economy?
2.	Predict Consequences Predict two possible consequences for wartime women factory workers when men began to return from overseas after the war.
3.	SynthesizeHow did the war affect American farming?
4.	Compare How were the causes of the Detroit race riots and the Los Angeles Zoot Suit Riots similar?
5.	Make Predications How did the U.S. government deal with Japanese Americans during the war? How did they respond?
World War II 400
6.5 The Home Front
In 1942 and 1943, the Allies turned back the Axis advances.
In the last two years of the war,
1944 and 1945, they delivered the final, crushing blow. They attacked Germany from the west and east, and the United States advanced across the Pacific to the doorstep of Japan. In the process, Americans created a new form of weapon that would change both warfare and global politics.
American troops prepare for an attack during the Battle of the Bulge, January 4, 1945.	How
might weather conditions like this affect soldiers?
ItQjl Interactive Flipped Video
The Allies Win the War
Planning Germany’s Defeat
Opening a Second Front Throughout 1943, Franklin Roosevelt, Winston Churchill, and Joseph Stalin argued over when they would start a second front in France. Up to that point, Soviet troops had done most of the fighting in Europe. Stalin insisted that Britain and the United States carry more of the military burden by attacking Germany in the west, thereby forcing Germany to divide its troops.
Roosevelt sympathized with Stalin’s position, but Churchill hesitated and delayed. Recalling the slaughter of British troops on the Western Front in World War I, he was not anxious to see history repeat itself. He argued that the German U-boat presence was too great in the English Channel and that the Allies needed more equipment, more landing craft, and better-trained soldiers.
The Big Three Meet In November 1943, Roosevelt and Churchill traveled to Teheran, Iran, for their first face-to-face meeting with Stalin. Churchill continued to voice concerns about an invasion of France, but Roosevelt sided with Stalin. Reluctantly, Churchill agreed. After years of war, British and American soldiers would invade France and begin
2.D, 7.B, 7.D, 7.E, 7.F, 7.G, 26.F, 27. B
» Objectives
Analyze the planning and impact of the invasion of Normandy.
Understand how the Allies achieved final victory in Europe.
Explore the reasons President Truman decided to use the atomic bomb against Japan.
» Key Terms
Battle of the Bulge Harry S. Truman island-hopping kamikaze Albert Einstein Manhattan Project J. Robert
Oppenheimer
PEARSON 1
realize

www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
401
» Joseph Stalin, Franklin Roosevelt, and Winston Churchill (left to right) at the Teheran Conference, November 1943
» General Dwight Eisenhower (left) and British General Bernard Montgomery (right) led the Allied invasion of Normandy.
their march toward Germany. At the end of the Teheran Conference, the Big Three issued a joint statement that gave no hint of their earlier disagreements:
We have reached complete agreement as to the scope and timing of the operations to be undertaken from the east, west and south. The common understanding which we have here reached guarantees that victory will be ours. . . . No power on earth can prevent our destroying the German armies by land, their U Boats by sea, and their war planes from the air.
—Declaration of the Three Powers, December 1, 1943
Six months after the Teheran Conference, the plan to open a second front in France became reality. The massive Allied invasion of France was given the code name Operation Overlord.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why did Roosevelt and Churchill not agree to open a second front in France until late 1943?
The Invasion of Normandy
Operation Overlord involved the most experienced Allied officers in Europe. American General Dwight D. Eisenhower again served as Supreme Commander. British General Bernard Montgomery served as commander of the ground forces, while General Omar Bradley led the American troops who would participate in the invasion.
Eisenhower Plans the Invasion U S. Army chief of staff George Marshall had long pushed for an Allied invasion of France, believing that the British strategy of invading North Africa and Italy would not contribute to Germany’s defeat. Although he was the obvious choice to lead the invasion of Normandy once the Allies had finally agreed to do so, Roosevelt decided that he was too valuable to remove from his current position. Instead, Roosevelt looked to Eisenhower.
Eisenhower had been given command of all American forces in Europe in 1942—even though more than 350 other generals had more seniority. After strong performances in North Africa and Italy, he was made Supreme Commander of Allied Forces. In this role, he planned Operation Overlord.
World War II 402	6.6 The Allies Win the War
D-Day
NORMANDV
FRANCE
KEY
American
British
Canadian
0	50 km
Albers Conic
Equal-Area Projection 4 w
Landing Beaches	
o	Utah
0	Omaha
©	Gold
©	Juno
0	Sword
Interactive Gallery
£
» Analyze Maps Summarize the Allied invasion of Normandy. Support your answer
with evidence from the map.	| Q9
Overlord involved landing 21 American divisions and 26 British, Canadian, and Polish divisions on a 50-mile stretch of beaches in Normandy. The fleet was the largest ever assembled, comprising more than 4,400 ships and landing crafts.
The plan involved striking five Normandy beaches (code-named Utah, Omaha, Gold, Juno, and Sword), but it also included an elaborate deception: the creation of a fictional Allied army under American General George S. Patton. The Allies set up fake headquarters in southeast England across the English Channel from Calais, France, equipped with wood and cardboard tanks, useless ships, and radio messages. The Allies hoped to convince the Germans that the Allied attack would come at Calais, not farther west in Normandy. In the end, the deception worked. Hitler ordered his top tank division to Calais.
Allies Storm the Beaches On June 6, 1944—known as D-Day—the Allies launched the invasion. More than 11,000 planes prepared the way, attempting to destroy German communication and transportation networks and soften Nazi beach defenses. At 6:30 A.M., after a rough crossing of the English Channel, the first Allied troops landed.
On four beaches, the landings were lightly opposed and casualties were low. But at Omaha, one of the two
beaches assigned to American forces, the Germans offered strong opposition.
Germans Defend Normandy On the cliffs overlooking the beach, the Germans had dug trenches and built small concrete pillbox structures from which heavy artillery could be fired. They had the beach covered with a wide variety of deadly guns. They had also heavily mined the beaches. When the first American soldiers arrived, they stepped out of their landing crafts into a rainstorm of German bullets and shells. Some crafts dumped their occupants too far from the beach; soldiers, weighted down by heavy packs and weapons, drowned. As one eyewitness recalled,
One writer called D-Day “the longest day." For many American soldiers, it was a very short day—and their last day on Earth. Some fought bravely and died. Others fought bravely and survived. By the end of the day, the Allies had gained a toehold in France. Within a month, more than one million Allied troops had landed at Normandy—but there they were held by German defenses.
In mid-July, under General Bradley—the commander of all American forces in France—Allied bombers launched an enormous assault on the German lines, opening up a gap that American armored divisions raced through. General Patton took charge of the U.S. Third Army and began an all-out drive across France,
World War II 403	6.6 The Allies Win the War
advancing rapidly toward Paris. Berlin, the capital of Germany, was still a long road ahead, but the Allies had taken the first, and most important, step on that road.
H DRAW CONCLUSIONS
Why do you think it was so important to the Allies for Operation Overlord to succeed? Use evidence from the text to support your answer.
Defeat of Germany
After D-Day, Germany faced a hopeless two-front war. Soviet soldiers were advancing steadily from the east, forcing German armies out of Latvia, Romania, Slovakia, and Hungary. Mile by mile, Germany lost the lands it had once dominated and the natural resources it had once plundered.
Allies on the Move Allied armies were also on the move in the west. British and Canadian troops had finally broken through the German lines in northern France and moved south to join Patton’s American forces. In August 1944, the Allies liberated Paris. Hitler had ordered his generals to destroy the French capital, but they disobeyed him, leaving the “City of Lights” as beautiful as ever. As Parisians celebrated, Allied troops kept advancing.
» An American soldier waves from his tank as the Allies enter Paris in August 1944.
As a mood of hopelessness fell over Germany, Rommel and other leading German generals plotted to overthrow Hitler. On July 20, 1944, a German officer planted a bomb at Hitler’s headquarters.
The explosion killed or wounded 20 people, but Hitler survived. Rommel took poison to escape being put on trial. Claiming that fate was on his side, Hitler refused to surrender to the advancing Allied troops.
Hitler’s Desperate Counterattack In December 1944, Hitler ordered a counterattack. With Allied troops strung out between the English Channel and the Alps, German forces massed near the Ardennes. Hitler’s plan called for English-speaking German soldiers in U.S. uniforms to cut telephone lines, change road signs, and spread confusion. German tanks would then secure communication and transportation hubs.
The counterattack, known as the Battle of the Bulge, almost succeeded. The Germans caught the Allies by surprise, created a bulge in the American line, and captured several key towns. Snowy, cloudy skies prevented the Allies from exploiting their air superiority. But at the Belgian town of Bastogne (bas tohn), American forces led by Eisenhower and Patton held despite frostbite and brutal German assaults. Then, on December 23, the skies cleared and Allied bombers attacked German positions.
After reinforcements arrived, the Allies went back on the offensive, steadily pushing the Germans out of France. The Battle of the Bulge was a desperate attempt to drive a wedge between American and British forces. Instead, the battle crippled Germany by forcing it to use its reserve troops and supplies. Ultimately, it shortened the time Hitler had left.
Winston Churchill gave U.S. forces full credit for the Allied victory at the Battle of the Bulge:
The United States troops have done almost all the fighting and have suffered almost all the losses. They have suffered losses almost equal to those of both sides at the Battle of Gettysburg. . . . [The Battle of the Bulge] will, I believe, be regarded as an ever-famous American victory.
—Winston Churchill, Address to the House of
Commons, January 18, 1945
Courage Under Fire The sacrifices made by American troops in battles such as the Battle of the Bulge were significant—as was the courage these young soldiers
World War II 404 1 6.6 The Allies Win the War
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
World War II in Europe, 1942-1945
KEY
i—I Greatest extent of Axis control, 1942
|	| Allied territory, 1942
|	| Neutral nations, 1942
Allied advance ★ Major battle
400 mi
0	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area
Projection
» Analyze Maps Use the information on the map to summarize the course of World War II in Europe from 1942 through 1945. Support your answer with evidence from the map.
5511 Interactive Map
showed in combat. In fact, some 40 percent of the Congressional Medals of Honor—the highest military award given by the United States—awarded since 1900 were given for service in World War II. Of the 464 Medals of Honor awarded for World War II, 266 were given posthumously.
Audie Murphy was one recipient of the Medal of Honor. In fact, he received more medals than any other American in World War II. In January 1945, his squad was set upon by German troops. Ordering his men to withdraw, Murphy climbed atop a burning tank that was in danger of exploding. For an hour, he used the tank’s machine gun to hold off the enemy:
Germans reached as close as 10 yards, only to be mowed down by his fire. He received a leg wound, but ignored it and continued the single-handed fight until his ammunition was exhausted. He then made his way to his company, refused medical attention, and organized the company in a counterattack.
—Medal of Honor Citation for Audie Murphy
Germany Surrenders By January 1945, the Soviet Army had reached the Oder River outside Berlin. The Allies also advanced northward in Italy. In April, Benito Mussolini tried to flee but was captured and executed. By this time, American and British troops had crossed the Rhine River into Germany, and a U.S. force soon reached the Elbe River, 50 miles west of Berlin. Allied forces were now in position for an all-out assault against Hitler’s capital.
Hitler was by now a physical wreck: shaken by tremors, paranoid from drugs, and kept alive by mad dreams of a final victory. He gave orders that no one followed and planned campaigns that no one would ever fight. Finally, on April 30, he and a few of his closest associates committed suicide. His "Thousand Year Reich” had lasted only a dozen years.
On May 7, in a little French schoolhouse that had served as Eisenhower’s headquarters, Germany surrendered. Americans celebrated V-E (Victory in Europe) Day. Sadly, President Roosevelt did not see the momentous day. He had died a few weeks earlier. It would be up to the new President, Harry S. Truman, to see the nation through to final victory.
E2 IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why do you think the authors write that “Germany faced a hopeless
World War II 405	6.6 The Allies Win the War
two-front war” after D-Day? Use evidence from the text to support your answer.
Americans Advance
Toward Japan
While war still raged in Europe, American forces in the Pacific had been advancing in giant leaps. Under the leadership of General Douglas MacArthur, they followed an island-hopping strategy, capturing some Japanese-held islands and ignoring others in a steady path toward Japan.
Navajo troops played a vital role in the Pacific island-hopping campaign. The Navajo language has no written alphabet, and at the start of the war only a small number of non-Navajo people could understand it—none of them Japanese. Navajo radio operators developed and memorized a secret code using the language, and they used it to send critical messages from island to island. The code was never broken by the Japanese.
Struggle in the Pacific From Tarawa and Makin in the Gilbert Islands, American forces jumped ahead to Eniwetok and Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands. Then, they took another leap to Saipan, Tinian, and Guam in
the Mariana Islands. By 1944, the United States Navy, under Admiral Nimitz, was blockading Japan, and in October General MacArthur began the fight to retake the Philippines.
American forces took each island only after a difficult struggle. Time and again, Japanese defenders fought virtually to the last man. Rather than surrender, many Japanese troops readily killed themselves. At the same time, Japanese kamikaze (kah muh kah zee) pilots deliberately crashed their planes into American ships. By the end of the war, more than 3,000 Japanese pilots had died in kamikaze missions. Their deaths, however, did not prevent MacArthur from retaking the Philippines—as he had promised when he left the islands in 1942—or the U.S. Navy from sinking Japanese ships.
American Forces Near Japan One of the fiercest battles in the island-hopping campaign took place in February and March 1945.
On Iwo Jima ( EE woh jee muh), a 5-mile-long island 650 miles southeast of Tokyo, the capital of Japan, United States Marines faced a dug-in, determined enemy. In 36 days of fighting, more than 23,000 marines became casualties. But in the end, the Allies took the island.
World War II in the Pacific, 1942-1945
INDIAN
OCEAN
» Analyze Maps Use the information on the map to summarize the course of World War II in the Pacific from 1942 through 1945. Support your answer with evidence from the map.
Interactive Map

World War II
6.6 The Allies Win the War
The fight for Okinawa (oh kuh NAH wuh) in April 1945 was even deadlier than Iwo Jima. Only 340 miles from Japan, Okinawa contained a vital air base, necessary for the planned invasion of Japan. Taking Okinawa was the most complex and costly operation in the Pacific campaign, involving half a million troops and 1,213 warships. U.S. forces finally took Okinawa but at a cost of roughly 50,000 casualties.
Americans Bombers Attack Japan From Okinawa and other Pacific bases, American pilots could bomb the Japanese home islands. Short on pilots and aircraft, low on fuel and ammunition, Japan was virtually defenseless. American bombers hit factories, military bases, and cities. In a single night in March 1945, B-29 bombers destroyed 16 square miles of Tokyo. The raid killed over 83,000 Japanese—more than either of the later atomic bombs—and injured 100,000 more.
USE VISUAL INFORMATION
Look at the image of destruction in Tokyo. How might American bombing like this affect the war in the Pacific?
The War Comes to an End
Advances in technology helped determine the outcome of World War II. Allied and Axis scientists labored to make planes faster, bombs deadlier, and weapons more accurate. As always in warfare, specific military needs resulted in scientific discoveries and technological innovations.
Science and Technology Help Win the War
Scientists and engineers on both sides of the war worked on the development of conventional weapons at a rapid pace, creating and improving many wartime technologies. They developed fast and powerful aircraft, ships, and weapons, as well as radar and sonar to detect enemy aircraft and ships. To treat sick and wounded soldiers, they developed a way to mass-produce penicillin, an antibiotic, and to more easily transport and store blood plasma.
To supply military needs, they invented synthetic materials such as nylon, used to make parachutes and vehicle tires. But the most crucial scientific development of all was the atomic bomb.
Scientists Develop the Atomic Bomb In the
early 1930s, scientists learned how to split the nuclei of certain elements. They also discovered that this process of nuclear fission released tremendous energy. Over the next decade, they learned more about the nature of the atom, the effect of a chain reaction, and the military uses of uranium.
» A two-man team of Navajo code talkers transmit secret orders over their radio. Summarize How did code talkers contribute to the American war effort?
>2.
ft'

' - •.	~ “"a. ''■«*' ■■■	vju."■	•
5? T
» In 1945, U.S. bombers launched devastating attacks on Tokyo, killing tens of thousands of people and destroying large areas of the city.

Interactive Gallery
6.6 The Allies Win the War
World War II
» The world's first atomic bomb, code-named Trinity, was detonated in the New Mexico desert on July 16, 1945. Hypothesize Why do you think it was important to the Allies that they successfully develop an atomic bomb before the Axis?
bomb against Japan in an effort to end the war and limit. American casualties.
Early in the war, Albert Einstein, the world’s most famous scientist, signed a letter that alerted President Roosevelt about the need to proceed with development of atomic weapons. In 1942, Roosevelt gave the highest national priority to the development of an atomic bomb. The program, code-named the Manhattan Project, cost several billion dollars and employed tens of thousands of people.
The two primary leaders of the project were General Leslie Groves and physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer. Groves was responsible for building facilities, acquiring materials, recruiting scientists, and providing security. Oppenheimer ran the scientific aspect of the project from Los Alamos, New Mexico. Scientists working on the top-secret project included many refugees from Europe, including Enrico Fermi, developer of the first atomic reactor.
On the morning of July 16, 1945, in a barren area outside of Alamogordo, New Mexico, the first atomic bomb was tested. The flash of light was clearly visible 180 miles away, and the sound was heard at a distance of 100 miles. Watching the blast, Oppenheimer recalled the following line from a Hindu poem: “Now I am become Death, the destroyer of Worlds.”
The general’s thoughts were less poetic. Turning to an aide, Groves said, “The war’s over. One or two of those things and Japan will be finished.”
Truman Decides to Use the Bomb The decision to use the bomb fell directly on the shoulders of Harry Truman.
The new President fully understood the ethical issues presented by using the bomb, especially against civilians. At the same time, he also knew that the Axis Powers had nuclear scientists, and there was no way to tell how close they were to developing their own bomb. Ultimately, Truman’s chief priority was to save American lives. His military advisers predicted that, in light of the ferocious defense waged by Japanese soldiers during the island-hopping campaign, an invasion of Japan might cost as many as 1,000,000 American casualties.
In truth, Truman did not agonize over the decision to use the atomic bomb against Japan. For the President, abstract ethical issues did not outweigh very real American lives and an opportunity to end the war. Later, some critics would condemn Truman’s decision. But in the late summer of 1945, no one close to him did so.
Hiroshima and Nagasaki Are Destroyed On
August 6, 1945, U.S. pilots dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima. It exploded at 8:15 a.m. One survivor of the blast later recalled the first moments:
World War II 408	6.6 The Allies Win the War
After I noticed the flash, white clouds spread over the blue sky. It was amazing. It was as if blue morning-glories had suddenly bloomed up in the sky. . . • Then came the heat wave. It was very, very hot. Even though there was a window glass in front of me, I felt really hot. It was as if I was looking directly into a kitchen oven.
—Isao Kita, Hiroshima Witness
Within two minutes, more than 60,000 of Hiroshima’s 344,000 residents were dead or missing.
Over the next three days, Japanese leaders debated whether to surrender or continue to fight. Then, on August 9, two events rocked Japan. First, the Soviet Union declared war against Japan and invaded Japanese-held Manchuria. Next, the United States dropped a second atomic bomb on Nagasaki, killing 35,000 residents.
Japan Surrenders Debate continued at the highest levels of Japanese government. Finally, Emperor Hirohito made the decision to surrender.
On August 15, the Allies celebrated V-J (Victory in Japan) Day. Japan officially surrendered on September 2 aboard the USS Missouri.
But even as the Allies celebrated victory, the horrifying costs of the war began to become clear. As many as 60 million people, mostly civilians, had died in the conflict. Cities, factories, farms, and roads lay in ruins in large parts of Europe and Asia, and millions of refugees were homeless. Winning the war had been an enormous effort for the Allies. Peace would bring new challenges.
SUMMARIZE
How did scientific discoveries and technological innovations affect the war?
» Americans celebrate the surrender of Japan in August 1945, New York City. At long last, World War II was over.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Draw Conclusions Which Ally bore the brunt of Germany’s assault during the first years of the war?
2.	Draw Conclusions On what issues did Stalin, Roosevelt, and Churchill disagree?
3.	Draw Conclusions Where and when did the Allies open a second front in Europe? What was the result?
4.	Synthesize How did the Allies go about pushing the Japanese back in the Pacific?
5.	Make Predications What were the consequences of the decision to bomb Hiroshima and Nagasaki?
World War II 409
6.6 The Allies Win the War
r'«2<
In this photograph, Nazi troops remove Jewish residents from the Warsaw ghetto after a failed uprising in 1943. This has become one of the most famous images associated with the Holocaust.
•mt
From the time he came to power, Adolf Hitler had targeted Jews for persecution. By the end of the war, the Nazis had murdered 6 million Jews and 5 million other people they considered inferior. In 1945, there was no word for Hitler’s murderous plan of extermination. Today, it is called the Holocaust. We continue to remember this tragedy and seek ways to prevent anything like it from ever happening again.
Interactive Flipped Video
7.D, 7.E
» Objectives
Trace the roots and progress of Hitler’s campaign against the Jews.
Explain the goals of Hitler’s “final solution” and the nature of Nazi death camps.
Examine how the United States responded to the Holocaust.
The Holocaust
» Key Terms
Holocaust
anti-Semitism
Nazism
Kristallnacht
genocide
concentration
camps death camps War Refugee Board
Roots of the Holocaust
The mass murders of Jews, as well as other "undesirables," were a direct result of a racist Nazi ideology that considered Aryans (white gentiles, especially those of Germanic, Nordic, and Anglo-Saxon blood) superior to other people. Among the groups that the Nazis considered inferior were the Slavic peoples of Russia and Eastern Europe.
From the start, the Nazi movement trafficked in anti-Semitism. Hitler blamed Jews for all the ills of Germany, from communism to inflation to abstract painting—and, especially, for the defeat of Germany in World War I. Other extremists influenced Hitler’s ideas and shared his prejudices. In the 1920s, his was just another angry voice in the Weimar Republic, advancing simplistic answers for the nation’s grave economic, political, and social troubles. In 1933, however, Hitler became chancellor of Germany.
Hitler’s Campaign Against the Jews Hitler’s persecution of the Jews began as soon as he came to power. At first, his focus was economic. He urged Germans to boycott Jewish-owned businesses, and he barred Jews from jobs in civil service, banking, the stock exchange, law, journalism, and medicine. In 1935, Hitler moved to a broader legal persecution. The Nuremberg Laws, named for the city that served as the spiritual center of Nazism. They denied German citizenship to Jews, banned marriage between Jews and non-Jews,
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
ze
410
1
and segregated Jews at every level of society. Yet even these measures were not enough for Hitler. He hinted that, in the future, there might be what he called the “Final Solution to the Jewish question.”
Hitler employed the full power of the state in his anti-Semitic campaigns. Newspapers printed scandalous attacks against Jews. Children in schools and the Hitler Youth movement were taught that Jews were “polluting” German society and culture. Comic books contained vile caricatures of Jews.
The Violence of Kristallnacht Acts of violence against Jews were common. The most serious attack on German Jews took place on November 9, 1938. It became known as Kristallnacht (krihs tahl nahkt), or the “Night of the Broken Glass." After a Jewish refugee killed a German diplomat in Paris, Nazi officials ordered attacks on Jews in Germany, Austria, and the Sudetenland. Secret police and military units destroyed more than 1,500 synagogues and 7,500 Jewish-owned businesses, killed more than 200 Jews, and injured more than 600 others. The Nazis arrested thousands of Jews.
Refugees Try to Escape Between 1933 and 1937, about 129,000 Jews fled Germany and Nazi-controlled Austria. They included some of the most notable figures in the scientific and artistic world, including physicist Albert Einstein.
More Jews would have left, but they were not generally welcomed into other countries. During the Great Depression, with jobs scarce, the United States and other countries barred their doors to many Jews. In 1939, the ocean liner St. Louis departed Germany for Cuba with more than 900 Jewish refugees on board. Only 22 of the passengers received permission to stay in Cuba. U.S. officials refused to accept any of the refugees. The ship returned to Germany. Almost 600 of the Jews aboard the St. Louis later died in Nazi concentration camps.
H IDENTIFY STEPS IN A PROCESS
How did Hitler and the Nazis gradually deprive Jewish people of their rights?
Hitler’s “Final Solution”
Since 1933, the Nazis had denied Jews the rights of citizenship and committed acts of brutality against them. These acts of persecution were steps toward Hitler’s “Final Solution to the Jewish question”: nothing short of the systematic extermination of all Jews living in the regions controlled by the Third Reich. Today,
» This propaganda poster from 1935 glorifies the image of what the Nazis saw as the ideal Aryan youth. At the same time, posters and comic books viciously caricatured people the Nazis considered “inferior.”
» Hitler is greeted by children in Poland. The white shirts and ties worn by the girls were part of the uniform of the female branch of the Hitler Youth movement.
World War II 411
6.7 The Holocaust
we use the word genocide to describe such willful annihilation of a racial, political, or cultural group.
The First Concentration Camps In 1933, the year he became chancellor, Hitler opened the first Nazi concentration camps, areas where members of specially designated groups were confined. The earliest camps included Dachau, Sachsenhausen, and Buchenwald. Later, Ravensbruck, not far from Berlin, was opened for female prisoners.
In theory, the camps were designed not to kill prisoners, but to turn them into "useful members” of the Third Reich. The Nazis imprisoned political opponents such as labor leaders, socialists, and communists, as well as anyone—journalists or novelists, ministers or priests—who spoke out against Hitler. Many Jews as well as Aryans who had intimate relations with Jews were sent to camps. Other groups targeted as "undesirable” included Gypsies, Jehovah’s Witnesses, homosexuals, beggars, drunkards, conscientious objectors, the physically disabled, and people with mental illness.
Camp administrators tattooed numbers on the arms of prisoners and dressed them in vertically striped uniforms with triangular insignias. For example, political prisoners wore red insignias, homosexuals pink, Jews yellow, and Jehovah’s Witnesses purple. Inside the walls of the concentration camps, there were
no real restraints on sadistic guards. They tortured and even killed prisoners with no fear of reprisals from their superiors.
Death by starvation and disease was an everyday occurrence. In addition, doctors at camps such as Dachau conducted horrible medical experiments that either killed inmates or left them deformed. Prisoners were made subjects of bogus experiments on oxygen deprivation, hypothermia, and the effects of altitude. Bodies were mutilated without anesthesia. Thousands of prisoners died in agonizing pain, including some 5,000 mentally or physically disabled children.
The Nazis Build Death Camps When Germany invaded Poland and the Soviet Union, the Nazis gained control of large territories that were home to millions of Jews. Under Nazi rule, Jews in Warsaw, Lodz, and other Polish cities were forced to live in crowded, walled ghettos. Nazis also constructed additional concentration camps in Poland and Eastern Europe.
At first, the murder of Jews and other prisoners tended to be more arbitrary than systematic. But at the Wannsee Conference in January 1942, Nazi leaders made the decision to move toward Hitler’s “Final Solution.” Reinhard Heydrich, an SS leader known as “the man with an iron heart,” outlined a plan to exterminate about 11,000,000 Jews. Although
Concentration Camps in Europe
ROMANIA
» Analyze Maps How did the locations of death camps differ from the location of concentration camps?
Interactive Gallery

World War II 412	6.7 The Holocaust
Color-Coding of Prisoners at Dachau
» Prisoners in Nazi concentration camps were identified by triangular color-coded patches. Some prisoners might be forced to wear combinations of patches.
the minutes of the meeting do not use the word “kill,” everyone there understood that killing was their goal.
Many concentration camps, especially in Poland, were designated as death camps, camps where prisoners were systematically exterminated. The largest death camp was Auschwitz in southern Poland. Others included Treblinka, Maidenek, Sobibor, Belsec, and Chelmno. Prisoners from various parts of the Reich were transported by trains to the death camps and murdered. Nazis forced prisoners into death chambers and pumped in carbon monoxide or crammed the prisoners into shower-like facilities and released the insecticide Zyklon B.
Some concentration camps that the Nazis converted into death camps did not have gassing equipment. In these camps, Nazi guards shot hundreds of thousands of prisoners. Nazi “Action Groups" that followed the army into Eastern Europe also shot several million Jews and buried them in ditches.
In fully functioning death camps, the bodies of murdered prisoners were further desecrated. Human fat was turned into soap; human hair was woven into wigs, slippers, and mattresses; cash, gold fillings, wedding rings, and other valuables were stripped off the victims. After the Nazis had taken what they wanted, they burned the bodies in crematoriums.
By 1945, about 6 million European Jews had been murdered. But Jews were not the only victims. As many as 5 million others lay dead, including nearly 2
million non-Jewish Poles. While many survivors lived with constant nightmares of the experience, or with the sorrow and guilt of being the last members of their families, many others determined to rebuild their lives and families in the United States, Israel, or elsewhere and continue to be productive citizens.
U SUMMARIZE
What actions did the Nazis take to carry out Hitler’s “Final Solution?”
ELPS
ELPS 1.A.1
Discuss with a partner what you know about how the Nazis treated the Jews. Read the first paragraph under the heading Hitler’s "Final Solution”. Discuss how your previous knowledge helps you understand Hitler’s plan. Allied Response to the Holocaust
Could the Holocaust have been prevented? Could western democracies—especially Britain, France, and the United States—have intervened to stop the slaughter of millions of innocent people? There are no simple answers. However, many people today believe that the West could have done more than it did.
Early Inaction Before the war, the United States and other countries could have accepted more Jewish refugees from Germany and Austria. However, the U.S.
World War II 413	6.7 The Holocaust
State Department at first made a conscious effort to block Jewish immigration. Later commentators have blamed this failure on several factors: anti-Semitism, apathy, preoccupation with the Great Depression, and a tendency to underestimate Hitler’s genocidal plans.
The United States Takes Limited Action Once the war started, news of the mass killings filtered to the West.
By the end of 1942, the Allies acknowledged that Jews were being taken to Poland and killed. In April 1943, British and American officials hosted the Bermuda Conference to discuss rescuing surviving Jewish refugees from Europe. However, no concrete action was taken.
By early 1944, however, FDR began to respond to the reports. He established the War Refugee Board, a government agency that worked with the Red Cross to save thousands of Eastern European Jews, especially in Romania and Hungary.
Tragically, too few were saved. Of the Allies, the Soviet Union was closest to the death camps, but Stalin showed no concern. Britain and the United States expressed sympathy, but their resources and strategy were focused on defeating Hitler not on stopping his genocidal campaign. They might have bombed railway
» These Jewish children from Austria were among those who eventually found homes with adoptive families in the United States.
lines to the death camps, but the camps were not military targets.
A
War Department official told the Refugee Board that bombing the railway lines “could be executed only by the diversion of considerable air support essential to the success of our forces now engaged in decisive operations elsewhere.” The Allies also refused to pressure countries within the Nazi sphere of influence to stop the transportation of Jews to Germany. The Liberation of the Concentration Camps As
they pushed toward Germany from the east and west, Soviet and American troops liberated the camps one by one. For most Americans, the enormity of the Nazi crime became real only when the camp liberators began to report back on what they found. When they saw it all—the piles of dead bodies, the warehouses full of human hair and jewelry, the ashes in crematoriums, the half-dead emaciated survivors—they realized as never before that evil was more than an abstraction.
Hardened by war, accustomed to the sight and smell of death, the liberators were nevertheless unprepared for what they saw. Major Richard Winters was stunned almost beyond belief:
The memory of starved, dazed men,
who dropped their eyes and heads
when we looked at them through the
chain-link fence, in the same manner
that a beaten, mistreated dog would
cringe, leaves feelings that cannot be
described and will never be forgotten.
The impact of seeing those people
behind that fence left me saying, only
to myself, ‘Now I know why I’m here.’
—Richard Winters, quoted in Band of Brothers (Ambrose)
The liberation of the camps led to an outpouring of American sympathy and sincere longing to aid the victims. Many survivors found temporary or permanent homes in the United States.
The revelation of the Holocaust also increased demand and support for an independent Jewish homeland. In 1948, when the Jewish community in Palestine proclaimed the State of Israel, President Truman immediately recognized the new nation. Since then, the United States has continued to offer strong support to Israel.
Today, people in the United States and around the world are working to make sure that the Holocaust is not forgotten. In 1993, the United States Holocaust Memorial
World War II
6,7 The Holocaust
Museum opened in Washington, D.C. Holocaust memorials can also be found in many states, including Texas, California, Florida, Indiana, and Virginia. In 1994, movie director Steven Spielberg founded an institute that recorded nearly 52,000 interviews with survivors and witnesses of the Holocaust.
B CLASSIFY
Do you think the U.S. military made the right decision or the wrong decision when they decided not to bomb railway lines leading to the death camps?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations How were Hitler’s racial ideas and policies connected to his concept of extreme nationalism?
2.	Describe How did Hitler enforce anti-Semitism as chancellor of Germany?
3.	Define What was the “Final Solution”?
4.	Interpret How did the U.S. government respond to the German campaign against European Jews?
5.	Connect How are the Holocaust and the creation of Israel connected?
» In April 1945, former prisoners of Dachau gather as their American liberators raise the American flag over the camp.

Interactive Chart
» This Holocaust museum in Texas is one of many museums and memorials across the United States. Draw Conclusions Why do Americans believe it is important to remember the Holocaust?
6.7 The Holocaust
World War II
World War II (1939-1945) was a turning point that changed the nation and the world in profound ways. Many Americans came home determined to extend the ideals of democracy and freedom at home as well as abroad. In addition, the United States emerged from the war prepared to take on the complex and vital role in world affairs that it still holds today.
The Potsdam Conference was the only time Harry Truman and Joseph Stalin met face to face. Though they seem friendly in this photo, their mutual distrust helped shape the postwar world.
2.D, 7.B, 11.C, 15.E, 17.E, 19.B, 19.E, 31.B
» Objectives
Evaluate the goals that Allied leaders set for the postwar world.
Describe the steps that United States and other nations took toward international cooperation.
Explain the impact of World War II on the postwar United States.
» Key Terms
Yalta Conference
superpowers
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
United Nations (UN)
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Geneva Convention
Nuremberg Trials
Impact of World War II
Planning the Postwar World
World War II differed from World War I in several ways. One major difference was that it was fought to the bitter end.
In 1918, the Kaiser surrendered before the Allies could invade Germany. By contrast, in World War II, Japan and Germany kept fighting long after their defeat was certain. In the last year of the war, they lost battle after battle, retreated from the lands they had conquered, and saw the slow destruction of their military forces. Allied bombing devastated their cities and industries. Yet Germany fought on until Hitler committed suicide, and Japan refused to surrender until after the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The Yalta Conference The protracted fighting gave the Allies time to make plans for a postwar world. Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin met at Yalta on the Black Sea in February 1945 to discuss final strategy and crucial questions concerning postwar Germany, Eastern Europe, and Asia. At the Yalta Conference, the Big Three agreed that Poland, Bulgaria, and Romania would hold free elections. However, Stalin later reneged on this promise.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
416
Roosevelt and Churchill were not in a good position to press Stalin too hard. The Red Army already occupied much of Eastern Europe, and Roosevelt wanted Soviet help in the war against Japan. Vague promises were about as much as Stalin would give.
The Potsdam Conference A dramatically altered Big Three met in July 1945 in the Berlin suburb of Potsdam. Although Stalin remained in power in the Soviet Union, Harry S. Truman had become U.S. President in April upon the death of FDR. After the start of the conference, Clement Atlee replaced Churchill as prime minister of Britain.
At Potsdam, Truman took the reins of international leadership and began to reshape the relationship of the United States with its Allies. While in Potsdam, Truman learned of the successful test of the atomic bomb. But he was more focused on Europe and the Soviet Union than on Asia. Truman was more distrustful of Stalin than Roosevelt had been. Fearing Soviet domination of Eastern Europe, Truman continued to press for free elections after the war.
At the meeting, the Big Three formalized the decision to divide Germany into four zones of occupation: Soviet, American, British, and French. They agreed to new borders and free elections for Poland, and they recognized the Soviets’ right to claim reparations for war damages from the German sector they controlled. Stalin also reaffirmed his Yalta pledge to enter the war against Japan.
B COMPARE AND CONTRAST
How did the leaders and decisions made at the Potsdam Conference differ from those at the Yalta Conference?
# ELPS
ELPS 1.A.2
With a partner, discuss your prior experiences with teacher-student conferences. Then answer these questions: How would you describe a teacher-student conference? How might a teacher-student conference be similar to the Yalta Conference? International Impact of the War
After the war ended in August 1945, plans for the postwar world had to be turned into realities. However, the changes that took place were often not what the Allies had envisioned at Yalta and Potsdam.
Worldwide Political Changes World War II changed political boundaries in many parts of the world. The borders of Poland, for example, shifted slightly to the west. In time, as you will learn, differences between the Soviet Union and its former Allies led to the division
of Germany into two countries: communist East Germany and noncommunist West Germany. Nearly all the nations of Eastern Europe became communist states under Soviet control.
Other countries experienced profound political changes. Communist and noncommunist interests clashed in Eastern Europe. In China, a long-standing civil war between Nationalists and communists resumed.
In Japan, General Douglas MacArthur headed an American military occupation and supervised the writing of a new constitution. It abolished the armed forces except for purposes of defense, gave women the right to vote, enacted democratic reforms, and established the groundwork for full economic recovery. In 1951, Japan and the United States signed a peace treaty that formally ended World War II and disbanded what was left of Japan’s colonial empire.
The War Weakens Imperialism The war also marked the end of Western European domination of the world. Since the 1500s, nations such as Britain, France, and Spain had exerted paramount influence on global developments. They colonized much of Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and the Americas. They controlled world trade and finance, led the industrial revolution, and stood at the forefront of world military power.

» This photograph shows (left to right) Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin at the Yalta Conference. Roosevelt died only a few months after this picture was taken.
Interactive Map
World War II 417	6-8 Impact of World War II
The aggressive acquisition of territories by Japan and Germany underscored the abuses of imperialism. After World War II, colonial peoples renewed their drive for independence from European powers. Freed from Japanese domination, the East Indies had no interest in returning to Dutch colonial status.
Nor did Indochina want to see the return of French rule. India, Burma, colonies in the Middle East and Africa—all had their sights set on independence.
By the end of the war, it was clear that the Age of Imperialism was in the twilight of its existence. The British Empire, the predominant power of the nineteenth century, came out of the war suffering severe economic shortages and, within decades, would see the loss of most of its colonies.
New Superpowers Emerge Into the power vacuum stepped the United States and the Soviet Union. They had played the most decisive roles in defeating the Axis Powers, and they emerged from the war confident and strong. Indeed, they so dominated the postwar world that they became known as superpowers.
Of the two superpowers, the United States was clearly the stronger. Except for the attack on Pearl Harbor, no major battle had been fought on U.S. soil. In addition, American industry had boomed during the
» Red Army troops proudly parade through Prague, Czechoslovakia, in 1945. Connect How does this photograph illustrate two advantages the Soviet Union enjoyed in the postwar world?
war. By 1945, America was wealthy, militarily powerful, and confident. By contrast, much of the war had been fought on Soviet soil. Its industries, cities, and peoples had suffered terribly.
Still, the Red Army controlled most of Eastern Europe and threatened to move farther west. Militarily, although the Americans had the atomic bomb, the Soviets had the Red Army, the world’s largest military force.
H IDENTIFY EFFECTS
What impact did World War II have on the relative roles of the United States and Britain in the world?
International Organizations and Treaties
Americans were quick to recognize that their nation had taken on a new position in the world. After World War I, the Senate had rejected the Treaty of Versailles and refused to join the League of Nations. Many Americans now viewed these decisions as mistakes that contributed to the rise of fascism and the outbreak of another war. As World War II drew to a close, Americans were ready to embrace the idea of world organizations.
Economic Effects of World War II World War II paved the way for a restructuring of the world economy. The United States took on major responsibilities in shaping the postwar world economy.
After meeting in 1944 with the Allies in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, the U.S. government pushed for establishment of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The United States provided most of the working capital for these new organizations, which worked to foster global economic and financial stability. The agreements made at Bretton Woods also represented another step in the shifting trend from the gold standard to fiat money. The international currency system was pegged to the U.S. dollar, with the United States agreeing to keep the price of gold at a certain level, effectively making the dollar the new standard.
In 1947, the United States signed the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), a treaty designed to expand world trade by reducing tariffs. It went into effect on January 1,1948. Between its signing and 1993, average tarrifs dropped from 40 percent to 5 percent. Losing protective tariffs has caused some industries in the United States to suffer from competition with foreign goods but the lower tariffs
World War II
418	6.8 Impact of World War II
encouraged world trade in general. GATT was replaced by the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995.
The United Nations Even more importantly, the United States led the charge for the establishment of the United Nations (UN), an organization that many hoped would succeed where the League of Nations had failed. In April 1945, delegates from 50 nations met in San Francisco to write the charter for the UN. The Senate overwhelmingly ratified the charter, and the UN later set up its permanent home in New York City. A major goal of the UN was to prevent further world wars or events such as the Holocaust.
The United Nations was organized on the basis of cooperation between the Great Powers, not on the absolute equality of all nations. All member nations sat on the General Assembly. However, the five major World War II Allies—the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France, and China—were assigned permanent seats on the most powerful arm of the UN, the Security Council.
President Truman named former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt to represent the United States at the UN.
As elected chair of the Commission on Human Rights, she guided the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a 1948 document that defined rights that belonged to all people in the world. It states:
Recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world. . . . All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act toward one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
—Universal Declaration of Human Rights
The Declaration condemns slavery and torture, upholds freedom of speech and religion, and affirms that “everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and his family.” Though the document sets lofty goals it has proved difficult to enforce.
Over the next decades, the UN set up a refugee agency to help people displaced by the war.
It also aided the move away from colonialism, helped to create the Jewish state of Israel, mediated
» American, British, and Soviet delegates vote at a United Nations meeting. The three Allies held permanent seats on the Security Council, but wartime cooperation soon turned to conflict.
» This statue of Eleanor Roosevelt stands at the Franklin D. Roosevelt Memorial in Washington, D.C. Behind her is the insignia of the UN.
World War II 419	6.8 Impact of World War II
regional conflicts, and provided food and other aid to much of the world.
Not all Americans support participation in the United Nations and other international bodies. Some argue that giving decision-making authority to global organizations undermines U.S. sovereignty.
War Crimes Trials In the effort to create a better world, the Allies did not forget to punish the people who had caused so much destruction and death. During the war, the Axis Powers had repeatedly violated the Geneva Convention, an international agreement governing the humane treatment of wounded soldiers and prisoners of war.
The Allies tried more than a thousand Japanese citizens for committing atrocities in China, Korea, and Southeast Asia and brutally mistreating prisoners of war. Hundreds were condemned to death, including Prime Minister Hideki Tojo and the general responsible for the Bataan Death March.
Americans more closely followed the Nuremberg Trials, in which the Allies prosecuted Nazis for war crimes. The trials turned a glaring spotlight on the evils of the Third Reich. The first of the Nuremberg Trials involved key leaders of Nazi Germany, such as Hermann Goring. Day by day, prosecutors described
» A 1948 war crimes tribunal found Tojo guilty of waging wars of aggression and allowing inhumane treatment of prisoners of war. Tojo accepted full responsibility and was condemned to death.
Interactive Gallery
their crimes, detailing especially the horrors of the Holocaust. Most of the defendants pleaded that they were just following orders, that Hitler was the source of all the crimes. But Robert Jackson, the American prosecutor, pointed out the importance of holding former Nazi officials responsible for their actions:
No half-century ever witnessed
slaughter on such a scale, such
cruelties and inhumanities. ... If
we cannot eliminate the causes and
prevent the repetition of these barbaric
events, it is not an irresponsible
prophecy to say that this twentieth
century may yet succeed in bringing
the doom of civilization.
—-Robert Jackson, closing speech, Nuremberg War Crimes Trials, 1946
Some of the Nazis were hanged; others received long prison terms. The evidence presented at the trials increased world support for the establishment of Israel as a Jewish homeland.
In the following decades, Allied or Israeli authorities captured and tried such other Nazis as Adolf Eichmann, a leading architect of the “Final Solution," and Klaus Barbie, a Gestapo officer convicted of torturing and murdering Jews and resistance fighters in Lyon, France. The periodic trials kept alive the memory of the Nazi crimes against humanity.
K3I IDENTIFY STEPS IN A PROCESS
What Steps did the United States take to increase its role in the postwar world?
Domestic Impact of the War
A new American identity rose from World War II. Americans regarded the Nazis as totalitarian, racist, and warlike. During the war, U.S. leaders and American popular culture had emphasized that the Allies were fighting a “people’s war” for tolerance, freedom, democracy, and peace. Although many Americans felt that their country had not always lived up to that ideal, they hoped that the postwar period would usher in significant changes.
A
Leader on the Global Stage Millions of Americans had spent several years closely following the war. They had attached world maps to their walls and traced the World War II 420	6.8 Impact of World War II
paths of U.S. troops in the deserts of North Africa, the forests of Europe, and the coral islands of the Pacific. For this generation of Americans, the world had somehow become a smaller, more interconnected place. They had learned to think in global terms.
Few Americans called for a return to a policy of isolationism or retreat from their global responsibilities. They recognized that what happened in the far reaches of the globe affected them, that America’s national security was linked to world security.
Impact on the Economy and Government World War II ended the Great Depression and ushered in decades of economic growth. Expansion in world trade, spurred by GATT and other treaties, also contributed to postwar economic prosperity.
The war also redistributed wealth across the country. Defense industries and military bases in the South and West spurred people to move to these regions, which in turn created more wealth and encouraged further migration.
Like other wars, World War II led to a greater governmental influence in economic affairs. From the collection of raw materials to attempts to control inflation, the government had made the important decisions to guide the economy. In the process, it established the expanded economic role that government would play in postwar America.
The war also increased the power of the U.S. presidency. The War Powers Acts of 1941 and 1942 gave the President broad powers to conduct the war. Backed by these laws, FDR issued Executive Orders to take actions he felt necessary to win the war. These included orders that established a Censorship Board and banned hiring discrimination in government-funded defense industries. The War Powers Acts raised constitutional issues in that some felt that the greater powers of the Executive branch threatened the traditional separation of powers laid out in the Constitution.The increased use of Executive Orders as a presidential tool remains controversial today.
Demanding Equal Rights African American soldiers in World War II had clearly believed they were fighting two foes: dictatorship overseas and racism in the United States. Less than two months after Pearl Harbor, one of the nation’s leading black newspapers published a letter from a young man in Wichita, Kansas:
Being an American of dark complexion and some 26 years, these
AMERICANS
will always fight for liberty
» This 1943 poster emphasizes America as a defender of liberty. After the war, the United States continued to take on the role of leader of the Free World in opposition to the Soviet Union.
Interactive Gallery
questions flash through my mind:
‘Should I sacrifice my life to live half
American?’ ‘Will things be better for the next generation in the peace to follow?’ . . .
I suggest that while we keep defense and victory in the forefront that we don’t lose sight of our fight for true democracy at home.
G.
Thompson, letter to the Pittsburgh Courier, January 31, 1942
World War II gave renewed vigor to the fight for civil rights. In this battle, African Americans were not alone. A growing number of white Americans also called for the nation to fully live up to its promise as a beacon of freedom, democracy, and justice.
B MAKE PREDICATIONS
How do you think World War II will change the way Americans view America’s role in the world in the following decades? World War II 421	6.8 Impact of World War II
ASSESSMENT
1.	Predict Consequences Predict at least one postwar issue that the former Allies will disagree about following the war.
2.	Compare In what way were the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the postwar push for civil rights both reactions to the war?
3.	Analyze ContextWhy did Americans agree to participate in the UN after World War II when
many had rejected participation in the League of Nations after World War I?
4.	Identify Patterns How did World War II impact the American economy? Did the war have the same impact on the British economy?
5.	Categorize In your opinion, what was the most important effect of World War II on the United States? Support your answer with evidence.
World War II . 422 ? 6.8 Impact of World War II
Analyze and Interpret a Speech Identify reasons for U.S. involvement in World War II, including German dictatorship, by using appropriate skills to analyze and interpret social studies information such as speeches. Analyze and interpret the excerpt below from a speech Adolf Hitler gave in 1937. Then write a paragraph identifying how the speech reflects the traits of a totalitarian dictatorship. Consider the characteristics of a totalitarian dictatorship and how Hitler’s message reflects these characteristics. 7.A, 29.H
For everyone has to obey orders. We have obeyed orders. ... And I must demand this of every German: You, too, must be able to obey orders, ... We shall educate our People to do this and ignore the obstinacy or stupidity of individuals. Bend or break—one or the other. We cannot permit this authority, the authority of the German People, to be challenged...
—Adolf Hitler. May 1. 1937
Identify Dictatorship Aggression Identify reasons for U.S. involvement in World War II, including Italian and German dictatorship's aggression. Write a paragraph describing Italy and Germany’s aggression during the 1930s and how the United States reacted to this aggression. Identify what aggressive moves Italy and Germany made, how the United States reacted, and why the United States reacted in this way. 7.A
Explain Contributions of the Flying Tigers Explain how American patriotism inspired exceptional actions by military personnel, including the bravery and contributions of the Flying Tigers. Write a paragraph explaining the contributions of the Flying Tigers to the war effort in the Pacific. Explain who the Flying Tigers were, who led the group, and how the group contributed to the war effort in the Pacific. 7.G
Explain 1943 as a Turning Point in World
War II Explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1939-1945 (World War II). Write a paragraph explaining why the battle of Stalingrad was a turning point in the war on Europe. Consider why Germany’s invasion of the Soviet Union stalled in 1941, why Germany wanted to take Stalingrad, and why the 1943 German defeat in the battle of Stalingrad was a turning point in the war in Europe. 2.D
Explain Rationing on the Home Front Explain the economic effects of World War II on the home front such as rationing, and explain how American patriotism inspired exceptional actions by citizens, including victory gardens. Write a paragraph explaining rationing on the home front and describing its effects. Answer
the following questions in your paragraph: What was rationing? How was rationing controlled? What kinds of goods and materials were rationed and why? How were victory gardens a response to the effects of rationing? 7.G, 17.A
6.	Describe Economic Effect of World War II Describe the economic effects of World War II on the home front, such as the end of the Great Depression. Write a paragraph describing the effects of World War II on the U.S. economy, including ending the Great Depression. Consider the effect of defense spending on the unemployment rate, what the line graph below indicates about federal spending between 1940 and 1946, what the circle graph below indicates about how the government spent its money in 1945, and what the text indicates about how the war affected the national debt. 17.A, 29.B
FEDERAL SPENDING
i940-i946 100
H
2 _ 80 60
OC A <
40 _i c
O ~ 20
□
0
1940	1941	1942	1943	1944	1945	1946
FEDERAL
SPENDING
7.	Analyze the U.S. Office of War Information Analyze the function of the U.S. Office of War Information. Write a paragraph analyzing how the Office of War Information (OWI) assisted the war effort. Consider what the OWI was, how the OWI carried out its duties, and how Hollywood assisted the OWI. 7.C
8.	Analyze Internment of Japanese Americans
Analyze major issues of World War II, including the internment of Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066. Write a paragraph analyzing the role that Executive Order 9066 played in the evacuation and internment of Japanese Americans during World War II and the treatment these evacuees faced. Consider the purpose of Executive Order 9066, how the order affected Japanese Americans on the West Coast, and how evacuation turned into internment. 7.D
World War II 423
TEKS ASSESSMENT
Migration and Location of Industry During World War II
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Gulf of Mexico
York •♦AB Newark •♦AB
Philadelphia+AI nore
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
200 mi
0	200 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
	KEY	
Population Change, Major War		
1940-1950	Industries	
Percent Change	▲	Aircraft
by State	•	Communications
- Ml 50.1 or more	■	Ships
1 SIS 20.1 to 50	♦	Weapons and
□ 10.1 to 20	O	supplies National capital
0-4.4 to 10 \		•	Large city
9.	Analyze Changing Demographic Patterns Analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including rural to urban. Write a paragraph describing the causes and effects of the demographic changes shown on the map above. Consider the war-related reasons why people migrated from rural
to urban areas during the war, what the map above indicates about the areas of the country that grew the most in population during the war and what war-related industries drew people to these areas, and what the long-term effects of receiving billions of dollars to fund industry and build military bases were for the South and Southwest. 13. A
10.	Explain Constitutional Issues Explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War II. Write a paragraph explaining the Supreme Court cases that arose out of Japanese American internment during World War II. Explain the Supreme Court’s rulings and identify what the government finally did in 1988. 19.B
11.	Describe Roles of Civil Rights Organizations Describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American civil rights movements. Write
a paragraph describing how the growth of civil rights organizations during World War II helped set the stage for the civil rights struggles of the coming decades. Consider the effect of victories such as those achieved by A. Philip Randolph on participation in civil rights organizations, the growth in the membership of the NAACP, the founding of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), and the effects of these developments on the civil rights movement. 9.B
12.	Describe Support for Israel Describe U.S. involvement in the Middle East such as support for Israel. Write a paragraph describing the formation of the State of Israel, President Truman’s response to Israel’s formation, and the U.S. relationship with Israel today. 10.D
World War II I
13.	Evaluate International Leadership of
Franklin D. Roosevelt Evaluate the international leadership of Franklin D. Roosevelt during World War II, including the U.S. relationship with its allies.
Write a paragraph evaluating Franklin D. Roosevelt’s role in reaching the agreement expressed in the quotation below. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What are Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin announcing in the quotation? Why did Joseph Stalin favor this approach? Why was Winston Churchill hesitant to take this step? What role did Roosevelt play in reaching the final decision? 7.B
We have reached complete agreement as to the scope and timing of the operations to be undertaken from the east, west and south.
The common understanding which we have here reached guarantees that victory will be ours. . . . No power on earth can prevent our destroying the German armies by land, their U Boats by sea, and their war planes from the air.
—Declaration of the Three Powers, December 1, 1943
14.	Discuss Medal of Honor Winners Discuss the importance of Congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders, such as Mary Edwards Walker, Alvin York, Vernon J. Baker, Roy Benavidez, and Salvatore Giunta. Write a paragraph discussing why Medal of Honor recipients are important. Discuss what the Congressional Medal of Honor is; what the chart indicates about why Mary Edwards Walker, Alvin York, Vernon J. Baker, Roy Benavidez, and Salvatore Giunta received the Medal of Honor; and why Medal of Honor recipients are important. 26.F
Selected Recipients of the Congressional Medal of
CIVIL WAR
Mary Edwards Walker Served as a surgeon in the Union Army
WORLD WAR I
VIETNAM WAR
Roy Benavidez Rescued a group of wounded U.S. soldiers despite suffering his own serious wounds
WAR IN AFGHANISTAN
Salvatore Giunta Defended wounded U.S. soldiers during a Taliban ambush
Alvin York
Led an attack on a German machine gun nest, taking 132 prisoners
Vernon J. Baker Attacked multiple German defensive positions in the Italian mountains
15.	Analyze Liberation of Concentration
Camps Analyze major military events of World War II, including the liberation of concentration camps.
Write a paragraph describing the liberation of the Nazi concentration and death camps. Describe how the camps were liberated and analyze the significance of first-hand accounts of the liberation of the camps, like the one below. 7.E
The memory of starved, dazed men, who dropped their eyes and heads when we looked at them through the chain-link fence, in the same manner that a beaten, mistreated dog would cringe, leaves feelings that cannot be described and will never be forgotten. The impact of seeing those people behind that fence left me saying, only to myself, Now I know why I'm here. ’
—Richard Winters, quoted in Band of Brothers (Ambrose)
16.	Explain Scientific Discoveries and
Innovations Explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in the military. Use the chart below and text information to write a paragraph explaining how military needs led to new scientific discoveries and technological innovations. Consider what developed out of the need to treat sick and wounded soldiers, help solve coded messages, and make parachutes and vehicle tires. 27.B
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF WORLD WAR II
IO MILLION PINTS
OF BLOOD INTO DRIED
FAST, POWERFUL
WERE DEVELOPED BY SEVERAL COUNTRIES AT THE SAME TIME. * *
*
1,500 PARACHUTES
SEVERAL NATIONS DEVELOPED
SECRETLY TO DETECT
ENEMY AIRCRAFT AND SHIPS.
WAS PRODUCING NEARLY
BILLION UNITS OF - -AN
ANTICiOlK USFD H' KILL HARMFUL BACTERIA- -EACH MONTH ALLIED CODEBREAKERS USEE! EARLY
TO HELP SOLVE GERMAN CODED MESSAGES.
World War II 425
TEKS ASSESSMENT
17.	Identify and Explain Changes in Political
Boundaries Identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from international conflicts. Use the 1942 (top) and 1949 (bottom) maps and text information to write a paragraph identifying what happened to Germany’s land following its defeat in World War II. Compare the extent of Germany’s lands in 1942 to its lands in 1949 and explain what happened to Germany’s boundaries between the end of World War II and 1949. 12.B
18.	Describe Relationship Between Free Enterprise and GATT Describe the dynamic relationship between U.S. international trade policies and the U.S. free-enterprise system, such as the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Write a paragraph describing how the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GATT) might benefit the free-enterprise system in the United States. Consider why agreements like GATT were signed after the war, what GATT’s goal was, and how GATT would benefit free enterprise. 17.E
World War II
19.	Evaluate Participation in International Treaties and Organizations Evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international treaties, including efforts
by global organizations to undermine U.S. sovereignty through the use of treaties, by using the process of historical inquiry to research, interpret, and use multiple types of sources of evidence. Use the information from the lessons and other sources to discuss the pros and cons of the United States joining global organizations and entering into international treaties. Then interpret and use the information you have collected to write a position paper on whether global organizations attempt to undermine U.S. sovereignty through the use of treaties. Use different sources of evidence, including primary and secondary sources, and support your position with evidence from the sources you have gathered. 11.C, 19.E, 29.D
20.	Identify Contributions of Eleanor Roosevelt Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Eleanor Roosevelt to American society. Write a paragraph identifying the political, social, and economic contributions Eleanor Roosevelt made through her work with the United Nations. Identify the role Roosevelt played in the UN and how her efforts
in drafting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights contributed to people’s political, social, and economic well-being. 26.D
21.	Describe Economic Impact of Defense Spending Describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle from 1945 to the 1990s. Write a paragraph describing how defense spending led to decades of economic growth. Consider the impact
of defense spending on the Great Depression and the redistribution of wealth across the nation. 17.C
22.	Analyze Advancement Through Pacific Islands Analyze major military events of World War II, including the U.S. military advancement through the Pacific Islands, and evaluate the military contributions of Douglas MacArthur in the advance. Write a paragraph analyzing General Douglas MacArthur’s strategy for advancing toward Japan. Identify Douglas MacArthur’s role in the Pacific war, explain what is meant by “islandhopping,” and evaluate the success of the plan. 7.E,
7.F
23.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: When is war justified? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
World War II
n 1 ’IV
March 1941
Lend-Lease Act authorizes the United States to sell, tease, lend or otherwise provide arms to other governments in defense of the United States.
1
August 1941________W September 1941
7 Atlahtft JGharter plots mutual
American and British war strategies against the Axis

After German U-boats attack U.S. naval ships escorting arms shipments to the Allies, President Roosevelt issues an order to the navy to shoot U-boats on sight.
1 Based on the time line, under President Roosevelt’s leadership, the United States’ relationship with its allies—
A was a calculated attempt to provoke Germany into declaring war on the United States
B included drawing Iceland into the conflict by making it a distribution port for American arms shipments
C was intended to secretly help defeat Germany by destroying the U-boat “wolf packs” that patrolled the Atlantic
D was leading it closer to entering the war, even though the United States’ official stance was one of neutrality
2	What turning point occurred on December 7,1941, causing the United States to officially enter World War II?
F
Germany broke the Munich Pact and invaded Poland. G
Japan bombed Pearl Harbor, intending to destroy the U.S. Navy. H
Japan attacked China, devastating the civilian population of Nanjing. J
Italy, Germany, and Japan declared open war against the United States. i:
World War II
realize
vww.reaioun iCAcid.uuiii
Access additional practice questions
3	To combat discrimination in the wartime hiring process, Roosevelt signed a fair employment executive order in 1941. This order resulted in—
A more jobs for U.S. teenagers ranging from ages 14 to 18 B one million women being hired for jobs typically held by men C nearly two million African Americans finding work in defense industries D Italian and Japanese Americans getting jobs in the defense industries
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF WORLD WAR II
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT CONVERTED OVER
MILLION PINTS OF BLOOD INTO DRIED
dv OlFlWl
JLl MJf AJr
W PLASMA
Mbs® sbi MF A w A A A TO TREAT WOUNDED SOLDIERS.
FAST, POWERFUL
THE ALLIES USED
ARTIFICIALLY-MADE FABRIC—
TO MAKE PARACHUTES.
ONE PARACHUTE FACTORY PRODUCED NEARLY
1,500 PARACHUTES
PER WEEK
SEVERAL NATIONS DEVELOPED
BY THE END OF THE WAR, THE UNITED STATES WAS PRODUCING NEARLY
BILLION UNITS OF
PENICILLIN
ANTIBIOTIC USED TO KILL HARMFUL BACTERIA— EACH MONTH. *
ALLIED CODEBREAKERS USED EARLY
WERE DEVELOPED BY SEVERAL COUNTRIES AT THE SAME TIME. *
± RADAR
SECRETLY TO DETECT
ENEMY AIRCRAFT AND SHIPS.
TO HELP SOLVE GERMAN CODED MESSAGES.
4	Based on this graphic, what technology did the United States perfect to keep diseases from spreading among American forces?
F
The use of radar for laser surgery G Methods of drying blood plasma H The mass production of penicillin J The mass production of nylon for bandages If you have trouble with...				
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	6.2	6.3	6.5	6.6
TEKS 7.B 7.A 17.A 27.B
World War II 429
5	After the Holocaust ended, the Jewish people formed the State of Israel, and the United States—
A has remained neutral towards Israel B immediately recognized the new nation C apologized for turning Jewish people away in 1939 D encouraged Jewish Europeans come to the United States instead of Israel
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS ™ AGREEMENTS
WORLD BANK
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (IMF)
GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE (GATT)
CREATED
GOAL
1944
1945
1948
to reduce poverty and finance world economic development
to stabilize finances of nations and encourage economic growth
to expand world trade
ACTIONS
offers loans and technical advice to developing nations
stabilizes exchange rates between countries; lends money to countries in financial crisis
reduced tariffs and other trade barriers between nations. Replaced in 1995 by World Trade Organization (WTO)
6	Based on this chart, how did the GATT differ from the World Bank and the IMF?
F
It stabilized the finances of war-torn nations by increasing tariffs to pay the cost of rebuilding. G
It encouraged trade among nations by loaning money to impoverished nations to grow their businesses. H
In addition to providing technical advice to developing nations, it removed obstacles to international trade. J
Instead of providing loans and other financial aid to nations, it encouraged trade among nations by lowering tariffs. World War II 430
c
® PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access additional practice questions
This campaign is more than a contest between two men.... it is a contest between two philosophies of government.
—Herbert Hoover, 1932
7	What contrast did President Herbert Hoover refer to in this statement?
A
His concern for enacting laws to control and regulate economic disasters, contrasted to Roosevelt’s laissez-faire philosophy. B
His belief that state and local governments could solve economic issues, contrasted to Roosevelt’s focus on federal aid programs. C
His approach to creating a modern expansionist foreign policy, contrasted to the isolationist policy of Roosevelt. D
His ideal that private agencies should control government, contrasted to Roosevelt’s ideal that government should maintain control over private agencies. 8	How did Frank Capra’s film Mr. Smith Goes to Washington reflect the issues of its time? F It emphasized the importance of being politically active.
G
It reinforced the public’s declining faith in law enforcement. H
It celebrated the strength and determination of the common man. J
It portrayed a government with only the best interests of the public in mind. If you have trouble with...				
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	6.7	6.8	5.3	5.6
TEKS 10.D 17.E 16.C 25.A
World War II
I
* TOPIC 7 TEKS Master
Postwar America
In this Topic, you will learn about America after World War II. You know the TEKS are very important, and this course will make it fun to learn about the things that will help you master them. Keep reading to see how.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
2.D, 7.B, 8.A, 8.B, 8.C, 13.A, 14.A, 17.B, 17.C, 18.A, 21 .A,
24.B, 25.A, 25.B, 25.C, 25.D, 26.B, 26.C, 26.E, 27.A, 27.B,
27.C, 28.A, 28.B, 29.A, 29.B, 29.C, 29.E, 29.F, 29.G, 30.A,
30.B
if
Connect
You will start by connecting with the Topic through a video that tells a personal story about the times. You will start to think about how the Topic connects with your own experience or to what you already know. And you’ll get a chance to think about a really big question, or Essential Question: What is America's role in the world?
Begin your study by trying the following:
NBC LEARN
Watch My Story Video: Margaret Chase Smith, A Declaration of Conscience
LESSON OUTLINE
7.1: The Beginning of the Cold War7.B, 8.A
7.2: The Korean War 8.C
7.3: The Cold War Intensifies 2.D, 8.B,
C, 28.B
7.4: Cold War Fears at Home 8.B, 25.A 7.5: Postwar Prosperity 13.A, 14.A, 17.B,
A, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C
7.6: Mass Culture in the 1950s 14.A, 17.B, 17.C, 21 .A, 24.B, 26.E, 27.B, 28.A 7.7: Social Issues of the 1950s 13.A, 25.B,
25.C, 25.D, 26.C
Launch your Document-Based Question:
• McCarthyism in the 1950s
432
9 Investigate
: Then you will investigate ; the Topic through a group of ; lessons. The story of Postwar ; America will come to life as ; you read and interact with ; key content. You will get a ; chance to read about what ; happened and why. And you’ll : be able to interact with a lot of ; fascinating online materials, j You’ll also keep working ; on your Document-Based : Question as you build further • mastery of the Topic TEKS.
o
» Digital interactivity from the online course
9 Synthesize
: Next you will pull it all together by : reflecting on the Essential Question.
•	This will give you a chance to be : the storyteller, to show how you
•	would answer the big question.
9 Demonstrate
: Finally, you can show what you : know. You can write an essay,
: hold a discussion, or make a : presentation. You can answer : questions about every TEKS on j the Topic Review and Assessment : pages. Or you can finish your essay • about McCarthyism...........
TEKS in Topic 7	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 7	Topic Review and Assessment Questions			
2.D	5	26. B	23			
7.B	10	26.C	21	j ■		
8.A	1,2	26.E	18			
8.B	5, 8,9	27.A	14		t	
8.C	3	27.B	4			
13. A	12	27.C	14		I	
14. A	12	28.A	16			
17.B	11	28.B	13			
17.C	6	29.A	1			
18. A	15	29. B	2			
21 .A	19	29.C	8			
24.B	17	29. E	9			
25.A	7	29.F	9			
25. B	24	29.G	23			
25.C	22	30.A	1			
25.D	20	30.B	11			
*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
2.D, 7.B, 8.A, 8.B, 8.C, 13.A, 14.A, 17.B, 17.C, 18.A, 21.A, 24.A, 24.B, 25.A, 25.B, 25.C, 25.D, 26.B, 26.C, 26.E, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 28.A, 28.B, 29.A, 29.B, 29.C, 29.E, 29.F, 29.G, 30.A, 30.B
Enduring Understandings
•	After World War II, a “Cold War” rivalry developed between the United States and the Soviet Union.
•	The Cold War exploded into armed conflict in Korea, ending in an uneasy truce and a growing concern about the communist threat to the free world.
•	Domestic spy cases increased fear of communist influence in the U.S. government, leading to a new Red Scare.
•	The U.S. economy boomed in the 1950s.
•	During the postwar population shift, many moved from the cities to the suburbs and the Sunbelt.
•	Despite postwar prosperity, discontent grew among minorities and the young.
PEARSON! •
NBC LEARN
A

Sch°ol air-raid drill in 1952
The United States and Great Britain supplied goods to West Berlin by plane during the Berlin Airlift.
In the 1930s, the policies of isolationism and appeasement did nothing to stop the rise of dictatorships and the outbreak of global war. After World War II, U.S. leaders viewed these past policies as mistakes. They sought new ways to keep the United States safe as well as to protect its interests around the world.
tOl Interactive Flipped Video
7.B, 8.A
» Objectives
Trace the reasons that the wartime alliance between the United States and the Soviet Union unraveled.
Explain how President Truman responded to Soviet aggression in Eastern Europe.
Describe the causes and results of Stalin’s blockade of Berlin.
» Key Terms
satellite state Cold War Truman Doctrine George F. Kennan containment Marshall Plan Berlin airlift North Atlantic Treaty
Organization
(NATO)
Warsaw Pact iron curtain
PEARSONl
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
The Beginning of the Cold War
Background of the Cold War
When Franklin Roosevelt died in April 1945, the nation was at a critical point. The United States was still at war. In addition, relations with the Soviet Union—one of the most important wartime allies—were beginning to break down.
Soviet Aggression Against Its Citizens The United States and the Soviet Union had been united only in their opposition to Nazi Germany. Beyond that, they had little in common. The United States was a capitalist democracy. Its citizens believed in free elections, economic and religious freedom, private property, and respect for individual differences. The Soviet Union was a dictatorship.
Under Joseph Stalin, the Communist Party made all key economic, political, and military decisions. The Soviet people could not worship as they pleased, own private property, or express their views freely. Those who opposed or questioned Stalin risked imprisonment and death.
Soviets Control Eastern Europe By the time Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill met at Yalta in February 1945, it was clear that the
436
Allies would defeat Germany. But it was unclear how Germany and the nations of Eastern Europe would be governed after the war. Soviet troops already occupied much of Eastern Europe and parts of Germany.
Stalin wanted to keep Germany weak and divided. He also wanted Eastern Europe to remain under the control of the Soviet Union. The United States and Great Britain sought a stronger, united Germany and independent nations in Eastern Europe. At the conference, Stalin agreed to establish "broadly representative” governments and free elections in Eastern Europe and to divide Germany only temporarily into zones of occupation.
Despite Stalin’s promises, nearly all of the lands occupied by the Soviet Red Army in the spring of 1945 remained under Soviet control after the war. The Eastern European countries of Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria, as well as the eastern portion of Germany, became satellite states controlled by the Soviet Union.
Wartime Alliance Unravels By the time Soviet, British, and U.S. leaders met at Potsdam in the summer of 1945, Harry Truman had succeeded Roosevelt as President. Truman and Clement Attlee, the new British prime minister, hoped that Stalin would confirm the decisions made at Yalta. However, Stalin refused to make a commitment to allow free elections in Eastern Europe.
Truman left Potsdam believing that the Soviet Union was “planning world conquest” and that the alliance with the Soviet Union was falling apart. With the Soviet Red Army at his command, Stalin seemed to present a real threat. Thus, the stage was set for a worldwide rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union. The 46-year struggle became known as the Cold War because the two superpowers never faced each other directly in a "hot” military conflict.
CONTRAST
How did the goals of U.S. and Soviet foreign policy differ after World War II?
» Russian soldier raising the Soviet flag over Berlin, Germany, in April, 1945.
Responding to the Soviet Challenge
President Truman was not the only world leader who believed that Stalin had aspirations toward world domination. Winston Churchill also spoke out forcefully against the Soviet Union. On March 5, 1946, he gave an important speech at Fulton College in Missouri, Truman’s home state. Referring to a map of Europe, Churchill noted that “an iron curtain has descended
» Winston Churchill delivers his “Iron Curtain” speech. This descriptive phrase became a lasting symbol of the brutal division that communism had created in Western Europe.
Interactive Timeline
across the Continent.”
7.1 The Beginning of the Cold War
Postwar America
East of that iron curtain, the Soviet Union was gaining more control by installing communist governments and police states and by crushing political and religious dissent. In addition, Churchill feared, the Soviets were attempting to spread communism to Western Europe and East Asia. The only solution, Churchill said, was for the United States and other democratic countries to stand firm.
Truman Faces Soviet Aggression in Eastern Europe Truman shared Churchill’s beliefs. Born in a small town in Missouri, Truman had been too poor to attend college. He was the only president in the twentieth century with no college education. Instead, he worked the family farm, fought in France during World War I, and eventually began a political career. His life was a testament to honesty, integrity, hard work, and a willingness to make difficult decisions. “The buck stops here,” was his motto as President. It meant that the person sitting in the Oval Office had the obligation to face problems head on and make hard decisions.
In 1947, no issue was more weighty than the growing crisis between the United States and the Soviet Union. After the war, a number of European and Asian countries were struggling against communist
» Greek soldiers bring in possible guerrilla operatives for questioning. The anticommunist struggle in Greece and Turkey led President Truman to formulate the Truman Doctrine.
movements supported by the Soviets. In particular, the governments of Greece and Turkey were battling communist forces seeking to gain control. Greece and Turkey needed aid, and in 1947 the United States was the only country with the resources to help them.
The Truman Doctrine Opposes Soviet Aggression
On March 12, 1947, President Truman addressed both houses of Congress. With emotion in his voice, Truman described the plight of the Greek and Turkish people. The fight they were waging, he said, was the fight that all free people had to confront. Truman requested money from Congress “to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation [conquest] by armed minorities or by outside pressures.” If the United States retreated into isolationism, he warned, the peace of the world and the welfare of the nation would be in danger. The fall of a nation to communism, Truman argued, could lead its neighbors into communism as well.
I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures. I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way. I believe that our help should be primarily through economic and financial aid which is essential to economic stability and orderly political processes.
—President Harry S. Truman, Address Before a Joint
Session of Congress, March 12, 1947
Congress responded by voting to give $400 million in aid for Greece and Turkey. President Truman’s promise to aid nations struggling against communist movements became known as the Truman Doctrine, and it set a new course for American foreign policy.
M IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
What events caused President Truman to propose what became known as the Truman Doctrine?
ELPS
ELPS LEARNING 1.B.1
Read the section The Truman Doctrine Opposes Soviet Aggression with a partner. Take turns defining the Truman Doctrine aloud. Help each other with pronunciation, word choice, and grammar.
Postwar America 438	7.1 The Beginning of the Cold War

The United States
Contains Soviet Expansion
In the July 1947 issue of the magazine Foreign Affairs, a writer who called himself “X” published an article titled “The Sources of Soviet Conduct.” The author was really George F. Kennan, an American diplomat and a leading authority on the Soviet Union. His article presented a blueprint for the American policy that became known as containment because its goal was to keep communism contained within its existing borders.
Kennan Urges a Policy of Containment Kennan contended that while Stalin was determined to expand the Soviet empire, he would not risk the security of the Soviet Union for expansion. In Kennan’s view, the Soviet Union would only expand when it could do so without serious risks. Stalin would certainly not chance war with the United States—a war that might destroy his power in the Soviet Union—just to spread communism.
Kennan cautioned his readers that there would be no quick, easy solution to the Soviet threat. Containment would require a full commitment of American economic, political, and military power:
We are going to continue for a long time to find the Russians difficult to deal with. It does not mean that they should be considered as embarked upon a do-or-die program to overthrow our society by a given date. ... In these circumstances, it is clear that the main element of any United States policy toward the Soviet Union must be that of long-term, patient but firm and vigilant containment of Russian expansive tendencies.
—George Kennan, “The Sources of Soviet Conduct”
United States Responds with Marshall Plan The
containment policy’s first great success was in Western Europe. After World War II, people there confronted severe shortages of food, fuel, and medical supplies, as well as brutally cold winters.
In this environment of desperate need, Secretary of State George C. Marshall unveiled a recovery plan for Europe. In a speech at Harvard University, he warned
» George Kennan, an expert on Russian history and culture, was the driving force behind American policy toward the Soviet Union in the early years of the Cold War.
» German workers reconstruct a Berlin concert hall. The Marshall Plan helped Germany rebuild all aspects of its society, improving Germans' quality of life in the difficult postwar years.

7.1 The Beginning of the Cold War
R
Postwar America
that without economic health, "there can be no political stability and no assured peace.”
In early 1948, Congress approved the Marshall Plan. Over the next four years, the United States gave about $13 billion in grants and loans to nations in Western Europe. The program provided food to reduce famine, fuel to heat houses and factories, and money to jump-start economic growth. Aid was also offered to the Soviet satellite states in Eastern Europe, but Stalin refused to let them accept it.
The Marshall Plan provided a vivid example of how U.S. aid could serve the ends of both economic and foreign policy. The aid helped countries that desperately needed assistance. The prosperity it stimulated then helped the American economy by increasing trade. Finally, the good relationships that the aid created worked against the expansion of communism.
H IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why did George Kennan think that containment would work against Soviet expansion?
Shipments Financed by the Marshall Plan, 1948-1951
» Analyze Graphs This graph shows the shipments financed by the Marshall Plan. Based on the chart, why would Food and Other Produce take up such a large percentage of the shipments?
[©
Soviet Aggression Drives Cold War
The front lines of the Cold War were located in Germany. The zones that were controlled by France, Britain, and the United States were combined to form West Germany. West Germany was bordered on the east by the Soviet-controlled East Germany. The Allies also controlled the western part of Berlin, a city tucked deep inside communist East Germany.
United States and Britain Respond with Berlin Airlift West Berlin was, as one Soviet leader later described it, "a bone in the throat” of the Soviet Union. Its relative prosperity and freedom stood in contrast to the bleak life of East Berliners. Stalin was determined to capture West Berlin or win other concessions from the Western allies. In June 1948, he stopped all highway, railway, and waterway traffic from western Germany into West Berlin. Without any means of receiving aid, West Berlin would fall to the communists.
Stalin was able to close roads, stop barges, and block railways, but he could not blockade the sky. As a result, the United States and Britain supplied West Berlin through a massive airlift that lasted nearly one year. Food, fuel, medical supplies, clothing, toys— everything the residents of West Berlin needed was flown into the city.
Even through rain and snow, goods arrived regularly. The Berlin airlift demonstrated to West Berlin, the Soviet Union, and the world how far the United States would go to protect noncommunist parts of Europe and contain communism.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization In May
1949, Stalin was forced to acknowledge that his attempt to blockade Berlin had failed. The Berlin airlift was a proud moment for Americans and Berliners and a major success for the policy of containment. One Berlin resident later recalled her feelings when the blockade was finally lifted:
Sheer joy—nothing else. Nothing else. Joy, and [the feeling that], ‘We have done it! And it works!’ . . . That was so very important. The West has won! I say this quite deliberately in such a crass way because you wanted to know how I felt emotionally. The West—well, we have succeeded. And
Interactive Gallery
7.1 The Beginning of the Cold War
Postwar America
Cold War Alliances, 1955
NATO WARSAW PACT
Belgium	Netherlands	Albania
Canada	Norway	Bulgaria
Denmark	Portugal	Czechoslovakia
France	Turkey	East Germany
Greece	United Kingdom	Hungary
Iceland	United States	Poland
Italy	West Germany	Romania
Luxembourg		Soviet Union
» Analyze Tables Which NATO countries were not located in Europe?
the West has won and the others have not!
—Ella Barowsky, CNN interview, 1996
The Berlin airlift demonstrated that Stalin could be contained if Western nations were prepared to take forceful action. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), formed in 1949, provided the military alliance to counter Soviet expansion. Twelve Western European and North American nations agreed to act together in the defense of Western Europe. Member nations agreed that “an armed attack against one or more of them . . . shall be considered an attack against all of them.” This principle of mutual military assistance is called collective security.
In 1955, West Germany became a member of NATO. In response, the Soviet Union and its satellite states formed a rival military alliance, called the Warsaw Pact. All the communist states of Eastern Europe except Yugoslavia were members.
Like members of NATO, nations of the Warsaw Pact pledged to defend one another if attacked. Although members agreed on paper not to interfere in one
another's internal affairs, the Soviet Union continued to exert firm control over its Warsaw Pact allies.
Id EXPLAIN How did the United States and its allies
respond to Soviet aggression in Europe?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Distinguish between the political systems of the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
2.	Identify Cause and Effect Describe the factors that led to the creation of the Truman Doctrine, as well as how the doctrine affected U.S. foreign policy.
3.	Evaluate Arguments Describe George F. Kennan’s argument in favor of the containment policy, and explain why he thought it would be successful.
4.	Generate Explanations How did the concept of collective security lead to the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)?
5.	Summarize the effects of the Marshall Plan on the United States and Western European countries.
7.1 The Beginning of the Cold War
Postwar America
Interactive Flipped Video
o Europe had been the first focus of the Cold War. But in the early 1950s, U.S. involvement in the Korean War made East Asia the prime battleground in the long, hard Cold War struggle. The division between North and South Korea remains a source of international tension today.
7.2
The Korean War
» Objectives
Explain how Mao Zedong and the communists gained power in China.
Describe the causes and the reasons for U.S. involvement in the Korean War.
Identify the long-term effects and outcomes of the Korean War.
China Turns Communist
Since the time of the Russian Revolution in 1917, the Soviets had hoped to spread communism to every corner of the world, training foreigners in Marxist theory and revolutionary strategy. The Soviets were confident that communism would reach worldwide influence. In 1949, events in China seemed to justify their confidence.
» Key Terms
Jiang Jieshi Mao Zedong 38th parallel Douglas MacArthur limited war Southeast
Asia Treaty
Organization
(SEATO)
U.S.
Policy During China’s Civil War Before Japan invaded China in 1937, Nationalist leader Jiang Jieshi (zhee AHNG zhi SHEE), known in the United States as Chiang Kai-shek, had been fighting a civil war against communists led by Mao Zedong (mow zeh DUHNG). Although Jiang and Mao temporarily joined forces in an uneasy alliance to fight Japan, the civil war resumed with a new fury after the war ended. The Soviet Union supported Mao, while the United States sent several billion dollars in aid to Jiang. American leaders feared that Jiang’s defeat would create a communist superpower spanning most of Asia.
Jiang’s regime proved unequal to the task. Nationalist generals were reluctant to fight. And, while masses of Chinese people faced starvation, corrupt officials diverted U.S. aid dollars into their own pockets. By promising to feed the people, Mao won increased support.
Ml
c

www.PearsonTexas.com
[ Access your Digital Lesson.
442

China Falls to Communism In 1948, Mao’s forces dominated the war. Jiang appealed for American military intervention. However, the U.S. government had no intention of sending American troops to support the corrupt Jiang. In 1949, Jiang fled the Chinese mainland, taking control of the large offshore island of Taiwan. Mao’s communists then took control of the world’s most populous country, renaming it the People's Republic of China.
Mao’s victory was an immense shock to Americans. Not only was China under the control of sworn enemies of the United States, but communist regimes now controlled about one fourth of the world’s landmass and one third of its population. “Who lost China?” Americans asked. Many critics blamed the Truman administration, saying that the United States had failed to give enough support to Jiang. But Secretary of State Dean Acheson argued:
The unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war in China was beyond the control of the government of the United States. Nothing that this country did or could have done within the reasonable limits of its capabilities could have changed the result.
- -Secret,hiy of St.dt.o Bean Acbcson. ‘'White Paper on
China." AuqusL 1 949
y CHECK UNDERSTANDING Why were the
communists able to win the Chinese Civil War?
U.S.
Involvement in Korea The focus of attention turned to the peninsula of Korea, separated from northeast China by the Yalu River. Once controlled by Japan, Korea had been divided into two independent countries by the United States and the Soviet Union after World War II. The dividing line was set at the 38th parallel. The Soviets installed a communist government and equipped the armed forces in North Korea. The United States provided smaller amounts of aid to noncommunist South Korea.
North Korea Invades South Korea American occupation troops remained in South Korea until June t949. Their departure coincided with the communist victory in China. Soon after, North Korea began a major military buildup.
» Jiang Jieshi, shown with his U.S.-educated wife Soong May-ling, led a nationalist Chinese government that attracted Western support.
» Portraits of Mao Zedong (right), Chairman of the People’s Government, and Zhu De (left), leader of the People’s Liberation Army, adorn a truck during a celebration of the founding of the People’s Republic of China.
Postwar America 443	7.2 The Korean War
On June 25, 1950, North Korean forces attacked across the 38th parallel. The 90,000 North Korean troops were armed with powerful tanks and other Soviet weapons. Within days, the northerners overtook the South Korean capital city of Seoul and set out in pursuit of the retreating South Korean army.
Reasons for U.S. Involvement President Truman remembered how the policy of appeasement had failed to check the German aggression that sparked World War II. This knowledge, coupled with the U.S. policy of containment, caused Truman to announce that the United States would aid South Korea.
Within days, the UN Security Council unanimously voted to follow Truman’s lead, recommending that “the Members of the United Nations furnish such assistance to the Republic of Korea as may be necessary to repel the armed attack and to restore international peace and security in the area.” Undoubtedly, the Soviet Union would have used its veto power to block the UN resolution if it had been present for the vote. However, it had been boycotting Security Council sessions because the UN had refused to seat Mao's People’s Republic of China.
Truman did not ask Congress for a formal declaration of war, as required by the Constitution. However, supported by the UN resolution, Truman ordered
» President Truman pins a medal on General Douglas MacArthur, who commanded the coalition of American-led United Nations forces in Korea.
American troops who were stationed in Japan to move to South Korea. The soldiers were mainly occupation troops who had not been trained for forced marches in monsoon rains or heavy combat in rice paddies, nor did they have the military equipment needed to stop the invasion. Soon, they joined their South Korean allies in retreating to the southeast corner of the peninsula near the city of Pusan. There, the allies held fast. As fresh supplies and troops arrived from Japan, soldiers from other UN countries joined the American and South Korean forces.
The U.S. and Its Allies Counterattack By September 1950, the UN forces were ready to counterattack. General Douglas MacArthur, the World War II hero, had a bold plan to drive the invaders from South Korea. He suspected that the rapid advance of North Korean troops had left North Korea with limited supply lines. He decided to strike at this weakness by launching a surprise attack on the port city of Inchon, well behind enemy lines. Because Inchon was such a poor landing site, with swift currents and treacherous tides, MacArthur knew that the enemy would not expect an attack there.
MacArthur’s bold gamble paid off. On the morning of September 15, 1950, U.S. Marines landed at Inchon and launched an attack on the rear guard of the North Koreans. Communist forces in South Korea began fleeing back to North Korea. By October 1950, the North Koreans had been driven north of the 38th parallel.
With the retreat of North Korean forces, U.S. officials had to decide what to do next. Should they declare their UN mandate accomplished and end the war? Or should they send their forces north of the 38th parallel and punish the communists for the invasion? Truman was concerned about the action China would take if the United States carried the war into North Korea. Chinese leaders publicly warned the Americans not to advance near its borders. But MacArthur did not take this warning seriously. He assured Truman that China would not intervene in the war. Based on this advice, the United States pushed a resolution through the UN, calling for a “unified, independent, and democratic” Korea.
Truman and MacArthur Disagree on Military Goals Highly confident, MacArthur attacked north of the 38th parallel. Despite mountainous terrain and freezing temperatures, by Thanksgiving the Allied advance had reached the Chinese border at the Yalu River. Then, on November 25, 1950, some 300,000 Chinese soldiers attacked South Korean and U.S. positions. Badly outnumbered, the UN troops were forced back.
Postwar America 444	7.2 The Korean War
EFFECTS	of the KOREAN WAR		
AMERICAN CASUALTIES NATIONAL DEFENSE OUTLAYS
military actions without Congressional approval. 		Vietnam	Dominican Republic
ADDITIONAL KILLED OR MISSING
Panama Grenada 		Somalia Bosnia Kosovo	Haiti Afghanistan, Sudan
		Libya	
» Analyze Data After the Korean War how much more did the U.S spend on defense than before the war?
Interactive Map

With China now in the war, the United States confronted a major land war in Asia. It was possible that this war could not be won without huge commitments of troops and even atomic weapons. Truman steadfastly ruled out both of these options. MacArthur, who favored an invasion of China, was enraged. He distrusted Truman’s policy of a limited war fought to achieve only specific goals. As a soldier, MacArthur favored total victory.
Unable to sway Truman, the general sent a letter to the House Republican leader attacking the President’s policies. After the letter became public, Truman fired MacArthur for insubordination. There was a huge outcry in the United States, and MacArthur returned home a national hero.
H RECALL
How did President Truman react to the North Korean invasion of South Korea? Outcomes of the Korean War
By the spring of 1951, Allied forces had regrouped aud stabilized their position near the 38th parallel. The stalemate lasted until 1953. During that time, the two sides fought small, bloody battles with limited
results. At the same time, diplomats tried to devise an acceptable peace agreement.
Short-Term Outcomes of the Korean War The
stalemate was a key issue in the presidential election of 1952. Republican candidate Dwight D. Eisenhower promised that if elected he would end the war. Upon his election, he visited Korea, spoke with the troops, and studied the enemy’s fortifications.
Eisenhower became president in January 1953. The former general was convinced that only strong action would break the stalemate. When peace talks threatened to fail, he hinted that he might introduce nuclear weapons into the conflict. That warning, along with the death of Joseph Stalin, convinced the communists to settle the conflict. On July 27, 1953, after slightly more than three years of fighting, the two sides signed a cease-fire. That cease-fire is still in effect today.
Long-Term Outcomes of the Korean War There was no victory in the Korean War. North Korea remained a communist country allied to China and the Soviet Union, and South Korea stayed a noncommunist country allied to the United States and the major democracies. The two Koreas remained divided at about the 38th parallel.
Postwar America 445	7.2 The Korean War
» Ongoing military exercises between U.S. and South Korean forces, such as these on the Namhan River, emphasize the U.S. commitment to the safety and security of the South Korean people.
Yet the war had important long-term outcomes. Truman had committed U.S. troops to battle without a congressional declaration of war. This set a precedent that future Presidents would follow. The Korean War also seemed to support the growing belief among policymakers that the fall of one nation to communism could have a ripple effect throughout the region. The Korean War also led to increased military spending. By 1960, military spending accounted for nearly half of the
federal budget. More than a million U.S. soldiers were stationed around the world.
A new alliance underscored U. S. interest in Asia. Like NATO, the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SE ATO) was a defensive alliance aimed at preventing the spread of communism. Its members included Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, New Zealand, France, Britain, and the United States.
B IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
What were the most important outcomes of U.S. participation in the Korean War?
ELPS LISTENING
2-1.2 Listen to a partner read the section titled Short-Term Outcomes of the Korean War. Summarize what you heard. Then read the section titled Long-Term Outcomes of the Korean War, and have your partner summarize what you read.
ELPS
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Why did the United States send financial aid to Jiang Jieshi at the beginning of the Chinese civil war, but later refuse his request for military aid?
2.	Identify Patterns Explain how President Truman’s knowledge of previous historical events influenced him to initiate U.S. involvement in Korea.
3.	Summarize General Douglas MacArthur’s plan for a counterattack against North Korea.
4.	Contrast the opinions of President Truman and General MacArthur regarding U.S. military action in Korea after China became involved.
5.	Identify Cause and Effect What long-term impact did the result of the Korean War have on the United States’ foreign and military policy?
Postwar America 446
7.2 The Korean War
By 1950, the United States and the Soviet Union were, by far, the two most powerful nations in the world. The conflicting ideologies and goals of these rival nations led to a worldwide struggle for influence. The policies followed by the two superpowers would help shape the history of the twentieth century for much of the world, from Latin America to the Middle East.
A vise
squeezes the world between the two superpowers’ weapons. What does this cartoon have to say about efforts to build up nuclear arms?
Interactive Flipped Video
The Cold War
Intensifies
The Arms Race Intensifies Tensions
A change in the balance of world power is usually gradual, taking place over decades or even centuries. But sometimes, the shift happens in a blink of an eye. Such a major shift in the balance of power in the Cold War took place on September 2, 1949. Instruments in an American B-29 aircraft flying over Alaska detected unusual atmospheric radiation. The radiation cloud was drifting eastward from the direction of Siberia.
American nuclear scientists analyzed the data that the aircraft had gathered. They then reached an inescapable conclusion: The Soviet Union had set off an atomic bomb.
2.D, 8.B, 17.C, 28.B
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
Cold War Worries Rise The news shook U.S. leaders. They had believed that the Soviet Union was years away from developing an atomic bomb. Now, the Americans no longer had a monopoly on atomic weaponry.
The news that the Soviets had the bomb was followed the next nionth by news of the communist takeover of China. In a very short
» Objectives
Describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Explain how Eisenhower’s response to communism differed from that of Truman.
Analyze the impact on the United States of significant international Cold War conflicts.
Describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the space race.
» Key Terms
mutually assured destruction
John Foster Dulles massive retaliation brinkmanship Nikita Khrushchev nationalize Suez crisis Eisenhower Doctrine Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
447
©
time, Americans sensed that the world was a much more dangerous and threatening place.
The Arms Race Speeds Up During the Cold War, specific needs resulted in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in the military. Three months after news that the Soviets had developed an atomic bomb, Truman ordered the Atomic Energy Commission to produce a hydrogen bomb. Developers predicted that the H-Bomb would be 1,000 times as powerful as an atomic bomb. They hoped it would restore the United States’ military advantage over the Soviets.
Some scientists, such as J. Robert Oppenheimer and Albert Einstein, opposed developing the H-Bomb, claiming it would only lead to a perpetual arms race. Others argued that Stalin would continue to develop more powerful weapons no matter what the United States did.
In 1952, the United States tested the first hydrogen bomb. The next year, the Soviets tested one of their own. More bombs and tests followed. Most of these tests were conducted above ground, spewing radioactive waste into the atmosphere. Atomic testing in the American west, at sites such as the Nevada desert, led to increased atmospheric radiation and
» Like Truman, President Eisenhower (left) and his Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles (right), believed that the containment of communism was essential to U.S. foreign policy.
long-range health problems for people living downwind of the test sites.
During the next four decades, the United States and the Soviet Union developed and stockpiled increasingly powerful nuclear weapons. They armed planes, submarines, and missiles with nuclear warheads powerful enough to destroy each country many times over. Both sides hoped that this program of mutually assured destruction would prevent either country from actually using a nuclear device against the other. Still, the threat of nuclear destruction seemed to hang over the world like a dark cloud.
El RECALL Why did the United States government
decide to build a hydrogen bomb?
ELPS LISTENING
2-1-3 Read a paragraph from the section titled The Arms Race Speeds Up to a partner. Have your partner answer a question about the content. Then switch roles, listen to your partner read, and answer his or her question.
ELPS
Eisenhower’s Response to Soviet Aggression
President Dwight Eisenhower knew firsthand the horrors of war and the need to defend democracy. He had led the World War II Allied invasions of North Africa, Italy, and Normandy. Having worked with top military and political leaders during the war, he was capable of speaking the language of both.
Eisenhower accepted much of Truman’s foreign policy. He believed strongly in a policy to actively contain communist aggression. Eisenhower’s secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, was an experienced diplomat who had helped organize the United Nations after World War II. Dulles endorsed the President’s vision of the role the United States should play in the world and had stood firmly behind U.S.
efforts to contain communism through involvement in Korea. Containment, Dulles believed, could prevent the possibility of a “domino effect” throughout Southeast Asia with one country after another falling under communist rule.
In their approach toward foreign policy, Eisenhower and Dulles differed significantly from both Truman and his Secretary of State, Dean Acheson. Both teams of men considered the spread of communism the greatest threat to the free world. But Eisenhower believed that Truman's approach to foreign policy had dragged the United States into an endless series of conflicts begun by the Soviet Union. These limited, regional conflicts threatened to drain the country’s resources.
Interactive Chart
Postwar America 1 448 ? 7-3 The Cold War Intensifies
LONG-TERM COSTS Z Z ARMS RACE
NUCLEAR WARHEAD
PROLIFERATION	m by *nZi
$543 BILLION	*■
COST OF THE
ARMS RACE
$1.4 TRILLION
Defending against foreign bombs
» Analyze Data How does the data shown in the infographic illustrate Eisenhower’s approach to defense spending?
Eisenhower’s Policies toward Communism
Eisenhower opposed spending billions of dollars on conventional forces, such as troops, ships, tanks, and artillery. Instead, he focused on stockpiling nuclear weapons and building the planes, missiles, and submarines needed to deliver them. He assumed that if there were a major war, it would be nuclear.
Eisenhower’s new policy drew some criticism: conservatives felt that downgrading conventional forces would weaken American defense, while liberals feared that preparing for nuclear war made such a war more likely. Still, Eisenhower’s approach did save money by providing a “bigger bang for the buck.” In 1953, the defense budget was $50.5 billion; in 1955, it dropped down to $35.8 billion.
In 1954, Dulles announced the policy of massive retaliation. The United States would respond to communist threats to its allies by threatening to use crushing, overwhelming force, perhaps even nuclear weapons.
A potential aggressor must know that he cannot always prescribe battle conditions to suit him. . . . The way to deter aggression is for the free community to be willing and able to
respond vigorously at places and with means of his choosing.
—John Foster Dulles, 1.954
Dulles further believed that only by going to the brink of war could the United States protect its allies, discourage communist aggression, and prevent war. “You have to take some chances for peace, just as you must take chances in war,” he said in 1956. Dulles’s approach became known as brinkmanship.
Stalin’s Death Eases Tensions On March 5, 1953, Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin died, setting off a short power struggle. Nikita Khrushchev soon emerged as the new head of the Soviet Union. Although a communist and a determined opponent of the United States, Khrushchev was not as suspicious or as cruel as Stalin. He condemned the excesses of the Stalin regime and inched toward more peaceful relations with the democratic West.
In July 1955, Khrushchev met with Eisenhower at a conference in Geneva, Switzerland. Although the meeting yielded few significant results, it did seem to be a small move toward “peaceful coexistence” of the two powers.
B CONTRAST
How was Eisenhower’s approach to foreign affairs different from that of Truman’s? Postwar America
7.3 The Cold War Intensifies
» In 1956, Poland revolted against Soviet rule. Here, the crowd carries a Polish flag during an anti-communist demonstration.
» Hungarian nationalists in 1956 burn a portrait of Hungarian communist party leader Maty as Rakosi. Unlike the protests in Poland, the uprising in Hungary was violently put down by the Soviet military.
International Cold War Conflicts
Peaceful co-existence was easier to imagine than it was to practice. The United States and the Soviet Union remained deeply divided. The Soviet Union would not allow free elections in the areas it controlled, and it continued to attempt to spread communism around the world. Dulles talked about “rolling back” communism and liberating the countries under Soviet rule.
Uprisings Behind the Iron Curtain: Poland and Hungary American talk of “rolling back” communist borders and Khrushchev’s talk of “peaceful coexistence” were taken seriously by people in Soviet-dominated countries behind the iron curtain. People in Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia resented the control exerted by the Soviet Union. Many hungered for more political and economic freedom.
In 1956, two uprisings shook Eastern Europe. First, workers in Poland rioted against Soviet rule and won greater control of their government. Since the Polish government did not attempt to leave the Warsaw Pact, Soviet leaders permitted the actions.
Then, encouraged by Khrushchev's words and Poland’s example, Hungarian students and workers organized huge demonstrations. They demanded that pro-Soviet Hungarian officials be replaced, that Soviet troops be withdrawn, and that noncommunist political parties be organized. Khrushchev responded brutally, sending Soviet soldiers and tanks to crush the Hungarian revolution. The Soviets executed many of the revolution’s leaders, killed hundreds of other Hungarians, and restored hard-line communists to power.
Americans could only watch these events in horror. Eisenhower’s massive retaliation approach was powerless. The United States would not use nuclear weapons—or any other weapons—to guarantee Hungarian independence from the Soviet Union.
The Hungarian revolt added a new level of hostility to international relations. At the 1956 Olympic Games, held that November in Melbourne, Australia, the bitter feelings surfaced. A water-polo match between the Soviet Union and Hungary turned violent. Sportswriters called it the “blood in the water” match.
The Suez Crisis The United States found itself involved in another Cold War conflict, this time in the Middle East. As Cold War tensions intensified, Egypts president Gamal Abdel Nasser tried to use the U.S." Soviet rivalry to his advantage.
Postwar America 450
7.3 The Cold War Intensifies
Suez Canal Region
Nasser wanted to construct a dam on the Nile River at Aswan. The United States and Britain initially offered to fund the project, but when Nasser recognized the communist People's Republic of China and opened talks with the Soviet Union, the Eisenhower administration withdrew its offer. In response, Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal, placing it under government control. The canal, which connects the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea, had originally been managed by a British-French company and was protected by British armed forces.
Nasser’s action threatened the flow of Middle Eastern oil to Europe. Without consulting with Eisenhower, Britain and France plotted to get the canal back into Western hands. They joined forces with Israel, a young nation that had long suffered from raids along its border with Egypt. Britain and France used the Suez crisis as an excuse to seize control of the Suez Canal. Israel viewed Egypt’s nationalization of the canal as a violation of international law and wanted to preserve freedom for Israeli shipping.
President Eisenhower was outraged by these actions. Rather than support his Western allies, Eisenhower criticized them and refused to supply them with U.S. oil. The three nations had counted on Eisenhower's support, and when it did not come, they were forced to withdraw their troops from Egypt.
The Eisenhower Doctrine Eisenhower’s response to the attempted seizure of the Suez Canal did not mean that he was unconcerned with communist influence in the Middle East. In response to Soviet influence there and elsewhere, the President made a statement in January 1957 that became known as the Eisenhower Doctrine. Eisenhower announced that the United States would use force to help any Middle Eastern nation threatened by communism. Eisenhower used his doctrine in 1958 to justify sending troops to Lebanon to put down a revolt against its pro-American government.
The Eisenhower administration also used the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in its struggle against communism. Congress had created the CIA in 1947 as an intelligence-gathering organization. Eisenhower gave it a new task. He approved covert, or secret, CIA operations to protect American interests. In 1953, the CIA aided a coup that installed a new government in Iran. In 1954, it accomplished a similar mission in Guatemala. While both operations helped to place anticommunist leaders in power, they also created long-term resentment against the United States.
The Space Race Increases Tensions Although the United States successfully contained the spread of communism on the ground, it did suffer a setback in
Postwar America 451	7.3 The Cold War Intensifies
» In the years immediately following the Soviets' launch of Sputnik 1, the United States responded by developing many more satellites, such as this one in 1960.
space. On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched a 184-pound steel ball containing a small transmitter into an orbit of Earth. The Soviets named the tiny satellite Sputnik 1. The following month they launched a much larger satellite. It carried a dog, named Laika, to see how a living creature would react to space travel. Since there was no way to return the satellite to Earth, Laika died in orbit.
The launches shocked many Americans, who had long believed that superior technology would keep the United States ahead of the Soviet Union. Would Soviet space technology give them the rocket power to launch missiles that could reach American cities?
In a state of crisis, Congress quickly approved the National Defense Education Act, a $1 billion program intended to produce more scientists and science teachers. The act authorized money for loans to enable high school and college graduates to continue their education in science. In addition, Congress created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to coordinate the space-related efforts of American scientists and the military. The space race and arms race provided some unexpected benefits that improved Americans’ quality of life, as technologies originally intended for military or space use, such as the microwave and the internet, eventually became available among the wider population.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL ISSUES
How did the Hungarian and Suez crises of 1956 intensify Cold War tensions?
ELPS LEARNING STRATEGIES 1.C.1
Read the sections titled The Eisenhower Doctrine and The Space Race Increases Tensions. With a partner, create a chart that compares and contrasts facts about the CIA and NASA.
ELPS
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Explain how the concept of mutually assured destruction influenced the course of the Cold War.
2.	Compare and Contrast the foreign policies of Eisenhower and Truman.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain the logic behind John Foster Dulles’ concept of brinkmanship.
4.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss how Stalin’s death affected tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States.
5.	Identify Patterns Explain how the Eisenhower administration used the CIA to fight the spread of communism in various countries.
Postwar America 452
7.3 The Cold War Intensifies
\~/ Americans have often faced the difficult task of balancing the need to provide national security with the need to protect people’s rights and freedoms. In times of crisis, rights have sometimes been limited. Beginning in the late 1940s, the Cold War dominated American life. For some of those years, the nation was in the grip of a new Red Scare. The hunt for communists netted some spies, but it also disrupted the lives of thousands of innocent Americans.
Senator Joseph McCarthy’s accusations that communist sympathizers worked in the U.S. government led to controversial televised Senate hearings.
BO!
Interactive Flipped Video Cold War Fears at Home
Cold War Tensions Rise at Home
The Cold War influenced many aspects of American life. American soldiers fought and died in Korea. Industries hummed with activity, turning out weapons and supplies. Americans read newspaper articles about who “lost” China or who was winning the “space race.” Popular culture reflected an us-versus-them attitude—democrats versus totalitarians, capitalists versus communists, the West versus the East. In the end, the Cold War was turning out to be every bit as global and as encompassing as World War II had been.
The Second Red Scare The fear that communists both outside and inside America were working to destroy American life created a reaction known as a Red Scare. This fear was not unique to the late 1940s and 1950s. The 1917 Russian Revolution and the communists’ call for worldwide revolution had led to a similar Red Scare in 1919 and 1920. However, the Red Scare that followed World War II went deeper and wider—and lasted far longer—than the earlier one. Trumans Attorney General, J.
Howard McGrath, expressed the widespread fear of communist Influence when he warned that communists are everywhere in
TEKS
» Objectives
Describe the efforts of President Truman and the House Un-American Activities Committee to fight communism at home.
Explain how domestic spy cases intensified fears of communist influence in the U.S. government.
Analyze the rise and fall of Senator Joseph McCarthy and the methods of McCarthyism.
» Key Terms
Red Scare
Smith Act
House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC)
Hollywood Ten
blacklist
Alger Hiss
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg
Venona Papers
McCarthyism
Joseph R. McCarthy
c
PEARSON 1
el realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
453
» Civil Defense posters warned Americans to remain on high alert for a nuclear attack.
» Playwright and screenwriter Lillian Heilman was blacklisted after telling HUAC, “I am not willing...to bring bad trouble to people who, in my past association with them, were completely innocent of any talk or any action that was disloyal or subversive.”
factories, offices, butcher stores, on street corners, and private businesses. And each carries in himself the death of our society.”
The spread of communism into Eastern Europe and Asia raised concerns that American communists, some in influential government positions, were working for the enemy. In truth, some American communists were agents of the Soviet Union, and a handful of them held high-ranking positions in government. However, overwhelmingly, government officials were loyal to the United States.
Recognizing public concern about domestic communism, President Truman used an executive order to create a Federal Employee Loyalty Program in March 1947. The order permitted the FBI and other government security agencies to screen federal employees for signs of political disloyalty. About 3,000 federal employees either were dismissed or resigned after the investigation.
The order also empowered the Attorney General to compile a list of “totalitarian, fascist, or subversive organizations” in the United States. Americans who belonged to or supported organizations on the Attorney General’s list were singled out for more intense scrutiny. Many were labeled “security risks” and dismissed from their jobs.
The Truman administration also used the 1940 Smith Act to cripple the Communist Party in the United States. This act made it unlawful to teach or advocate the violent overthrow of the U.S. government. In 1949, a New York jury found 11 communists guilty of violating the Smith Act and sent them to prison.
The House Un-American Activities Committee
Congress joined in the search for communists. In 1938, the House of Representatives had created the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) to
investigate possible subversive activities by fascists, Nazis, or communists. After the war, the committee conducted several highly publicized hearings on communist activities in the United States. Cold War fears were intensified by HUAC investigators, who probed the government, armed forces, unions, education, science, newspapers, and other aspects of American life.
The best-known HUAC hearings targeted the movie industry in 1947. The HUAC investigations uncovered people who were, or had been, communists during the 1930s and 1940s. A group of left-wing writers, directors, and producers known as the Hollywood Ten refused to answer questions, asserting their Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination. The hearings turned into a war of attacks and counterattacks as committee
Postwar America
1 454 ) 7.4 Cold War Fears at Home
members and witnesses yelled at each other and pointed accusatory fingers.
After the hearings, the Hollywood Ten were cited for contempt of Congress and were tried, convicted, and sent to prison. Movie executives circulated a blacklist of entertainment figures who should not be hired because of their suspected communist ties. The careers of those on the list were shattered. Not until the case of Watkins v. United States (1957) did the Supreme Court decide that witnesses before HUAC could not be forced to name radicals they knew.
The HUAC investigation had a powerful impact on filmmaking. In the past, Hollywood had been willing to make movies about controversial subjects such as racism and anti-Semitism. Now, most producers concentrated only on entertainment and avoided addressing sensitive social issues.
Red Scare Intensifies Cold War Fears The case of the Hollywood Ten demonstrated that in the mood of fear created by Soviet aggression, freedom of speech was not guaranteed. Americans lost their jobs because they had belonged to or contributed to an organization on the Attorney General’s list. Others were fired for associating with people who were known communists or for making remarks that were considered disloyal. Teachers and librarians, mail carriers and longshoremen, electricians and construction workers—people from all walks of life—might be accused and dismissed from their jobs.
The effort to root out communist influence from American life cut across many levels of society. Communists were exposed and blacklisted in the country’s academic institutions, labor unions, scientific laboratories, and city halls. No one was above suspicion. The case of J. Robert Oppenheimer illustrates the difficulty of distinguishing loyalty from disloyalty. During World War II, Oppenheimer had led the Manhattan Project, which developed the atomic bomb. After the war, he became chairman of the General Advisory Committee of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). However, Oppenheimer had ties to people who belonged to the Communist Party, including his wife and brother.
In 1954, the AEC denied Oppenheimer access to classified information. Although the AEC had no evidence that Oppenheimer himself had ever been disloyal to the United States, it questioned whether his communist ties disqualified him from holding this position.
H SUMMARIZE
What steps did Truman and Congress take to investigate communist influence in the United States? » The 1956 film Invasion of the Body Snatchers expressed Americans’ fears of invasion and infiltration during the era of the Red Scare.
Interactive Gallery
•> ELPS
ELPS LEARNING STRATEGIES 1.D.1
Read the section titled The House Un-American Activities Committee. Discuss its main ideas with a partner. If you cannot think of a particular word, use a synonym or gesture, or ask your partner for help.
Domestic Spy Cases
Increase Fears
Two sensational spy trials drew the nation’s attention to the threat posed by communist agents working to subvert the United States. The accused in the two cases could not have been more different. Alger Hiss had been educated at Johns Hopkins University and Harvard Law School. Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were from the poor, lower east side of Manhattan. Although Hiss and the Rosenbergs never met, their crimes and their trials have linked them in the public’s imagination.
HUAC
Investigates Alger Hiss Until 1948, Alger Hiss’s career seemed flawless. A seemingly dedicated government servant, Hiss had worked on several important New Deal agencies and helped to organize the United Nations. But a man named Whittaker Postwar America 455	7.4 Cold War Fears at Home
Chambers disputed Hiss’s image. As a young man, Chambers had become a communist espionage agent. But Chambers later turned against communism because of the brutality of Stalin’s rule. Chambers began writing compellingly about the evils of communism. In 1948, he testified before HUAC about his communist past and named Alger Hiss as one of his contacts in the federal government.
Hiss soon appeared before HUAC. He denied that he was a communist and an espionage agent, and he denied that he even knew Whittaker Chambers. But Richard Nixon, a young member of Congress from California, convinced the other committee members to press the case. Slowly, Hiss’s story began to unravel. Chambers proved that he did know Hiss and that Hiss had given him confidential government documents. Chambers had even kept a microfilm copy of some of those documents, storing them in a hollowed-out pumpkin on his Maryland farm.
Hiss was tried for perjury. The first trial ended in a hung jury. At his second trial, he was found guilty and sentenced to five years in prison. Even after his conviction, many Americans continued to believe that Hiss was innocent. However, as years passed, the evidence grew overwhelmingly against him. The fact that someone as influential as Hiss was a communist
Vet 32. No, 24b
BAliXUiKws
litcgy
A-SPY COUPLE DOOMED TO DIE
Use Chiang's Army, Mac Asks
» A jury found Julius and Ethel Rosenberg guilty of passing atomic secrets to the Soviet Union, and sentenced them to death for espionage.
agent raised serious concerns. The Hiss case had another unexpected effect. The congressional hearings thrust Richard Nixon into the national spotlight. In 1952, he was named Eisenhower’s running mate and would later become President.
The Rosenbergs and the Venona Papers Nothing created more concern about internal security than the charge that some Americans had helped the Soviets build an atomic bomb. The case began when a scientist named Klaus Fuchs was charged with sending atomic secrets to the Soviet Union. The investigation against Fuchs ultimately led to the arrest of Ethel and Julius Rosenberg in 1950. The Rosenbergs were charged with conspiring to pass secret information about nuclear science to Soviet agents.
The trial of the Rosenbergs generated intense controversy in America and around the world. The case against them was based largely on the word of one confessed spy. Pleading innocent, the Rosenbergs claimed that they were being persecuted for being Jewish and for holding unpopular beliefs. In the end, both were found guilty and sentenced to death. Many believed that the harsh sentence was intended as a lever to force them to identify other members of the alleged spy ring. But the Rosenbergs claimed they had no such information. After 26 months on death row, the Rosenbergs were electrocuted in 1953.
Years of debate followed the executions. Some insisted that anti-Semitic sentiment led to the Rosenbergs’ conviction and death. However, in 1995, the U. S. National Security Agency released secret Soviet messages that the United States had intercepted in the 1940s, known as the Venona Papers. The papers revealed the names of many Americans who spied for the Soviet Union. These documents confirmed the guilt of some of those investigated by HUAC, including the Rosenbergs and Alger Hiss.
U EXPLAIN
Why did the Rosenberg case attract nationwide attention and controversy?
ELPS LISTENING
2.1.4 Read aloud the text with a partner. Then discuss Alger Hiss and the Rosenbergs. Ask your partner questions so you can better understand his or her ideas.
ELPS
McCarthyism
The early Cold War years saw one ominous event after another. The fall of China, Soviet nuclear bombs, and the exposure of Soviet agents in the United States all undermined American confidence. At that time, as Americans worried about the nation’s security, a
Interactive Timeline
A
Postwar America
456
7.4 Cold War Fears at Home
clever and unscrupulous man began to take advantage of this sense of fear and helplessness. He suggested that these setbacks were really caused by the work of traitors inside the United States.
The Rise of Senator Joe McCarthy In February 1950, a little-known senator from Wisconsin made a speech in Wheeling, West Virginia. The senator, Joseph R. McCarthy, charged that the State Department was infested with communist agents. He waved a piece of paper, which, he said, contained the names of State Department employees who were secretly communists.
The reason why we find ourselves in a position of [weakness] is not because the enemy has sent men to invade our shores, but rather because of the traitorous actions of those who have had all the benefits that the wealthiest nation on earth has had to offer—the finest homes, the finest college educations, and the finest jobs in Government we can give. .
. . I have here in my hand a list of 205 [individuals] that were known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping the policy of the State Department.
- Joseph McCaithy, February 9, 1950
The charge provoked a furor. When challenged to give specific names, McCarthy said he had meant that there were “205 bad security risks” in the department. Then he claimed that 57 employees were communists. Over the next months, the numbers on his list changed. McCarthy never did produce the list of communists. Still, with the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950, McCarthy’s accusations grabbed the attention of the American public.
At the time of the above speech, McCarthy was finishing his first term in the Senate. He had accomplished very little in that term and was looking for a popular issue on which to focus his 1952 reelection campaign. Anticommunism seemed to be just the issue. McCarthy was easily reelected to a second term.
The Methods of McCarthyism In the following four years, McCarthy put forward his own brand
» The charges from McCarthy and others that communists were working from within to overthrow the American government helped spread panic through popular culture.
of anticommunism—so much so that the term McCarthyism became a catchword for extreme, reckless charges. By making irresponsible allegations, McCarthy did more to discredit legitimate concerns about domestic communism than any other single American. Between 1950 and 1954, McCarthy was perhaps the most powerful politician in the United States. Piling baseless accusations on top of charges that could not be proved, McCarthy became chairman of an investigations subcommittee. Merely being accused by McCarthy caused people to lose their jobs and destroyed their reputations. He attacked ruthlessly. When caught in a lie, he told another.
When one case faded, he introduced a new one. Confident because of his increasing power, McCarthy took on larger targets. He attacked former Secretary of State George Marshall, a national hero and author of the Marshall Plan. Even other senators came to fear McCarthy. They worried that he would brand them as communist sympathizers.
McCarthy Loses Support In 1954, McCarthy went after the United States Army, claiming that it, too, was full of communists. Army leaders responded that McCarthy’s attacks were personally motivated.
Postwar America 457 ;	7.4 Cold War Fears at Home
» Republican Senator Margaret Chase Smith of Maine so strongly opposed McCarthy’s tactics that she made her “Declaration of Conscience” on the Senate floor in June 1950.
Finally, the Senate decided to hold televised hearings to sort out the allegations. For weeks, Americans were riveted to their television sets. Most were horrified by McCarthy’s bullying tactics. For the first time, the public saw McCarthy badger witnesses, twist the truth, and snicker at the suffering of others. It was an upsetting sight for many Americans.
By the time the hearings ended in mid-June, the senator had lost many of his strongest supporters. The
Senate formally censured, or condemned, him for his reckless accusations. Although McCarthy continued to serve in the Senate, he had lost virtually all of his power and influence.
The end of the Korean War in 1953 and McCarthy’s downfall in 1954 signaled the decline of the Red Scare. The nation had been damaged by the suppression of free speech and by the lack of open, honest debate. However, Americans had come to realize how important their democratic institutions were and how critical it was to preserve them.
B IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
What events led to Senator McCarthy being censured by the U.S. Senate?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Support Ideas with Examples In what ways did McCarthyism intensify tensions within the United States during the Cold War?
2.	Summarize Explain the purpose of the House Un-American Activities Committee, or HUAC, and the effect the committee had on the American public.
3.	Use Context Clues Discuss how U.S. involvement in the Korean War contributed to the fears Americans had about the communist threat during the Cold War.
4.	Generate Explanations Why did the televising of the Senate hearings help end McCarthyism?
5.	Compare Points of View Explain the debate on the convictions of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, and how this debate changed when the Venona Papers were revealed.
Postwar America
7.4 Cold War Fears at Home
■
After World War II, many Americans worried that the war’s end would bring renewed economic depression. Numerous economists shared this pessimistic view of the future, predicting that the American economy could not produce enough jobs to employ all those who were returning from the military. Yet instead of a depression, Americans experienced the longest period of economic growth in American history, a boom that enabled millions of Americans to enter the middle class. This era of sustained growth fostered a widespread sense of optimism about the nation’s future.

Postwar Prosperity
B, 27.C
Causes and Effects of Prosperity in the 1950s
At the end of the war in August 1945, more than 12 million Americans were in the military. Thousands of American factories were churning out ships, planes, tanks, and all the materials required to help fight the war in the Pacific. Virtually overnight, both the need for such a huge military machine and the focus on war production came to an end. Orders went out from Washington, D.C., canceling defense contracts, causing millions of defense workers to lose their jobs. Wartime industries had to be converted to meet peacetime needs.
As Americans set about enjoying the fruits of peace, President Harry Truman responded to calls to “bring the boys home for Christmas by starting the demobilization, or sending home members of the army. By July 1946, only 3 million remained in the military.
Americans were happy that the war was over, but they retained some sense of unease about the future. One poll taken in the fall of 1945 showed that 60 percent of Americans expected their earnings to fall with the return of a peacetime economy. “The American soldier is . . . worried sick about postwar joblessness, Fortune magazine observed.
» Objectives
Describe how the Unites States made the transformation to a booming peacetime economy.
Discuss the growth of the Sunbelt and the effects of migration.
Describe changes in the U.S. economy in the postwar period.
Discuss the accomplishments and leadership qualities of Presidents Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower.
» Key Terms
demobilization	Estee Lauder
Gl Bill of Rights	Sam Walton
baby boom
productivity
Taft-Hartley Act
Fair Deal
Sunbelt
service sector
information industry
franchise business
multinational
corporation
AFL-CIO
c
PEARSON 1	_
el realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
459
Impact of the Gl Bill To help deal with this anxiety, the federal government enacted the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, also popularly known as the Gl Bill of Rights. It granted veterans a variety of benefits. It provided a year of unemployment payments to veterans who were unable to find work. Those who attended college after the war received financial aid. The act also entitled veterans to government loans for building homes and starting businesses.
The Gl bill had an enormous impact on American society. Home loans to veterans fueled an upsurge in home construction, which led to explosive growth in suburban areas. Perhaps the greatest contribution of the Gl bill came in education. The average soldier was inducted into the armed forces at the time when he or she would have been finishing high school.
The bill encouraged veterans to enter or return to college. Each veteran was eligible to receive $500 a year for college tuition. The bill also provided $50 a month for living expenses and $75 a month for married veterans. Eight million veterans eventually took advantage of the education benefits.
A
Baby Boom Increases Consumption Upon their return, soldiers quickly made up for lost time by marrying and having children. Americans had put off having children because of the depression and war. Now, confident that the bad times were behind them, many married couples started families. This led to what population experts termed a baby boom. In 1957, at the peak of the baby boom, one American baby was born every 7 seconds, a grand total of 4.3 million for the year. One newspaper columnist commented, “Just imagine how much these extra people . . . will absorb—in food, in clothing, in gadgets, in housing, in services. . . .” Between 1940 and 1955, the U.S. population experienced its greatest increase, growing 27 percent from about 130 to about 165 million.
Postwar Inflation Fortunately, unemployment did not materialize, nor did a depression return. However, Americans experienced some serious economic problems. The most painful was skyrocketing prices. With war’s end, the federal government ended rationing and price controls, both of which had helped keep inflation in check during the war. A postwar rush to buy goods created severe inflationary pressures. There was just too much money to spend on too few goods. Overall, prices rose about 18 percent in 1946. The price of some products, such as beef, nearly doubled within a year.
Free Enterprise Improves U.S. Standard of Living
During the depression, Americans could not buy the goods they desired. The economy improved during the war, but wartime restrictions kept spending down
J
THE BABY BOOM
f
k
1940-1960
z 1.0 0.5
Homeowners in 1940
Homeowners in 1960
By 1960,1 of every 4 American homes had been built in the last decade.
1940	1945
1950
Year
1955	1960
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
CONSUMER SPENDING PER YEAR)
■ Fooc* ■ Nothing | Housing Other
III 1934-36 $1,512
1950 $3,808
|	1960-61 $5,390
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, BLS Report 991
11945 70,000 (wartime limits)
1950 6,000,000
1955 7,900,000
Source: National Museum of American History
A

» Analyze Data In your opinion, which is more important to the U.S. economy, home ownership or automobile ownership? Why?
Postwar America 460	7.5 Postwar Prosperity
and limited economic growth. The end of wartime restrictions finally opened the floodgates to consumer purchases. As demand soared, businesses employed more people to produce goods. This created a cycle in which people bought new goods, leading businesses to hire more workers, who in turn bought more goods.
At the end of World War II, the United States was the only developed nation largely untouched by the devastation. Although it had only 6 percent of the world’s population, the United States produced about 50 percent of the world’s total output. The free enterprise system allowed Americans to enjoy a higher standard of living than any other nation in the world.
Technological Progress Enhances Productivity
The American economy benefited from numerous technological advances during the postwar period. Some developments, such as the use of atomic energy, were the result of war research. The use of computers increased, and businesses gradually began to depend on them. Farms benefited from improved machinery and chemicals, allowing farmers to grow more crops with fewer laborers. Worker productivity—the rate at which goods are produced or services performed— continued to improve, largely because of new technology.
Military Spending Supports Growth Increased government spending boosted the economy, too. The Cold War had a number of economic effects. With the outbreak of the Korean War and the escalating Cold War with communist nations in Europe and Asia, the United States once again committed a significant part of its budget to defense spending. Military spending led to the development of new technologies and new materials, such as plastics and new light metal alloys, that found widespread use outside the military. Other large federal spending programs, such as the Marshall Plan, initiated foreign demand for goods made in the United States.
IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
How did the baby boom help cause increased economic prosperity during the 1950s?
ELPS LISTENING
2.1.5 With a partner, take turns reading paragraphs of the section titled Impact of the Gl Bill. While one of you reads, the other can listen and take notes.
ELPS
» The end of the war and the nation’s newfound prosperity prompted many young Americans to start families. The result was a "baby boom” that increased the population by 27 percent.
» Postwar American prosperity led to widespread depictions in the media of an idealized suburban society.
Postwar America : 461
7.5 Postwar Prosperity
Americans Migrate to the Sunbelt
In 1958, two New York baseball teams—the Dodgers and the Giants—moved to California. Their move reflected another crucial trend of the postwar era, the growth of the Sunbelt, the name given to the southern and western states. By the mid-1960s, California passed New York as the state with the largest population. The migration to Sunbelt cities, such as Houston, Texas, and Los Angeles, California, continued for the rest of the twentieth century.
Causes of Migration Many factors played a role in attracting people to the Sunbelt. A warm, sunny climate drew some Americans. A booming industrial economy and rapidly growing cities attracted people to Texas, which added more than 3 million new residents in the 1940s and 1950s. The explosive growth of the aerospace and electronics industries also attracted newcomers to the Sunbelt.
The development of air conditioning also played a major role. Invented in 1902, air conditioners were at first used only in public buildings, such as movie theaters and courthouses. But after World War II, the development of window units made it possible to cool
homes. Northerners who had visited states like Florida, Texas, or Arizona only in winter could now live in hotter climates all year round.
Latinos contributed to the growth of the Sunbelt. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, many Cubans, who were escaping the new regime of Fidel Castro, made Miami, Florida, their new home. Prior to World War II, most Mexican Americans lived in rural areas. However, by the 1960s, the majority of them migrated to urban areas, such as Los Angeles, El Paso, and Phoenix.
Effects of Migration on Society and the Environment The shift to the suburbs and the Sunbelt had a momentous impact on American society. As people moved, their political power went with them. Thus, suburbs and the Sunbelt gained representation. Urbanites in the Northeast and Midwest lost political power. Texas, for example, gained eleven new seats in the U.S. House of Representatives between 1940 and 2000.
Urban and suburban growth created environmental concerns, ranging from traffic jams and smog to water shortages. To meet growing populations, communities utilized once valuable open lands for housing, schools, roads, new businesses, and parking lots. In the 1960s
Sunbelt Population Changes, 1970-1980
0	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
KEY ' Percent Change by State H 20.0 or more
■	10.1 to 19.9
■	5.1 to 10.0
■	2.6 to 5
I I
Less than 2.5 or loss » Analyze
populations.
population?
Maps Several states in the sunbelt saw significant growth in their Based on the map, which states had the most growth? Which states lost
SSSrATLuroc
Maryland OCEAN 0	400 mi
Postwar America 462	7.5 Postwar Prosperity
and 1970s, environmental groups would begin to grapple with some of the byproducts of this growth.
Q CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What motivated so many Americans to migrate to the Sunbelt?
Innovations and Economic Development
The important postwar population shifts were matched by equally groundbreaking structural changes in the American economy. For the first time in American history, more people found employment in the service sector—businesses that provide services, such as healthcare, law, retail, banking, or insurance—than in the manufacturing sector. These shifts led some to describe the United States as a postindustrial society.
Innovative Computers Drive Economic Growth
Between 1947 and 1957, the percentage of the American workforce employed in industrial or blue-collar jobs declined 4 percent. During the same time period, employment in the service sector, or white-collar jobs, rapidly grew.
The new workforce included many who worked in information industries, including those who built or operated the first computers. These computers were enormous. One of the first, named ENIAC, short for Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, took up roughly 18,000 square feet, or the size of three basketball courts! Despite its size, it was less powerful than today’s desktop computer.
Still, ENIAC was a remarkable advance. By the 1960s, the government and private industry had found many uses for the computer. Hotels used computers to help make reservations, and banks used them to keep track of accounts. Industries started using computers to automate work or perform jobs once done by people. All these technological innovations clearly revealed that the free enterprise system was improving the standard of living in the United States.
Changes in the Labor Force Meanwhile, the number of women in the labor force continued to grow, doubling between 1940 and 1960. Many of these women worked part time. Few pursued long-term careers and most remained underpaid. Yet without their paychecks, their families would have found it difficult to remain in the middle class.
While the service sector grew rapidly, both the number and the percentage of Americans who made a living by farming continued to decline. In 1935, one fourth of the nation’s families lived on farms. By 1960,
» During the 1950s, many Americans moved to the warm and sunny South and West, the so-called “Sunbelt.” Huge developments, like Lakeland Park in California, met their need for housing.
less than one in ten families did. At the same time, improvements in technology, ranging from mechanical cotton pickers to chemical pesticides, made agriculture much more productive. This allowed fewer workers to grow even more food. New irrigation systems helped transform much of the land in the Southwest from arid to fertile fields.
The Role of Entrepreneurs At home, the postwar era saw the rise of franchise businesses. A franchise business allows a company to distribute its products or services through retail outlets owned by independent operators.
Franchises were attractive to consumers because they stressed quality and sameness, no matter where one was in the United States. The Holiday Inn franchise came into existence following a trip that home builder Kemmons Wilson took to Washington, D.C., with his family of five children. Frustrated, Wilson found hotels difficult to locate, overpriced, and lacking adequate parking facilities. As he traveled, according to author David Halberstam, "Wilson became more irritated until he turned to his wife and announced that he was going into the hotel business. Everyone in this country, he thought, had a car and a family, and sooner or later
Postwar America | 463 1 7.5 Postwar Prosperity
everyone had to go somewhere.” Today, there are tens of thousands of Holiday Inn hotels all over the world.
Many postwar critics lamented the growth of franchise businesses. For them, the franchises represented a growing lack of originality, evidence that the United States was becoming a “bland” nation in which people ate bland food, lived in bland look-alike houses, and watched bland television shows that followed the same plot line.
Entrepreneurs Lead Management Innovations
The transition from an industry-based to a service-based economy created opportunities for entrepreneurs. For example, Californians Richard and Maurice McDonald opened their new restaurant in 1948. The brothers emphasized efficiency, low prices, high volume, and quick service. They did away with anything that slowed down the process, including plates, glasses, dishwashing, and tipping. In 1955, Ray Kroc began to franchise McDonald’s system and name. By the end of the century, McDonald’s had become the most successful food service organization in history, and the name McDonald’s came to stand for low-priced, standardized-quality food.
Other entrepreneurs’ names also came to represent their businesses. For example, Wal-Mart, a discount merchandising business founded by Sam Walton,
became one of the most successful businesses in the late twentieth century. Another entrepreneur, Estee Lauder, founded a cosmetics company that specialized in skin care and protection products.
Lauder’s focus on selling her products only in high-end department stores created a $100 million dollar business by the 1970s. Walton and Lauder are just two of the millions of small business entrepreneurs whose businesses grew, allowing them to achieve the American dream.

5
McD0NRLU5
CPWOUS
15
HAMBURGERS
BUVIB BV THE BRG
» The original McDonald’s restaurant in San Benardino, California featured 15 cent hamburgers.
American Corporations Go Multinational As the postwar economy expanded, so did multinational corporations, companies that produced and sold their goods and services all over the world and established branches abroad. General Motors, General Electric, and IBM produced a larger and larger share of all of the goods sold. Changing business strategies and management innovations allowed many of these corporations to earn large portions of their profits abroad. Coca Cola, for instance, sold its soft drinks all over the globe. Hollywood movies found eager audiences in Tokyo, Mexico City, and Germany.
Effects of Prosperity on Labor The prosperity of the 1950s was reflected in generally good times for the labor movement. In 1955, the AFL and the CIO, which had split in the mid-1980s, united to form the AFL-CIO. The new organization enjoyed a good deal of political clout, especially within the Democratic Party Yet trade unions also lost some momentum during the late 1940s and early 1950s. Most of the new white-collar workers did not join unions, and labor’s image was tarnished by a corruption scandal involving the Teamsters Union. Government investigators accused the Teamsters, who represented truck drivers, of illegally using their members’ funds.
fid EXPLAIN In what ways did American business
change during the postwar period?
Truman’s Postwar
Leadership
As the postwar economy evolved and new demographic patterns changed society, American leaders faced rapidly shifting domestic and foreign political landscapes. On April 12,1945, when Franklin Roosevelt died, Harry S. Truman had been Vice President for only 4 months. When Eleanor Roosevelt told him that her husband had died, Truman responded, “Is there anything I can do for you?” She replied, “Is there
Interactive Gallery
Postwar America 464	7.5 Postwar Prosperity
anything we can do for you? For you are the one in trouble now.”
Eleanor Roosevelt’s remark captured Harry Truman’s predicament. He had to preside over one of the more difficult times in American history. The postwar years saw the beginning of the Cold War and communist takeovers in Europe and Asia. At home, there was inflation and labor unrest. Communist advances and a troubled domestic economy created a sense of deep unrest in the American public during the Truman years.
Relationships with Congress and Labor From the first days of his presidency, Truman faced a double-barreled challenge: a restless labor movement and a combative Republican Party. Trade unionists demanded pay increases to keep up with inflation. When employers refused to meet labor’s demands, millions of steel, coal, railroad, and automotive workers went on strike.
The wave of strikes was one of the largest in American history. It prompted Congress to enact the Taft-Hartley Act, a law that outlawed the closed shop—a workplace in which only union members can be hired. Taft-Hartley rolled back some of the rights that labor unions had gained during the New Deal. Although Truman vetoed the Taft-Hartley Act, Congress overrode his veto.
Support for Civil Rights Unlike FDR, who feared challenging the power of white southern senators and representatives, Truman refused to remain passive. He established a special committee on civil rights to investigate race relations. The committee made several recommendations for civil rights reforms.
However, Congress rejected the recommendations and did not pass any meaningful civil rights reforms until the late 1950s. Truman also issued an executive order desegregating the military. This was more successful. By 1951, most units had been integrated.
Truman Defeats Dewey By the spring of 1948, Truman’s standing had sunk so low that he faced challenges from both the right and the left in his own Democratic Party. Southern Democrats, angry at Truman’s support for civil rights, left the party and established the States' Rights Party. They named South Carolina governor Strom Thurmond as their candidate for President. At the other end of the political spectrum, Henry Wallace, who had been Vice President during FDR’s third term, broke with Truman over foreign policy issues. Wallace became the candidate of a new Progressive Party.
» Unmet demands for pay raises in the face of inflation led to labor unrest, such as this strike at a Pittsburgh steel mill, during the Truman administration.
The breakaway of two large blocs of Democrats was accompanied by the Republican Party's nomination of Thomas Dewey, the well-known governor of New York, for President. Few people thought that Truman had any chance of winning the 1948 election. Truman, however, did not see it that way.
He staged an energetic “whistle stop” train tour of the nation, delivering over 300 speeches and traveling 31,000 miles in a matter of weeks. At train stops in small towns, Truman attacked the current Congress as “do nothing” and the worst in history. “Give ’em hell, Harry!” some in the crowd would cry out during his speeches. Although every political poll predicted that Dewey would win easily, Truman won by a narrow victory. He had managed the political upset of the century.
Consequences of Truman’s Presidency Shortly after the election, Truman announced a far-ranging legislative program, which he called the Fair Deal. The Fair Deal, he explained, would strengthen existing New Deal reforms and establish new programs, such as national health insurance. But Congress was not in a reforming mood, and Truman failed to win approval for most of his Fair Deal proposals.
Legislative failure and a stalled war in Korea contributed to Truman’s loss of popularity. He chose not to seek the 1952 Democratic nomination. His reputation, however, has improved through the years. Today, many historians applaud him for his common-
Postwar America 465	7-5 Postwar Prosperity
» Americans enjoyed peace and prosperity under the Eisenhower administration. For many, it was a time for new homes, new cars, and family vacations.
Interactive Chart
sense approach, as the first President to challenge public discrimination and as a determined opponent of communist expansion.
U RECALL
Why was Truman’s victory in 1948 so surprising?
Eisenhower Leads a
Thriving Nation
The 1952 election was hardly a contest. The Republican candidate, Dwight Eisenhower, was so popular that both the Democratic and Republican parties had wanted him as their presidential candidate. Eisenhower, whose nickname was Ike, charmed the public with his friendly smile, reassuring personality, and record of service and honesty. The Democratic candidate, Adlai
Stevenson, a senator from Illinois, failed to catch the popular imagination the way Eisenhower did.
Dwight Eisenhower had spent nearly his entire adult life in the military and had never held a political office before 1952. Thus, Americans could not know for certain which way he would guide the nation upon taking office. However, most Americans believed that Eisenhower’s calm personality mirrored his political views and that he would keep to the “middle road," achieving a balance between liberal and conservative positions.
Eisenhower charted a middle course as President. While he shared the conservative view that the federal government had grown too strong, he did not repeal existing New Deal programs, such as Social Security and the minimum wage. Federal spending actually increased during his presidency. Eisenhower even introduced several large new programs. For example, he created an interstate highway system and began to spend federal dollars for education, specifically to train more scientists.
One reason for Eisenhower’s popularity was the strength of the American economy during the 1950s. His presidency was one of the most prosperous, peaceful, and politically tranquil in the twentieth century.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why did federal spending increase during Eisenhower’s presidency?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the reasons for American prosperity at the end of World War II.
2.	Evaluate Arguments Discuss the different viewpoints on franchise businesses.
3.	Infer Why did so many veterans choose to enter or return to college after the war?
4.	Support Ideas with Examples What effects did technology have on the agricultural sector in the postwar years?
5.	Generate Explanations What effects did the baby boom have on the economy between 1940 and 1955?
Postwar America
466
7.5 Postwar Prosperity
The 1950s marked a period of changing national population distribution. Between 1940 and 1960, more than 40 million Americans moved to the suburbs, one of the largest mass migrations in history. Rural regions suffered the most dramatic decline in population, but people also came by the thousands from older industrial cities, seeking, as one father put it, a place where “a kid could grow up with grass stains on his pants.” During the same time period, many older industrial cities lost population.
Americans' yearning for a better life after World War II, coupled with innovations in home building, led to an explosion of growth in suburban areas
Interactive Flipped Video
Mass Culture in the 1950s
Suburban Migration
Causes and Effects of Suburban Growth People flocked to the suburbs in part because the nation suffered from a severe shortage of urban housing. During the depression and World War II, new housing construction had come to a near standstill. At war's end, as Americans married and formed families, they went in search of a place they could call their own.
Fortunately, at this time of peak demand, developers figured out how to build affordable housing in a hurry. William Levitt became a leader in mass producing suburban homes. Entire rows of houses in Levittown, a suburb of New York City on Long Island, were built using the same plan. This method enabled workers to build houses in weeks rather than in months. On the installment plan, buyers could pay $58 a month toward the cost of a home. Demand for the homes was so great that Levitt built two other Levittowns—one outside Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and the other in New Jersey. These houses were ideal foi young couples starting out because they were affordable and comfortable. Other developers adopted Levitt’s innovative techniques, and suburbs were soon springing up across the country.
14.A, 17.B, 17.C, 21.A, 24.B, 26.E, 27.B, 28.A
» Objectives
Examine the rise of the suburbs and the growth of the interstate highway system.
Explain the causes and effects of prosperity in the 1950s on consumers.
Discuss postwar changes in family life.
Describe changes in education in the postwar period.
Describe the rise of new forms of mass culture.
» Key Terms
consumerism median family
income nuclear family Benjamin Spock Interstate Highway
Act
California Master
Plan
Billy Graham
c
PEARSON i
Bl] realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
467
Suburban development benefited from investment by the government. State and federal governments constructed thousands of miles of highways that linked the suburbs to cities. New home buyers also benefited from the GI bill and the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), which provided low-interest loans. FHA-backed loans allowed home buyers to pay as little as 5 to 10 percent of the purchase price and to pay off their mortgages over 30 years.
Residents of new suburbs faced the challenge of establishing new towns with churches, synagogues, schools, and police and fire departments. Through these institutions, the suburbanites forged a sense of community. During the 1950s, the suburbs became increasingly self-contained. While suburban residents of earlier generations had depended on the city for entertainment and shopping, the postwar suburban dweller could find a vast array of goods and services in nearby shopping centers.
Interstates Support Migration and Prosperity
Free enterprise was supported by government policy to improve the quality of life in suburban communities. Committed to the idea of easing automobile travel, President Eisenhower authorized the first funding of the interstate system in 1953. Further legislation
» President Eisenhower authorized funding of the massive new interstate highway system. One outcome was that new suburbanites could more easily commute by car to jobs in major cities.
passed by Congress in 1956 resulted in the Interstate Highway Act, which authorized funds to build 41,000 miles of highway consisting of multilane expressways that would connect the nation’s major cities.
Such expressways, Eisenhower argued, would safely carry the nation’s growing automobile traffic, boost economic prosperity, and provide a valuable transportation network to strengthen national defense. This represented the biggest expenditure on public works in history, bigger by far than any project undertaken during the New Deal. In 1990, further recognition of President Eisenhower’s role in establishing the massive highway system led to a renaming of the highways. It became the Dwight D. Eisenhower System of Interstate and Defense Highways.
Besides easing commutes from suburbs to cities, highways boosted the travel and vacation industries. Vacationers drove to national parks, to beaches, and to new destinations, such as Las Vegas. With more money and more children, families sought leisure activity. Walt Disney met this demand by building an extraordinary amusement park in California. Disneyland excited the imagination with visions of the future, including make-believe rides in space.
Technological Innovations Lead to the “Car Culture” During the 1920s, automobile ownership had soared in the United States. With the explosion of suburban growth in the 1950s, Americans grew even more dependent upon their cars. The number of registered automobiles jumped from 26 million in 1945 to 60 million in 1960.
These new automobiles tended to have big engines and enormous horsepower. They came with the newest technology, such as power steering and brakes and automatic transmissions. Harley Earl of the Ford Motor Company captured the mood of the 1950s by designing cars with lots of chrome that reminded people of jet planes.
While some suburbanites rode the train or other forms of mass transportation, Americans increasingly depended upon their cars to commute to work. Suburbanites also needed their cars to shop at suburban shopping malls. Entrepreneurs opened fast-food restaurants and drive-in movie theaters, both of which catered to the car culture. While these businesses flourished, many older businesses, often located in older city neighborhoods, struggled to survive.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did suburban free enterprise benefit from the “car culture”?
©
Interactive Illustration
Postwar America
468	7.6 Mass Culture in the 1950s
|
I
Median Family Income, 1947 and 1970
Under	$3,000	$5,000	$7,000	$10,000
$3,000	to $4,999	to $6,999	to $9,999	and over
Income Level
SOURCE:
Historical Statistics of the United States l	------------------------ . ..	-	•	•
» Analyze Data How did the percentage change in the top two income brackets shown affect U.S. consumer culture?
Increased Consumption and Consumerism
For much of our history, Americans had been taught to save their money. “A penny saved is a penny earned,” advised Benjamin Franklin. However, as the U.S. economy began to boom in the postwar era, Americans were caught up in a wave of consumerism, buying as much as they could, much of it on credit. What accounted for this spending spree?
Free Enterprise System Improves Standards of
Living One reason Americans spent more was that they had more money to spend. During the 1950s, median family income, or average family income, rose from $3,319 to $5,417.
The average American family now had twice as much real income as the average family had during the prosperous years of the 1920s. Consumer-oriented companies found new and innovative ways to encourage buying on credit. For example, General Motors advertised its cars with the slogan “Buy Now, Pay Later.” The Diner’s Club introduced the first credit card.
Technological Innovations Drive New Conveniences Embracing the free-enterprise system, American businesses developed technological and Purchasing innovations that improved the standard
of living. Home appliances topped the list of the goods that Americans bought. Families purchased electric washing machines and dryers, refrigerators and ranges. These labor-saving appliances helped transform housework, lessening the physical demands of everything from washing clothes to preserving foods.
With money to spend, easy credit, and new goods to buy, shopping became a new pastime for Americans. Supermarkets, where customers could buy everything from milk to mops, appeared. Shopping centers sprouted all over suburbia.
One product that Americans bought in record numbers was a television. In 1946, manufacturers produced fewer than 6,000 TV sets. Seven years later, Americans purchased 7 million sets, and by the end of the decade, 90 percent of all households owned a television.
IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
What were some reasons why consumption skyrocketed in the postwar era? Families and Communities in the Fifties
American society had been shaken to its core by the mass mobilizations and disruption brought about by World War II. As Americans readjusted to life in
Postwar America 469	7.6 Mass Culture in the 1950s
peacetime, they embraced traditional ideals of family life and community.
The “Ideal” American Family During World War II, many women—including married women with children — had gone off to work in factories. In 1943, women made up 25 percent of the workers in the wartime auto industry. With the war’s end, however, most of the women who had entered the workforce returned to being homemakers. Now, a more traditional image of the family took hold, one in which women stayed home and men served as “breadwinners.” Women who wanted a career outside the home faced social pressures to rethink their decisions.
During the 1950s, the ideal family was one in which men worked and supported their families and women stayed home and reared their children. In the popular magazines of the postwar era, social scientists and other opinion makers described the nuclear family, or a household consisting of a mother and father and their children, as the backbone of American society. For the nuclear family to function smoothly, experts claimed, women had to accept their role as homemakers. Television shows and movies made similar assertions. For example, in the 1955 Hollywood movie The Tender Trap, actress Debbie Reynolds declared, “A woman isn’t a woman unless she’s been married and had children.”
» Women in the 1950s were encouraged to return to traditional family roles by staying home to raise families.
As the 1950s progressed, however, more women were willing to challenge the view that a woman could not have a career outside the home. By 1960, women held one third of the nation’s jobs. Approximately half of these women workers were married.
Baby Boom Increases Focus on Children More so than in the past, family life revolved around children. Not surprisingly, the best-selling book of the era was Dr.
Benjamin Spock’s Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care. Parents bought and read his book because they wanted expert advice on how to raise their children. Spock emphasized the importance of nurturing children, from their earliest days as infants through their teen years. Mothers, Spock suggested, should not worry about spoiling their children because children could not get too much comfort and love. Some criticized Spock for promoting what they called “a permissive culture.” Nevertheless, Spock’s book remained extremely popular for several decades.
Another sign of the degree to which family life revolved around children was the amount of money parents spent on their children. Some parents defended their spending by arguing that such spending guaranteed against the recurrence of another depression.
As baby boomers became teens, their impact on the economy and American culture became even more noticeable. While as children they received toys, such as Davy Crockett caps and Barbie dolls, as teens they purchased very expensive items. As LIFE magazine observed:
The time is past when a boy’s chief possession was his bike and a girl’s party wardrobe consisted of a fancy dress worn with a string of dime-store pearls. . . . Today’s teenagers surround themselves with a fantastic array of garish and often expensive baubles and amusements. They own 10 million phonographs, over a million TV sets, 13 million cameras.
-—UEE, August 31, 1959
Billy Graham Contributes to a Religious Revival
The 1950s also witnessed a revival of religion in the United States. Organized religious groups became more powerful and more houses of worship were built. Regular church attendance rose from about 50 million in
Postwar America
7.6 Mass Culture in the 1950s
1940 to about 80 million in 1958. The increased number of churches and synagogues in suburban communities across the country helped to strengthen community ties. The evangelist Billy Graham attracted millions to religious revivals that he held around the nation.
Roman Catholic bishop Fulton Sheen effectively used television to reach audiences estimated at 10 million a week. During the 1950s, Congress added the words “In God We Trust” to the dollar bill and “under God," to the Pledge of Allegiance. These additions were aimed at making clear the contrast between the centrality of religion in American society and the atheist basis of communist societies.
Specific Needs Lead to Medical Innovations
During the 1950s, American families benefited from numerous advances in medicine. By 1952, Dr. Jonas Salk was refining a vaccine against polio, the disease that had struck down Franklin Roosevelt and that, in 1952 alone, had crippled tens of thousands and killed 1,400, mostly children. By 1960, the widespread distribution of Salk’s new vaccine and an oral vaccine developed by Albert Sabin had nearly eliminated the disease.
At the same time, antibiotics, such as penicillin, came into widespread use.
The antibiotics helped control numerous infectious diseases caused by bacteria, such as whooping cough and tuberculosis. As a result of these medical advances and a better understanding of the importance of diet, children born after 1946 had a longer life expectancy than those born before 1946.
Hl CONNECT How did the focus on children and
teenagers help develop prosperity during the 1950s?
Educational Opportunities and Priorities
As the economy grew, so too did opportunities for Americans to attain higher education. A more educated workforce boosted economic productivity. In 1940, only about 15 percent of college-age Americans attended college. By the early 1960s, however, close to 40 percent did. The percentage of Americans who completed high school also rose sharply. "The astonishing growth of education in the late 1940s (and thereafter),” wrote historian James Patterson, "seemed yet another sign that the American Dream was well and alive.”
Defense Spending Shapes Education Priorities
New priorities meant that students had expanded opportunities. In Texas, for example, the state
» In 1954, Dr. Jonas Salk created a polio vaccine. The vaccine was ordered for all American children and was eventually used around the globe to virtually eradicate polio.
» A combination of more educational opportunities and a large baby-boom population contributed to full classrooms
across the nation.

Postwar America 471	7.6 Mass Culture in the 1950s
legislature passed laws guaranteeing young people the chance to attend public school through the twelfth grade. Large sums of money were needed to meet the education needs of the baby-boom generation. Most of the funding for education came from local and state governments, but after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1 in 1957, many Americans called for more federal funds for education.
In a mood of crisis, Congress quickly approved the National Defense Education Act. Its $1 billion program was aimed at producing more scientists and science teachers. The act authorized money for loans to high school and college graduates to continue their scientific education.
Education Becomes More Accessible The postwar era saw the stirrings of a movement to make education more accessible. Many states poured funds into their public universities, making it easier for ordinary Americans to attend college. California, for example, established a California Master Plan, which called for three tiers of higher education: research universities, state colleges, and community colleges. All of them were to be accessible to all of the state’s citizens. Other states also built or expanded their college systems.
On another front, in 1954, the Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka that segregated
Vour DINE/OUT carton
carries your reputation
» Television gained such popularity during the 1950s that many families got into the habit of watching their favorite shows even while eating dinner.
schools were unconstitutional. However, it would be years before many schools were actually integrated.
M explain How did American educational priorities change in the years following World War II?
Television Shapes
American Culture
In 1938, when television was still just a curiosity, E.
B.
White, author of Charlotte's Web, wrote that it “is going to be the test of the modern world. . . . We shall stand or fall by the television.” While White’s view may have been exaggerated, clearly television has had an enormous impact on American society. Between 1945 and 1960, Americans purchased television sets at a faster pace than they had bought either radios or cars during the 1920s. The popularity of this new technology threatened the movie industry because families stayed home to watch TV rather than go out to watch movies at the theater.
Although television attracted viewers of all ages, it had a special influence on children. Baby-boom children rushed home from school to watch the Howdy Doody Show or the Mickey Mouse Club. Children also watched hours of cartoons and shows featuring their favorite superheroes, such as the Lone Ranger. Westerns were especially popular during the 1950s and early 1960s.
Among the most memorable shows were sitcoms about families. Fifty million Americans tuned in each week to watch the I Love Lucy show, starring the comedic actress Lucille Ball. Other popular family sitcoms included Leave It to Beaver, The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet, and Father Knows Best.
These shows reflected and reinforced the ideal of the 1950s family. None of the family sitcoms had important African American characters. None of the major characters got divorced. Major real-life problems, such as mental illness, alcoholism, and personal depression, rarely, if ever, appeared. Writes David Halberstam, "No family problem was so great that it could not be cleared up within the allotted twenty-two minutes.”
Even before television emerged in the 1950s, a mass national culture had begun to develop in the United States. Nationally broadcast radio programs, Hollywood films, and other forms of popular culture had helped erode distinct regional and ethnic cultures. Television sped up and reinforced this process. Americans in every region of the country watched the same shows and bought the same goods they saw advertised.
Television changed political campaigns. During the 1952 presidential campaign, Americans could see the
Postwar America
472
7.6 Mass Culture in the 1950s
candidates in action. Usually, candidates with more money could buy more advertising time. The impact of television on elections continues today.
Q SUMMARIZE
How did television reflect and reinforce the ideal of the nuclear family in the postwar period?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss how the religious revival during the 1950s was linked to America’s response to communism.
2.	Support Ideas with Evidence Describe the role television played for children during the 1950s.
3.	Support a Point of View with Evidence “The astonishing growth of education in the late 1940s (and thereafter) seemed yet another sign that the American Dream was well and alive.” —historian James Patterson explains how the increase in the number of Americans finishing high school and attending college supports Patterson’s statement.
4.	Summarize Explain the connection between the prosperity of the 1950s and increased consumerism.
5.	Generate Explanations Explain the effect that the car culture had on businesses in older inner-city neighborhoods.
Postwar America 473 j
7.6 Mass Culture in the 1950s
» Objectives
Despite the prosperity of the 1950s, not all people benefited. Some felt let out of the era’s prosperity. Others, who had obtained more wealth, wondered whether all of the material things they acquired had actually led to a better life.
The discontents of the 1950s would manifest the first signs of the dissent that would dominate the 1960s.
Social Issues of the 1950s
f
Summarize the arguments made by critics who rejected the culture of the fifties.
Describe the causes and effects of urban and rural poverty.
Explain the problems that many minority groups faced in the postwar era.
» Key Terms
beatniks urban renewal termination policy rock-and-roll Elvis Presley
Critics and Rebels Emerge
The failure of society to provide equal opportunities to minorities was one source of discontent during the postwar era. Another was the belief that while material conditions were better in the 1950s, the quality of life had not improved. Many intellectuals and artists did not consider homes in the suburbs, shopping centers, and an unending supply of new gadgets as representing a better life.
Cultural Movements Against Conformity Many social critics complained about an emphasis on conformity. In a book called The Lonely Crowd, sociologists David Riesman and Nathan Glazer lamented that Americans had sacrificed their individualism in order to fit into the larger community. They also criticized the power of advertising to mold public tastes. The theme of alienation, or the feeling of being cut off from mainstream society, dominated a number of the most popular novels of the era. The bestseller The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit, by Sloan Wilson, followed a World War II veteran who could not find real
meaning in life after the war. Holden Caulfield, the main character in J. D. Salinger’s Catcher in the Rye, a favorite among many teens, mocked what Salinger saw as the phoniness of adult society
PEARSON 1
SI realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
474
Although not published until 1963, Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique described the plight of the suburban housewife during the 1950s. By the 1960s, Friedan would be at the forefront of a movement to change the social and political status of women in American society.
The Impact of the Beat Generation on American Society An additional critique of American society came from a small group of writers and artists called beatniks, or the beats. The beats refused to conform to accepted ways of dressing, thinking, and acting. Conformity, they insisted, stifled individualism. They displayed their dislike of American society by careless dress and colorful jargon.
In their poems, such as Allen Ginsberg’s “Howl,” and novels, such as Jack Kerouac’s On the Road, the beats lambasted what they saw as the crass materialism and conformity of the American middle class. Many Americans, in turn, were outraged by their behavior and believed that Beatnik values would have a negative impact on society.
Hollywood captured this rebellious spirit and youthful defiance in several influential films in the 1950s. In Rebel Without a Cause, James Dean portrayed a tormented teenager who rejects the values of the establishment while trying to fit in with his peers.
Actor Marlon Brando became a symbol of nonconformity for his role as the leader of an outlaw motorcycle gang in the film The Wild One. These characters—and ultimately, Dean and Brando themselves—became role models for disenchanted teenagers.
A
New Style of Music In the summer of 1951, a relatively unknown white disc jockey named Alan Freed began broadcasting what commonly had been called “race” music to listeners across the Midwest. Renaming the music rock-and-roll, Freed planted the seed for a cultural revolution that would blossom in the mid-1950s. Rock music originated in the rhythm and blues traditions of African Americans. As African Americans began to move north, they brought their musical traditions with them. Independent recording companies began recording rhythm and blues (R&B) music. Rock-and-roll borrowed heavily from rhythm and blues. As Chuck Berry, known as the pioneer of rock-and-roll, put it, “It used to be called boogie-woogie, it used to be called blues, used to be called rhythm and blues... . It’s called rock now.”
Live performances of rhythm and blues music had long been kept separate from whites by Jim Crow laws in the South or by more subtle forms of segregation

Warner
Bros’.
CHALLENGING DRAMA OF TODAY'S
JUVENILE
VIOLENCE!
The star sensation of 'East of Eden'
JAMES DEAN
■	IN
Lnaa
RHIMT
AQHK*
Cl N E maScoPE: WarnerColor
NATALIE WOOD •SAL
MiNEO «cwhcky » Some popular entertainment of the 1950s, including movies such as Rebel Without a Cause, questioned the values of the middle class.
» Chuck Berry was one of the most popular musicians of early rock-and-roll. This new musical genre blurred the racial divisions of 1950s society.
Postwar America 475	7.7 Social Issues of the 1950s
in the North. But now, through the radio, it began to attract a wider white audience in the postwar era. For example, a young Elvis Presley listened to a Memphis radio station that played African American gospel tunes. He began to integrate those tunes into the music he played. Meanwhile, in the early 1950s, Sam Phillips set up a recording studio in Memphis to record and play the music of some of Memphis’s best African American blues performers, such as B. B. King. One day Phillips heard Presley and almost immediately recognized that he had found the person he had been looking for.
Presley’s arrival set off the new rock craze. His first hit, “Heartbreak Hotel,” sold in the millions, and his success sparked popularity for rock music. Presley, along with African American performers such as Chuck Berry, Fats Domino, Little Richard, and Ray Charles, had profound influence on popular music throughout the world. Within a few years, this new music would inspire the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, British rock-and-roll groups whose music would captivate audiences worldwide.
Yet at first, not everyone liked Elvis or the new rock craze, which many saw as having a very negative impact on culture. When Ed Sullivan, the host of a famous TV variety show, invited Elvis to sing on his
» Rock-and-roll singer Elvis Presley became extremely popular with young people, but some Americans worried that his hip-shaking performances were subversive or immoral.
show, he directed cameramen to show Elvis only from the waist up, because many parents objected to Elvis's gyrating hips and tight pants. Ministers complained about the passions that rock music seemed to unleash among so many youngsters. Congress held hearings on the subversive nature of rock music. Nonetheless, it became a symbol of the emerging youth culture and of the growing influence of youth on mass culture.
H INFER
Why would Elvis Presley have achieved greater success than African American musicians in the 1950s?
Poverty in the Cities and Rural Areas
Behind the new household appliances, the spreading suburbs, the burgeoning shopping malls, and the ribbons of highways was a very different United States. It was a nation of urban slums, desperate rural poverty, and discrimination. People who were poor and dispossessed were well hidden.
In an influential 1962 book entitled The Othei America, Michael Harrington shocked many Americans by arguing that poverty was widespread in the United States. Harrington claimed that 50 million Americans, one fourth of the nation, lived in poverty. Despite American affluence, Harrington said, poverty plagued African Americans in the inner cities, rural whites in areas such as Appalachia, and Hispanics in migrant farm labor camps and urban barrios. Harrington argued that Americans could not afford to ignore the existence of the poor:
The poor live in a culture of poverty.
[They] get sick more than anyone else in the society. . . . Because they are sick more often and longer than anyone else, they lose wages and work and find it difficult to hold a steady job. And because of this, . . . their prospect is to move to an even lower level . . . toward even more suffering.
—Michael Hainngton, Hi< > 6 '!■>>'/	1962
Effects of Migration on Cities During the decades that followed World War II, African Americans and other nonwhite minorities moved in great numbers from rural areas to cities. Most migrated in search of better economic opportunities. In the same period, however,

Interactive Gallery
7.7 Social Issues of the 1950s
Postwar America
POVERTY ZZZZ OTHER AMERICA
"We suffered. We didn't have. We worked land that we thought we owned and after a while found out that we didn't own it. We could go to town and we had to wait until everybody else passed by and then we could walk on the street. It was a suffering life."
AMERICANS
POVERTY
w
THE SECOND GREAT MIGRATION
159,600
LEFT THE SOUTH
AVERAGE INCOME
» Analyze Data What push and pull factors might have affected Americans in the South during this period?
American cities were suffering a severe decline as middle-class white families moved to the suburbs.
The loss of the middle class hurt cities economically because the middle class paid a large share of the taxes. It hurt them politically, as well, because as the suburbs gained population, they also gained representation in state legislatures and the national government. This combination of declining economic and political power put a serious strain on cities, leading to a deterioration of services, such as garbage removal and street repair. In turn, as the conditions worsened and crime increased in what was now called the inner city, more of the middle class decided to move to the suburbs. Inner city refers to the older, central part of a city with crowded neighborhoods in which low-income, usually minority, groups live. Inner cities are often plagued with problems such as inadequate housing and schools, as well as crime.
Federal, state, and local governments tried to reverse the downward trend in American cities by developing urban renewal projects. With these projects, the government cleared large tracts of older housing and built freeways and developments that, it was hoped, would “revitalize” downtown areas. Unfortunately, the projects often backfired. Urban renewal drove people from their homes to make room for the new projects and highways. The poor were forced to seek housing rn neighborhoods that were already overcrowded and
overburdened. One resident of East Harlem, New York, who lost his home to an urban renewal project, observed:
Middle-class flight only worsened inner-city problems, such as inadequate services and schools.
Nobody cared what we wanted when they built this place. They threw our houses down and pushed us there and pushed our friends somewhere else. We don’t have a place around here to get a cup of coffee or a newspaper even, or borrow fifty cents. —America’s History Since 1865
The federal government tried to ease the shortage of affordable housing by constructing public housing. At the time, these housing projects seemed a godsend to those who lived there. Rent was cheap and the residents often enjoyed certain services, like hot running water, for the first time in their lives. Yet, since the public housing was often built in poor neighborhoods, the
Postwar America 477 Y7 Social Issues of the 1950s
projects led to an even greater concentration of poverty. This, in turn led to other problems, such as crime.
Migration from Rural Areas The plight of the rural poor was just as bad if not worse than that of the urban poor. Mississippi Delta sharecroppers, coal miners in Appalachia, and farmers in remote areas were left behind as others prospered, and often their economic situation got worse as time passed. A major transformation in farming was taking place. Corporations and large-farm owners came to dominate farm production. Many independent small-farm owners found it difficult to compete with the large farms and slipped into poverty.
Many farmers responded by leaving their rural communities behind, joining the waves of the poor who relocated to the city. Others remained behind, wondering if they would ever get to enjoy the benefits of the new economy.
RECALL
How did the federal government respond to the decline of American cities? Struggles of Minorities
During the postwar years, the battle for civil rights in the South began to gain headlines. Yet, in the same time period, African Americans and other minorities also fought for equality in the urban north and west.
Central to their struggles were efforts to overcome housing and employment discrimination.
Discrimination against Puerto Ricans Latinos from Puerto Rico and Mexico and Native Americans faced many of the same problems that African Americans encountered in the years following World War II. Puerto Rican migrants to New York City, for example, often found themselves clustered together in many of the poorest inner city neighborhoods with employment opportunities limited by both formal and informal forms of discrimination. As newcomers whose native language was not English, they enjoyed little political power. Thus, they received little help from city governments in getting better services, education, or an end to discriminatory practices.
Labor Conditions and Mexicans Both Mexicans and Mexican Americans faced a similar situation in the United States. During World War II, the U.S. government had established the bracero program as a means of addressing the shortage of agricultural workers. Braceros was a term for Mexican migrant farmworkers in the United States. The program gave temporary visas to Mexican immigrants. By 1964, 3 million Mexicans had worked in the United States under the program, most of them as farm laborers. Many were exploited and cheated by their employers. Mexican workers followed crops from state to state. Often, children worked alongside their parents. The migrants
Poverty Levels in the United States, 1955-2005
» Analyze Graphs This graph shows how poverty levels changed from 1955-2005. Overall, what was the poverty trend in this period?
Postwar America 478 s 7.7 Social Issues of the 1950s
had little power to oppose the exploitation, for if they complained about conditions, employers threatened to deport them back to Mexico. One U.S. Department of Labor official called the program “legalized slavery."
One champion of the rights of Mexican migrant workers, Ernesto Galarza, joined the effort to organize unions for Mexican farm laborers.
Americanization of Native Americans In 1953, the federal government enacted the termination policy, a major change in the rules governing Native Americans. The law sought to end tribal government and to relocate Native Americans to the nation’s cities. It also terminated federal responsibility for the health and welfare of Native Americans. Proponents of the policy argued that it would free American Indians to assimilate, or merge, into American society. While some Native Americans praised the intent of the program, most came to agree with Senator Mark Hatfield of Oregon who argued that it made things worse for them. “[Tjhe social and economic devastation which these policies have wrought upon many groups has been tremendous. . . . While these problems were already severe among Indian societies generally, they have become epidemic among terminated Indians."
B EXPLAIN
What were some of the problems that minorities had to overcome in the postwar era?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Make Generalizations Describe the impact beatniks had on society and culture in the 1950s.
2.	Support Ideas with Evidence Describe the struggles and discrimination minorities faced in post-World War II America.
3.	Draw Conclusions Explain the significance of Alan Freed renaming race music as rock-and-roll music.
4.	Support Ideas with Examples Describe the causes for the feelings of discontent that came to the surface during the 1950s.
5.	Identify Central Issues Describe the impact that the migration of middle-class families to suburbs had on the economic stability of the nation’s cities,
» Puerto Ricans, like previous waves of immigrants, formed communities in specific urban neighborhoods.
» The sheer difficulty of the work undertaken by migrant farmworkers, coupled with the low wages, led directly to activism and, eventually, positive changes.
Postwar America
7.7 Social Issues of the 1950s
TEKS ASSESSMENT
The Berlin Airlift - Divided Germany
0	75	150 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
KEY
Free
Communist Flight path Airfield used by allies
		0		6 mi
		/ 0	6 km
		East \ Berlin v	
y y	West “towBerlin 1 XA	Tempelhof		
			
EAST GERMANY —
1.	Describe Berlin Airlift Use a variety of primary and secondary valid sources to acquire information to create a written presentation describing U.S. responses to Soviet aggression after World War II, including the Berlin airlift. Use the map above, the topic lessons, and other primary and secondary sources to create
a written presentation about the Berlin airlift. In your presentation, use the map and text information to describe how Germany and Berlin were divided between West and East; why Stalin stopped all highway, railway, and waterway traffic from western Germany into West Berlin in June 1948; how the United States and Britain responded; and what the Berlin airlift demonstrated. 8.A, 29.A, 30.A
2.	Describe Truman Doctrine Describe U.S. responses to Soviet aggression after World War II, including the Truman Doctrine, and analyze information by finding the main idea in a quotation. Write a paragraph describing the events that led President Truman to issue the Truman Doctrine and analyzing the doctrine’s main idea. Describe why the governments of Greece and Turkey needed help and what Truman asked Congress to do. Then find the main idea in the quotation from the Truman Doctrine below. 8.A, 29.B
I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed
minorities or by outside pressures. I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way. I believe that our help should be primarily through economic and financial aid which is essential to economic stability and orderly political processes.
..—President Harry S. Truman, Address Before a Joint
Session of Congress, March 12, 1947
3.	Explain Korean War’s Relationship to Containment Explain the Korean War’s relationship to the containment policy. Write a paragraph explaining how the U.S. policy of containment played a role in drawing the United States into the Korean War. Explain the roles of the United States and the Soviet Union in the establishment of North and South Korea; North Korea’s act of aggression on June 25, 1950; and how World War II and the Cold War contributed to Truman’s decision to aid South Korea. 8.C
4.	Explain Military Innovations Explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in the military. Write a paragraph explaining what specific need led the United States to develop the hydrogen bomb. Be sure to explain the strategic need for a hydrogen bomb and when the first hydrogen bomb was tested, 27.B
-	—I
Postwar America ; 480 ?
5.	Explain 1957 As Turning Point Explain the significance of the 1957 Sputnik launch as a turning point, and describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the space race. Write a paragraph explaining why the Soviet satellite launches in 1957 were turning points for the United States and how they increased Gold War tensions. Describe the Sputnik launch and the launch of Laika a month later, explain why the launches shocked and worried Americans, and explain the effect of the launches on competition between the United States and the Soviet Union.
2.D, 8.B
6.	Describe Impact of Defense Spending on Education Priorities Describe the economic impact of defense spending on the education priorities from 1945 to 1990s. Write a paragraph explaining how the 1957 Soviet space launches affected educational spending in the United States. Describe how Congress responded and what the National Defense Education Act was intended to accomplish. 17.C
7.	Describe Reflections of U.S. History in
Films Describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of film. Write a paragraph describing how the hearings conducted by the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) affected the types of films that were produced. Describe what kinds of films were produced before the hearings, what kinds of films were produced after the hearings, and how blacklisting might have contributed to this shift. 25.A
8.	Describe Effect of HUAC Investigations Understand how historians’ interpretations of history may change over time by describing how the findings of the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) concerning Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were later confirmed by
the Venona Papers. Write a paragraph describing what led to Julius and Ethel Rosenberg being tried for espionage, the controversy over the couple’s conviction and execution, and the role of the Venona Papers in changing the historical view of the case. 8.B, 29.C
9.	Identify Bias Describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by McCarthyism by identifying bias in oral material and evaluating the validity of the source based on information about the author, including language, historical context, frame of reference, point of view, and corroboration with other sources. Write a paragraph identifying the bias in Joseph McCarthy’s speech below. In identifying the bias, be sure to consider
what you know about the historical context of the time period, including what you know about McCarthy and McCarthyism; what you know about the language McCarthy used, as well as his frame of reference and point of view; and what you know about McCarthy’s ability to provide evidence. 8.B, 29. E, 29.F
The reason why we find ourselves in a position of [weakness] is not because the enemy has sent men to invade our shores, but rather because of the traitorous actions of those who have had all the benefits that the wealthiest nation on earth has had to offer—the finest homes, the finest college educations, and the finest jobs in Government we can give, ... I have here in my hand a list of 205 [individuals] that were known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping the policy of the State Department.
l\AcC,u Ur m	lr qsn'1 VV< ' t
Virginia, February 9, 1950
10.	Evaluate Truman’s Leadership Evaluate the
international leadership of Harry Truman during World War II, including the U.S. relationship with its allies.
Write a paragraph evaluating how Harry Truman’s relationship with Stalin broke down at the Potsdam meeting. Consider how Truman viewed Stalin and the Soviet Union by the time he left Potsdam and why, what the Cold War was and why Potsdam set the stage for it, and how the political cartoon illustrates what was at stake. 7.B
z
(481
Postwar America
Median Family Income, 1947 and 1970
Income Level
SOURCE:
Historical Statistics of the United States 11.	Identify Increased Consumption Identify the effects of prosperity in the 1950s, such as increased consumption, and use correct social studies terminology to explain historical concepts. Write
a paragraph identifying the causes and effects of increased consumption during the 1950s. Consider what consumerism is; what median family income is, what the graph above shows about how it changed in the postwar years, and how this change fueled consumption; and what consumers bought in the postwar era. 17.B, 30.B
12.	Analyze Effects of Demographic Patterns Analyze the effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt, and identify the effects of this growth and redistribution of population on the physical environment. Write a paragraph analyzing the effects of the shift in population to the suburbs and Sunbelt. Consider the effects of the redistribution of population on the political power of the states and the effects of population growth and the redistribution of population on the environment of the suburbs and Sunbelt. 13.A,
14.	A
13.	Explain Impact of Space Technology Explain how space technology improves the quality of life. Write a paragraph describing how technologies developed for the space race also improved Americans’ quality of life. Be sure to give examples in your paragraph. 28.B
14.	Explain Economic Impact of Computers Understand the applications of technological and management innovations in the workplace by explaining the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as computers on the economic development of the United States. Write a paragraph explaining how the use of computers in the workplace contributed to economic growth in the postwar years. Explain when workers first began building and using computers
and how the government and private businesses and industry used computers. 27.A, 27.C
15.	Discuss Role of Entrepreneurs Discuss the roles of American entrepreneurs such as Sam Walton, Estee Lauder, and millions of small business entrepreneurs who achieved the American dream. Write a paragraph discussing how entrepreneurs during this time pursued the American dream. Consider the roles played by Ray Kroc, Sam Walton, and Estee Lauder. 18.A
16.	Analyze Innovations in Transportation Analyze how the application of scientific discoveries and technological innovations, including those in transportation, by the free enterprise system improve the standard of living
in the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing how the creation of an interstate highway system improved the standard of living in the United States. Consider how free enterprise and government policy worked together to improve the quality of life in suburban communities by easing automobile travel, what the Interstate Highway Act authorized, and what President Eisenhower argued were the benefits of the interstate highway system. 28.A
Postwar America 1482
17.	Evaluate Contributions of Billy Graham Evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the United States such as Billy Graham.
Write a paragraph evaluating the contributions of Billy Graham. Identify Billy Graham and his contribution to society. 24. B
18.	Discuss Historical Significance Discuss the meaning of the motto “In God We Trust” and its historical significance. Write a paragraph discussing the historical significance of the motto “In God We Trust.” Discuss where Congress added the motto and why. 26.E
19.	Analyze Effects of Brown v. Board of Education Analyze the effects of landmark U.S.
Supreme Court decisions, including Brown v. Board of Education. Write a paragraph analyzing the effects of Brown v. Board of Education. Identify when the Supreme Court heard the case, what the Court ruled, and the ruling’s effect. 21 .A
20.	Analyze Diffusion of American Culture Analyze the global diffusion of American culture through the entertainment industry via various media. Write a paragraph analyzing how television and other media created a mass national culture in the United States. Consider the effect of media on regional and ethnic cultures and how television sped the process. 25.D
21.	Explain Contributions to American Culture Explain how the contributions of people of various racial groups shape American culture. Write a paragraph explaining how African American music and performers contributed to the development of rock-and-roll and popular music. Consider the African American roots of rock-and-roll and the contributions of African American musicians to rock-and-roll. 26.C
22.	Identify Impact of American Popular
Culture Identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest of the world over time. Write a paragraph identifying the impact of American rock-and-roll on music around the world. Consider the influential American musicians and the groups in other countries they influenced. 25.C
23.	Discuss Americanization Movement Discuss the Americanization movement to assimilate American Indians into American culture, and identify a point of view on this social studies issue. Write a paragraph discussing the termination policy the federal government established in 1953 to govern Native Americans.
Describe the termination policy, discuss what the
proponents of the policy hoped it would do, and identify the point of view Senator Mark Hatfield expresses in the quotation below. 26.B, 29.G
[T]he social and economic devastation which these policies have wrought upon many-groups has been tremendous. . . . While these problems were already severe among Indian societies generally they have become epidemic among terminated Indians.
—Senator Mark Hatfield of Oregon
24.	Describe Impact of Rock and Roll Describe both the positive and negative impact on American society of significant examples of cultural movements in music, such as rock-and-roll. Write a paragraph describing the positive and negative impact of rock music. Describe the roots of rock music and explain how the popularity of rock brought this music to a wider audience, how the photograph below illustrates why some parents objected to Elvis Presley, and other concerns people had about the growing influence of rock. 25.B
25.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What is America’s role in the world? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
Postwar America 483
1 It was necessary to fly in supplies to some Europeans in need after World War II because—
A roadways and railroads were destroyed by the war, and they were impassable for many years
B it was the only way NATO forces could get aid past the Iron Curtain and into Soviet-controlled Poland, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria
C NATO
blockaded all roadways, railroads, and waterways into West Berlin to try to force the Soviet Union out of that sector of the city D the Soviet Union blockaded all roadways, railroads, and waterways into West Berlin to keep Allied aid from entering that sector of the city
2	The United States had to develop the hydrogen bomb because— F it was not as strong as the atomic bomb G the Soviet Union had developed an atomic bomb H the Soviet Union had launched the Sputnik satellite J the Soviets were about to develop a hydrogen bomb
Postwar America 484
Access additional practice questions
3	Why did filmmaking change after the House Un-American Activities Committee hearings began?
A
Filmmakers stopped making movies altogether for a few months. B
Filmmakers began making science-fiction films about alien invasions. C
Filmmakers were afraid to make movies about controversial social topics. D
Filmmakers had to show movies to the committee before they could be screened in theaters. The GI Bill of Rights
•	Veterans were granted a year of unemployment benefits.
•	Veterans were granted financial aid to attend college.
•	?
4	What statement below replaces the question mark to explain how the GI Bill of Rights increased prosperity in the United States after World War II?
F
Veterans were granted guaranteed factory jobs. G
Veterans were granted extended military pension plans. H
Veterans were granted family leave to help raise their children. J
Veterans were granted access to low-cost home and business loans. If you have trouble with... 				
JJuestion	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	7.1	7.3	7.4	7.5
teks	8	27.B	25.A	17.B
Postwar America
5	Why did Congress add the words “In God We Trust” to the dollar bill?
A
To distinguish a new dollar bill from an old one B
To attempt to persuade people to embrace religion C
To contrast the United States with atheist communist countries D
To explain that people should not hold the government responsible for economic troubles 6	What option below best replaces the question mark to explain the effects of migration into and out of urban areas in the graphic above?
F
Schools were built in inner cities. G
Rates of crime decreased in cities. H
More houses were needed in inner cities. J
More middle class people moved to the suburbs. Postwar America <486
nuucoo auumui icii (jidunuc c|ut?c>i.iui
7	Hitlers rise to the dictatorship of Germany set the stage for U.S. involvement in World War II because Hitler—
A fostered anti-Semitism and threatened the safety of German Jews
B acted to overthrow Germany’s democracy in favor of a socialist regime
C established a totalitarian state with the goal of expanding Germany’s power in Europe and beyond
D helped Germany rebound from the Great Depression, causing an economic imbalance throughout Europe
Battle of Midway
KEY
H
Extent of Japanese control, June 1942 |	] United States and
territories Japanese advance Allied advance Battle
0_________800 m i
0	800 km
Plate Carree Projection

8	Based on the extent of Japanese control in the Pacific as shown on this map, why was the Allied victory at the battle of Midway a World War II turning point?
F
The victory caused Japan to surrender Wake Island and the Mariana Islands. G
The victory allowed Admiral Nimitz to claim the Aleutian Islands for the Allies. H
The victory halted the Japanese advance across the Pacific and put Japan on the defensive. J
The victory forced Japan to attempt an attack on Hawaii from the Marshall Islands rather than from Midway Island. If you have trouble with...
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	7.6	7.7	6.1	6.4
[W	26.E	13.A	7.A	7.E
Postwar America
I
* TOPIC 8 TEKS Mastery
J i
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
In this Topic, you will learn about the Civil Rights Movement. You will also find lots of interesting ways to master the TEKS associated with this Topic.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
2.D, 9.A, 9.B, 9.C, 9.D, 9.E, 9.F, 9.G, 9.H, 9.1,11.F, 13.B, 14.B, 17.D, 21 .A, 21 .B, 21 .C, 23.A, 23.B, 24.B, 26.A, 28.B, 29.A, 29.D, 29.H, 30.A, 30.C, 31 .A
Connect
Connect with this Topic by watching a video about a fascinating person or situation related to this Topic. You can think about how this Topic connects to your own life. And you’ll encounter an intriguing Essential Question: How can we ensure equality for all?
i Begin your study by trying the i following:
LEARN
Watch My Story Video: j Minnijean Brown-Trickey, A Sojourn to the Past
Launch your Project:
• Create an Interactive Timeline on Civil Rights
LESSON OUTLINE
8.1: The Civil Rights Movement
Strengthens 9.A, 9.C, 9.F, 9.G, 9.1,
21 .A, 23.A, 23.B, 24.B
8.2: The Movement Surges Forward 9.B, 9.C, 9.E, 9.F, 9.G, 23.A
8.3: Successes and Setbacks 2.D, 9.A, 9.B, 9.D, 9.F, 9.G, 9.H, 17.D, 21 .A,
21.B, 23.A, 23.B, 26.A
8.4: Kennedy’s Reforms 2.D, 9.A 8.5: Reform Under Johnson 11.F, 17.D,
21 .A, 21.C, 24.B, 26.A
488
• Investigate
; The Lesson Outline lists all the : lessons you will investigate in : this Topic. As you read and ; interact with key content, the : story of the causes and events : of the Civil Rights Movement : will come to life. Read the : texts; try the interactivities.
; Investigate the fascinating ; story of Civil Rights and : reform in the 1960s.
o

VOTING
RIGHTS
I I
SOCIAL ( SEGREGATION '

j
V EDUCATIONAL
7 / OPPORTVW1T1ES\
FAMILY LIFE /
/ RKSTBICTtOMS \
I
WORKPLACE
SEGREGATION
1
: And keep working on your	>:> Digital interactivity from the online course
; Project to help build your i mastery of the Topic TEKS.
9 Synthesize
; You will get a chance to pull : together everything you have : learned by thinking again about the
•	Essential Question. How would you : answer the question now: How can
•	we ensure equality for all?
9 Demonstrate
i Now you will get to show what = you know. You will get a chance ; to complete the TEKS Review and i Assessment pages, answering : questions about every TEKS for : this Topic. Or you can write an i essay, take part in a discussion,
: or share your Project. No matter : which you do, it will be a real-world : demonstration of the things you now • understand about the Topic..........•
TEKS in Topic 8	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 8	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
2.D	16	21 .A	1,3,19
9.A	20	21.B	20
9.B	2	21 .C	19
9.C	9	23.A	7,9
9.D	12	23. B	7,10, 20
9.E	13	24.B	18
9.F	6	26.A	5
9.G	4,8	28.B	17
9.H	11	29.A	8
9.1	3	29.D	4
11.F	22	29. H	1
13.B	15	30.A	10
14.B	21	30.C	10
17.D	14	31 .A	10
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
How can we ensure equality for all? Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
Enduring Understandings
•	After World War II, a growing civil rights movement challenged discrimination in America.
•	Martin Luther King, Jr. led the civil rights movement, encouraging nonviolent protest.
•	The movement faced resistance in Congress and violence in the streets.
•	In the late 1960s, some African Americans grew militant, as frustration erupted into urban violence.
•	Under the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, laws were enacted to protect voting rights and civil rights.
•	President Johnson’s “Great Society” programs tried to improve the quality of life in America.
PEARSON 1	®
realize nbc learn
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. during the March on I Washington in 1963.
’ /•

Rosa Parks sparked a movement that resulted in a Supreme Court ruling stating that segregation on public bus systems was illegal. A year later, she rode at the front of the bus.
Interactive Flipped Video I
U?)
KJ/
The postwar period brought prosperity to many, but most African Americans were still treated as second-class citizens. The civil rights movement, a broad and diverse effort to attain racial equality, compelled the nation to live up to its ideal that all are created equal. The movement also demonstrated that ordinary men and women could perform extraordinary acts of courage and sacrifice to achieve social justice, a lesson that continues to inspire people around the world today. 9.A, 9.C, 9.F, 9.G, 9.1, 21.A, 23.A, 23.B, 24.B
» Objectives
Describe efforts to end segregation in the 1940s and 1950s.
Explain the importance of the landmark case of Brown v. Board of Education.
Describe the controversy over school desegregation in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Discuss the Montgomery bus boycott and its impact.
The Civil Rights
Movement
Strengthens
Segregation Limits Equality
African Americans had a long history of fighting for their rights. Ate World War II, the struggle intensified, as African Americans grew increasingly dissatisfied with their second-class status.
» Key Terms
de jure segregation de facto segregation Thurgood Marshall Earl Warren Civil Rights Act of
1957
Martin Luther King,
Jr.
Separate but Not Equal In the South, Jim Crow laws enforced strict separation of the races. Segregation that is imposed by law is known as de jure segregation. In 1896, in Plessy v. Ferguson, the Supreme Court had ruled that such segregation was constitutional as long as the facilities for blacks and whites were "separate but equal.” But this was seldom the case. The facilities for African Americans were rarely, if ever, equal.
Rosa Parks Orval Faubus
In the South and elsewhere, segregation extended to most areas of public life. Officials enforced segregation of schools, hospitals,
Discrimination Throughout the Country In the
North, too, African Americans faced segregation and discrimination. Even where there were no explicit laws, de facto segregation, or segregation by unwritten custom or tradition, was a fact of life. African Americans in the North were denied housing in many neighborhoods. They faced discrimination in employment and often could get only low-paying jobs.
Jim Crow laws and more subtle forms of discrimination had a widespread and severe impact on African Americans. Black Americans occupied the bottom rungs of the economic ladder. Compared to white Americans, they had significantly higher rates of poverty and illiteracy, as well as lower rates of homeownership and life expectancy. Although African Americans living in the North could vote, most who lived in the South could not. Very few African Americans held public office.
In the West and Southwest, Asian Americans and Mexican Americans, too, faced de facto segregation and, in some cases, legal restrictions.
Civil Rights Advance Slowly in the 1940s In many ways, World War II set the stage for the rise of the modern civil rights movement. President Roosevelt banned discrimination in defense industries in 1941. Gunnar Myrdal’s publication in 1944 of An American Dilemma brought the issue of American prejudice to the forefront of public consciousness. Lastly, after risking their lives defending freedom abroad, African Americans were unwilling to accept discrimination at home.
In the 1940s, new organizations arose to try to bring an end to racial injustice and expand participation in the democratic process. James Farmer and several others founded the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) with the goal of ending discriminatory policies and improving relations between races. Its members were deeply influenced by the teachings of Henry David Thoreau and Mohandas Gandhi about the use of nonviolent protest to confront injustice. They became convinced that African Americans could apply similar nonviolent methods to gain civil rights. CORE organized nonviolent protests such as sit-ins against segregation in public facilities in Chicago, Detroit, Denver, and other northern cities.
Success was limited, but one highly visible break in the wall of segregation did take place in 1947. Jackie Robinson joined the Brooklyn Dodgers, becoming the first African American to play major league baseball. Robinson braved death threats and rough treatment, but throughout his career he won the hearts of millions and paved the way for integration of other sports.
» Segregated drinking fountains in the South were a stark reminder that the ideals of equality described in the Declaration of Independence had yet to be attained.
» On February 26, 1946, racial tensions led to mass arrests of African Americans in Columbia, Tennessee. A young attorney named Thurgood Marshall helped with their legal defense.
Interactive Gallery
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	493	8.1 The Civil Rights Movement Strengthens
Nevertheless, African Americans continued to face discrimination and felt that racial equality was long overdue. However, the vast majority of white Americans took the opposite view. Racial violence erupted in the South, sometimes against African American veterans who were just trying to register to vote.
In the wake of this violence, President Truman appointed a Committee on Civil Rights to investigate race relations. In its report, the committee recommended a number of measures to ensure equal opportunity for all Americans, including an antilynching law and federal protection of voting rights. Unfortunately, Truman was unable to win congressional support for these initiatives. However, in 1948, he did use his executive power to order the desegregation of the military. Over time, the U.S. armed forces would become one of the most integrated institutions in the United States.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What tactics did some civil rights organizations use during the 1940s?
A
Landmark Supreme Court Decision Although the civil rights movement had made some gains in the 1940s, it stalled in the early 1950s. One of its greatest disappointments was the NAACP’s
failure, after decades of lobbying Congress, to make the lynching of African Americans a federal crime. Feeling that the executive and legislative branches of government were unwilling to promote additional reforms, the NAACP decided to turn to litigation in the federal courts to attain its political goals.
The NAACP Turns to Litigation in the Courts By the
end of World War II, the NAACP had become the largest and most powerful political civil rights organization in the nation. It attracted a wide array of individuals, both black and white, including a number of lawyers who used litigation as a means to expand civil rights across the country. In the 1940s, a team of NAACP attorneys pursued a legal strategy to challenge the legality of segregation in the courts. Thurgood Marshall, an African American lawyer from Baltimore, Maryland, headed the legal team that mounted this challenge.
In 1950, the NAACP won a number of key court cases. In Sweatt v. Painter, the Supreme Court ruled that the state of Texas had violated the Fourteenth Amendment by establishing a separate, but unequal, all-black law school. Similarly, in the McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents, the Court ruled that the state of Oklahoma had violated George McLaurin’s constitutional rights. Even though McLaurin had been admitted to the graduate school of the University of Oklahoma, he was denied equal access to the library, dining hall, and classrooms. According to the Supreme
Segregation in Public Schools, 1954
KEY
W
Segregation required M Segregation allowed BB Segregation prohibited | ~| No specific legislation »In 1954, each state had its own laws governing segregation in public schools. Analyze Maps What states required segregation in 1954?

Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s | 494 1 8.1 The Civil Rights Movement Strengthens
EFFECTS OF
BROWN v. BOARD OF EDUCATION
AFRICAN-AMERICANS AFRICAN-AMERICAN AFRICAN-AMERICAN
DROPOUT RATES INCOME
PERCENTAGE OF
YEAR-OLDS J PER CAPITA INCOME
(2012 DOLLARS) LEAVING HIGH SCHOOL | '«COLLEGE PERCENTAGE COMPLETING FOUR OR MORE YEARS OF COLLEGE
BEFORE GRADUATION
AFRICAN-AMERICANS
HIGH SCHOOL
PERCENTAGE COMPLETING FOUR OR MORE YEARS OF HIGH SCHOOL
1960 | 3.1
1970 |-
■
t 1980 |
1990 |
2000 H 16.5%
.1%
4.4%
8.4%
11.3%
2010 j
19.8%
j 1967 |
’ 1977 | 1987 I 1997 | 2007 I
H 28.6% | 19.8%
| 14.1% i 13.4%
8.4%
1967 | 1972 J 1980 | 1990 |
2000 I
$8,427
$9,863
$12,745
$15,356
$19,728
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
[ED: Please note upper/lowercase "Source:" is the correct format for infographics]
»In what ways are these graphs related? Analyze Data Cite evidence to support the claim that school desegregation improved the lives of minorities living in the United States.
Court, a truly equal education involved more than simply admitting African Americans to previously all-white universities.
The Supreme Court Issues a Broad Decision Not
long after it won these cases, the NAACP mounted a much broader challenge to segregated public education at all grade levels. This challenge became known as Brown v. Board of Education. In the Sweatt and McLaurin cases, the NAACP asserted that Texas and Oklahoma had failed to provide equal educational experiences. In the Brown case, however, the NAACP challenged the “separate but equal” principle itself, which had been established in the 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson case.
The Supreme Court agreed with the NAACP’s argument that segregated public education violated the U.S. Constitution. All nine of the Court’s Justices supported the Brown decision, which was written by newly appointed Chief Justice Earl Warren. “Does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race . . . deprive the children of the minority group equal education opportunities?” Warren asked in his decision. “We believe that it does.” The Chief Justice and the Court declared, “in the field of public education the doctrine of ‘separate but equal’ has no place.”
In the same month as the Brown decision, the Supreme Court decided another civil rights case, this time involving Mexican Americans. In Hernandez v. Texas, the Court ended the exclusion of Mexican Americans from trial juries. The Hernandez decision was the first Supreme Court ruling against discrimination targeting a group other than African Americans.
The Public Response The Brown decision was one of the most significant and controversial in American history. Because public education touched so many Americans, it had a much greater impact than cases involving only professional and graduate schools. Moreover, by overturning the principle of "separate but equal,” the Court lent its support to the views of many civil rights advocates that all forms of segregation are wrong.
In a separate ruling, known as Brown II, the Court called for the implementation of its decision “with all deliberate speed” across the nation. However, most southerners had no intention of desegregating their schools without a fight. In 1956, about 100 southern members of Congress endorsed “The Southern Manifesto.” They pledged to oppose the Brown ruling through all “lawful means,” on the grounds that the Court had misinterpreted the Constitution.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	495	8.1 The Civil Rights Movement Strengthens
More ominously, the Ku Klux Kian staged a revival. Many prominent white southerners and businessmen organized “White Citizens Councils” that declared that the South would not be integrated. The Citizens Councils imposed economic and political pressure against those who favored compliance with the Supreme Court’s decision.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did earlier legal decisions differ from Brown v. Board of Education?
Conflict Between Federal and State Power
Historically, education had been a state matter. States and local school boards ran the schools, and the federal government had little involvement. Local and state officials resisted the Brown decision’s order to desegregate, and clashes with the federal government resulted. The most famous battle took place in 1957 in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Soldiers Arrive at a High School in Little Rock
The Little Rock school board had established a plan to gradually desegregate its schools, beginning with
» Elizabeth Eckford, one of nine students chosen to integrate Little Rock High School in Little Rock, Arkansas, walked past an angry crowd as officers from the National Guard stood by.
Central High School. Nine young African American students volunteered to enroll. But Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus announced his opposition to integration and called out the Arkansas state National Guard. When the nine students arrived at Central High, the soldiers blocked their way.
One of the nine, Elizabeth Eckford, has described the scene. An angry white mob began to approach her, with some screaming, “Lynch her! Lynch her!” Eckford sought out a friendly face, someone who might help. "I looked into the face of an old woman and it seemed a kind face,” she recalled, “but when I looked at her again she spat on me.” Fortunately, another white woman whisked Eckford away on a public bus before the mob could have its way. None of the Little Rock Nine gained entrance to the school that day.
Up until the Little Rock crisis, President Eisenhower had provided little leadership on the civil rights front. Following the Brown decision, he did not urge the nation to rapidly desegregate its schools. Privately, he expressed his misgivings about the ruling. But when Governor Faubus resisted the will of the federal courts, Eisenhower realized he had to act. He sent federal troops to Little Rock to protect the students and to enforce the Court’s decision. Eisenhower explained this action in a nationally televised address:
It is important that the reasons for my action be understood by all our citizens. ... A foundation of our American way of life is our national respect for law. . . .
If resistance to the federal court orders ceases at once, the further presence of federal troops will be unnecessary and the City of Little Rock will return to its normal habits of peace and order and a blot upon the fair name and high honor of our nation in the world will be removed.
—President Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Address on Little
Rock,” 1957
For the entire school year, federal troops stayed in Little Rock, escorting the nine students to and from Central High and guarding them on the school grounds. On the last day of class, Ernest Green, the one senior of the nine, became the first African American to graduate from Central High School. The showdown demonstrated that the President would not tolerate
f496l	8.1 The Civil Rights Movement Strengthens
%
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
open defiance of the law. Still, most southern states found ways to resist full compliance with the Court’s decision. Many years would pass before black and white children went to school together.
Political Lobbying Leads to a New Civil Rights
Act While organizations like CORE continued to nonviolently protest discrimination in public places in the North, the political lobbying efforts of civil rights forces yielded a small victory when Congress voted to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1957. President Eisenhower signed the bill into law, which established the United States Civil Rights Commission and gave it the power to investigate violations of civil rights. It empowered the U.S. Attorney General to bring lawsuits to address civil rights violations. The law also gave the Attorney General greater power to protect the voting rights of African Americans. But overall, it lacked teeth. CORE leader Bayard Rustin noted, however, that it had symbolic importance as the first civil rights law passed by Congress since Reconstruction.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
How did the crisis in Little Rock spark a conflict between state and federal government?
[# ELPS
ELPS SPEAKING 3.B.2
Read the section titled Soldiers Arrive at a High School in Little Rock, and retell the story aloud with a partner. Use the section’s two photographs to help you add detail and emotion.
The Montgomery Bus
Boycott
In addition to legal efforts during this era, some civil rights activists took direct action to end segregation. On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks, an African American seamstress, did just that. She boarded a bus in Montgomery, Alabama, and sat down in an empty seat. Several stops later, the bus driver requested that she give up her seat to a white passenger. Montgomery law required African American passengers to give up their seats to whites. After Rosa Parks refused to obey the law, she was arrested. "The [policemen] asked if the driver had asked me to stand up, and I said yes, and they wanted to know why I didn’t,” Parks later recalled. “I told them I didn’t think I should have to stand up. After I had paid my fare and occupied a seat, I didn’t think I should have to give it up.”
Rosa Parks’s Act Transforms a Movement Parks s action set in motion a chain of events that transformed the civil rights movement. Over the next few days, a core of civil rights activists in Montgomery organized
» For years, public buses in many states segregated riders along racial lines.
a one-day bus boycott. They called upon the black community to refuse to ride the buses as a way to express their opposition to Parks’s arrest, in particular, and segregation, in general. Meanwhile, during the Montgomery bus boycott, the NAACP began preparing a legal challenge.
For a long while, many people thought that Parks had refused to give up her seat simply because she was tired after a long day of work. In reality, Parks had a record of fighting for civil rights. She had been active in the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP for years. This does not mean that she set out to get arrested and spark a movement. However, her choice to not give up her seat was an effective form of nonviolent protest and an influential moment in the civil rights movement’s struggle for the equality of political rights.
Martin Luther King Calls for Nonviolent Protest
On the evening following the boycott, the Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA), the organization that sponsored the bus boycott, held a meeting. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., a Baptist minister, addressed the group. Though he had little time to prepare, King delivered an inspirational speech that brought the audience to its feet. Noting that African Americans were tired of segregation and oppression, King declared that there was no alternative but to protest.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
497
8.1 The Civil Rights Movement Strengthens
» Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., became known for his powerful speeches calling for desegregation and racial equality.
ended its boycott, and African Americans began to ride the buses again.
Ministers Inspire the Movement The bus boycott represented a tremendous victory for African Americans in Montgomery and across the nation. The boycott revealed the power that African Americans could have if they joined together. The protest also elevated King and his philosophy of nonviolence into a prominent position within the civil rights movement.
After the boycott, King and another Montgomery minister, Ralph Abernathy, established the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) to continue the struggle for civil rights. Made up largely of southern African American ministers, the SCLC advocated nonviolent resistance to fight injustice. The SCLC went on to organize a series of protests, including a Prayer Pilgrimage in Washington, D.C., in 1957, which helped convince Congress to pass civil rights legislation. Still, discrimination and segregation remained widespread.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did the Montgomery Improvement Association ask African Americans to boycott Montgomery’s bus system?
§1 Interactive Gallery
However, he called for the protest to be nonviolent. He urged them not to become resentful, which would lead to hatred toward whites, but rather to follow Christian doctrine and love them.
After King spoke, the MIA vowed to continue the boycott and chose King as its leader. For more than a year, African Americans in Montgomery maintained their boycott of the buses. They did so despite economic pressures from their employers and threats of violence by the Ku Klux Kian. King himself survived a bombing of his house. Fortunately, his wife and baby daughter were not home at the time.
Finally, in 1956, the Supreme Court ruled that the Montgomery city law that segregated buses was unconstitutional. After more than a year, the MIA
1.
ASSESSMENT
Generate Explanations Explain how events during World War II set the stage for the rise of the modern civil rights movement.
Compare Points of View Explain how President Eisenhower’s position on civil rights changed after Governor Orval Faubus brought the Arkansas National Guard to Little Rock.
Summarize the effect that Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. had on the Montgomery bus boycott.
Contrast Explain how the Brown v. Board of Education case differed from previous Supreme Court cases.
Distinguish between de jure segregation and de facto segregation.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	498
8.1 The Civil Rights Movement Strengthens
Despite the Brown decision and other civil rights victories, little changed in the everyday lives of most African Americans. Nonetheless, activists continued to struggle for civil rights. In the early 1960s, the movement experienced a groundswell of support. This surge produced a dramatic shift in race relations, led to the passage of landmark civil rights legislation in 1964, and set the stage for future reforms.
Martin Luther King, Jr. called on the nation to end segregation in his famous “I Have a Dream” speech delivered from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., in 1963.
Interactive Flipped Video
The Movement
Surges Forward
Student Activists Promote Civil Rights
After the Brown decision, many black youths expected that their schools would integrate quickly and that other racial reforms would follow. Change was not quick to come, however. Disappointed by the lack of progress, young African Americans began to challenge segregation with new vigor and determination.
Nonviolent Protests Challenge Segregation On February 1,1960, four African American college students ordered doughnuts and coffee at a Woolworth's lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina. As they expected, the white waitress refused to serve them. In the South, nearly all restaurants that served whites refused to serve blacks. To protest this discrimination, the four students sat down on the stools at the lunch counter, where they stayed until closing time.
Word of the Greensboro sit-in spread rapidly, sparking a wave of similar protests across the nation. In Nashville, Tennessee, for instance, students led by the Reverend James Lawson staged sit-ins nnd, later, marches to protest racial inequality.
9.B, 9.C, 9.E, 9.F, 9.G, 23.A
» Objectives
Describe the sit-ins, freedom ride, and the actions of James Meredith in the early 1960s.
Explain how the protests at Birmingham and the March on Washington were linked to the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Describe how the Civil Rights Act of 1964 addressed minority rights in the United States.
» Key Terms
sit-in
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
“freedom ride”
James Meredith Medgar Evers George Wallace March on
Washington
filibuster
Civil Rights Act of 1964
c
PEARSON 1
Bi 1 realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
499
Elsewhere, protesters held “wade-ins” at public beaches and “read-ins” at public libraries, refusing to leave beaches or libraries reserved for whites only. African Americans boycotted buses. Groups of demonstrators knelt in prayer. Other activists carried picket signs in demonstrations and wrote letters to newspapers and government officials to express their support of the protests in the South.
Protestors in the civil rights movement used many different nonviolent methods to make it clear that they were determined to expand political rights and economic opportunities.
Political Organizations Encourage Nonviolent Protest The sit-ins marked the birth of a new militancy, especially among young African Americans. To build on the momentum they had gained, about 175 students from 30 states met at Shaw University, in Raleigh, North Carolina. There, on Easter weekend in 1960, they listened to James Lawson deliver an inspiring address:
We who are demonstrators are trying to raise what we call the ‘moral issue.’ That is, we are pointing to the viciousness of racial segregation and prejudice and calling it evil or sin. . . .
» In 1960, students at the University of Michigan joined the call for civil rights and equality for all Americans.
[We are also] asserting, ‘get moving.’
The pace of change is too slow. At this rate it will be another generation before the major forms of segregation disappear. . . . Most of us will be grandparents before we can live normal human lives.
—James Lawson, “From a Lunch Counter Stool," 1960
Ella Baker, a veteran of the struggle for civil rights, had organized the meeting. The granddaughter of enslaved African Americans, Baker had been active in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). She helped the young activists to establish a new civil rights organization, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, or SNCC. Its goal was to create a grass-roots movement that involved all classes of African Americans in the struggle to defeat white racism and to obtain equality.
K2 RECALL
How did students and other young people energize the civil rights movement in the 1960s?
Freedom Rides Begin Throughout the South
The next battleground was interstate transportation. Political activists targeted this industry because they knew that travel between states was subject to federal rather than state regulation. In fact, the Supreme Court had recently ruled in Boyntonv.Virginia (1960) that segregation on interstate buses and in waiting rooms was illegal. Civil rights activists were now going to test the federal government’s willingness to enforce the law.
Freedom Riders Risk Physical Harm In the spring of 1961, CORE staged a “freedom ride” through the Deep South. Riders set off in two separate buses from Washington, D.C., bound for New Orleans. En route, they defied segregationist codes. African Americans sat in the front of the bus and used “white” restrooms in bus stations.
In Alabama, the trip took a dangerous turn. After departing from Anniston, segregationists firebombed one of the buses. When the second bus arrived in Birmingham, a white mob attacked the riders.
The President Intervenes Photographs of the bombed-out bus and the injured riders appeared in newspapers and on television screens around the
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s > 500 f 8.2 The Movement Surges Forward
world, prodding President John F. Kennedy to intervene. Kennedy had intervened before. The previous year, when he was running for the presidency, Kennedy had helped to win Martin Luther King’s release from a Georgia prison after state officials had sentenced King to 6 months in jail for a traffic violation. King was freed and Kennedy, with the help of African American voters, went on to win the presidential election of 1960.
Kennedy now took action to stem the violence against the freedom riders. His administration worked out a deal with Mississippi’s leaders. Police and state troopers agreed to protect the riders. The Federal Transportation Commission also issued an order mandating the desegregation of interstate transportation.
In exchange, the Kennedy administration agreed not to intervene when Mississippi authorities arrested the activists and sentenced them to jail for disturbing the peace.
The freedom riders achieved their immediate goal. They compelled a reluctant federal government to act. By refusing to allow violent mobs to deter them, the riders also displayed that intimidation would not defeat the movement.
B DESCRIBE
What did the freedom rides accomplish? L^- Public Institutions Open Doors to Minorities
In the fall of 1962 and spring of 1963, protests against racial discrimination intensified. The protesters put pressure on the federal government to help break down legal, or de jure, segregation.
Litigation Against the University of Mississippi
One struggle that gained international attention involved James Meredith. Meredith was an Air Force veteran who sought to enroll at the all-white University of Mississippi, known as “Ole Miss.” He was aided by the NAACP, a political organization that had been using litigation to challenge the legality of segregation in the courts. In September 1962, with the support of the NAACP, Meredith won a federal court case that ordered the university to desegregate. Civil rights activist Medgar Evers was instrumental in this effort.
Mississippi governor Ross Barnett was determined to prevent the integration of the university. The issue became a standoff between the governor and the federal government.
On September 30, rumors of Meredith’s arrival on the university’s campus began to spread. Federal marshals had been assigned to protect him. Over
» Senator John F. Kennedy campaigns in 1960. Martin Luther King’s endorsement of Kennedy helped Kennedy win the African American vote.
Interactive Timeline
» James Meredith, shown here with a federal escort, became the first African American student to integrate the University of Mississippi after winning a federal case guaranteeing his right to do so in 1962.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	501	8.2 The Movement Surges Forward
the course of the night, a full-scale riot erupted, with federal marshals battling white protesters intent on scaring Meredith away.
As the rioting took place, President Kennedy addressed the nation on television. “Americans are free ... to disagree with the law but not to disobey it,” he declared. “For any government of laws . . . , no man, however prominent and powerful ... is entitled to defy a court of law.” The rioting went on throughout the night. By the time it ended, 160 people had been injured and 2 men had been killed.
The following morning, Meredith registered as a student and took his first class. He graduated from Ole Miss in 1963 and went on to obtain his law degree from Columbia University in New York City. Tragically, Medgar Evers was assassinated, on his front doorstep, in June 1963. Three years later, Meredith was shot and nearly killed. Both shootings stand as historical reminders of the high costs of fighting racial discrimination.
A
Letter from Birmingham Jail In the spring of 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr., and the SCLC targeted Birmingham, Alabama, for a major civil rights campaign. They chose Birmingham because of its reputation as the most segregated city in the South. » Scenes of young protesters being attacked with high-pressure hoses and dogs shocked Americans, prompting a cry for federal action.
The campaign began nonviolently at first with protest marches and sit-ins. City officials got a court order prohibiting the demonstrations. On Good Friday, April 12,1963, King decided to violate the order and join the demonstration personally, even though he knew it would lead to his arrest.
From his jail cell, King wrote a letter explaining why he and other civil rights activists were tired of waiting for reform: “For years now I have heard the word ‘wait!’ It rings in the ear of every Negro with piercing familiarity. This ‘Wait!’ has almost always meant ‘Never.’"
One of the most poignant passages of the letter describes King's concern about the impact of discrimination on his children:
Perhaps it is easy for those who have never felt the stinging darts of segregation to say, ‘Wait.’ But . . . when you suddenly find your tongue twisted and your speech stammering as you seek to explain to your six-year-old daughter why she can’t go to the public amusement park that has just been advertised on television, and see tears welling up in her eyes when she is told that Funtown is closed to colored children. . . . Then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait.
—Martin Luther King, Jr., “Letter from Birmingham
Jail,” 1963
The SCLC gave King’s letter to the press, and it soon appeared in newspapers across the nation. The letter provided Americans with a clear explanation of King’s philosophy of nonviolence and his use of direct action. Its powerful message and eloquence also stirred many white moderates to support the civil rights movement.
After King was released from jail, the SCLC increased the frequency of the demonstrations. For the first time, schoolchildren joined the “freedom marches.” Finally, Birmingham’s Public Safety Commissioner, T. Eugene “Bull” Connor, would not tolerate the demonstrations any longer. He used police dogs and fire hoses on the protesters. Many Americans were shocked by photographs and news coverage of nonviolent protesters set upon by dogs and overwhelmed by the powerful jets of water from fire hoses. They sent telegrams and letters by the thousands to the White House, calling on the President to act.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s > 502 ? 8.2 The Movement Surges Forward
Kennedy Addresses Minority Rights In Alabama, Governor George Wallace made it clear where he stood on civil rights: “I say segregation now! Segregation tomorrow! Segregation forever!” In response to the impending entrance of two African American students, Vivian Malone and James Hood, to the University of Alabama, Wallace vowed to stand “in the schoolhouse door” and personally block any attempt to integrate Alabama schools. Because of the events unfolding at the University of Alabama, President Kennedy became convinced that he had to take a more active role in promoting civil rights.
On June 11,1963, in order to facilitate the registration of Malone and Hood, Kennedy ordered the secretary of defense to call up the Alabama National Guard. Faced with the authority of the federal government, Governor George Wallace backed down.
He stepped aside and allowed the two students to enter the University of Alabama—only after proclaiming for the assembled media cameras the rights of states to control their own schools. Later, reflecting on the showdown with Wallace, Vivian Moore stated, “I didn’t feel I should sneak in. I didn’t feel I should go around the back door. If [Wallace] were standing in the door, I had every right to face him and go to school.”
That evening, as a result of the events in Alabama, President Kennedy delivered a moving televised address. Calling civil rights a “moral issue,” he declared that the nation had an obligation to “fulfill its promise” of giving all Americans “equal rights and equal opportunities.” President Kennedy sent to Congress a proposal for sweeping civil rights legislation. His brother, Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, led the charge for passage of the bill.
0 How did James Meredith and Martin Luther King,
Jr. prompt President Kennedy to promote civil rights?
Thousands Gather in the Nation’s Capital
To put pressure on Congress to pass the new civil rights bill and to improve economic opportunities for blacks, supporters made plans for a massive nonviolent protest in Washington, D.C. The event brought together the major political organizations promoting civil rights— including the NAACP, SCLC, and SNCC—as well as labor unions and religious groups.
The March on Washington took place on August 28, 1963. Organizers had hoped for 100,000 demonstrators. More than double that number showed UP, having made the journey to the capital from around
» Alabama Governor George Wallace, a staunch advocate of segregationist policies, attempted to block the integration of the University of Alabama in 1963.
the country. They were a diverse group—young and old and from many different classes and religious backgrounds. More than a quarter of the marchers were white.
Before the march, there had been some concern about maintaining order at such a huge demonstration. Yet despite the massive numbers, the day was peaceful and even festive. Popular celebrities and entertainers were on hand to perform for the crowd.
The Washington Monument was the starting point for the day's events. Prominent singers performed songs, including the civil rights movement’s unofficial anthem, “We Shall Overcome.” Then the throng marched to the Lincoln Memorial. The main rally took place in front of the Lincoln Memorial, where a distinguished roster of speakers addressed the crowd. A. Philip Randolph, the elder statesman of the civil rights movement, gave the opening remarks. He was followed by representatives of various religious and labor groups.
The highlight of the day came when the final speaker, Martin Luther King, Jr., took the podium. King held the audience spellbound as he described his dream of a colorblind society “when all of God’s children” would be free and equal. Millions more watched King’s address live on television. This powerful and eloquent speech has come to be known as the “I Have a Dream” speech.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	503 '	8.2 The Movement Surges Forward
Behind the scenes, there was some tension between the organizations that had planned the March. SNCC, in particular, had wanted to stage a more militant protest to show its dissatisfaction with the pace of change. Yet for the public at large and for most who took part, the March on Washington represented a magical moment in American history.
The March on Washington was one of the largest political demonstrations in U.S. history. Widely covered in the media, the March increased awareness of the movement and built momentum for the passage of civil rights legislation.
Despite the huge numbers and the emotional intensity of the day, the March remained orderly and is considered a model for peaceful protest. The March on Washington has come to symbolize the civil rights movement.
Id IDENTIFY Why did Martin Luther King, Jr.’s speech
during the March on Washington have such a profound effect on the nation?
ELPS
ELPS SPEAKING 3.B.3
Read the text with a partner. When you come across an unfamiliar word, ask your partner: How do you say this word? What does this word mean?
' E nrOLLINS CAKOL HOBEHTSCN
TAKEN 'BY'-
OR SEPTEMBER 15, ' !
y ’ EL vTH STREET • IS BOMBED, 
IN tOORY OF
biitOness
» A plaque outside the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, honors the four girls who died there. Three local Ku Klux Klansmen were eventually convicted of this crime.
A
Significant Congressional Vote
Addresses Minority Rights
On September 15, 1963, less than three weeks after the march, a bomb exploded in the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham. The church had been the SCLC’s headquarters earlier that spring. Four young African American girls, all dressed in their Sunday best, were killed in the bombing.
Two months later, on November 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson assumed the presidency.
Johnson was a southerner with an undistinguished record on racial matters. However, he surprised many Americans by immediately throwing his support behind the cause of civil rights. “No eulogy could more eloquently honor President Kennedy’s memory," Johnson told Congress and the nation, “[than the] earliest passage of the civil rights bill for which he fought so long.”
The civil rights bill faced strong opposition in Congress, but Johnson put his considerable political skills to work for its passage. The bill passed in the House of Representatives, but it faced a more difficult fight in the Senate, where a group of southern Democratic senators attempted to block it by means of a filibuster. This is a tactic by which senators give long speeches to hold up legislative business. The filibuster went on for more than 80 days until supporters finally put together enough votes to overcome it. In the end, the measure passed in the Senate, and President Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 into law in July.
The act banned segregation in public accommodations and gave the federal government the ability to compel state and local school boards to desegregate their schools. The act also allowed the Justice Department to prosecute individuals who violated people’s civil rights and outlawed discrimination in employment on account of race, color, sex, or national origin. It also established the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), which is responsible for enforcing these provisions and investigating charges of job discrimination.
BI IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did the Civil Rights Act of 1964 try to end discrimination?
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	504	8.2 The Movement Surges Forward
assessment
Draw Conclusions What link do you see between the mass protests of the early 1960s and the Montgomery bus boycott of 1955?
Contrast Explain how the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee differed from other civil rights organizations.
3.	Analyze Information What were some outcomes of the freedom rides?
4.	Summarize the main points of Martin Luther King Jr.’s argument in “Letter from Birmingham Jail.”
5.	Generate Explanations Explain why the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee was dissatisfied after the March on Washington.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
8.2 The Movement Surges Forward

6


8 3 ' During the 1950s and 1960s, the civil rights movement made great strides forward. Yet racial injustice was not fully eradicated. Frustration with this situation led some African Americans to turn to more radical and sometimes violent methods. African Americans achieved further successes, but for some the radicalism of the times left a bitter legacy.
African Americans vote in the 1964 presidential election in New York City. In the South, however, it was much more difficult for African Americans to vote.
Interactive Flipped Video
i
i
2.D, 9.A, 9.B, 9.D, 9.F, 9.G, 9.H, 17.D, 21.B, 23.A, 23.B, 26.A
» Objectives
Explain the significance of Freedom Summer, the march on Selma, and why violence erupted in some American cities in the 1960s.
Compare and contrast the goals and approaches taken by African American leaders to expand political rights and economic opportunities.
Describe the social and economic situation of African Americans by 1975.
» Key Terms
Freedom Summer Voting Rights Act Twenty-fourth
Amendment Kerner Commission Malcolm X Nation of Islam black power Black Panthers Lester Maddox affirmative action
Successes and
Setbacks
Increasing Participation in the Political Process
None of the federal court decisions or civil rights measures passed through 1964 fundamentally affected the right to vote. The problem was a southern political system that used literacy tests, poll taxes, and intimidation to keep blacks from voting.
In Mississippi, in 1964, for instance, not a single African American person was registered to vote in five counties that had African American majorities. All of the major civil rights organizations sought to overcome these political injustices.
SNCC and Political Rights SNCC had spent several years organizing voter education projects in Mississippi. It met with little success and a great deal of violent opposition. But in 1964, it decided to get more directly involved in the political process. It called for a major campaign, known as Freedom Summer. About 1,000 volunteers, mostly black and white students, were to flood Mississippi to register African Americans to vote. They also formed the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP), an alternative to Mississippi's all-white
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
506
regular Democratic Party, to give African Americans a voice in state politics.
Even before most of the Freedom Summer volunteers had arrived, three civil rights workers—Michael Schwerner, James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman— disappeared. SNCC claimed that they were murdered; state authorities denied these charges.
President Johnson ordered a massive search for the three, which ended when their bodies were found buried in an earthen dam. All had been shot at point-blank range. Yet, despite the obvious dangers, almost all of the other volunteers remained in the state.
Work of Political Organizations After Freedom Summer ended in August 1964, an MFDP delegation traveled to the Democratic Convention in New Jersey, seeking to be recognized as Mississippi's only Democratic Party. At the convention, Fannie Lou Hamer, one of the MFDP’s leaders, gave powerful testimony. She described how she and other activists had been beaten, fired from their jobs, and displaced from their homes all because, as she put it, they wanted "to register” and “live as decent human beings.”
Despite Hamer’s testimony, the Democrats refused to seat the MFDP. Instead, party officials offered a compromise: they would seat two MFDP members as "at-large delegates” and reform the nomination rules to
guarantee greater minority representation in the future. The MFDP rejected this offer. Ironically, Mississippi’s regular Democratic delegation left the convention in protest because the national party had made the offer to the MFDP.
Martin Luther King, Jr., Leads the March on Selma Early in 1965, Martin Luther King, Jr., and the SCLC organized a major campaign in Selma, Alabama, to pressure the federal government to enact voting rights legislation. The protests climaxed in a series of confrontations on the Edmund Pettus Bridge, on the main route from Selma to Montgomery. The first of these confrontations took place on March 7, 1965, a day that became known as “Bloody Sunday.” Heavily armed state troopers and other authorities attacked the marchers as they tried to cross the bridge. Sheyann Webb, a six-year-old girl at the time, recalled the scene:
I heard all of this screaming and .
. . somebody yelled, ‘Oh God, they’re killing us!’ . . . And I looked and I saw the troopers charging us . . . swinging their arms and throwing canisters of tear gas, . . , Some of them had clubs and others had ropes and whips. ... It
Civil Rights Organizations
ORGANIZATION AND DATE FOUNDED KEY PEOPLE KEY FEATURES
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) 1909	Thurgood Marshall	Focused on legal cases to end segregation and gain legal equality
Nation of Islam 1930	Elijah Muhammad Malcolm X	Advocated separation of the races
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) 1942	James Farmer	Organized peaceful protests to gain civil rights
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) 1957	Martin Luther King, Jr. Ralph Abernathy	Church-based group dedicated to nonviolent resistance; organized demonstrations and protest campaigns
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) 1960	James Lawson Ella Baker Stokely Carmichael	Grass-roots movement of young activists; organized voter education projects in the South
Black Panther Party 1966	Huey Newton Bobby Seale	Militant group advocating armed confrontation; organized antipoverty campaigns
» Analyze Charts What do you think are the strengths and weaknesses of each organization’s approach to gaining civil rights for African Americans?
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	507	8.3 Successes and Setbacks
was like a nightmare. ... I just knew then that I was going to die.
—Sheyann Webb, Selma, Lord, Selma, 1980
Webb survived, but the rampage continued. Television coverage of the violence outraged the nation. On March 15, President Johnson went on national television and called for a strong federal voting rights law. Historically, regulation of voting rights had been left to the states, but Johnson argued that “it is wrong to deny any of your fellow citizens the right to vote.” He added, “Their cause is our cause too, because it is not just Negroes, but really it is all of us, who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice. And we shall overcome.”
Voting Rights Act of 1965 Spurred by the actions of protesters, lobbying by the Washington bureau of the NAACP, and the words of the President, Congress passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965. The act banned literacy tests and empowered the federal government to oversee voting registration and elections in states that had discriminated against minorities. In 1975, Congress extended coverage to Hispanic voters in the Southwest.
Some legislation laid the groundwork for the Voting Rights Act. One such legal landmark was the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1964. It banned the poll tax, which had been used to keep poor African Americans from voting. Also, in response to litigation, the federal courts handed down several important decisions that expanded the right to participate in the democratic process. Baker v. Can and Reynolds v. Simms limited racial gerrymandering, the practice of drawing election districts in such a way as to dilute the African American vote, and established the legal principle of “one man, one vote.” In 1973, the Supreme Court further challenged racial gerrymandering in White v. Regester.
These laws and decisions had a profound impact. Particularly in the Deep South, African American participation in politics skyrocketed. In Mississippi, the percentage of African Americans registered to vote jumped from just under 7 percent in 1964 to about 70 percent in 1986. Nationwide, the number of African American elected officials rose from fewer than 100 to more than 6,000 by the mid-1980s.
Q IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
What impact did the protests in Selma, Alabama, have on the nation?
THE BATTLE VOTING RIGHTS
VOTER REGISTRATION
1964
1968
ALABAMA
LOUISIANA
MISSISSIPPI
TEXAS
VIRGINIA
1964	24th Amendment abolishes the poll tax
1965	Martin Luther King, Jr. leads the Selma march
1971 26th Amendment lowers the voting age
1982 Ronald Reagan signs a 25-year extension to the Voting Rights Act
1993 National Voter Registration Act regulates state management of voter registration
1961-1963 1—1965-1967 J r1969-1971
1973-1975
1977-1979
'-1981-1983
1985-1987
1989-1991
r1993-1995
1997-1999
2001-2003
2005-2007 _ 2009-2011
IN CONGRESS
» Analyze Data In which state did African Americans make the most gains in voter registration? Do you believe it’s more important for African Americans to increase their representation in Congress, or in state government?
8.3 Successes and Setbacks
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
Violence Troubles Civil Rights Efforts
Many celebrated the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Yet for some African Americans, things had not changed much. In many urban areas, there was anger and frustration over continuing discrimination and poverty. That anger exploded into violence in several cities.
Disorder in the Cities Less than a week after Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act, one of the worst race riots in American history erupted in the predominantly African American neighborhood of Watts in Los Angeles. Violence, looting, and arson spread for several days before National Guard troops restored order.
Watts was one of many race riots that erupted in the 1960s. The worst violence occurred in Newark, New Jersey, and Detroit, Michigan, in the summer of 1967. In Detroit, 43 people died, and property damage reached $50 million. The outbursts frightened many white Americans.
In most previous race riots, whites had used violence to keep African Americans “in their place.” But now, blacks were using violence against police and white business owners in black neighborhoods.
Investigating the Race Riots To determine the causes of the riots, President Johnson established the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, known as the Kerner Commission. It concluded that long-term racial discrimination stood as the single most important cause of violence. The commission also recommended establishing and expanding federal programs aimed at overcoming the problems of America’s urban ghettos.
Our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white, separate and unequal. . . . Segregation and poverty have created the racial ghetto and a destructive environment totally unknown to most Americans.
—National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders,
Report, 1967
The Kerner Commission’s findings proved highly controversial. A number of conservative commentators argued against expanding federal spending.
They said that this amounted to rewarding the rioters. Others noted that the black-white split that the report described ignored other minorities.
» During the 1960s, race riots, like this one in Detroit, often left significant parts of largely African American neighborhoods burned out or otherwise destroyed.
» Conservative critics argued that the Kerner Commission did not satisfactorily explain why the riots occurred.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	509
8.3 Successes and Setbacks
» Malcolm X speaks to a crowd at the Unity Rally in Harlem, New York City, on June 29, 1963. He drew criticism from many civil rights activists for his belief that the races should be separated.
» At the 1968 Summer Olympic Games, U.S. athletes Tommie Smith, center, and John Carlos, right, raise their gloved fists to show their support for the black-power movement.
President Johnson did not follow up on the commission’s recommendations, largely because the Vietnam War was consuming enormous sums of federal money. The riots also fueled a white backlash. Many whites opposed further reforms. However, the private sector stepped in to create economic opportunities for citizens. In 1967, the life insurance industry formed an Urban Problems Committee of CEOs who created a “Billion Dollar Urban Investment Program” to provide investments for low- and moderate- income housing and job-creating enterprises in poor urban areas.
RECALL
Why was the Kerner Commission formed? New Civil Rights Groups
The racial rioting of the mid-1960s coincided with the radicalization of many African Americans, particularly young urban African Americans. Rather than advocating nonviolence and integration, they called for another approach.
Malcolm X Offers a Different Vision The most well known African American radical was Malcolm X, who was born Malcolm Little in Omaha, Nebraska, in 1925. He adopted the X to represent his lost African name. Little, he argued, was his slave name. Malcolm had a difficult childhood. In his teens, he moved to Boston and then to New York City, where he became involved in drugs and crime and landed in prison on burglary charges at age 21.
While in prison, Malcolm became a convert to the Nation of Islam, a religious sect headed by Elijah Muhammad. The group prescribed strict rules of behavior, including no drugs or alcohol, and demanded a separation of the races.
After his release from prison, Malcolm became the Nation of Islam’s most prominent minister. In this role, he preached a message of self-reliance and selfprotection. He called for black pride and spread the idea of black nationalism, a belief in the separate identity and racial unity of the African American community. Malcolm was a “charismatic speaker who could play an audience as great musicians play instruments.” His dynamic speeches won many adherents to his cause.
In 1964, Malcolm X broke away from the Nation of Islam and formed his own organization. He then made a pilgrimage to Mecca, the holy city of Islam, afterward adopting the religious name el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz. Returning to the United States, he seemed willing to consider limited acceptance of whites. In February 1965, however, Malcolm X was shot and killed. Three members of the Nation of Islam were convicted of the murder.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	510	8.3 Successes and Setbacks
The “Black Power” Movement Many young African Americans saw themselves as heirs of the radical Malcolm X. They began to move away from the principle of nonviolence. They also began to question the goal of integration. As SNCC leader Stokely Carmichael put it:
Integration . . . has been based on complete acceptance of the fact that in order to have a decent house or education, blacks must move into a white neighborhood or send their children to a white school. This reinforces the notion . . . that ‘white’ is automatically better and ‘black’ is by definition inferior.
—Stokely Carmichael. “What We Want,’1 1966
Carmichael first used the term “black power” in 1966. In that year, James Meredith had set off on a "March Against Fear” across the state of Mississippi to encourage African Americans to register and vote. Meredith traveled only 20 miles before he was shot and left for dead by a white supremacist. SNCC, CORE, and SCLC members vowed to continue the march.
When they reached Greenwood, Mississippi, Carmichael and some other marchers were arrested. After his release, Carmichael told a crowd that African Americans needed “black power."
He later said that black power meant African Americans should collectively use their economic and political muscle to gain equality. Yet many white Americans felt threatened. They believed that black power meant black violence.
The Black Panthers’ Approach Not long after Carmichael’s "black power” speech, Huey Newton and Bobby Seale formed the Black Panther Party in Oakland, California. Almost overnight, the Black Panthers became the symbol of young militant African Americans. The Black Panthers organized armed patrols of urban neighborhoods to protect people from police abuse. They also created antipoverty programs, such as free breakfasts for poor African American children. The Black Panthers gained national attention when they entered the state capitol in Sacramento carrying shotguns and wearing black leather jackets and berets to protest attempts to restrict their right to bear arms.
The Panthers’ style appealed to many young African Americans, who began to wear their hair in Afros” and to refer to themselves as “black” rather than Negro” or “colored.”
» At the University of California at Berkeley, Stokely Carmichael advocated combining the economic, social, and political power of African Americans to achieve civil rights.
» Members and sympathizers demonstrate their support for Black Panther leader Huey Newton as he stands trial for the murder of an Oakland police officer in Alameda County, California.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	511
8.3 Successes and Setbacks
» Poor People’s Campaign members march through Atlanta on May 10, 1968, to promote economic justice. Draw Conclusions How did the goal of this march differ from previous civil rights demonstrations?
» Civil rights activists at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis point toward the sniper’s position moments after Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was shot by an assassin.
Some, following the lead of Malcolm X, changed their name and celebrated their African heritage. At the same time, the Panthers’ militancy often led to violent confrontations with police. Each side accused the other of instigating the violence.
ET EXPLAIN
What effect did Malcom X have on the civil rights movement? King Expands His Dream
Martin Luther King understood the anger and frustration of many urban African Americans whose lives had changed little despite the civil rights reforms of the 1960s. However, he disagreed with the call for “black power” and sought a nonviolent alternative to combat economic injustice.
After spending about a year in Chicago’s slums to protest conditions there, King made plans for a massive "Poor People's Campaign.” The campaign’s goal was to broaden civil rights’ goals to address economic inequality in America.
King’s Assassination: A Turning Point As part of this effort, King journeyed to Memphis, Tennessee, in early April 1968. There, he offered his assistance to sanitation workers who were striking for better wages and working conditions.
On April 3, King addressed his followers. He referred to threats that had been made against his life. "Like anybody, I would like to live a long life,” King declared. “But I’m not concerned about that now. I just want to do God’s will.”
The following day, as King stood on the balcony outside his motel room, he was struck by a shot from a high-powered rifle. He died at a hospital shortly afterward, at the age of 39. James Earl Ray, a white exconvict, was later charged with King’s murder.
King’s assassination marked an important turning point. His efforts had increased minority participation in the political process and encouraged racial integration. Yet much racist hostility persisted. For example, Lester Maddox, a restaurant owner in Atlanta, Georgia, gained national attention when he closed his business rather than comply with 1964 Civil Rights Act that banned discrimination against African Americans. Hoping to maintain the status quo, Maddox then ran for and was elected governor of Georgia. After King’s assassination, Governor Maddox would not even allow the civil rights leader’s body to lie in state in the Georgia state capitol building.
The protests for black freedom and racial equality that began in the mid-1950s crested in the late 1960s
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	512	8.3 Successes and Setbacks
Civil Rights Legislation
Banned segregation in public accommodations
Increased federal authority to enforce school desegregation
Outlawed discrimination in employment on basis of race, color, and sex
Eliminated poll tax as voting requirement
Banned literacy tests as voting requirement
Empowered the federal government to supervise voter registration and elections
Banned discrimination iri housing
» Analyze Information Based on the information in the chart, which legislation
dealt specifically with voting rights?	|
Interactive Chart
around the time of King’s death. By then, the civil rights movement had made significant gains. Yet the impact of King’s legacy would continue to grow. His messages of political equality and economic opportunity for all continue to define political discourse to this day.
Robert F. Kennedy Responds Robert F. Kennedy was campaigning for the presidency in Indianapolis when he heard of King’s death. RFK stopped his campaign speech to give the audience the sad news. He reminded them that he had lost his own brother to an assassin’s bullet. Kennedy asked those assembled to honor King’s memory by replacing their anger and desire for revenge “with an effort to understand with compassion and love.” Despite Kennedy’s plea, riots broke out in hundreds of cities after King’s assassination. Two months later, Robert Kennedy’s life, too, was cut short by an assassin.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did King go to Memphis in 1968?
Results of the Civil Rights Movement
The civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s succeeded in eliminating legal, or de jure, segregation and knocking down barriers to African American voting and participation in the political process. During the same period, African American poverty rates fell and the median income of African American men
and women rose rapidly, as did the number of African Americans who graduated from high school.
One symbol of the progress that had been made was the appointment of Thurgood Marshall as the first African American Supreme Court Justice in 1967. The following year, in the wake of King's murder, Congress passed one final civil rights measure, the Fair Housing Act, which banned discrimination in housing. Yet, in spite of these efforts to create economic opportunity, the social and economic gap between many blacks and whites remained. New measures aimed at closing this gap tended to provoke more controversy than consensus in America.
Controversies over Busing and Affirmative Action Attempts to increase economic opportunities for African Americans and to integrate neighborhoods and schools encountered great difficulties. To achieve desegregated schools, the federal courts had ordered the use of forced busing. Richard Nixon, who succeeded Lyndon Johnson as president, criticized busing as a means of attaining racial balance.
At the same time, the Nixon administration formally established affirmative action as a means of closing the economic gap between blacks and whites.
In a short period of time, colleges and universities, businesses, and local and state governments followed the federal government’s lead and implemented their own affirmative action plans to increase African American representation in schools and the workforce.
Affirmative action proved controversial almost from the start. Some whites argued that it constituted
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	513	0.3 Successes and Setbacks
» African American poll watchers observe voters in Tuskegee, Alabama, on May 31, 1966. Hypothesize Why were poll watchers present during voting?
through the regular admissions process at less selective institutions.
Changes to the Voting Rights Act The Voting Rights Act of 1965 continues to encourage minority participation in the democratic process. Congress has renewed the law four times—for 5 years in 1970, for 7 years in 1975, for 25 years in 1982 and, most recently, for 25 years in 2006.
In recent years, however, the Supreme Court has redefined the scope of the Act’s provisions. In 1993, the Court ruled that the first district in North Carolina to elect an African American to Congress was shaped in a way that violated the rights of white voters. In 2013, the Court severely weakened the heart of the act, Section 5, which empowered the federal government to oversee election practices in states where voting rights are at risk. In a 5-4 decision, the Court released nine states, seven of them in the South, from federal supervision. The ruling cited the gains those states had made since 1965 in black voter registration as rationale for the decision.
LIST
What gains had the civil rights movement made by the early 1970s? reverse discrimination and violated the goal of creating a colorblind society. Justice Thurgood Marshall disagreed. “Three hundred and fifty years ago, the Negro was dragged to this country in chains to be sold into slavery,” Marshall wrote. “The position of the Negro today in America is the tragic but inevitable consequence of centuries of unequal treatment.” Until the nation addressed the legacy of this unequal treatment, Marshall asserted, it would not fulfill its promise of providing equal rights and opportunities to all.
Affirmative action remains a divisive social policy. Critics—and even some supporters—contend that the practice has had unintended consequences, sometimes hurting the very people it is intended to help.
For example, some studies show that minority students accepted through affirmative action at the nation’s most selective universities do not have as high a graduation rate as minority students accepted
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Explain how Martin Luther King, Jr.’s assassination marked a turning point for the civil rights movement.
2.	Compare Points of View Discuss the reasoning behind affirmative action, and compare it with criticisms of the policy.
3.	Sequence Events Describe the events that led to President Johnson’s call for federal voting legislation in 1965.
4.	Compare and Contrast the efforts of Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Black Panthers to reform economic injustice.
5.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the conclusions of the Kerner Commission, and explain why many people found it controversial.
71
8.3 Successes and Setbacks
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	514
The civil rights movement had begun gaining momentum in the 1950s, when President Dwight Eisenhower was presiding over a time of peace and prosperity. But even during this optimistic Eisenhower era, there were a number of issues that caused Americans grave concern. The launch of Sputnik 1 showed that the rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union was still intense. The U-2 spy plane incident demonstrated that the Cold War might heat up at a moment’s notice. Deep, unsettled problems remained—problems for a new decade and a new generation of political leadership.
President Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy brought youthful energy and glamour to the White House.
Interactive Flipped Video
Kennedy’s Reforms
2.D, 9.A
The Torch is Passed to a New Generation
Kennedy Versus Nixon In the presidential election of I960, Democrat John F. Kennedy and Republican Richard M. Nixon were quite similar in a variety of ways. For the first time in U.S. history, both candidates had been born in the twentieth century, Nixon in 1913 and Kennedy in 1917. Both had served in the navy during World War II. Both had been elected to Congress in 1946 and to the Senate in the early 1950s. Both were passionate about foreign affairs and supported the Cold War fight against communism. Young and energetic, intelligent and hardworking, both wanted to be the first of their generation to lead the country.
Their differences, however, were as significant as their similarities. Kennedy was the son of a wealthy Boston businessman. His grandfather had been a state senator, and his father had served as the ambassador to Great Britain. Kennedy attended Harvard University. Although he was a Catholic and his religion was an issue in the election, he insisted that what church he attended should not be a factor.
Nixon, born in California, did not enjoy the advantages of a wealthy upbringing. His father struggled to make a living. As a young man, Nixon had to balance his time between his school studies and work
» Objectives
Discuss the election of 1960.
Evaluate Kennedy’s domestic policies.
Assess the impact of Kennedy’s assassination.
» Key Terms
New Frontier Equal Pay Act deficit spending space race Warren Commission John F. Kennedy Richard M. Nixon
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
515
©
to help support the family. Many voters, however, respected him for his experiences as Vice President under Eisenhower.
Television Influences Voter Opinion The 1960 election highlighted the growing power and influence of television. The candidates agreed to four televised debates. During the campaign, Nixon was hospitalized with a knee infection. After getting out of the hospital, he committed himself to a grueling schedule of public appearances.
By the time of the first debate, held in late September in Chicago and watched by about 70 million people, Nixon looked pale and exhausted. He arrived at the television studio an hour early, but he refused the offer to have makeup applied to hide his newly growing beard. By contrast, Kennedy, tanned from open-air campaigning in California, looked healthy and confident. His relaxed manner, easy charm, and quick sense of humor added to his appeal.
In many ways, the debate boiled down to how the candidates looked and spoke, rather than what they said. Most Americans who listened to the debate on radio believed that Nixon had won. But the larger audience who watched the debate on television concluded that Kennedy was the clear victor. Although Nixon tried to change his image in the later debates, he was unable to significantly alter the country’s initial impression of him. Kennedy’s “victory” in Chicago proved crucial in the election.
Kennedy Wins a Close Election Kennedy not only looked better on television, but he also demonstrated an ability to react more quickly to unexpected events. For example, several weeks before the election, civil rights leader Martin Luther King. Jr., and a group of African American students were jailed during a protest in Atlanta, Georgia. Nixon said nothing publicly about the episode. Kennedy, however, telephoned King’s
wife, Coretta Scott King, to voice his concern. He also worked behind the scenes to obtain King’s release on bail. Kennedy’s actions attracted the strong support of African Americans in the election.
The election of 1960 was the tightest presidential election since 1888. In an election that witnessed the largest voter turnout in the country’s history, Kennedy won by less than 120,000 of the 68 million votes cast. His electoral victory was more convincing. He carried enough states to give him 303 electoral votes to Nixon’s 219. However, had a few thousand people voted differently in Illinois and Texas, the electoral vote and the election would have gone to Nixon.
RECALL
How did Kennedy attract strong support among African American voters?
A
President’s Unique Charisma Kennedy’s determination to change life at home resulted in his domestic agenda, called the New Frontier. Faced with a conservative Congress, Kennedy met with opposition as he fought to turn his vision into a reality. Still, he had some success in making changes in Social Security benefits, dealing with poverty and racial discrimination, and spurring new interest and expectations for the space program.
As John Kennedy showed in his 1960 campaign and in his Inaugural Address, he had a special charm—or charisma—that separated him from other politicians. With his exquisitely tailored clothes, quick smile, and sense of humor, he seemed closer to a movie star than to a run-of-the-mill politician. Although he suffered many health problems, he projected youthful health and energy.
He surrounded himself with other distinguished men. Reporters dubbed them “the best and the
The Presidential Election of 1960
CANDIDATE POPULAR VOTE % POPULAR VOTE ELECTORAL VOTE % ELECTORAL VOTE
John Kennedy (Democrat)	34,227,096	49.7	303	56.4
Richard Nixon (Republican)	34,107,646	49.6	219	40.8 ....	- '	
» Analyze Data How do the percentages of the electoral vote compare to those of the popular vote?
Interactive Gallery

Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	516 ,	8.4 Kennedy’s Reforms
brightest.” They came from some of the country’s most prestigious businesses and universities. Robert McNamara, president of Ford Motor Company, agreed to serve as Secretary of Defense. Dean Rusk, president of the Rockefeller Foundation, signed on as Secretary of State. Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., a Pulitzer Prizewinning historian, worked at the White House as a spokesperson for liberal causes and was a source of ideas for the President.
President Kennedy promised Americans that his administration would blaze a “New Frontier.” The term described Kennedy’s proposals to improve the economy, education, healthcare, and civil rights. He also hoped to jump-start the space program. In his nomination acceptance speech on July 15,1960, in Los Angeles, California, Kennedy said,
I stand tonight facing west on what was once the last frontier. . . . From the lands that stretch three thousand miles behind me, the pioneers of old gave up their safety, their comforts and sometimes their lives to build a new world here in the West. . . .
But the problems are not all solved and the battles are not all won, and we stand today on the edge of a new frontier—the frontier of the 1960s—the frontier of unknown opportunities and perils—a frontier of unfulfilled hopes and threats.
F.
Kennedy, July 15, 1960 BI IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
Why did many feel that Kennedy was a different kind of politician?
Domestic Priorities
Early in his presidency, occupied by events in Cuba and Berlin, Kennedy devoted most of his attention to foreign affairs. But by 1963 he had become more concerned about pressing problems at home.
Kennedy—like millions of other Americans—was troubled by the high levels of poverty in the United States. The Other America, Michael Harrington’s bestselling and influential 1962 expose of poverty in America, shocked Kennedy and many other Americans.
» President John F. Kennedy discusses the upcoming disarmament talks at Geneva with his top cabinet-level advisers in the White House on March 9, 1962.
» During the early 1960s, studies found that millions of women working in skilled and technical jobs across the country received lower pay than men doing the same work.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s ; 517	8.4 Kennedy’s Reforms
While Kennedy failed to get Congress to accept his more ambitious social programs, he did push through an increase in the minimum wage, an extension in Social Security benefits, and improvements in the welfare system.
In addition, in 1962 Kennedy established the President’s Commission on the Status of Women, a blue-ribbon panel that studied how poverty and discrimination affected women. The difference in wages received by men and women for the same work was an especially glaring problem. The Equal Pay Act (1963) required equal wages for “equal work” in industries engaged in commerce or producing goods for commerce. Although it contained various loopholes, the law was a crucial step on the road to fair and equal employment practices. The next year Congress would prohibit discrimination by employers on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, or sex.
One Approach to Economic Stimulus Kennedy believed that increased prosperity would help to eliminate some of the nation’s social problems. When he became President, the country was suffering from a high unemployment rate and a sluggish economy. To help the sagging economy, Kennedy proposed tax credits to encourage business investment in new factory equipment. At the same time, increased military spending created new jobs and boosted the economy.
In addition, Kennedy accepted the “new economics” of theorist John Maynard Keynes that advocated deficit spending to stimulate the economy. Deficit spending is the government practice of borrowing money in order to spend more than is received from taxes. In 1963, Kennedy called for dramatic tax cuts for middle-class Americans as a way to put more money in the pockets of more people. At the same time, he increased the tax burden on wealthier citizens. Kennedy’s economic initiatives jump-started the tremendous economic growth of the late 1960s.
Cautious Steps toward Civil Rights Kennedy pursued a timid approach toward civil rights. He had narrowly won the 1960 election, and he had little real influence in Congress or even complete partisan support. He did not want to anger conservative, white southern members of Congress in his own party. They stood ready to block any civil rights legislation.
While Kennedy remained largely passive on civil rights issues, African Americans and their white allies challenged segregation in the South. In 1961, they took “freedom rides” to desegregate interstate bus travel.
In 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr., took the civil rights struggle to Birmingham, Alabama. Such actions took courage and were met by angry, oftentimes violent, responses by white southerners.
In early 1963, Kennedy introduced a civil rights bill that demanded prosecution for voting-rights violations and federal money to aid school desegregation. Further
» Analyze Data Based on the data in the table, how many years did it take for the Equal Pay Act of 1963 to make a significant impact on women’s rate of pay as compared to men’s?
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s ( 518 I 8.4 Kennedy’s Reforms
Key Events in the American Space Program
February 1962
January 1986
John Glenn is the first American to orbit Earth.
The Challenger space shuttle explodes 73 seconds after takeoff, killing 7 astronauts.
November 2000
The first crew occupies the International Space Station.
October 1958
July 1969
November 1998
NASA is created.
Apollo 11 astronauts land on the moon.
Construction begins on the International Space Station.

kJ	i
1990
May 1961			June 1976		Anril 1990
Alan Shepard is the first American to fly in space.			Viking 1 transmits images of Mars.		Hubble Space Telescope is launched.
January 1967
During training, a space capsule fire kills astronauts Roger Chaffee, Virgil Grissom, and Edward White.
April 1997
Pathfinder lands on Mars.
» Analyze Information Based on the events in the timeline, how did the goals of the space program change over time?
violence in the South prompted Kennedy to introduce stronger civil rights legislation.
First to the Moon The launching of the satellite Sputnik 1 by the Soviet Union in 1957 called into question American technological superiority. Although Congress created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in 1958, the Soviets’ space program remained several steps ahead of the American program. In April 1961, for example, the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth.
Kennedy recognized that the United States and the Soviet Union were locked in a “space race.” Space race was the term used to describe the competition between the Soviet Union and the United States to develop technology to successfully land on the moon. In May 1961, NASA put astronaut Alan Shepard into a suborbital space flight aboard the Project Mercury space capsule Freedom 7. Encouraged by the success of Project Mercury, Kennedy committed the United States to landing a man on the moon by 1970.
America’s quest to reach the moon was punctuated by enormous successes and heartbreaking failures. Astronaut John Glenn became the first American to orbit Earth in February 1962. But astronauts Virgil Grissom, Edward White, and Roger Chaffee burned to death when their docked capsule exploded in fire during a routine test. Finally, in July 1969, astronaut Neil Armstrong left his spacecraft Columbia's landing
vehicle and became the first man to step on the moon. The mission was a successful completion of Kennedy’s bold dream.
The moon landing in 1969 was a turning point in the space race. Never again would the Soviet Union rival the United States for supremacy in space. In addition, the space program’s many innovations improved Americans’ quality of life. For example, materials developed for the visors on the moon astronauts’ helmets allowed eyeglass manufacturers to replace glass lenses with lighter, scratch-resistant ones. Today's cordless tools use the same technology that astronauts used on the moon. Manufacturers of athletic shoes applied high-tech features found in the astronauts’ boots. Memory foam, enriched baby food, and freeze-drying technology are also among the hundreds of ways that space exploration has benefited society and improved the quality of life.
fid CHECK UNDERSTANDING Why did Kennedy
change his approach to civil rights issues?
Kennedy Is Assassinated
During his first two and a half years in office, Kennedy made the transition from politician to national leader. In foreign affairs he confronted Soviet challenges, made hard decisions, and won the respect of Soviet leaders and American citizens. He also spoke eloquently about
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	519 <	8.4 Kennedy’s Reforms
» President Kennedy and his wife ride with Texas Governor John Connally and his wife in the presidential motorcade through Dallas, Texas, just prior to the President’s assassination on November 22, 1963.
the need to move toward a peaceful future. In domestic affairs he finally came to the conclusion that the federal government had to lead the struggle for civil rights. Added to his new maturity was his ability to inspire Americans to dream noble dreams and work toward lofty ends.
In November 1963, Kennedy traveled to Dallas, Texas, to mend political fences for his 1964 reelection bid. He never lived to see 1964. While his motorcade moved through the city, assassin Lee Harvey Oswald, perched by a window on the sixth floor of the Texas
School Book Depository, fired three shots at the President. The third shot hit Kennedy in the back of his head. A half hour later, doctors at Parkland Memorial Hospital pronounced him dead.
Texan Lyndon B. Johnson, Kennedy’s Vice President, was sworn in as the new President. Although many people would later question whether Oswald acted alone, the Warren Commission, which conducted the official investigation of the assassination, described Oswald as the “lone killer.”
The senseless murder deeply saddened Americans across the nation. Millions of people watched Kennedy’s funeral procession on television, and many reacted as if they had lost a family member. It seemed as if part of America’s innocence had died with him.
DESCRIBE
What was the purpose of the Warren Commission?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare and Contrast the backgrounds and political beliefs of John F. Kennedy and Richard M. Nixon.
2.	Generate Explanations Explain how television influenced the presidential election of 1960.
3.	Summarize Discuss the accomplishments of the “New Frontier,” President Kennedy’s domestic policy plan.
4.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss the impact that the moon landing of 1969 had on American standards of living and on American foreign relations.
5.	Draw Conclusions Explain how the United States’ economy changed during President Kennedy’s term.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	520
8.4 Kennedy’s Reforms
Lyndon B. Johnson, who became President after Kennedy’s assassination, shared the same goals as his predecessor. These goals shaped the purpose of Johnson’s Great Society program. A seasoned politician,
Johnson successfully pushed through significant domestic legislation that he hoped would become the first step to achieving the quality of life he thought all Americans should enjoy.
President Johnson talks with an impoverished man about the challenges facing his Kentucky community.
I
Interactive Flipped Video
Reform Under
Johnson
Johnson’s Path to the Presidency
Born in Stonewall, Texas, Lyndon B. Johnson was raised in the Hill Country town of Johnson City. He attended Southwest Texas State College and then taught for several years in Cotulla, Texas. There, at a tiny segregated school for Mexican Americans, he confronted firsthand the challenges faced by poverty-stricken minority students, and the lessons he learned remained with him for the rest of his life.
17.D, 21.A, 21.C, 24.B, 26.A
» Objectives
Evaluate Johnson’s policies up to his victory in the 1964 presidential election.
Analyze Johnson’s goals and actions as seen in his Great Society programs.
Assess the achievements of the Great Society in creating economic opportunities for citizens.
Analyze the effects of U.S. Supreme Court decisions.
An Influential Legislator After teaching for several years, Johnson entered politics—first as a Texas congressman’s secretary and then as the head of the Texas National Youth Administration.
In 1937, Johnson was elected to Congress, and during the next several decades he became the most powerful person on Capitol Hill. Elected to the Senate in 1948, Johnson proved himself a master of party politics and rose to the position of Senate majority leader in 1955. In the Senate, he was adept at avoiding conflict, building political coalitions, and working out compromises. His skill was instrumental in pushing the 1957 Civil Rights Act through Congress.
In 1960, he hoped to be chosen by the Democratic Party to run for President, but when Kennedy got the nomination Johnson agreed to
» Key Terms
Civil Rights Act War on Poverty Economic
Opportunity Act Great Society Medicare Medicaid Immigration and
Nationality Act of
1965
Warren Court Barry Goldwater
Tinker v. Des Moines School District
judicial interpretation

PEARS0N1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
521
join him on the ticket as the vice presidential nominee. A New Englander and a Catholic, Kennedy needed Johnson to help carry the heavily Protestant South. Johnson was also popular both with Mexican American voters and in the Southwest. He was an important part of Kennedy’s victory in 1960.
Continuing Kennedy’s Civil Rights Policies On
becoming President after Kennedy’s assassination, Johnson radiated reassurance and strength. His every action indicated that he was ready for the job and that the government was in good hands. Less than a week after the assassination, Johnson addressed a joint session of Congress.
. . . [N]o memorial oration or eulogy could more eloquently honor President Kennedy’s memory than the earliest possible passage of the Civil Rights Bill for which he fought so long.
-—President Johnson, Speech before a Joint Session of
Congress, 1963
With Johnson’s ability to build consensus, or agreement on an issue by a group, the Civil Rights Act became law in the summer of 1964. It outlawed discrimination in voting, education, and public
accommodations. The act demanded an end to discrimination in hospitals, restaurants, theaters, and other places open to the public. It also created the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to fight discrimination in hiring.
African Americans and Mexican Americans who faced almost daily discrimination benefited immeasurably from the legislation. Finally, Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act prohibited discrimination on the basis of sex.
The Fight to Expand Economic Opportunity
Johnson made his intentions clear in his first State of the Union address when he said it was time to “declare an unconditional war on poverty.” The new President planned to fuse his own dreams for America onto Kennedy’s legislative agenda. Although Kennedy had failed to get Congress to approve his tax bill calling for dramatic tax cuts for middle-class Americans, Johnson was able to maneuver it through. In addition, he had added a billion-dollar War on Poverty to the bill.
Johnson’s War on Poverty introduced measures to train the jobless, educate the uneducated, and provide healthcare for those in need. The 1964 Economic Opportunity Act created the Job Corps to train young men and women between the ages of 16 and 21 in the work skills they needed to acquire better jobs and move out of poverty.
i
LEGACY of he GREAT SOCIETY
EXPENDITURES ON ELEMENTARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION ACT
MEDICAID MEDICARE
OF GOVERNMENT BUDGET)
20%
0%
1970	1980	1990	2000	2010
Source: Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the U.S.
$42.4
BILLION
OVER 20 YEARS TITLE 1 FUNDING
FOR SCHOOLS FOR THE
LEARNING DISABLED
Sources: U.S. House of Representatives, ESEA 65.001; U.S. Census Bureau
HEAD START PROGRAM
CHILDREN ENROLLED (THOUSANDS)
UNITED STATES
POVERTY
RATE
1959-2012
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1960	1970	1980	1990	2000	2010
» Analyze Information Use information from the chart to evaluate the effects of the Great Society on U.S. poverty levels over time. Do you think the programs were a success? Why or why not?
@1 Interactive Chart
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	522	8.5 Reform Under Johnson
The act also established Volunteers in Service to America,, or VISTA, patterned after Kennedy’s Peace Corps, which sent American volunteers into poverty-stricken American communities in an effort to solve the country’s pressing economic, educational, and medical problems. The volunteers served in inner city schools and on Indian reservations. They worked in rural health clinics and urban hospitals.
Perhaps the most successful element of the Economic Opportunity Act was the Head Start program. Funds were provided for play groups, day care, and activities designed to help underprivileged children get ready for elementary school. Head Start enjoyed bipartisan support for decades.
Johnson Defeats a Conservative Challenger If
Johnson was to continue his War on Poverty and other social goals, he needed to win the 1964 presidential election. In that year, the Republicans nominated Arizona senator Barry Goldwater, whose economic and social views were directly opposed to Johnson’s.
Whereas Johnson believed the federal government could best regulate the economy and promote social justice, Goldwater maintained that the federal government was the problem, not the solution. According to Goldwater, social and economic issues, such as racism and poverty, should not be addressed by the federal government.
Goldwater promised to rein in the federal government by reducing its size and restricting its activities. He favored significant tax cuts and right-to-work laws, and he opposed social welfare legislation and government spending on educational, public housing, and urban renewal programs.
In 1964, most Americans were not ready for Goldwater’s conservative message. In addition, Johnson’s campaign portrayed Goldwater as an extremist, suggesting that his election would ensure the repeal of civil rights legislation and economic ruin.
Johnson had prosperity on his side, as well as his own impressive legislative record and the legacy of Kennedy. In the November election, he won a landslide victory capturing more than 60 percent of the popular vote and carrying all but six states.
Goldwater carried only Arizona and five southern states— Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and South Carolina. Furthermore, the outcome of the election was significant. The South was no longer solidly Democrat. Not only had Johnson won a ringing victory but Democrats had captured both houses of Congress.
Although Goldwater suffered a crushing political defeat in 1964, his conservative ideas resonated with
» Barry Goldwater, the Republican nominee for President in 1964, strongly opposed the use of federal resources to address social issues.
many. Support for Goldwater’s message remained strong in parts of California, propelling Ronald Reagan to the governor's office in 1966. When a conservative tide swept Reagan into the White House in 1981, Goldwater regained some influence and continued to be a strong voice on behalf of modern American conservatives.
ET RECALL
How did Johnson continue Kennedy's plan to eliminate poverty in the United States?
Creating the Great Society
In the spring of 1964, in a speech at the University of Michigan, Johnson outlined his vision for America, calling it the Great Society. He said that during the past hundred years, Americans had spread across the continent, developed industrially, and created great wealth. But the work of America was not complete. He added,
The challenge of the next half century is whether we have the wisdom to use that wealth to enrich and elevate our national life, and to
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	523	8.5 Reform Under Johnson
advance the quality of our American civilization. . . .
[W]e have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society, but upward to the Great Society.
—President Johnson, University of Michigan, May 22,
1964
For Johnson, the Great Society demanded “an end to poverty and racial injustice” and opportunity for every child.
increasing Access to Healthcare In the first half of 1965, Congress passed parts of Johnson’s Great Society legislation. Kennedy had supported similar legislation that failed to win congressional support. Johnson’s agenda amended the Social Security Act by adding the Medical Care for the Aged Program, or Medicare, as it was more popularly called. Medicare provided basic health insurance for Americans in the Social Security system who were age 65 and older. It was funded by a new tax on workers’ earnings and by payments from the Social Security benefits of retirees.
» President Johnson gave healthcare special attention. With Medicare and Medicaid, more Americans would be able to receive basic healthcare.
The new law also included a Medicaid feature that provided basic medical services to poor and disabled Americans who were not part of the Social Security system. Johnson signed the bill into law in Independence, Missouri, home of former President Harry Truman, who had called for a national health insurance program almost 20 years earlier.
When the Social Security Act was amended, few questions were raised about how programs like Medicare and Medicaid would be paid for in the years to come. Medicare has become increasingly expensive as medical costs have risen, the percent of retirees in the population relative to workers has increased, and because people live longer now than they did in 1965.
Investing in Public Education Along with health, education was one of the centerpieces of the Great Society program. Improved healthcare and education were necessary steps toward the goal of ending poverty
The 1965 Elementary and Secondary Education Act was designed to aid schools in poorer communities. It provided federal funds to improve school libraries, learning centers, language laboratories, and services in impoverished school districts. The act dramatically increased funding for Indian, inner city, and Mexican American schools.
Environmental and Consumer Protection The
Great Society program extended to improving the overall quality of American life. In the early 1960s, several best-selling books raised Americans’ awareness about environmental and consumer problems. Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring (1962) detailed how chemical fertilizers and pesticides were damaging the fragile ecosystem. Ralph Nader’s Unsafe at Any Speed (1965) attacked the automotive industry for its lack of concern for passenger safety.
Both these books helped to foster environmental and consumer activity and led to several important pieces of legislation. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act (1966) established safety standards for automotive vehicles and created the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to administer them. The Water Quality Act (1965), the Clean Water Restoration Act (1966), and the Air Quality Act (1967) aimed at improving water and air standards in the country. The U.S. Public Health Service was empowered to enforce air quality standards, but dealing with water pollution was largely left to the states. Not until the Environmental Protection Agency was created in 1970 did the federal government gain significant regulatory power to protect the environment.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
I 524

8.5 Reform Under Johnson
U.S.
Immigration and the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 1,200
1,000
u
$ « 800 C </» m 3 &£
l = 600 - *
Oj 3	400
c
(0
200
1960s	1970s	1980s	1990s	2000s
Population Distribution by Race/Ethnicity
■White non-Hispanic ■Black ■Hispanic Asian Other
2050*
SOURCE:
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Immigration Statistics SOURCE:
U.S.Census Bureau; *projection 0

» Analyze Charts Based on the data in the pie charts, which ethnic group is projected to grow the most by 2050?
Less Restrictive Immigration Policies Meanwhile, the civil rights movement was raising questions about America’s long-standing immigration policy. The National Origins Acts of 1921 and 1924 had established a quota system that favored Western European immigrants and limited immigrants from other parts of the world. Such a discriminatory policy was clearly out of touch with the mood of the country in the early 1960s.
The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 altered America’s quota system. Nearly 170,000 immigrants from the Eastern Hemisphere were allowed into the country. Nearly 120,000 immigrants from the Western Hemisphere were welcomed. Immigrants from Latin America, Central America, the Caribbean, and Asia soon began to pour into the United States, providing the country with a pool of ideas, talent, and skills.
The doors of America were once again open to immigrants from around the world. During the 1960s and 1970s, millions of immigrants would arrive on American shores. Like earlier immigrants, many came seeking economic opportunity. Others were fleeing war or social unrest or were in search of political or religious freedom. As in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, New York and the urban East and West coasts attracted many of the country’s newest immigrants.
The Legacy of the Great Society Although critics said that Great Society programs did not work, many point out that these programs have improved the lives of millions of individual Americans. Poverty and infant mortality rates declined. Medicare and Medicaid delivered needed healthcare to millions of elderly and poor Americans. Head Start and other antipoverty programs provided the educational tools many underprivileged Americans needed to escape poverty. Furthermore, Congress also provided artists and scholars with assistance through the National Endowment for the Arts and Humanities, created in 1965.
The better future that the Great Society envisioned inspired many Americans, including women and minorities, to take action to expand their economic opportunities. Latino farm workers formed a union and organized national boycotts of farm products to win better wages. Latino students boycotted their schools to demand better education. Meanwhile, Asian Americans made economic gains unmatched by any other minority group. Women, too, made great advances during this time. By 1970 the percentage of women with college degrees was nearly double what it had been in 1950.
The Great Society victories may not have been as grandiose as Johnson predicted, but they were victories. The simple fact that 22.2 percent of all Americans lived
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	525	8.5 Reform Under Johnson

below the poverty line in 1960 and 12.6 percent lived below the poverty line in 1970 says something about the triumphs of the Great Society.
U IDENTIFY
Which immigrant groups were affected by the Immigration and Nationality Reform Act of 1965?
ELPS SPEAKING 3.C.3
Read the section titled Increasing Access to Healthcare with a partner. Then practice asking and answering questions about Medicare and Medicaid.
AF ELPS
The Impact of the Warren Court
During the 1960s, the Supreme Court demonstrated a willingness to take the lead on controversial social, religious, and political issues. Led by Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Supreme Court at this time—often called the Warren Court—became the most liberal in American history. Its decisions supported civil rights, civil liberties, voting rights, and personal privacy.
A
Principle of Voting Rights In several decisions the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the “one man, one vote” principle. The problem was one of apportionment » The Warren Court issued many landmark rulings in the areas of civil rights, criminal justice, the First Amendment, and legislative districting.
Interactive Gallery
of seats in state legislatures. During the twentieth century, large numbers of voters moved from rural to urban areas, but many state governments had not changed, or reapportioned, electoral districts to reflect the new conditions.
This led to an electoral imbalance. In many states, rural areas had more power and urban areas had less power than their populations actually mandated.
In Baker v. Carr (1962), the Supreme Court ruled in favor of reapportionment on the basis of “one man, one vote.” Electoral districts, it said, had to reflect the numbers of people in those districts. In Reynolds v. Sims (1964), the Court reaffirmed its decision, adding that any arrangement other than “one man, one vote" violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Redefining Civil Rights and Liberties In several decisions, the Warren Court expanded the definition of what constitutes free speech. For example, in Tinker v. Des Moines School District (1969), the Court ruled that wearing black armbands in school to protest the Vietnam War was protected as “symbolic” speech. The decision also made it clear that students do not give up all of their rights to free speech while in school.
In the Tinker decision, critics complained that the Court interpreted the Constitution too loosely, taking their judicial interpretation of the Constitution too far. The Court applied what critics have called judicial interpretation to the Constitution. That is, the Justices expanded the Constitution’s meaning beyond the framers’ original intent. In this case, the Court expanded the definition of free speech to include more than the spoken word. A narrow, or strict, construction of the First Amendment would have protected only actual speech.
The Warren Court also showed a heightened concern for the constitutional rights of accused lawbreakers. In four landmark cases, the Court broadened the individual rights of accused criminals and narrowed those of federal, state, and local government officials. In Mapp v. Ohio (1961), the Court ruled that evidence obtained illegally violated the Fourth Amendment and had to be excluded from federal and state trials. In Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), the Court decided that all accused criminals had the right to a lawyer whether or not they could pay for one.
In Escobedo v. Illinois (1964), the Warren Court expanded on Gideon v. Wainwright by adding that every accused lawbreaker had to be offered access to a lawyer before questioning, and all evidence obtained from a suspect who had not been informed of his or her right to a lawyer could not be used in court. Finally in Miranda v. Arizona (1966), the Court ruled that an
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	526	8.5 Reform Under Johnson
accused criminal had to be informed of his or her Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights before being questioned.
Critics of these decisions argued that the Warren Court had tipped the balance of justice in favor of the rights of accused criminals. Today, many conservative justices still side with this opinion. The majority of the members of the Warren Court, however, countered that the rights of individuals had to be protected, especially when freedom hung in the balance.
Church and State in the Public Sphere The Warren Court addressed the separation of church and state in the case of Engel v. Vitale (1962). The case involved whether or not a public school could require students to recite a state-sanctioned prayer. The Court ruled that school prayer was a violation of the First Amendment and an attempt by a governmental body to promote religion. The next year, the Court ruled in Abington v. Schempp that Bible reading in public schools also violated the First Amendment. The two decisions divided religious groups and the American people. Some welcomed the rulings, saying the government should have no say in personal religious matters. Others insisted the decisions were hostile to religion. The two decisions ignited, and continue to ignite, controversy. For more than 40 years, various religious groups have railed against these decisions.
IDENTIFY
What major court ruling gave a person accused of a crime the right to have a lawyer?
» In the years following the Miranda v. Arizona decision, the reading of a suspect’s “Miranda rights” became part of standard police procedure.
Compare President Johnson’s success in the civil rights movement with President Kennedy’s civil rights achievements.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Define What is a strict construction of the Constitution?
2.	Summarize the policies that President Johnson implemented in order to “declare an unconditional war on poverty.”
4.	Generate Explanations Explain why Lyndon B. Johnson defeated Barry Goldwater in the 1964 presidential election.
5.	Draw Conclusions Describe the impact that the Warren Court had on the separation of church and state in the United States.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
!
8.5 Reform Under Johnson
TEKS ASSESSMENT
EFFECTS OF BROWN
v. BOARD OF EDUCATION AFRICAN-AMERICANS AFRICAN-AMERICANS AFRICAN-AMERICAN
COLLEGE DROPOUT RATES
I PERCENTAGE COMPLETING FOUR
p PERCENTAGE OF 16-24 YEAR-OLDS OR MORE YEARS OF COLLEGE AFRICAN-AMERICAN
INCOME
PER CAPITA INCOME
DOLLARS) LEAVING HIGH SCHOOL BEFORE GRADUATION
"HIGH school
PERCENTAGE COMPLETING FOUR OR MORE YEARS OF HIGH SCHOOL
20.1%
31.4%
51.2%
66.2%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
196o| 3.1 19701 4.4 19801 8.4% 199°J| 11.3%
2000H i6,5%
nW 19.8%
..1%
t.4%
1967^^H 28.6% 1977|| 19.8% 1987^ 14.1%
19971 13*4%
2007( 8.4%
J E
1972| 198o| 19901 2000|
$8,427
$9,863
$12,745
$15,356
$19,728
1.	Analyze Effects of Brown v. Board of	4.
Education Analyze the effects of landmark U.S.
Supreme Court decisions, including Brown v. Board of Education, by using appropriate skills to analyze graphs on African American education and income. Write a paragraph analyzing the positive effects of the Court’s ruling in Brown v. Board of Education. Describe the trend over time shown in each graph above and draw a conclusion about the relationship between Brown v. Board of Education and the trends shown in the graphs. 21 .A, 29.H
2.	Describe Roles of Political Organizations in Promoting Civil Rights Describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American civil rights movements, such
as the Congress of Racial Equality. Write a paragraph describing how the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) promoted civil rights. Describe who founded CORE, the organization’s goal, and the organization’s methods and what teachings influenced them. 9.B
3.	Analyze Effects of Brown v. Board of Education Analyze the effects of landmark U.S.
Supreme Court decisions, including Brown v. Board of Education. Write a paragraph analyzing how some groups reacted negatively to the Supreme Court’s rulings in Brown v. Board of Education and Brown II.
Address what the court case challenged, what the Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education and in Brown II, and how some people responded negatively to the Court’s rulings. 9.I, 21 .A
Analyze Attempts to Maintain Status Quo Use
the process of historical inquiry to interpret multiple types of sources of evidence that describe President Eisenhower’s reaction to the role of governor Orval Faubus in seeking to maintain the status quo in Little Rock. Use the primary source quotation below and the information and photographs from the lessons in this topic and other sources to write a paragraph describing the Little Rock crisis. Cite evidence from the quotation and the lessons when you identify Governor Orval Faubus’s desire to maintain the status quo; describe Faubus’s role in the crisis; describe why President Eisenhower took action, even though he had misgivings about the Brown ruling; describe what action Eisenhower took; and identify how Eisenhower’s respect for the law influenced his action. 9.G, 29.D
It is important that the reasons for my action be understood by all our citizens. ... A foundation of our American way of life is our national respect for law. .. .
If resistance to the federal court orders ceases at once, the further presence of federal troops will be unnecessary and the City of Little Rock will return to its normal habits of peace and order and a blot upon the fair name and high honor of our nation in the world will be removed.
—President Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Address on Little Rock,” 1957
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	528
5.	Explain Actions to Expand Political Rights Explain actions taken by people to expand political rights, including those for racial minorities, in American society. Write a paragraph explaining why civil rights activists launched the freedom ride through the South, and what President Kennedy did when violence broke out. Be sure to describe what the freedom ride was, why the ride took a dangerous turn, and what President Kennedy did in response. 26.A
6.	Describe Actions Related to Voting Rights Act of 1965 Describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the United States, including the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Write a paragraph describing how the March on Selma spurred efforts by President Johnson and Congress to address African American voting rights in 1965. Describe what Martin Luther King, Jr., and the SCLC hoped the March on Selma would do, what President Johnson did in reaction to events in Selma, what factors convinced Congress to take action, and what protections the Voting Rights Act of 1965 provided. 9.F
7.	Evaluate Methods of Expanding Right to Participate in Democratic Process Identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including litigation and amendments to the U.S. Constitution such as
the Twenty-fourth Amendment, and evaluate their effectiveness. Write a paragraph about how the Twenty-fourth Amendment, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the federal court cases of Baker v. Carr and Reynolds v. Simms expanded the right of African Americans to participate in the political process. Identify what each of these methods outlawed or established and analyze and evaluate the impact of these legal actions on African American political participation. 23.A, 23.B
8.	Describe Role of Groups in Maintaining Status
Quo Use a variety of secondary valid sources to acquire information to describe the role of groups, including the congressional bloc of southern Democrats, that sought to maintain the status quo. Use the map below and the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to acquire information to write a paragraph describing why about 100 southern members of Congress signed “The Southern Manifesto.” Cite evidence from the lessons about what the signers of the manifesto pledged to do and cite evidence from the map that helps explain why so many southern members of Congress signed the manifesto. 9.G, 29.A
Segregation in Public Schools, 1954
KEY
B
Segregation required B Segregation allowed B Segregation prohibited [ I No specific legislation Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
529
9.	Identify Role of Rosa Parks in Nonviolent Protest Identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements, including Rosa Parks, and identify how Parks used nonviolent protesting to expand the right to participate in the democratic process. Use the quotation below and the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to write a paragraph identifying Rosa Parks and her contribution to nonviolent protest in the 1950s. Be sure to identify who Rosa Parks was; tell what form her nonviolent protest took; and describe the consequences of her action for Parks, the civil rights movement, and Montgomery. 9.C, 23.A
The [policemen] asked if the driver had asked me to stand up, and I said yes, and they wanted to know why I didn't. I told them I didn't think I should have to stand up. After I had paid my fare and occupied a seat, I didn't think I should have to give it up.
—Rosa Parks
10.	Create Visual Presentations Create visual presentations on the effects of voting-rights amendments and congressional legislation by using different forms of media to convey information about increased participation among African Americans, including written to visual and statistical to written, and by using available computer software as appropriate to create thematic charts and graphs representing the changes. Use computer software to recreate the charts, graphs, and information from the lessons in this topic to create a visual presentation on the effects of constitutional amendments and congressional legislation on political participation among African Americans. Include graphs and charts that show changes in participation over time and captions that summarize the statistical information presented in the graphs and charts. 23.B, 30.A, 30.C, 31.A
11.	Evaluate Minority Participation in Political Process Evaluate events and changes in the United States that have resulted from the civil rights movement, including increased participation of minorities in the political process. Write a paragraph evaluating how the Twenty-fourth Amendment and the Voting Rights Act
of 1965 affected the political participation of minorities. Identify the purpose of the Twenty-fourth Amendment and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and provide evidence that they had an impact on minority participation in the political process. 9.H
12.	Compare Approaches to Protesting Compare and contrast the approach taken by some civil rights groups with the nonviolent approach of Martin Luther King, Jr. Write a paragraph comparing and contrasting the approaches used by new civil rights groups that emerged in the 1960s with King’s nonviolent approach. Explain how different views about integration led to different approaches and then explain the views of Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael and the tactics used by the Black Panthers. 9.D
13.	Discuss Impact of King’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail” Discuss the impact of the writings of Martin Luther King, Jr., such as his “Letter from Birmingham Jail” on the civil rights movement. Use the quotation below and text information to write a paragraph discussing the impact of King’s letter. Discuss the points King made in the letter and the effects the letter had on the public. 9.E
Perhaps it is easy for those who have never felt the stinging darts of segregation to say, ‘Wait/ But. . . when you suddenly find your tongue twisted and your speech stammering as you seek to explain to your six-year-old daughter why she can't go to the public amusement park that has just been advertised on television, and see tears welling up in her eyes when she is told that Funtown is closed to colored children. . . . Then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait.
—Martin Luther King, Jr., “Letter From Birmingham Jail,” 1963
14.	Identify and Analyze Affirmative Action Identify actions of government and the private sector such as affirmative action to create economic opportunities for citizens, and analyze the unintended consequences. Write a paragraph identifying why the government and the private sector established affirmative action and analyzing some of the unintended consequences. Describe what affirmative action is, identify what
it was designed to accomplish, identify the role of the private sector in affirmative action, and analyze possible unintended consequences of the policy. 17.D
T
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	? 530 ?
U.S.
Immigration and the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 Population Distribution by Race/Ethnicity
■White non-Hispanic ■ Black ■Hispanic Asian Other
2050*
SOURCE:
U.S.Census Bureau; *projection 15.	Analyze Demographic Patterns Analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal immigration to the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal immigration. Address what the bar graph above shows about changes in the number of legal immigrants, what the bar graph shows about changes in the source of legal immigrants, and how changes in immigration policies affected the patterns shown on the bar graph. 13.B
16.	Explain Turning Points Explain the significance of the years 1968-1969 as a turning point because the United States landed on the moon. Write a paragraph explaining why the U.S. moon landing was a turning point. Explain what the “space race” was, who was the first person to land on the moon and when he did it, and why the moon landing was a turning point in the space race. 2.D
17.	Explain Improved Quality of Life Explain how space technology and exploration improved the quality of life. Write a paragraph explaining how space exploration and space technology improved Americans’ quality of life. Give specific examples of space innovations and describe how the innovations have been applied to products Americans use in their daily lives. 28.B
18.	Evaluate Contributions of Barry Goldwater Evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the United States such as Barry Goldwater. Write a paragraph evaluating the contributions of Barry Goldwater. Identify who Barry Goldwater was and describe how Goldwater’s economic and political views differed from Johnson’s, what Goldwater said he would do if elected president, and how American voters evaluated Goldwater’s social and economic views, based on the outcome of the 1964 presidential election. Then evaluate Goldwater’s long-term contribution to modern American conservatism. 24.B
19.	Analyze Effects of Tinker v. Des Moines Analyze the effects of U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Tinker v. Des Moines, and evaluate the constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation. Write a paragraph analyzing Tinkers. Des Moines. Describe what the case was about and the Supreme Court’s decision. Then evaluate the decision in terms of whether it represented a loose or strict interpretation of the Constitution. 21.A, 21.C
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
IN CONGRESS
1964	24th Amendment abolishes the poll tax
1965	Martin Luther King, Jr. leads the Selma march
1971 26th Amendment lowers the voting age
1982 Ronald Reagan signs a 25-year extension to the Voting Rights Act
1993 National Voter Registration Act regulates state management of voter registration
1961-1963
1965-1967
■1969-1971
1973-1975
1977-1979
■1981-1983
1985-1987
1989-1991
•1993-1995
1997-1999
2001-2003
2005-2007
2009-2011
Trace Historical Development of Political Equality Trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the twentieth century, including the Nineteenth Amendment, by discussing the historical reasons that the Constitution has been amended and by evaluating various means of achieving equality of political rights, including congressional acts. Use the graph above and text information to write a paragraph discussing how constitutional amendments and congressional acts have advanced voting rights in the twentieth century. Trace what constitutional amendments, including the Nineteenth Amendment, have advanced voting rights and what congressional acts have advanced voting rights. 9.A, 21.B, 23.B
Identify Roles in Managing Environment Identify the roles of private citizens in managing the environment. Write a paragraph identifying how Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring helped foster environmental activity and led to legislation. Be sure to identify what Silent Spring is about and the legislation it inspired. 14.B
22. Discuss Entitlement Programs Discuss the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Medicare. Write a paragraph describing what Medicare and Medicaid are and discussing the expenses related to the programs. Describe what each program is designed to do, describe what the graph below shows, and discuss why expenses are changing. 11 .F

EXPENDITURES on MEDICAID MEDICARE
0%
1970	1980	1990	2000	2010
Source: Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the U.S.
23.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: How can we ensure equality for all? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	$ 532 >
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	^533
1 What decision resulted from the Brown v. Board of Education case?
A
Separate-but-equal schools are not equal, and so they are a violation of the U.S. Constitution. B
Segregated schools must be within five miles of each other in order to assure equal physical access. C
Segregated schools within the same school district must be controlled by the same Board of Education. D
Separate-but-equal schools must file a report with the government showing that they are providing a high-level of education. 2 Study this photo of Dr. King speaking at the Bus Boycott meeting. This photo supports the change in the political landscape that was set in motion after the Bus Boycott because most people at the meeting—
F were inspired to take their frustrations to the street, which resulted in rioting and arrests
G became angry listening to Dr. King, which resulted in them getting involved in politics that opposed Dr. King
H intently listened to Dr. King, which resulted in many people getting involved in the political process for the first time
J walked out of the meeting early, since they had heard the same story before and believed political action was useless
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	534
3 President Kennedy sent the Alabama National Guard to the University of Alabama in 1963 to— A control racial rioting among students on the campus B stop Governor George Wallace’s intentions to prevent integration C clean up after a bomb exploded in an African American dormitory D force the university president to hire an African American faculty member
VOTER REGISTRATION
THE BATTLE
f°* VOTING HIGHTS IN CONGRESS
1961-1963
1965-1967
1969-1971
1973-1975 1977-1979 1981-1983 1985-1987 1989-1991 ■1993-1995 1997-1999 2001-2003 2005-2007 2009-2011
1964 24th Amendment abolishes the poll tax
1965 Martin Luther King, Jr. leads the Selma march
1971 26th Amendment lowers the voting age
USES
1982 Ronald Reagan signs a 25-year extension to the Voting Rights Act
1993 National Voter Registration Act regulates state management of voter registration I


4 This chart suggests that the Voting Rights Act of 1965—
F increased voter turnout among southern African Americans, but the percentage of voters was still low
G was not embraced by the state of Mississippi as much as by the other four states included on the chart
H was a national success which resulted in getting most African Americans to the voting booths immediately
J prevented increases in the African American vote until large numbers of African Americans were seated in Congress
If you have trouble with...						
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	8.1	8.1	8.2	8.3
teks	9.I	9.H	9.G	9.F
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s
(535!
January 1986
5	Review the time line for a reminder of some key points in the U.S. space program. The “space race” was important to President Kennedy because he wanted to show—
A that the United States could meet its space goals without any failures or setbacks B that the United States would soon make regular visits to the moon and proceed on to Mars
C that the United States had the best space program in the world and would be the first to land on the moon
D that the United States would be able to make many new products based on technologies developed for space travel
6	The U.S. immigration laws from the 1920s favored Western European immigrants. The changes in the 1965 law welcomed many immigrants from other parts of the world. These changes resulted in—
F many more immigrants from France and Spain than ever before G a decrease in the number of U.S. citizens of Western European descent H U.S. voting demographic changes, especially in New York and along the coasts J similarly large increases in the percentages of Asian and Hispanic populations
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	; 536
I
| nuucoo auuiuui icii piauLiu-c queouui i£>
1949
1952
1957
The Soviet Union sets off an atomic bomb.
Communists take over the government of mainland China.
The United States develops and tests a hydrogen bomb.
7	Which turning point in the Cold War best replaces the question mark on the time line?
A
The Soviet Union develops microwave technology B The Soviet Union launches Sputnik I and ignites the space race C The United States ignites the space race with the first international space station D The United States installs a new government in Iran to prevent a communist takeover 8	What effect did computers have on the economic development of the United States in the 1950s?
F
Computers accounted for growth in white-collar jobs. G
Computers helped drive up the number of unemployed Americans. H
Computer entrepreneurs were encouraged to franchise their research. J
Computers allowed people more free time to develop entrepreneurial businesses. If you have trouble with...	,					
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	8.4	8.5	7.3	7.5
teks	2.D	13.B	2.D	27.A
Civil Rights and Reform in the 1960s	537
* TOPIC 9 TEKS Master
y__________
The Vietnam War Era
In this Topic, you will learn about the Vietnam War. You will also find lots of ways to investigate the ideas of this Topic and to master the TEKS.
Your study will help you master	J
these TEKS:	I
TEKS
8.A, 8.D, 8.E, 8.F, 9.G, 17.C, 19.B, 20.A, 21.B, 23.B, 26.F, 29.A, 29.D, 29.E, 29.F, 30.B
•	Connect
I
My Story Video and Topic Essential Question— ; see how they connect to your past experience or i to what you have already learned. The Essential i Question for this Topic is: What is the role of the ; United States in the world?
i Begin your study by trying the i following:
i rfk NBC LEARN Watch My Story Video:
i Edie Meeks, Vietnam War Nurse
Launch your Document-Based Question:
•	Reasons Behind the Antiwar Movement
LESSON OUTLINE
9.1: The Cold War and Vietnam 8.A, 8.D, 8.E, 20.A
9.2: America’s Role Escalates 8.E, 17.C 9.3: The Antiwar Movement 8.E, 8.F, 9.G,
23.B
9.4: The War’s End and Effects 8.D, 8.E, 8.F, 17.C, 19.B, 20.A, 26.F
• Investigate
: A group of lessons will help : you investigate the Topic ; further. Each lesson has ; interesting text readings and ; fascinating interactivities.
; Together, they will bring the ; Topic to life and help you ; master the TEKS for this Topic
j And keep working on your ; Document-Based Question.
; You’re almost ready to show ; what you have accomplished ; by expressing your position ■ using the evidence you have i gathered.
» Digital interactivity from the online course
*	Synthesize
: You’ll see that this Topic is about more than : fascinating texts and fun interactivities. It’s : really about how those things help you think : about big ideas, like the Essential Question for
•	this Topic.
* Demonstrate
; Completing this Topic is like practicing all
; your soccer skills or rehearsing the scenes
: in a play. Now you get a chance to pull it
: all together for the final game or the live
: performance. You can do this on the Topic
i Review and Assessment pages. Or you can
: complete work on your Document-Based
: Question essay, Reasons Behind the Antiwar
* Movement..........................................
TEKS
Topic I ■ I LJ Topic Review and Assessment Questions 8.A		1
8.D		2, 3,16
8.E		12
8.F		5, 6, 7, 9,10, 15
9.G		11
17.C		8
19.B		13
20.A		4
21.B		7
23.B		7 '
26.F		14
29.A		3, 10
29.D		16
29.E		15
29.F		15
30.B		5
*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
8.A, 8.D, 8.E, 8.F, 9.G, 17.C, 19.B, 20.A, 21.B, 23.B, 26.F, 29.A, 29.D, 29.E, 29.F, 30.B
Enduring Understandings
•	The United States responded to Soviet aggression worldwide and supported anticommunist forces in Vietnam.
•	U.S. involvement in Vietnam moved from an advisory to a combat role.
•	The Vietnam War drained U.S. troops, money, and morale.
•	Lack of progress and a rising death toll reduced public support for the war.
•	Although President Nixon expanded the war into Cambodia, all parties signed the Paris Peace Accords in January 1973.
•	The Vietnam War had a long-lasting effect on politics and attitudes in the United States.
PEARSON
NBC LEARN
WELCOME 10 l#l IKI MWiil
IN VIETNAM
THE
nnTlFMT
to learn more about the experiences of Edie Meeks, a Vietnam War nurse.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments

5
During a May Day rally in Havana, Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro stokes public distrust of the United States, accusing it of preparing to attack Cuba through nearby Latin American countries.
Interactive Flipped Video
John Kennedy’s 1960 campaign stressed the need for the United States to move forward with vigor and determination. Kennedy argued that during the Eisenhower years America had lost ground in the Cold War struggle against communism. He pointed to the new communist regime under Fidel Castro in Cuba and charged that there was now a “missile gap’’ that left the U.S. nuclear missile force inferior to that of the Soviet Union. The first goal of the Kennedy administration would be to build up the nation’s armed forces.
8.A, 8.D, 8.E, 20.A
» Objectives
Explain the steps Kennedy took to change American foreign policy.
Analyze the causes and effects of the Bay of Pigs invasion and the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Assess the outcome of the Berlin Crisis and other foreign-policy events of the 1960s.
Describe the reasons that the United States helped the French fight the Vietnamese.
Identify ways in which the United States opposed communism in Southeast Asia.
Analyze how the United States increased its involvement in Vietnam.
The Cold War and Vietnam
Kennedy Strives to Win the Cold War
Nowhere was the difference between Eisenhower and Kennedy more evident than in two important 1961 addresses. In his farewell address, Eisenhower counseled caution in foreign affairs. “The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist,” he said.
As the first President born in the twentieth century, Kennedy proclaimed that a "new generation of Americans” was ready to meet any challenge. In his inaugural address, Kennedy warned his country's enemies:
PEARSON | - - -
realize
» Key Terms
John Kennedy Fidel Castro flexible response Peace Corps Alliance for Progress Bay of Pigs invasion Cuban missile crisis Nikita Khrushchev hot line
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
Berlin Wall Ho Chi Minh domino theory Southeast
Asia Treaty
Organization
(SEATO)
Vietcong Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, in order to assure the survival and the success of liberty.
F.
Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961 www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
542
As the Cold War continued into the 1960s, Kennedy took office facing the spread of communism abroad and the threat of nuclear war. Determined to succeed where he felt Eisenhower had failed, Kennedy’s enthusiasm and commitment to change offered the hope that with hard work and persistence the United States could win the Cold War. Kennedy issued a challenge to Americans: "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country.”
Significant National Decisions Impact the Cold War Eisenhower’s defense policy of “massive retaliation” had emphasized the construction of nuclear weapons. Although Kennedy did not ignore the possibility of a nuclear war, he wanted to make sure that the United States was prepared to fight both conventional wars and conflicts against guerrilla forces. Kennedy therefore gave increased funding to conventional U.S. Army and Navy forces as well as to Army Special Forces, such as the Green Berets. He wanted a “flexible response” defense policy, one that prepared the United States to fight any type of conflict.
Important International Decisions Shape the Cold War The “Third World,” as it was known at the time, was made up of the developing nations in Africa, Asia, and Latin America that did not align themselves with the United States or the Soviet Union. According to Soviet propaganda, Western capitalism created poverty and inequalities in the Third World, whereas communism promoted equality.
Like previous American leaders, Kennedy believed that democracy combined with prosperity would contain or limit the spread of communism. Therefore, he initiated programs to economically and politically strengthen the nations of the Third World. The Peace Corps, created in 1961, sent American volunteers around the world on “missions of freedom” to assist developing countries. They worked to provide technical, educational, and health services. The first Peace Corps volunteers arrived in Ghana, Africa, in 1961, to work as teachers. By the end of the year, the Peace Corps had volunteers working in two other countries in Africa— Nigeria and Tanzania. The program celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2011 and had 8,073 volunteers in 76 countries in 2012.
Other programs stressed purely economic development. One such project, the Alliance for Progress promised to resurrect America’s Good Neighbor policy toward Latin America. During the 1950s, many Latin Americans had grown increasingly resentful of the United States, claiming that it had too cauch influence in their region. Kennedy hoped the Alliance for Progress would change that view.
» President-elect Kennedy meets President Eisenhower at the White House in December, 1960. After he took office, Kennedy increased defense spending by $6 billion.
» By 1963, the Peace Corps had over 7,300 volunteers serving in over 40 countries, including Togo. President Kennedy appointed his brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver, as the Peace Corps’s first director.
The Vietnam War Era 543	9-1 The Cold War and Vietnam
At its start in 1961, the program pledged $20 billion to help 22 Latin American nations raise their per capita income, distribute income more equitably, and improve industry, agriculture, health, and welfare. Unlike the Peace Corps, however, the Alliance for Progress was not successful.
H CONTRAST
How did the message of Kennedy’s inaugural address differ from that of Eisenhower’s farewell address?
Kennedy Responds to Communism in Cuba
In 1959, Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro succeeded in overthrowing the regime of Fulgencio Batista. Initially, the United States attempted to cultivate good relations with Castro. However, it soon became clear that the Cuban leader was determined to nationalize land held by U.S. citizens, enforce radical reform measures, and accept Soviet economic and military aid. Thousands of wealthy and middle-class Cubans fled their country, many settling in Miami and southern Florida. Proud of their heritage and deeply anticommunist, they made new lives for themselves and their families in the United States.
Bay of Pigs Invasion After breaking diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1961, the Eisenhower administration authorized the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to plan an invasion of Cuba to overthrow Castro. The CIA recruited Cuban exiles and trained them in Guatemala. But when Eisenhower left office, the invasion plan was still that—an unexecuted plan.
Pressured by members of the CIA and his own aides, Kennedy decided to implement the plan. On April 17, 1961, a CIA-led force of Cuban exiles attacked Cuba in the Bay of Pigs invasion. The invasion was greatly mismanaged. The poorly equipped forces landed at the site with no protective cover. All but 300 of the 1,400 invaders were killed or captured. Not only did the Bay of Pigs invasion fail, it probably strengthened Castro’s position in Cuba. It also turned many Cuban Americans against Kennedy.
Kennedy took personal responsibility for the failed invasion. He emphasized, however, that the United States would continue to resist “communist penetration” in the Western Hemisphere.
Kennedy’s Role in the Cuban Missile Crisis
Kennedy’s efforts to contain communism were severely threatened during the Cuban missile crisis. In August and September of 1962 U.S. intelligence discovered that the Soviets were building nuclear missile sites in Cuba,
Cuba and the Bay of Pigs
KEY
1 Cuba
|	| United States and its
territories
European possessions
» Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, what factors might have influenced President Kennedy’s decision to launch the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba, in 1961?
Sil Interactive Timeline




The Vietnam War Era 544	9.1 The Cold War and Vietnam
apparently to protect Castro from another American invasion. When the sites were completed, major East Coast cities and the Panama Canal would be in range of the missiles.
In response to this Soviet aggression, Kennedy demanded the removal of the missiles. In a dramatic television address on October 22, 1962, he blamed Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet premier, for causing a "reckless and provocative threat to world peace.” He also announced that he had approved a naval quarantine (blockade) of Cuba to prevent the Soviets from completing the bases. Behind the scenes, however, Kennedy worked toward a diplomatic settlement. He indicated that he would remove U.S. missiles in Turkey and Italy if the Soviets removed their missiles in Cuba.
After six tense days during which nuclear war seemed a real possibility, Khrushchev agreed to honor the blockade and remove the missiles. As Secretary of State Dean Rusk later told a reporter, "Remember, when you report this, that, eyeball to eyeball, they blinked first.”
The Impact of the Crisis During the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev stood on the edge of a nuclear war and then slowly backed away. In the Soviet Union, Khrushchev lost prestige and more hard-line leaders chipped away at his power. In the United States, Kennedy emerged as a more mature and thoughtful leader, one who had faced a frightening test and had remained calm and resolute. The crisis prompted both leaders to move toward detente—a relaxing of tension between rivals. They installed a “hot line” telephone system between Moscow and Washington, D.C., to improve communication. In 1963, the year after the crisis, the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the first nuclear-weapons agreement, which ended aboveground nuclear tests. Thirty-six other nations soon signed the agreement.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What diplomatic enticement did Kennedy offer the Soviets to help solve the Cuban Missile Crisis?
The Causes and Outcomes of the Berlin Crisis
Since 1958, Khrushchev wanted to sign a peace treaty that would put the western zones of Berlin under control East Germany. His actions were motivated by the steady flow of skilled East German workers into West Berlin. Desiring to show his strength, Kennedy stood firm on America’s commitment to defending the rights
» Kennedy and Khrushchev smile for the cameras, but their June 1961 summit in Vienna, less than 2 months after the Bay of Pigs, was tense and combative.
» In 1961, workers build part of the Berlin Wall. The ninety-six-mile-long wall would divide Soviet controlled East Berlin from democratic West Berlin.
The Vietnam War Era 545	9-1 The Cold War and Vietnam
of West Berliners and West Germans. At a conference in Vienna in June 1961, Kennedy and Khrushchev focused on Berlin as the key issue. Khrushchev called the present situation “intolerable.”
He demanded that the United States recognize the formal division of Germany and end its military presence in West Berlin. Kennedy refused. He did not want to give up occupation rights he considered critical to defending Western Europe. In a tense atmosphere, Khrushchev said, “I want peace, but if you want war, that is your problem.” Kennedy answered, “It is you, not I who wants to force a change.” The meeting ended abruptly. The conference, meant to relax Cold War tensions, only increased them.
After returning home, both world leaders made moves that threatened the peace. Kennedy asked Congress to dramatically increase military spending. Khrushchev ordered the construction of a wall between East and West Berlin. The Berlin Wall became a visible symbol of the reality of the two Germanys and the gulf between the communist East and the democratic West. Kennedy responded by sending 1,500 U.S. troops to West Berlin. For a time, Russian and American tanks moved within sight of each other. Yet, neither side could fully claim a victory.
KSI HYPOTHESIZE
For what reason might the Soviets have wanted to gain control of West Berlin?
ELPS
ELPS SPEAKING 3.C.4
Read aloud the text with a partner. Look at the last two sentences, and think of what word or phrase could connect them in place of yet. Say
........... I \Nir\rr\ nr nhrac;^
thn onntpnnpQ alniiri iisina the I
Reasons for U.S.
Involvement in Indochina
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson shared a vision for a better America in the 1960s. They also shared a vision for a better world in which America would emerge victorious from its Cold War struggle against global communism. As part of this strategic and ideological battle, the United States established a new line of defense against communism in Vietnam. The conflict in Southeast Asia would grow to be one of the most costly wars in American history.
Situated far away in Southeast Asia, Vietnam did not attract significant American attention until the 1960s. Television news shows rarely mentioned it, and many Americans could not locate it on a map. But over a span of more than ten years, the United States sent several million soldiers to fight in Vietnam. America’s involvement in Vietnam had roots in European colonialism, Cold War politics, and Vietnamese calls for national independence.
French Indochina,1954
>> Analyze Maps Based on the information in this map, which regions of present-day Vietnam were particularly dangerous for French forces?
f
South China Sea
KEY
Areas under French control Areas under Vietminh control
r



The Vietnam War Era 546	9.1 The Cold War and Vietnam
French Control of Indochina in Southeast Asia In
the 1800s, French military forces established control over Indochina, a peninsula in Southeast Asia that includes the modern countries of Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. Slightly larger than the state of Texas, Indochina included almost 27 million people by the end of World War II. French colonial officials ruled Vietnam with an iron fist. They transplanted French laws into Vietnam and imposed high taxes. French business people acquired large rice and rubber plantations and controlled the mineral wealth of the country. Some Vietnamese, especially wealthier members of society, benefited from western culture and technology. Many others, however, were impoverished by colonialism.
Some Vietnamese rebelled against France’s exploitative rule. Ho Chi Minh became the most important voice demanding independence for Vietnam. Born in 1890, Ho became involved in anti-French organizations as a young man and fled Vietnam in 1912.
He traveled the world, visiting American ports and living periodically in London, Paris, and Moscow. During his 30-year absence, Ho constantly thought and wrote about Vietnam, and he searched for westerners who would support his plans for Vietnamese independence. Ho embraced communism, and eventually Soviet communists rallied to his cause.
The French Fight Nationalism and Communism
During World War II, Japan had undermined French control over Vietnam. But when the conflict ended, France reasserted its colonial claims there. France's problem, however, was that colonialism was a dying institution. World War II had strengthened nationalist movements while weakening the economic and military positions of traditional European powers. In Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh clamored for independence as France struggled to maintain its dwindling global power.
Meanwhile, the United States faced a difficult decision. On the one hand, it supported decolonization. On the other hand, America wanted France as an ally in its Cold War effort to contain the Soviet Union.
President Harry S. Truman believed that if he supported Vietnamese independence, he would weaken anticommunist forces in France. So, to ensure a strong, anticommunist Western Europe, Truman sacrificed his own anticolonial sentiments.
Vietnam thus became a pawn in Cold War politics. To ensure French support in the Cold War, Truman agreed to aid France’s efforts to regain control over Vietnam. After communist forces won the civil war in China in 1949, America increased its aid to the French in Vietnam. Truman did not want to see another
» Ho Chi Minh was a revolutionary leader who fought against French occupation. Later, he became the prime minister, then president of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam).
communist victory in Asia. Between 1950 and 1954, the United States contributed $2.6 billion to France’s war efforts. Containing Ho Chi Minh’s communist Vietminh—an abbreviation of the League for the Independence of Vietnam— became a national priority.
The Domino Theory Spurs U.S. Involvement in Vietnam When President Dwight D. Eisenhower took office in early 1953, he continued Truman’s policies toward Vietnam. He sent monetary aid to the French, arguing that by battling Ho Chi Minh, they were containing the spread of communism.
Eisenhower told a journalist that the fight in Vietnam involved more than the future of just one country:
You have a row of dominoes set up, you knock over the first one, and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly. So you could have a beginning of a disintegration that would have the most profound influences.
D.
Eisenhower, Arpil 7, 1954 The Vietnam War Era
9.1 The Cold War and Vietnam
The domino theory was the idea that if Vietnam fell to communism, its closest neighbors would follow. This in turn would threaten Japan, the Philippines, and Australia. In short, stopping the communists in Vietnam was important to the protection of the entire region.
In 1954, however, the French lost their eight-year struggle to regain Vietnam. The Vietminh trapped a large French garrison at Dien Bien Phu, a military base in northwest Vietnam, and laid siege to it for 55 days. During the siege, which one Frenchman described as “hell in a very small place,” Vietminh troops destroyed the French airstrip, cut French supply lines, and dug trenches to attack key French positions. Finally, on May 7,1954, after suffering some 15,000 casualties, the French surrendered.
The very next day at an international peace conference in Geneva, Switzerland, France sued for peace. According to the Geneva Accords, France granted independence to Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. The accords also divided Vietnam at the seventeenth parallel into two countries, North Vietnam and South Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh’s communist forces ruled in North Vietnam, and an anticommunist government, supported by the United States, assumed
power in South Vietnam. The accords also called for free elections in 1956 to unify Vietnam.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why was supporting the French in Indochina problematic for President Truman? The United States
Responds to Communism in Vietnam
During the Battle of Dien Bien Phu, France appealed to the United States for military support. President Eisenhower was willing to supply money but not soldiers. Ike would not commit American troops to defend colonialism in Asia. Nevertheless, the President firmly supported the new anticommunist government of South Vietnam.
The U.S. Escalates Involvement in South Vietnam America channeled aid to South Vietnam in different ways. In 1954, the United States and seven other countries formed the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO). Similar to NATO’s goal in Europe, SEATO’s goal was to contain the spread of communism in Southeast Asia.
DOMINO THEORY
AND THE SPREAD OF COMMUNISM
Communist rebel group the Pathet Lao begins fighting government forces. (1953) Would North Vietnam aid the Laotian communists?
Several communist groups are formed in Cambodia and abroad in the 1950s. Would the South Vietnamese communists infiltrate and aid Cambodian rebellion?
Thailand was governed by a series of military dictatorships beginning in 1932. If Laos and Cambodia fell would Thailand follow?
Chinese communist forces defeat nationalists and establish a communist government. (1949)
North Korea is recognized as a result of the Korean War. (1954)
Ho Chi Minh’s communist forces defeat the French and establish North Vietnam.
South Vietnamese communists begin rebellion. (1954)
» Support a Point of View with Evidence The graphic shows the international chain reaction that American strategists of the 1950s most feared. Were these strategists justified in their concern about the spread of communism? Explain.
^1 Interactive Gallery
The Vietnam War Era = 548	9-1 The Cold War and Vietnam
The United States provided economic and military aid to the South Vietnamese government led by Ngo Dinh Diem. Diem was an ardent nationalist and anticommunist. Although he lacked popular appeal, his anticommunism guaranteed American support. When it came time for the 1956 unification elections, American intelligence analysts predicted that Diem would lose to the more popular Ho Chi Minh. Rather than risk losing, Diem refused to participate in the elections, a move made with the support of the U.S. government.
Impact of the Communist Insurgency By 1957, a communist rebel group in the South, known as the National Liberation Front (NLF), had committed itself to undermining the Diem government and uniting Vietnam under a communist flag. NLF guerrilla fighters, called Vietcong, launched an insurgency in which they assassinated government officials and destroyed roads and bridges. Supplied by communists in North Vietnam, the Vietcong employed surprise hit-and-run tactics to weaken Diem’s hold on South Vietnam.
Diem’s own policies also weakened his position in South Vietnam. A devout Roman Catholic in an overwhelmingly Buddhist nation, Diem did little to build a broad political base. Instead, he signed anti-Buddhist legislation and refused to enact significant land reforms. His lack of popular support hurt him in the civil war against North Vietnam. Only the support of the United States kept the unpopular leader in power.
Kennedy Sends U.S. Troops to Vietnam After his election in 1960, President John F. Kennedy took a more aggressive stand against the communists in Vietnam. Beginning in 1961, he sent Special Forces troops to South Vietnam to advise the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) on more effective ways to fight the communist forces. By 1963, more than 15,000 American military personnel were fighting in Vietnam.
Although U.S. military personnel fought bravely and achieved some success, Diem continued to alienate South Vietnamese citizens. By late 1963, his regime was in shambles. Buddhists protested his restrictive policies, occasionally by setting themselves on fire. The Kennedy administration eventually concluded that South Vietnam needed new leadership. Working behind the scenes, Americans plotted with anti-Diem generals to overthrow Diem’s government. On November 1, 1963, Diem was removed from power; he was assassinated the following day.
» French soldiers march Vietminh prisoners captured during fighting near Dien Bien Phu.
■*%,, if
» Viet Cong guerillas patrol the Saigon River in South Vietnam.
Johnson Leads the Nation into the Vietnam War
Three weeks after Diem’s fall, an assassins bullet struck down President Kennedy. Vice President Lyndon
The Vietnam War Era 549	9-1 The Cold War and Vietnam
» President Johnson meets with his cabinet to discuss the Gulf of Tonkin incident. Predict Consequences How might the Gulf of Tonkin incident affect U.S. policy in Vietnam?
B.
Johnson was sworn in as the new President. Johnson was a Cold War traditionalist who held a monolithic view of communism. For this “Cold Warrior,” communism in the Soviet Union, China, and Vietnam were all the same. He did not recognize subtle differences. He also knew that the American people expected victory in Vietnam. Reasons for Escalating Conflict In 1964, President Johnson faced his first crisis in Vietnam. On August 2, North Vietnamese torpedo boats fired on the American destroyer USS Maddox as it patrolled the Gulf of Tonkin off the coast of North Vietnam. The Maddox was not hit, and it returned fire on the North Vietnamese boat. Johnson promptly responded to the attack and to other North Vietnamese provocations. He announced that “aggression by terror against peaceful villages of South Vietnam has now been joined by open aggression on the high seas against the United States of America.” Troubled by increasing strikes against an American
ally, Johnson ordered an airstrike against North Vietnam.
Congress Gives Johnson Broad Military Powers
The President next asked Congress to authorize the use of force to defend American troops. With little debate and only two senators voting against it, Congress agreed to Johnson’s request and passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. The resolution authorized the President “to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression.” The resolution gave Johnson tremendous war powers. It allowed him to commit U.S. troops to South Vietnam and fight a war against North Vietnam without ever going back to Congress to ask for a declaration of war. By authorizing the resolution, Congress had handed its war powers as expressed in the Constitution to the executive branch. This raised questions about the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government. Presidents Johnson and Nixon used the resolution as the legal basis for their military policies in Vietnam.
KJ DESCRIBE
What role did religious issues play in Diem’s troubles as leader of South Vietnam?
ELPS
ELPS SPEAKING 3.F.1
Read aloud the text with a partner. After your partner reads, ask a question beginning with What was the result of... After you read, listen carefully to your partner’s question and answer it. ASSESSMENT
1.	Contrast the foreign policies of Eisenhower and Kennedy during the Cold War.
2.	Generate Explanations Explain how Kennedy's response to the Cuban Missile Crisis mixed diplomacy and force.
3.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how World War II affected French colonial power in Vietnam.
4.	Draw Conclusions Discuss reasons why the United States supported Ngo Dinh Diem, and explain how this changed in later years.
5.	Determine Point of View Discuss President Truman’s decision to support French efforts in Vietnam during the Cold War.
The Vietnam War Era 550
9.1 The Cold War and Vietnam
After the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, President Johnson began to shift U.S. military efforts in Vietnam into high gear. But America’s leaders and soldiers soon found themselves stuck in a deadly quagmire with no quick victory in sight. The war began to weaken the economy, divide the American people, and erode the nation’s morale.
- > An American B-52 bombs North Vietnamese supply lines and military installations in Operation Rolling Thunder.
KOI
Interactive Flipped Video America's Role
Escalates
Escalation of Forces in Vietnam
In February 1965, President Johnson dramatically altered the U.S. role in the Vietnam War. In response to a Vietcong attack that killed American troops at Pleiku, Johnson ordered the start of Operation Rolling Thunder, the first sustained bombing campaign against North Vietnam. Johnson hoped that this new strategy of intensive bombing would convince North Vietnam to stop reinforcing the Vietcong in South Vietnam.
The bombs caused widespread destruction, but they failed to convince North Vietnam to make peace. As the communist forces continued to fight, the United States committed more troops to battle them on the ground. American soldiers moved beyond their advisory roles and assumed greater combat responsibilities, while South Vietnamese troops accepted a secondary, more limited role in the war. U.S. military and civilian leaders hoped that American airstrikes, along with the troops on the ground, would eventually force the communists to the peace table.
8.E, 17.C
» Objectives
Analyze the major issues and events that caused President Johnson to increase American troop strength in Vietnam.
Assess the nature of the war in Vietnam and the difficulties faced by each side.
Evaluate the effects of low morale on American troops and on the home front.
» Key Terms
William
Westmoreland
napalm
hawk
dove
Johnson Changes Strategies Johnson’s change in strategy in 1965 stemmed primarily from the counsel of Secretary of Defense Robert
c
PEARSON 1	'
Bl| realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
551
1'
McNamara and General William Westmoreland, the American commander in South Vietnam. These two advisors believed that the United States needed to increase its military presence in Vietnam and do more of the fighting in order to win the war. Operation Rolling Thunder and increased troop commitments fulfilled this need to “Americanize” the war effort.
Beginning in March 1965, U.S. airstrikes hammered North Vietnam and Vietcong strong points in South Vietnam. Between 1965 and 1973, American pilots dropped more than 6 million tons of bombs on enemy positions—almost three times the tonnage dropped by all the combatants during World War II. In addition to conventional bombs, American pilots dropped napalm and sprayed Agent Orange. Napalm is a jellied gasoline which was dropped in large canisters that exploded on impact, covering large areas in flames. It clung to anything it touched and was difficult to extinguish. Agent Orange is an herbicide meant to kill plant life. U.S.
forces used it to defoliate forest areas that might conceal enemy fighters and to disrupt the enemy’s food supply. Almost half of South Vietnam’s forested areas were sprayed at least once, and the ecological impact was devastating. There also may have been a hidden human cost, as many scientists believe that Agent Orange causes cancers and other physical problems.

{
I
Is
Vietnam War, 1963-1967
Miller Cylindrical Projection
\
» Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, what advantage did the Ho Chi Minh Trail give the Vietcong?
As airstrikes intensified, American ground troops landed in South Vietnam. On March 8, 1965, U.S. Marines arrived to defend the airbase at Da Nang. They were soon followed by other troops. The soldiers accepted a wide range of missions. Some guarded bases. Others conducted search-and-destroy missions to kill as many Vietcong guerrillas as they could. Helicopters ferried commandos to and from remote locations for quick strikes against enemy positions.
Vietcong Tactics and Strategies Large-scale battles against Vietcong or North Vietnamese Army units were not typical of America’s strategy in Vietnam. American soldiers generally fought lightly armed Vietcong guerrillas in small engagements.
Ho Chi Minh’s military doctrine hinged on fighting only when victory was assured, which meant never fighting on his opponents’ terms. He compared his troops to a tiger, while the Americans were like an elephant. If the tiger stands still, the elephant will crush it. But if the tiger keeps moving and occasionally jumps on the elephant to take a bite out of it, the elephant will slowly bleed to death.
During the war, the Vietcong behaved like Ho’s tiger. They traveled light, often carrying just a rifle and a few handfuls of rice. They hid in tunnels during the day and emerged at night to ambush American patrols. They infiltrated American bases and set off explosives. They
KEY
Q
November 1963 Diem government overthrown Q.
August 1964 Gulf of Tonkin incident escalates war Q
February 1965 Vietcong attack at Pleiku Q
March 1965 Operation Rolling Thunder Q
March 1965 First U.S. combat troops arrive Q
December 1967 More than 480,000 U.S. soldiers in South Vietnam 
Interactive Chart
fit
The Vietnam War Era 552	9.2 America’s Role Escalates
VIETNAM EFFECTS OF ESCALATION

COST ESCALATION
DEFENSE SPENDING (BILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
$20
MILITARY ESCALATION AMERICAN TROOP DEPLOYMENT
; 600,000 li 500,000 400,000 300,000 200,000 I 100,000
FATALITY ESCALATION
American casualties $0
’60 ’62 ’64 ’66 ’68 ’70 ’72 ’74 ’76
Sources: Office of Budget and Management,
Fiscal Year 2012 Historical Tables ',
National Archives, Military Records
» Analyze Data What does the data reveal about the war during the years 1965 to 1968?
set booby traps that maimed and crippled American troops. Their strategy was to wear the Americans down. The leaders of North Vietnam and the Vietcong remained convinced that if they could just avoid losing the war, the Americans would eventually leave.
American Casualties Escalate American strategy during this stage of the war yielded limited results. U.S. bombers did disrupt North Vietnamese industry and slow the movement of supplies to the Vietcong. But when the communists did not sue for peace, American troop commitments and battlefield deaths escalated rapidly. By the end of 1965, there were 184,300 U.S. troops in Vietnam, and only 636 American soldiers had died in the war. Three years later, there were more than 500,000 U.S. troops in Vietnam, and the number of American dead had risen to more than 30,000.
Each year, the war claimed more American lives and cost more American dollars. But at the end of each year, the United States seemed no closer to success. America’s mission was to help South Vietnam build a stable noncommunist nation and thereby win the “hearts and minds” of its citizens. But corruption Plagued the South Vietnamese administrative structure. Outside of the major cities, the government enjoyed little support. Although American forces won most of the larger battles, they did not achieve a successful end to the war. By 1967, the war had devolved into a stalemate. Some U.S. critics of the war
ELPS
compared it to a quagmire—muddy terrain that sinks underfoot and is difficult to exit.
INFER
Why did General Westmoreland and Secretary of Defense McNamara want to “Americanize” the war?
ELPS SPEAKING 3.D.1, 3.F.2
Head aloud the text with a partner. Use context clues to determine the meaning of quagmire. Then discuss why the Vietnam War was compared to a quagmire.
Patriotism, Heroism, and Sinking Morale
For American soldiers in the field, the Vietnam War presented difficult challenges that demanded courage and patience. Unlike World War II, the Vietnam War did not emphasize territorial acquisition. The United States and its allies did not invade North Vietnam, march on Ho Chi Minh’s capital of Hanoi, or attempt to destroy the communist regime. As in the Korean War, the United States was wary of triggering both Chinese and Soviet entry into the conflict. Instead, U.S. forces supported the survival and development of South Vietnam, which was besieged by the Vietcong and their North Vietnamese allies. In this fight, U.S. troops could never fully tell their friends from their
The Vietnam War Era 553	9.2 America’s Role Escalates
I volunteered. . . . Ever since the American Revolution my family had people in all the different wars, and that was always the thing—when your country needs you, you go. You don’t ask a lot of questions. . . .
—David Ross, United States Army medic
» Lieutenant Commander Dorothy Ryan, a Navy Nurse aboard the hospital ship USS Repose was one of about 10,000 American women who bravely served in Vietnam.
enemies. Yet from the outset, they faced the dangers of Vietnam’s battlefields with dedication and bravery.
New Battlefield Dangers and Guerrilla Warfare Although American troops won numerous battles, they could not win the war outright. The problem was that the Vietcong and North Vietnamese avoided significant engagements. Rather than expose themselves to superior American firepower, the communists employed guerrilla warfare tactics, fighting smaller skirmishes where their small-unit abilities and their knowledge of the landscape bettered their chances for victory.
U.S. forces often had no alternative but to fight indecisive battles in the jungles, rice paddies, and mountains of Vietnam. Most of these battlefields abounded with natural cover. Clad in black clothing, Vietcong gunmen would spring out of the dense foliage, attack with automatic rifles and grenades, and disappear back into the landscape. Much of this fighting took place at night, which reduced the effectiveness of American planes, artillery, and troop tactics.
American Soldiers Fulfill Their Duty
Despite the trials of war, American soldiers adapted to adverse conditions in Vietnam and fought with the same intensity that U.S. forces had shown in World Wars I and II. Many fought to prevent the spread of communism. Some fought to protect villagers in South Vietnam and win their trust and respect. Others fought because their country was at war, and they felt it was their duty. A medic in the First Infantry Division explained his reason for going to Vietnam:
I volunteered. . . . Ever since the
American Revolution my family had people in all the different wars, and that was always the thing— when your country needs you, you go. You don’t ask a lot of questions.
—David Ross, United States Army medic
Later, many did ask questions about America’s involvement in the war, but overwhelmingly while they were in Vietnam, the soldiers met their duties
The Vietnam War Era 554	9.2 America’s Role Escalates
impact of the War on the U.S. Economy, 1968
INFLATION
Reached 4% TAXES
Income tax increased by 10% GDP (GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT)
Reached a high of 9.5% devoted to the war effort GREAT SOCIETY INITIATIVES
President Lyndon B. Johnson's reform programs weakened by rising costs of the war: $94.3 billion spent on the war, $14.9 billion spent on welfare EDUCATION
Out of the $277 billion spent by the U.S., 16% was directed toward education, 34% toward the war effort » Analyze Data In your opinion, which two effects had the most negative impact and why?
with courage. More than 58,000 of them gave their lives for their country.
Women also displayed courage and valor. About 10,000 American military women served in Vietnam during the war. Most female military personnel were nurses.
Not only did they face danger working close to the front, but they also had to cope with the emotional toll of constantly working with injured and dying soldiers and civilians.
Lynda Van Devanter volunteered to go to Vietnam and spent a year there as a nurse. Like other nurses, she confronted war and death on a daily basis. However, on one occasion she had to deliver a baby. She later recalled:
It was creation of life in the midst of all that destruction. And creation of life restored your sanity. . . . Those were the things that kept you going. That there was life coming. There was still hope.
—Lynda. Van Devanter, United States Army nurse
Questioning the Cause As the war lengthened, many Americans began to question U.S. involvement. The earliest soldiers in Vietnam had been volunteers, men committed to the fight against communism. But
by the end of 1965, most American soldiers in Vietnam had been drafted into military service, and they were not as certain that preserving the government in South Vietnam was crucial to American interests. They sensed that many South Vietnamese people were indifferent—if not openly hostile—to their own nation. Increasingly, it seemed that Americans were dying to defend a nation whose people were unwilling to die to defend themselves.
U DESCRIBE
What relatively successful tactic did North Vietnamese and Vietcong fighters employ against U.S. forces?
Doubt Grows on the Home Front
The lack of progress toward victory in Vietnam also led to doubt in the United States. When President Johnson had begun to send troops to war, Americans had expected a relatively quick victory. After all, the United States was a militarily powerful, technologically advanced country, and North Vietnam was a poor country with comparatively little technology. Over the next few years, the Johnson administration kept asserting that an American victory was close at hand. But when that did not come, many began to question the President’s foreign policy.
Impact of Defense Spending on the Economy The
war strained government finances. President Johnson’s
The Vietnam War Era 555	9.2 America’s Role Escalates
Great Society plan called for enormous domestic spending to eliminate poverty, improve education and medical care, and fight racial discrimination. The costs of fighting a war on the other side of the world were just as mammoth. Although massive government spending lowered the unemployment rate, it also led to rising prices and inflation. The combination of heavy government spending, rising prices, and inflation forced Johnson to raise taxes. Ultimately, Johnson had to cut back on his Great Society reform initiatives to help pay for the war.
An Antiwar Movement Emerges As long as America’s involvement in Vietnam had been small and relatively inexpensive, few politicians voiced serious opposition. Congress offered bipartisan support for the Vietnam policies of Johnson’s predecessors. Soon after the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, however, Congressional support began to waver over the President’s escalation of the war.
Beginning in 1967, Congress—and eventually most of the nation—divided into two camps: hawks and doves. The mostly conservative hawks supported Johnson’s war policy. Believing strongly in the containment of communism and the domino theory, they accepted rising troop levels, escalating costs, and increasing numbers of battlefield deaths. For the hawks, Vietnam was a crucial front in the Cold War. Doves, however, broke with Johnson’s war policy. A diverse group that included liberal politicians, pacifists, student radicals, and civil rights leaders, doves questioned the war on both moral and strategic grounds. For them, the conflict was a localized civil war, not a vital Cold War battleground.
Senator J. William Fulbright, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, emerged as the
early leader of the doves in Congress. A Democrat who had supported the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Fulbright soon came to believe that the war in Vietnam was a national civil war, not a Cold War conflict directed from Moscow or Beijing. In 1967 and 1968, Fulbright held public hearings on the war, providing a platform for critics of the conflict.
B RECALL
How did the growing belief that the Vietnam War was not a vital, Cold War conflict affect American society?
ELPS
ELPS 2.C.3
Work with a partner to compile a list of unfamiliar vocabulary words that you hear while reading aloud the section “Doubt Grows on the Home Front.” Look up the meanings and use the words in sentences. ASSESSMENT
1.	Distinguish Discuss the relationship between U.S. troops and South Vietnamese troops during the Vietnam War.
2.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how Operation Rolling Thunder represented a change in the U.S. war strategy.
3.	Compare and Contrast Explain the advantages that North Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers had over U.S. soldiers during the war.
4.	Generate Explanations Explain the respective goals of the United States and North Vietnam during the Vietnam War.
5.	Determine Point of View Discuss reasons that some Americans opposed the Vietnam War.

The Vietnam War Era . 556	9.2 America’s Role Escalates

■,,«< * i.
J
! «?is
President Johnson sent more American troops to Vietnam in order to win the war. But with each passing year, casualty lists got longer and victory seemed further away. As soldiers died abroad and hawks and doves argued at home, the Vietnam War opened up a deep emotional rift in American society. After the war ended, it would take years for the country to heal itself.

V|
ltd

*4
Antiwar students at the University of South Carolina protest the U.S. invasion of Cambodia, in May 1970.
Interactive Flipped Video
The Antiwar
Movement
Antiwar Sentiment Grows
The war in Vietnam divided Americans more deeply than any conflict since the Civil War. Although most Americans initially supported President Johnson’s bombings and troop deployments, by 1966 critics began speaking out. Senator Fulbright’s opposition to the war hurt Johnson in Congress, and the senator was soon joined by like-minded activists who believed that American soldiers were dying in a war that had little to do with American interests.
Protesting the Draft By 1965, most of the troops sent to Vietnam were no longer volunteers who had enlisted in the army. Instead, they were draftees—young men drafted into military service—who had been assigned a tour in Vietnam. In accordance with the Selective Service Act of 1948, the government drafted more than 1.5 million men into military service during the Vietnam War. All males had to register the draft when they turned 18, and the Selective Service System
called up draftees based on projected military needs.
Critics of the Selective Service System argued that the draft was
not fair. The system gave local draft boards considerable influence in selecting men for service, and it also granted deferments to college
8.E, 8.F, 9.G, 23.B
» Objectives
Describe the divisions within American society over the Vietnam War.
Analyze the Tet Offensive and the American reaction to it.
Summarize the factors that influenced the outcome of the 1968 presidential election.
» Key Terms
draftee
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS)
“credibility gap”
Tet Offensive Eugene McCarthy Robert Kennedy
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
557
» Frank E. Petersen, who later became the first African American Marine Corps general, prepares for combat in Vietnam.
(
» Over 4,000 protestors marched near the Armed Forces Induction Center in New York City to voice their opposition to the draft during Stop-the-Draft week in October 1967.
gll Interactive Chart
, i
students and men who worked in certain designated occupations. Most of the 2.5 million men who served in Vietnam came from working-class and poor backgrounds.
During the Johnson presidency, the number of African American troops fighting and dying in Vietnam was also disproportionately high. At the beginning of the war, African Americans suffered more than 20 percent of the total combat deaths, roughly twice the percentage of the U.S. population. Additionally African American soldiers were more likely to serve in combat positions and less likely to become commissioned officers.
Civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr., spoke out against the added war burden shouldered by African American soldiers. Speaking at a New York church in 1967, King said that the war was hurting both poor blacks and whites. Vietnam was drawing human and economic resources away from America’s other wars on poverty and discrimination. He added that it hindered poor Americans in other more direct ways:
It was sending their sons and their brothers and their husbands to fight and to die in extraordinary high proportions relative to the rest of the population. . . . [W]e have been repeatedly faced with the cruel irony of watching Negro and white boys on TV screens as they kill and die together for a nation that has been unable to seat them together in the same schools.
—Martin Luther King, Jr., 1967
Perceived inequities in the draft led to widespread resistance. Antiwar advocates sponsored Stop the Draft Week in October 1967, and some draft-eligible males burned their draft cards in protest. Finally in 1969, the Selective Service System adopted a lottery that was designed to eliminate deferment abuses and create a more diverse army of draftees.
Protests on College Campuses Across America, college campuses became centers of antiwar sentiment. Professors and students criticized the war for a variety of reasons, ranging from pacifism and the war’s effects on the economy to a personal desire to avoid military service. Antiwar activity on college campuses did not, however, reflect the attitudes of all Americans.
In fact, many professors remained vocal in their defense of the war effort during lectures and at
The Vietnam War Era 558	9.3 The Antiwar Movement
protest rallies. For the most part, though, colleges and universities were focal points of the strongest antiwar opinion.
Antiwar activities were part of more significant changes taking place on college campuses. Never before the 1960s had so many Americans entered colleges and universities. Between 1946 and 1970, the number of students enrolled in institutions of higher education increased from 2 million to 8 million. Many college students became a class unto themselves— segregated from the workforce, free from many adult responsibilities, and encouraged by their professors to think critically. Many of the students who embraced the antiwar cause came from middle-class families. Students from working-class families were less likely to protest against the war.
The University of Michigan and the University of California at Berkeley became important hubs of the antiwar movement. The Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) was founded in 1960 at the University of Michigan. Originally formed to campaign against racism and poverty, the SDS soon began campaigning to end the war in Vietnam. By 1964, SDS had organized campus "teach-ins” and demonstrations against the war and encouraged draft-age males to sign “We Won’t Go” petitions.
The 26th Amendment Although today people take for granted that 18- to 20-year-olds can vote, this was not the case until 1971. The drive to gain voting rights for young adults was yet another instance of people during this era demanding equality of political rights. In addition, since the issue concerned rights for young people, student activism played a key role in getting out the movement’s key message: "old enough to fight, old enough to vote.”
This idea was not exactly new. President Eisenhower, the former Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in WWII, backed the idea in his 1954 State of the Union message. In it, he said that since 18- to-20-year-old citizens were again and again summoned to risk their lives for our nation, “they should participate in the political process that produces this fateful summons.”
But it was not until the issue was pressed by young people whose lives might soon be on the line in Vietnam that support for this area of voting rights gained steam. Once the proposed constitutional amendment won congressional support on March 23, 1971, it was quickly ratified by the states. By July 7, 1971, once the ratification was certified, the 26th Amendment was in place.
» Journalist Mike Wallace reports from the front lines. New broadcast technology meant that television viewers in the U.S. got an intimate glimpse of events in the war zone.
Interactive Gallery
enlisted in the antiwar cause. Hawks and doves drifted farther apart. More groups organized against the war, their names corresponding with whom they represented—Vietnam Veterans Against the War, Catholic Peace Fellowship, Another Mother for Peace, and so on.
Antiwar sentiment was to some degree the result of the news media’s extensive coverage of the war. A large majority of American households now had television sets. Most Americans learned the news of the war by watching TV news reports. Thus, the war in Vietnam became the first “living-room war.” Americans watched its progress—or lack of it—in their living rooms on nightly newscasts.
For the first time, the brutal reality of war was broadcast into Americans’ homes. They saw what the TV cameramen saw: death, destruction, horrible injuries, civilian casualties, and chaos. Horrific images also filled newspapers and news magazines. War correspondents issued reports, not of a string of great American victories leading to a clear goal, but of a messy conflict that seemed to lack a clear objective. As early as 1962, the printed the following gloomy forecast: “The United States seems inextricably committed to a
The Role of the Media and the “Credibility Gap” long, inconclusive war ” Outside college campuses, other Americans soon
The Vietnam War Era 559 ;	9.3 The Antiwar Movement
Yet television and print journalists also broadcast and reported on government officials issuing optimistic statement after optimistic statement. Soon, a “credibility gap” emerged between what the Johnson administration said about the war and what many journalists reported about it. This gap referred to the American public’s growing distrust of the statements made by the government.
El ANALYZE INFORMATION Before changes were
made in 1969, why was the Selective Service System the subject of criticism?
ELPS SPEAKING 3.G.1
With a partner, read aloud the text up to the section titled The 26th Amendment. Use short phrases to discuss the antiwar movement.
-V ELPS
The Tet Offensive
In November 1967, President Johnson brought General Westmoreland home from Vietnam to address the nation’s concerns about the war. Westmoreland said that the Vietcong were declining in strength and could no longer mount a major offensive. As Westmoreland made his claims, however, the North Vietnamese and Vietcong were planning just such an attack.
Widespread Attacks In early 1968, U.S. officials anticipated a communist offensive. As expected, on January 21, the North Vietnamese Army hit Khe Sanh in northwest South Vietnam. However, ten days later, the communists expanded their attack by hitting U.S. and ARVN positions throughout South Vietnam. The Tet Offensive—named after the Vietnamese lunar new year—was a coordinated assault on 36 provincial capitals and 5 major cities, as well as the U.S. embassy in Saigon.
The communists planned to take and hold the cities until the urban population took up arms in their support. They thought the Tet Offensive had a good chance of ending the war.
The fighting was fierce, but in the end, American and South Vietnamese forces repelled the offensive, and there was no popular uprising against the government of South Vietnam. Although U.S. forces won a tactical victory by preventing the Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army from achieving their primary objectives, the Tet Offensive was a strategic blow to the Americans. It demonstrated that the communists had not lost the will or the ability to fight on.
Shifting Policy from Victory to Peace After the Tet Offensive, American military leaders seemed less confident of a quick end to the war. When Westmoreland requested more troops, President Johnson asked his
Tet Offensive, 1968
» Analyze Maps Identify two regions of South Vietnam that were hard-hit by the Tet Offensive.
South China Sea
KEY
Q
January-June 1968 Battle of Khe Sanh Q
January 31,1968 American embassy attacked ★ Attack during Tet Offensive
}>
o
V

The Vietnam War Era 560	9.3 The Antiwar Movement
new Secretary of Defense, Clark Clifford, to take an objective look at the military and political situation in Vietnam. The deeper Clifford delved into the matter, the more pessimistic he became. Sending more troops would inevitably require raising taxes, increasing draft rolls, and calling up reserves. It would lead to increased casualties in the field and dissent at home. And it still might not lead to victory. Clifford, calling the war “a bottomless pit,” concluded that the President should radically shift U.S. policy from one that pursued victory to one that pursued a negotiated peace.
Johnson Refuses to Seek Reelection While Clifford deliberated, many Americans began to turn dramatically against the war. Some marched in protest and engaged in antiwar activities. Others registered their disapproval at the polls. In early 1968, Minnesota senator Eugene McCarthy, the antiwar candidate for the Democratic Party nomination, made a surprisingly strong showing in the New Hampshire primary. Sensing that Johnson was in a politically weakened position, New York’s Democratic senator Robert Kennedy announced his candidacy for the presidency. Both McCarthy and Kennedy believed that the war had divided America and drained resources away from the fights against poverty and discrimination. What Johnson feared most was happening: The war was undermining his presidency.
On March 31, 1968, two months after the Tet Offensive, the President addressed the nation on television. He announced that America would limit its bombing of North Vietnam and seek a negotiated settlement to the war. Johnson then shocked the nation by announcing that he would not run for another term as President. The speech marked another turning point in the war. The fight for victory was over. Peace was now the official government policy.
Q DETERMINE RELEVANCE
What was the relevance of the Tet Offensive for U.S. policy makers?
ELPS LISTENING 2.C.4, SPEAKING 3.D.2
Listen as a partner reads the section titled Widespread Attacks. Locate the academic vocabulary words coordinated and demonstrated. Discuss their meanings and use them in original sentences about the Vietnam War.
# ELPS
The 1968 Presidential Race
Johnson’s decision not to seek reelection in 1968 threw the presidential race wide open. Many Americans believed it provided an opportunity to enact fundamental political and social changes. They argued that the future of the country was at stake. It was a
» An American tank patrols among the ruins in Saigon following the Tet Offensive in 1968. American forces were unprepared due to a cease-fire supposedly in effect during the celebration of Tet.
Roh.rt French K.nn.dy	- A» ««»<»» «»•«*♦ lnt.rr.pCd M.	trbmpli.
» The assassination of presidential candidate Robert Kennedy in June 1968 shocked the nation and the world.
The Vietnam War Era 561
9.3 The Antiwar Movement
time of new ideas and new plans. But the optimism and high hopes of the early campaign would soon die amidst political infighting, violence, and assassination.
King and Kennedy Assassinated In the spring and summer of the campaign season, bullets struck down two Americans who spoke out eloquently for peace in Vietnam and peaceful change in American society. Martin Luther King Jr., the most prominent leader of the civil rights movement, had publicly turned against the war in 1967. He contributed compelling social and moral reasons to the argument for peace. But his voice was tragically silenced on April 4, 1968, when a racist assassin shot and killed him in Memphis, Tennessee.
Robert Kennedy was the next leader to fall. He had based his campaign for the presidency on compassion and idealism, and millions of Americans rallied to his camp. On June 5, 1968, at a rally celebrating his victory in the California primary, Kennedy asserted that “we are a great country, an unselfish country, a compassionate country,” and that he intended “to make that the basis of my running.” Minutes later, a Palestinian immigrant named Sirhan Sirhan shot Kennedy in the head, killing him instantly. Sirhan may have wanted revenge for America’s support for Israel in that country’s war with Egypt the year before.
» Chaos ensued as police clashed with protestors outside the 1968 Democratic National Convention, held in Chicago.
The Chicago Democratic Convention The murders of King and Kennedy cast a dark shadow over the election campaigns. In August 1968, the Democrats convened in Chicago to choose a presidential candidate to represent their party in the November election. As the delegates arrived, so too did antiwar protesters. Chicago’s mayor deployed police and members of the National Guard to prevent any outbreaks of violence.
Inside the convention, the Democrats angrily debated placing an antiwar plank in the party platform. They chose Hubert Humphrey, Johnson’s Vice President, over Eugene McCarthy, who had garnered support from many antiwar groups. As the delegates cast their votes, violence between police and protesters erupted outside the convention. After police beat activists with nightsticks, some protesters retaliated by throwing rocks and bottles at the onrushing tide of police.
The television coverage of the fierce fighting in the streets and the bitter arguments on the convention floor shocked Americans. Chaos and civil disorder appeared to have replaced civil debate in the political arena. The divisions and violence in Chicago mirrored the deep divisions in American politics and the heartbreaking violence on the front lines in Vietnam.
Richard Nixon Wins the Presidency At a much more peaceful convention in Miami, Republicans nominated Richard M. Nixon, who promised if elected he would deliver “peace with honor.” He wanted the United States out of Vietnam, but he also demanded honorable peace terms.
He promised to listen to “the great, quiet forgotten majority—the nonshouters and the nondemonstrators.” This large group of Americans, described by one commentator as “the unyoung, the unblack, and the unpoor,” was dubbed the “silent majority.” Throughout his campaign, Nixon used a “Southern strategy” of courting more conservative Southern voters with appeals to law and order, striving to pull them away from their traditional support of the Democratic Party
Alabama governor George Wallace also ran for the presidency on a third-party ticket. A lifelong Democrat prior to his entry into the race, Wallace said that neither of the traditional political parties represented Southern voters who were unsettled by the cultural and social changes in the country. He had no sympathy for the demands of antiwar radicals, counterculture hippies, or African American militants. He represented the "white backlash” against the civil rights movement and the desire to press forward to victory in Vietnam.
The combination of Nixon’s “Southern strategy” and Wallace’s third-party candidacy siphoned traditionally Democratic votes away from Humphrey. In a close
r/4
The Vietnam War Era 562	9.3 The Antiwar Movement
election, Nixon captured victory by winning 43.6 percent of the popular vote and 301 electoral votes. Humphrey received 42.5 percent of the popular vote and Wallace 13.6 percent. The election marked the end of the Democratic “Solid South” and signaled significant changes in the nation’s political landscape. Richard Nixon’s ascendancy marked a new Republican domination of the American presidency.
B EXPRESS IDEAS CLEARLY
In your own words, who were the so-called “Silent Majority” and why did Nixon call them that?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Determine Point of View Discuss the reasons that many Americans criticized the draft system during the Vietnam War.
2.	Make Generalizations Discuss the role of college students in the antiwar movement.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain why the Vietnam War became known as the first “living-room war.”
4.	Apply Concepts Discuss the factors that influenced Richard Nixon’s victory in the 1968 presidential election.
5.	Analyze Information Explain how the Tet Offensive affected U.S. confidence in the Vietnam War.
The Vietnam War Era 563	9.3 The Antiwar Movement
Fourteen-year-old Mary Ann Vecchio kneels over the body of Kent State student Jeffrey Miller, age 20. Also killed were Allison Krause, 19; William Schroeder, 19; and Sandra Scheuer, 20.
I PSI
Interactive Flipped Video 9.4
As a presidential candidate, Richard Nixon promised “peace with honor” and an end to a war that had fractured American society. Nixon did indeed withdraw American troops, and the Vietnam War finally ended. But the impact of the war endured.
As the nation recovered from war, Americans reexamined the struggle against communism, the power of the presidency, and America’s role in the world.
8.D, 8.E, 8.F, 17.C, 19.B, 20.A, 26.F
» Objectives
Assess Nixon’s new approach to the war, and explain why protests continued.
Explain what led to the Paris Peace Accords and why South Vietnam eventually fell to the communists.
The War’s End and Effects
Attempts to Withdraw from Vietnam
Evaluate the impact of the Vietnam War on the United States.
» Key Terms
Vietnamization My Lai
Pentagon Papers Paris Peace War Powers Act Roy P. Benavidez
Nixon’s defenders argued that he was a hard-working patriot with a new vision for America. His critics charged that he was a deceitful politician bent on acquiring power and punishing his enemies. There were elements of truth to both views. But defenders and critics alike agreed that Richard Nixon was a determined man with abundant political talent. From his first day in office, the new President realized that ending the Vietnam War was the key to everything else he hoped to achieve.
Peace Talks Stall Though formal peace talks between the warring parties had begun in May 1968, the talks bogged down from the outset due to disagreements and a lack of compromise. When Richard Nixon took office in January 1969, his peace delegation firmly believed they could break the impasse. The Americans and South Vietnamese wanted all communist troops out of South Vietnam.
They also wanted prisoners of war (POWs) returned. Meanwhile, the North Vietnamese demanded an immediate American withdrawal from Vietnam and the formation of a coalition government in South
<	PEARSON 1
t	realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.

Vietnam that would include representatives from the Vietcong. Still hoping to win the war in the field, North Vietnam refused to budge from its initial position. And South Vietnam refused to sign any agreement that compromised its security.
Vietnamization President Nixon refused to accept the North Vietnamese peace terms. He was committed to a policy of “peace with honor” and believed that there were still military options.
He continued a gradual pullout of American troops, and expressed faith in the ability of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) to assume the burden of war. He called his approach Vietnamization—U.S. forces would withdraw as ARVN troops assumed more combat duties. The hope was that with continued American aid behind the front lines, the ARVN would fight its own battles to secure South Vietnam.
To reduce the flow of communist supplies to the Vietcong, Nixon ordered the secret bombing of the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Cambodia. This was a controversial move because it widened the scope of the war and helped to undermine the neutral government in Cambodia. In the end, neither Vietnamization nor secret bombings dramatically improved South Vietnam's chances of winning a war against the communists.
B GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
Explain why you think the bombings in Cambodia were kept secret.
» President Nixon meets with his defense team in January 1971.

Events Intensify the
Antiwar Movement
Nixon inherited two things from Lyndon Johnson: an unpopular war and a vocal American opposition to it. The new President wanted “peace with honor,” security for America’s ally South Vietnam, and international respect for U.S. foreign policy. Antiwar activists wanted the war ended and American troops out of Vietnam— on any terms. Nixon found it increasingly difficult to achieve his goals and satisfy the snowballing antiwar movement.
The War Widens into Cambodia More than a year into office, Nixon had grown impatient with the snail s pace of the peace negotiations. In 1970, he attempted to break the stalemate by ordering a ground attack on North Vietnamese Army and Vietcong bases in Cambodia. Nixon also hoped to aid the pro-American Cambodian government in its fight against the Khmer Rouge, a communist movement supported by North Vietnam.
Interactive Timeline
» Analyze Political Cartoons What is the cartoon saying about the consequences of Nixon’s lack of follow-through on a 1968 campaign promise?
The Vietnam War Era 565
9.4 The War's End and Effects

1
On the evening of April 30, Nixon addressed the American people, informing them of his decision to carry the war into Cambodia. He stressed that the war had become a measure of how committed the United States was to preserving freedom around the world:
If, when the chips are down, the world’s most powerful nation, the United States of America, acts like a pitiful, helpless giant, the forces of totalitarianism and anarchy will threaten free nations . . . throughout the world.
—-President Richard Nixon, 1970
The next morning, U.S. and ARVN forces crossed the border into Cambodia. These soldiers captured large stockpiles of weapons and supplies, but they did not break the stalemate. North Vietnam remained determined to have peace on its terms or no peace at all.
The Kent State Killings The Cambodian incursion had a profound impact on the peace movement at home. It stirred antiwar activists, who argued that Nixon had
» Students protesting American involvement in Vietnam are heckled by opposing students, many of whom carry anti-communist signs.
widened the war and made the world a more dangerous place. Throughout the country, college campuses erupted with protests. Several demonstrations prompted the police and National Guard to step in to preserve order.
On two campuses, confrontations between students and armed authorities led to deaths. Four days after Nixon’s speech, demonstrators at Kent State University in Ohio threw rocks and bottles at members of the National Guard. When one guardsman thought he heard a sniper’s shot, he fired his rifle. The shot prompted other National Guardsmen to discharge a volley of gunfire into a group of protesters, killing four youths. The Kent State killings led to demonstrations on other campuses. At Jackson State University, a historically African American college in Mississippi, a confrontation between students and police ended with two students dead.
College demonstrations against the war sometimes prompted counterprotests by Americans who supported the President. In response to a May 8, 1970, antiwar rally in downtown New York City, construction workers staged a counter-demonstration, carrying American flags and chanting ‘All the Way USA.”
Believing that some anti-war demonstrators had spit on the American flag, they pushed into the crowd and started hitting the antiwar protesters. The clash drew national attention. Days later, thousands of construction workers, businessmen, secretaries, and housewives marched peacefully through Manhattan’s streets in support of Nixon and the war effort. One man expressed his feelings about the march:
I’m very proud to be an American, and I know my boy that was killed in Vietnam would be here today if he was alive, marching with us. ... I know he died for the right cause, because in his letters he wrote to me he knew what he was fighting for: to keep America free. . . .
—Robert Geary, May 20, 1970
As the fighting continued in Vietnam, the American home front became its own physical and emotional battlefield.
The My Lai Massacre In 1971, two events increased the pressure on Nixon to pull U.S. troops out of Vietnam. The first event had roots in a U.S. action in South Vietnam three years earlier.
The Vietnam War Era 566	9.4 The War’s End and Effects
On March 16, 1968, American forces searching for enemy troops in an area with a strong Vietcong presence came upon the village of My Lai. By this point in the war, many American troops had been injured and killed by Vietcong fighters posing as civilians. It was a recipe for disaster at My Lai, where Lieutenant William Calley’s unit began shooting and killing unarmed civilians. During the assault, U.S. soldiers killed between four and five hundred Vietnamese.
Lt. Calley later maintained that he was following orders, but many of the soldiers present did not participate in the massacre. At least one risked his own life to stop it. The tragedy was made even worse by an inadequate military investigation of the incident. Life magazine eventually published disturbing photos taken during the event, and in March 1971, a military court convicted Lt. Calley of his participation in the attack. News of the My Lai massacre, the coverup, and Calley’s trial shocked many Americans and added fuel to the burning antiwar fire.
The Pentagon Papers On the heels of My Lai came the 1971 publication of the Pentagon Papers in The New York Times. The papers were a classified government history of America’s involvement in Vietnam. The study was leaked to The Times by one of its coauthors, Daniel Ellsberg. Nixon tried to block the full publication, but in New York Times v. United States, the Supreme Court ruled against the administration. The study revealed that American leaders involved the United States in Vietnam without fully informing the American people and occasionally even lied to Congress. Along with the invasion of Cambodia, the killings on college campuses, and the My Lai Massacre, the Pentagon Papers turned even more Americans against the war.
fej CHECK UNDERSTANDING Why did the Nixon
administration try to stop publication of the Pentagon Papers?
The Vietnam War Ends
The failings of Vietnamization and growing dissent at home forced President Nixon to search for some final way out of the conflict. A 1971 public-opinion poll revealed that two thirds of Americans favored withdrawing American troops, even if it meant a communist takeover of South Vietnam. Sensitive to the public mood, Congress pressed Nixon to bring the troops home. Many believed that to win reelection in 1972, he had to end the war.
American Troops Withdraw from Vietnam In
October 1972, the United States and North Vietnam
» A photographer captured the terrible scene in the village of My Lai where American troops killed civilians.
» U.S. troops wait to return home after completing their tours in Vietnam. Hypothesize What difficulties might be faced by soldiers returning from duty?
Interactive Gallery
©
The Vietnam War Era 567	9.4 The War’s End and Effects
came to terms on a peace settlement. One month later, with lasting peace almost at hand, Nixon easily defeated the antiwar Democrat George McGovern for reelection. But Nixon’s triumph was short-lived. The Vietnamese peace fell apart when North Vietnam refused to sign the agreement. Talks broke off, but renewed American bombing in North Vietnam finally induced the North Vietnamese to resume negotiations.
At last, in January 1973, the United States, South Vietnam, North Vietnam, and the Vietcong signed the Paris Peace Accords. The parties agreed to a ceasefire and a U.S. troop withdrawal from South Vietnam. POWs would be exchanged, but North Vietnamese troops would remain in South Vietnam. The National Liberation Front (Vietcong) would become a legitimate political party in South Vietnam, and South Vietnam's noncommunist government would remain in power pending a political settlement. With the war ended, the last American troops came home. Among the returning soldiers were more than 550 POWs, most of whom were pilots shot down during the war.
The Fall of Saigon For the United States, the war in Vietnam was over. For the Vietnamese, however, it continued. Neither North nor South Vietnam honored the cease-fire or worked toward a diplomatic settlement of their differences. In the spring of 1975, minor fighting
escalated when North Vietnam launched an offensive against the South.
Without American aid and ground support, the ARVN was no match for the Soviet-supplied North Vietnamese Army. By the end of April, the communists had taken Saigon. After decades of fighting and millions of deaths, Vietnam was unified under one flag.
B RECALL
Did the Paris Peace Accords bring an end to fighting in Vietnam? Explain.
Effects of the Vietnam War
More than 58,000 American soldiers gave their lives serving their country in Vietnam; another 300,000 were wounded. Although figures are not exact, the Vietnamese death toll most likely exceeded 2 million. Peace, however, did not mean the end of pain and hardship. The end of the war created other problems in Southeast Asia. The war also affected American attitudes toward world affairs.
Southeast Asia After the War Many foreign-policy experts in the United States had predicted that if North Vietnam won the Vietnamese civil war, communism
HUMAN COST
of THE VIETNAM WAR SERVICE UNIT FATALITY CATEGORY VIETNAM WAR DEATHS
58,220	
AMERICANS	
KILLED	
OR MISSING
2,559 NAW	
» Analyze Data Compare the total number of civilian casualties to the number of military casualties. What do the totals tell you about the effects of modern warfare on civilian populations?
The Vietnam War Era : 568	9.4 The War’s End and Effects
would spread to other nations in Southeast Asia. In a limited sense, they were right. Communist regimes eventually came to power in both Laos and Cambodia. In Cambodia, the ruling Khmer Rouge unleashed a genocide on the populace, killing everyone who had ties to the West or previous Cambodian governments. Between 1975 and 1979, upwards of 2 million Cambodians were executed or died in labor camps.
In an expanded sense, however, many American foreign-policy strategists misjudged the spread of communism. They concluded it was a monolithic global movement controlled by Moscow and Beijing. However, as the war’s aftermath would attest, communist movements in Southeast Asia were nationalistic and intolerant of outside influences. In 1978, Vietnam invaded Cambodia and installed a pro-Vietnamese government. China supported the ousted Khmer Rouge. For more than ten years that followed, the U.S. supported a coalition of anti-communist Cambodian opposition groups that included the Khmer Rouge.
American Veterans Return Home The war and the
peace divided Americans. Some argued that the United States should never have entered the war and that their leaders had lied to them. Others countered that the war was part of an ongoing struggle against communism and that in the end, the United States betrayed South Vietnam. An unfortunate result of the controversy was that the nation never fully expressed its appreciation to the returning veterans.
Overwhelmingly, the 2.5 million enlisted men who served in Vietnam did so with honor and distinction. Yet, unlike the soldiers that returned to the United States after World Wars I and II—the famed Doughboys and G.I. Joes—few Vietnam vets enjoyed the warmth and adulation of victory parades. In addition to the indifference that some veterans encountered, some also suffered from physical and psychological ailments for years when they returned home.
Not until almost a decade after the end of the war did Americans begin to fully honor the courage and sacrifice of these veterans. The Vietnam Veterans Memorial, dedicated in Washington, D.C., in 1982, stands as an eloquent testament to the men and women who served and died in Vietnam.
Individuals of all races and genders served their country during the Vietnam War. There were countless actions of heroism and sacrifice, some of which were singled out for the Congressional Medal of Honor. For example, Army Sergeant Peter C. Lemon fought off numerous enemy assaults even after being seriously wounded three times. Marine Sergeant Rodney M. Davis was one of an astounding number of soldiers who
» A veteran and his son visit the Vietnam Memorial in Washington, D.C. On this wall are the names of all military personnel who lost their lives in the war.
gave his life to save the lives of others by diving on a live grenade and absorbing the explosion. Green Beret Sergeant Roy P. Benavidez was also decorated for his bravery in combat. Despite terrible injuries, he rescued the lives of at least eight men. For his outstanding gallantry, he was awarded the nation’s highest military award: the Congressional Medal of Honor.
Sergeant Benavidez’ gallant choice to join voluntarily his comrades who were in critical straits, to expose himself constantly to withering enemy fire, and his refusal to be stopped despite numerous severe wounds, saved the lives of at least eight men. His fearless personal leadership, tenacious devotion to duty, and extremely valorous actions in the face of overwhelming odds were in keeping with the highest traditions of the military service, and reflect the utmost
The Vietnam War Era 569	9 4 The War’s End and Effects

I
credit on him and the United States Army.
—Citation, Congressional Medal of Honor, Sergeant Roy P. Benavidez
The Impact on U.S. Domestic and Foreign Policies
The war was costly both monetarily and in the human toll of shattered lives. The war also altered American domestic and foreign policies. Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society campaign against poverty and racism fell victim to the conflict. Increasingly, between 1964 and 1968, Johnson could not pay for both the Vietnam War and the Great Society. Paying for more guns left less money to pay for textbooks, school lunches, and prenatal care.
Additionally, the war undermined Americans’ trust in their leaders and fragmented the Cold War consensus on foreign affairs. In 1973, Congress passed the War Powers Act. The act restricted the President’s warmaking powers by requiring him to consult with Congress within 48 hours of committing American forces to a foreign conflict. The act was a congressional attempt to check the unilateral formation of American foreign policy and stop the growth of the “imperial presidency.”
» The voting age was reduced from 21 to 18 in 1971. Draw Conclusions Why did the war focus attention on the voting age?
Thus, the Vietnam War had an important impact on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government. With the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Congress had years earlier granted the President a great deal of power to conduct war using “all necessary measures” without further legislative approval.
The War Powers Act was an attempt to regain some of that power from the executive branch and return it to the legislative branch. Ultimately, the question of where war-making power lies is a constitutional issue. On one hand, the Constitution gives the power to declare war to Congress. On the other, it makes the President commander in chief of the armed forces.
The Vietnam War had an impact on America foreign policy, as well. The deaths and costs and ultimate failure of the war left many Americans with “war fatigue.” Even those who had not been personally touched by the war had grown weary of the conflict. This weariness of war became a social factor that would be reflected in the U.S. role in the world from the 1970s through 1990. Throughout this time, American citizens would cite the Vietnam War as a cautionary tale whenever the country considered using force abroad. Many Americans would view conflicts in Central America, Africa, the Balkans, and the Middle East through a lens tinted by the fear of “another Vietnam.”
U ANALYZE INFORMATION
What effect did the quagmire in Vietnam have on U.S. foreign policy through 1990?
The Impact on the American Economy The United States spent about $738 billion (in 2011 dollars) to fight the Vietnam War. Since that time, the government has spent an additional $270 billion on benefits for veterans and their families. These payments continue, costing the federal government more than $20 billion every year. Therefore, the Vietnam War can be said to have cost the country more than $1 trillion—and the price keeps going up.
This is a staggering amount of money, and it has had an enormous impact on the American economy. Many economists view the spending on the Vietnam War as marking the end of the prosperity of post-World War II America. War spending meant war production, and so American factories made military goods instead of consumer goods, warping American industry. Although the relationships are complex, war spending was a factor in federal budget deficits, inflation, higher interest rates, and a weaker dollar.
Interestingly, this greatly increased amount of defense spending did not cut into the amount of money the nation spent on education. By one estimate, public school expenditures actually increased by 58 percent in the 1960s and 27 percent in the 1970s. Federal aid outlays to college students also increased between 1965 and 1975. All in all, however, the American economy in
ELPS LISTENING 2.D.1, SPEAKING 3.E.1, 3.G.2
Read aloud the section titled The Impact on U.S. Domestic and Foreign Policies with a partner. Discuss what you have heard or any other information on the subject. If you do not understand your partner’s comment, ask him or her to repeat or explain it. Economic Problems of the mid-1970s
UNEMPLOYMENT	
INFLATION
Inflation reached 10 percent in the mid-1970s, the highest it had been in the twentieth century up to that point. ENERGY CRISIS
An oil embargo in 1973 caused a severe shortage of gas, and prices soared from 40 cents per gallon in 1973 to $1.20 by 1980. GOVERNMENT SPENDING
In 1970, total government spending was $321.8 billion; by 1975, spending had risen to $550.5 billion. » Analyze Information What economic problems affected the greatest number of Americans? Explain.
the 1970s was marked by crises, which many attribute to the economic effects of the Vietnam War.
ASSESSMENT
ELPS
1.	Identify Central Issues Discuss the measures that President Nixon took in order to withdraw U.S. troops from the Vietnam War.
2.	Sequence Events Explain the events leading up to the Kent State killings.
3.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss the economic effects of the Vietnam War, and explain how its costs are still affecting the United States today.
4.	Generate Explanations Discuss the “war fatigue” that many Americans felt after the Vietnam War, and explain how it affected U.S. foreign policy.
5.	Generate Explanations Explain how the spread of communism after the Vietnam War differed from U.S. strategists’ expectations.

9.4 The War’s End and Effects
The Vietnam War Era 570	9-4 The War’s End and Effects
The Vietnam War Era
1'
The Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962
!
I

Gulf of Mexico
Z KEY
1	Soviet missile base
	U.S. naval blockade
□	U.S. naval base
		", i 	-JF

Caribbean Sea
_100 mi 100 km
Miller Cylindrical Projection
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

O
Guantanamo
Bay
1.	Describe Cuban Missile Crisis Describe U.S. responses to Soviet aggression after World War II, including John F. Kennedy’s role in the Cuban Missile Crisis. Write a paragraph describing President Kennedy’s role in the Cuban Missile Crisis. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What triggered the crisis? What does the map above show about Kennedy’s public plan to counter the threat? What diplomatic solution did Kennedy work toward behind the scenes? How was the crisis resolved? 8.A
2.	Explain Reasons for and Outcomes of U.S. Foreign Involvement Explain reasons for and outcomes of U.S. involvement in foreign countries, including programs like the Peace Corps and the Alliance for Progress. Write
a paragraph explaining President Kennedy’s political reasons for sending Peace Corps volunteers to Africa and providing aid to Latin America through the Alliance for Progress. Explain how the Cold War was a reason for starting the programs, the goals of each program, and the success of each program. 8.D
3.	Explain Reasons for U.S. Foreign Involvement Use
a variety of primary and secondary sources to acquire information to explain reasons for U.S. involvement in foreign countries. Use the quotation below, text information, and other sources to write a paragraph explaining why President Kennedy wanted the United States to be ready for any kind of conflict, and describing his plan for being prepared. Consider what point of view the quotation expresses, how Cold War concerns influenced Kennedy’s reasoning, and what Kennedy meant by “flexible response.” 8.D, 29.A
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, in order to assure the survival and the success of liberty
F.
Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20, 1981 The Vietnam War Era
4.	Describe Impact of Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
Describe the impact of events such as the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government. Write a paragraph describing how the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution changed the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What powers did the resolution give President Johnson? How was this a change from what the Constitution intended? 20.A
5.	Use Correct Social Studies Terminology Use
correct social studies terminology to explain historical concepts, such as the responses of hawks and doves to the war in Vietnam. Write a paragraph distinguishing between the responses of hawks and doves to the war. Associate the terms hawks and doves with the correct positions and describe the views of the war held by each camp. 8.F, 30.B
6.	Describe Responses to Draft Describe the responses to the Vietnam War such as the draft. Write a paragraph describing how critics of the war responded to the draft. Be sure to describe why critics of the Selective Service System argued that the draft was not fair, how the draft affected African Americans, and draft protests. 8.F
7.	Discuss Twenty-sixth Amendment Discuss historical reasons why the Constitution has been amended by evaluating how the Twenty-sixth Amendment was
a means of achieving equality of political rights and by describing how its passage and ratification was a response to the Vietnam War. Write a paragraph discussing how the Vietnam War helped gain passage and ratification of the Twenty-sixth Amendment. Describe why the Twenty-sixth Amendment was a means of achieving equality of political rights and how passage and ratification of the Twenty-sixth Amendment was a response to the Vietnam War. 8.F, 21.B, 23.B
8.	Describe Impact of Defense Spending Describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and educational priorities from 1945 to the 1990s. Use the table below and text information to write a paragraph describing the impact of defense spending on the U.S. economy and on President Johnson’s Great Society programs. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: How did defense spending affect the economy in terms of unemployment, prices, inflation, and taxes? How did defense spending affect the amount of money spent on Great Society programs
to improve education and deal with other social issues? 17.C
Impact of the War on the U.S. Economy, 1968
INFLATION	
TAXES
Income tax increased by 10% GDP (GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT)
Reached a high of 9.5% devoted to the war effort GREAT SOCIETY INITIATIVES
President Lyndon B. Johnson's reform programs weakened by rising costs of the war: $94.3 billion spent on the war, $14.9 billion spent on welfare EDUCATION I
Out of the $277 billion spent by the U.S., 16% was directed toward education, 34% toward the war effort The Vietnam War Era
573
TEKS ASSESSMENT
9.	Describe Credibility Gap Describe the responses to the Vietnam War such as the credibility gap. Write a paragraph describing how the credibility gap affected people’s responses to the Vietnam War. Be sure
to explain what a credibility gap is and how media coverage led to a credibility gap. 8.F
10.	Describe Responses to Vietnam War Use a variety of primary and secondary valid sources to analyze and answer historical questions about responses
to the Vietnam War. Use the quotations below, text information, and other sources to write a paragraph describing responses to the Vietnam War by answering the following historical questions: What are some ways that the volunteers who served in Vietnam responded to the war? How did the way soldiers responded to the war change after the draft began? Why do you think the responses changed? 8.F, 29.A
I volunteered, . . . Ever since the American Revolution my family had people in all the different wars, and that was always the thing—when your country needs you, you go. You don't ask a lot of questions. . . .
—it * hnU’d Stales Amiy medic
It was creation of life in the midst of all that destruction. And creation of life restored your sanity. . . . Those were the things that kept you going. That there was life coming. There was still hope,
—Lynda Van Devanter, United States Army nurse
11.	Describe George Wallace’s Role in 1968
Presidential Election Describe the role of individuals, such as governor George Wallace, who sought to maintain the status quo. Write a paragraph describing how Alabama governor George Wallace tried to maintain the status quo in his 1968 campaign for the presidency. Describe the ticket on which Wallace ran, who Wallace claimed to speak for, and how his candidacy affected the outcome of the 1968 presidential race. 9.G
12.	Analyze Vietnamization Analyze the major issues and events of the Vietnam War such as Vietnamization. Write a paragraph analyzing why President Nixon adopted his approach of Vietnamization. Describe what Vietnamization involved, what issues and events led Nixon to adopt this approach, and the outcome of Vietnamization. 8.E
13.	Explain Constitutional Issues Explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including the 1960s. Write a paragraph explaining how the Pentagon Papers raised constitutional issues about government policies. Describe what the Pentagon Papers were and what they showed, what President Nixon did in response to the leak, and what the Supreme Court ruled in New York Times v. United States. 19.B
14.	Discuss Medal of Honor Recipients Discuss the importance of Congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders, such
as Roy Benavidez. Use the quotation below and text information to write a paragraph describing the contributions of individuals from different races and genders. Describe why Roy Benavidez received the Medal of Honor and give other examples of Medal of Honor recipients. 26.F
Sergeant Benavidez' gallant choice to join voluntarily his comrades who were in critical straits, to expose himself constantly to withering enemy fire, and his refusal to be stopped despite numerous severe wounds, saved the lives of at least eight men. His fearless personal leadership, tenacious devotion to duty, and extremely valorous actions in the face of overwhelming odds were in keeping with the highest traditions of the military service, and reflect the utmost credit on him and the United States Army.
- CSLdLm ComPHYma] WAV' V? ? St njm > Roy R Benavidez
The Vietnam War Era
574
HUMAN COST THE VIETNAM WAR
SERVICE UNIT FATALITY CATEGORY VIETNAM WAR DEATHS
AMERICANS KILLED OR MISSING
2,559 NAVY	
15.	Identify Bias in Responses to Vietnam
War Describe the responses to the Vietnam War by identifying bias in written and oral primary sources and evaluating the sources based on language, corroboration, and information about the author. Use primary sources from the lessons in this topic and other sources to create a chart identifying bias in responses to the Vietnam War. List at least two primary sources in your chart, identify the bias in each, and evaluate the validity of the sources based on the following criteria: language; corroboration with other sources; and information about the author, including points of view, frames of reference, and historical context. 8.F, 29.E, 29.F
16.	Explain Outcomes of Vietnam War Explain outcomes for U.S. involvement in foreign countries, including the human cost of the Vietnam War, by using the process of historical inquiry to interpret multiple types of sources of evidence. Use the graphs above, text information, and other sources to write a paragraph explaining the human cost of the U.S. involvement in Vietnam. Consider the human costs for American troops by service unit and type of fatality and the human costs for other countries in terms of numbers of civilian and soldier deaths. 8.D, 29.D
17.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What is the role of the United States in the world? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
The Vietnam War Era 575
1 How did U.S. involvement in postwar Germany contribute to the construction of the Berlin Wall?
A
The East Germans built the wall to keep American soldiers from invading East Berlin. B
The United States was forced to build the wall to contain the communist regime of East Berlin. C
The Soviets built the wall after the United States refused to give up its occupation of West Berlin. D
The Soviets built the wall to stop U.S. soldiers from crossing the border into East Berlin without permission. 2	By passing the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Congress—
F ceded many of its war powers to the executive branch G affirmed its powers to declare war under the Constitution H made membership in a communist organization a war crime J took a clear stance against U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia
The Vietnam War Era 576
3	The response of many Americans as the Vietnam War dragged on was to— A volunteer to serve and fight in Vietnam B question the wisdom of U.S. involvement C donate money and goods to the war effort D increase their support for further escalation
		
Media coverage of the Vietnam War		?
		
IgtX'CAUSE, ■	■		
Johnson administration's optimistic reports on war progress		
4	What phrase best replaces the question mark in the graphic organizer above? F A credibility gap for the American public G An increase in public support for the war H A willingness in Congress to cut war funding J The censorship of news reports from Vietnam
If you have trouble with...				
JQuestion	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	9.1	9.1	9.2	9.3
TEKS	u—8D	20.A	8.F	8.F
The Vietnam War Era ( 577
5
Vietnamization
•	Gradual pullout of American troops
•	Assumption of more combat duties by South Vietnamese troops (ARVN)
•	American aid behind the front lines as opposed to on the battlefield
What was the result of the policy of Vietnamization?
A
The United States and South Vietnam won the Vietnam War. B
The policy failed to improve South Vietnam’s chances of winning the war. C ARVN
troops successfully secured South Vietnam and drove out the Vietcong. D ARVN troops turned against the Americans and surrendered to North Vietnam. 6	When North Vietnamese forces took the city of Saigon—
F
Vietnam was unified under a communist flag G the United States sent troops back to the region H North Vietnam awarded independence to South Vietnam J the United States established diplomatic ties with North Vietnam The Vietnam War Era (5781
Access additional practice questions
7	In the early 1960s, some of the methods of nonviolent civil rights protesting included—
A threatening and intimidating those who did not agree with their requests B refusing to talk to or interact with people who did not support civil rights C staging plays, concerts, and prayer sessions at which whites were not allowed D participating in sit-ins at restaurants, wade-ins at beaches, and read-ins at libraries
LEGACY of hE GREAT SOCIETY
EXPENDITURES on
MEDICAID MEDICARE
OF GOVERNMENT BUDGET)
20%
ELEMENTARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION ACT 1965
0%
1970	1980	1990	2000	2010
Source: Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the U.S.
$42.4
BILLION
i OVER 20 YEARS
TITLE 1 FUNDING FOR SCHOOLS FOR THE
LEABHMG DISABLED
Sources; U.S. House of Representatives, ESEA 65.001; U.S. Census Bureau
HEAD START PROGRAM
CHILDREN ENROLLED (THOUSANDS)
UNITED STATES
POVERTY
I RATE
I 1959-2012
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1960	1970	1960	1990	2000	2010
8	Based on the information from the lessons and in the chart, which statement most clearly represents a positive result of the Great Society initiatives?
F
The poverty rate decreased between 1960 and 2010. G
Fewer children were enrolled in Head Start in 1985 than in 1965. H
More than 40 billion tax dollars have been spent on Title 1 funding. J
Government spending for Medicaid and Medicare has increased over the last 30 years. If you have trouble with...				
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	9.4	9.4	8. 1	8.5
TEKS 8.E 8.E 9.D 17.D
The Vietnam War Era 579
* TOPIC 10 TEKS Master
y________
An Era of Change
In this Topic, you will learn about the 1960s, ‘70s, and ‘80s in the United States. You know the TEKS are very important, and this course will make it fun to learn about the things that will help you master them. Keep reading to see how.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
4 TEKS
9.A, 9.B, 9.C, 9.1, 10.A, 10.C, 10.D, 10.E, 10.F, 11.F, 13.A,
13.B, 14.B, 14.C, 17.C, 17.D, 17.E, 19.C, 19.D, 19.E, 21.A, 23.A, 23.B, 24.A, 25.B, 26.A, 26.D, 29.A, 29.B, 29.E, 29.F, 29.G, 30.A
LESSON OUTLINE
10.1: The Counterculture of the 1960s 10.F, 25.B
10.2: The Women’s Rights Movement 9.B, 9.C, 10.E, 10.F, 17.D, 23.A, 23.B, 26.A
10.3: Expanding the Push for Equality
A, 9.B, 9.C,
9.1, 13.B, 23.A, 23.B, 25.B, 26.A, 26.D 10.4: The Environmental Movement 14.B, 14.C
10.5: The Two Sides of the Nixon
Presidency 10.A, 11.F, 17.C, 17.D, 17.E, 19.C
10.6: Ford and Carter Struggle 10.C,
D, 10.E, 10.F, 13.A, 13.B, 19.D, 19.E,
21 .A • Connect
: You will start by connecting with the Topic : through a video that tells a personal story about the : times. You will start to think about how the Topic : connects with your own experience or to what : you already know. And you’ll get a chance to think : about a really big question, or Essential Question:
: What are the challenges of diversity?
Begin your study by trying the following:
JfcNBC LEARN Watch My Story Video:
Betty Friedan, The Feminine Mystique
Launch your Document-Based Question:
• Leadership Qualities of Nixon, Ford, and Carter
580
•	Investigate
: Then you will investigate ; the Topic through a group ; of lessons. The story of this ; period of change will come to ; life as you read and interact ; with key content. You will get ; a chance to read about what ; happened and why. And you’ll ; be able to interact with a lot of ; fascinating online materials.
: You’ll also keep working : on your Document-Based : Question as you build further
♦	mastery of the Topic.
November 1979
Iranian students seize the U S Embassy in Tehran and take 90 hostages, including 66 Americans,
They demand that the United States return the Shah to Iran to face trial. The Iranian premier resigns, leaving Khomeini and the Revolutionary Council m power , Khomeini refuses to meet American envoys but releases 13 hostages President Carter freezes Iranian assets m U.S banks In December, the Shah leaves the United States tor treatment tn Panama (in March 1980, the Shah goes to Egypt, he dies m July.)
SES UNFOLDS
freezes Iranian assets in the United States,
» Digital interactivity from the online course
•	Synthesize
i Next you will pull it all together by : reflecting on the Essential Question, i This will give you a chance to be ; the storyteller, to show how you
•	would answer this big question.
• Demonstrate
: Finally, you can show what you ; know. You can write an essay,
; hold a discussion, or make a ; presentation. You can answer ; questions about every TEKS on
•	the Topic Review and Assessment
i pages. Or you can finish your essay ; on the Leadership Qualities of ; Nixon, Ford, and Carter and share it
•	with the class.......................
581 ?
5
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
What are the challenges of diversity? *
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
9.A, 9.B, 9.C, 9.1,10.A, 10.C, 10.D, 10.E, 10.F, 11.F, 13.A, 13.B, 14.B, 14.C, 17.C, 17.D, 17.E, 19.C, 19.D, 19.E, 21.A, 23.A, 23.B, 24.A, 25.A, 25.B, 26.A, 26.D, 29.A, 29.B, 29.E, 29.F, 29.G, 30.A
Enduring Understandings
•	The United States experienced a period of rapid social and cultural change in the 1960s and 1970s.
•	Movements for equal rights for women and minorities emerged in the 1960s.
•	Economic problems at home and political problems abroad characterized the 1970s.
•	The political turbulence of the 1960s provoked a conservative reaction in the 1970s.
PEARSON
NBC LEARN
V
In the later 1960s, “love-ins”—events celebrating love as a kind of social activism—showcased the countercultural desire to reject norms of behavior and dress.
Many of the generation born after the challenging times of the Great Depression and World War II embraced a different worldview than that of their parents—a worldview that found dramatic expression in the counterculturemovement that arose in the 1960s. Members of the counterculture adopted values that ran counter to mainstream culture. They rebelled against long-standing customs in dress, music, and personal behavior. The counterculture both challenged the values of mainstream American society and provoked a countermovement to reassert traditional values.
| Interactive Flipped Video
» Objectives
Describe the rise of the counterculture.
List the major characteristics of the counterculture.
Evaluate the positive and negative impacts of the counterculture movement on American society.
The Counterculture of the 1960s
» Key Terms
counterculture generation gap Beatles communes
A
Counterculture Emerges Countercultural Values The counterculture was rooted in the social and political events of the preceding decade. In the 1950s, the Beat movement had rejected materialism and emphasized the importance of personal experience. The civil rights movement introduced the idea of social and political protest, which intensified the Vietnam antiwar movement. Both movements prompted many people to challenge a range of traditional social behavior, from restrictions on rights to cultural norms in dress or hairstyles. The counterculture also heightened distrust of authority, leading some young people to warn their peers, “Don’t trust anyone over 30.”
Members of the counterculture valued youth, spontaneity, and freedom of expression. In the mid-1960s a subculture known as the hippies emerged. These young people claimed to value peace, love, and freedom. They experimented with new styles of dress and music, freer sexual relationships, and the recreational use of drugs. Their values were so different from traditional ones that many social analysts described America as experiencing a generation gap, in which there was a lack of understanding and communication between the old and
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
P %
584
young. Jerry Rubin, a political activist, described how young people’s fashion for long hair divided parents from their children:
Young kids identify short hair with • authority, discipline. . . . Wherever
we go, our hair tells people where we stand on Vietnam, Wallace, campus disruption, dope. . . . Yesterday I was walking down the street. A car passed by, parents in the front seat and a young kid, about eight, in the back seat. The kid flashed me the clenched fist sign. [Meaning: He identified with Rubin’s long hair.]
—Jerry Rubin, America in the Sixties
The baby boom that followed World War II resulted in a huge student population in the 1960s. Through their numbers alone, the baby boomers became a force for social change. The music industry rushed to produce the music they liked; clothing designers copied the styles they introduced; universities were forced to change college courses and rules to accommodate them.
The Generation Gap The large population of baby boomers and their emerging influence emphasized the growing divide between the younger and older generations. In the 1960s and 1970s, many parents and their children had little in common apart from their genes. Parents of boomer children were heavily influenced by the two major events of their own childhoods, the Depression and World War II. Boomers’ parents had learned to live frugally through years of rationing during the Depression and war.
As teens, they had listened to big-band music. They generally valued loyalty and authority, and respected the military and veterans. Many also married at a young age, choosing to take on the responsibilties of a family. As a result, many in this so-called “silent generation,” sought stability by conforming.
Their baby-boomer children on the other hand rejected tradition and authority in favor of individuality. “Do your own thing!” became the catchphrase of the young. Boomers did not want to fit in; they wanted to stand out. With the economic difficulties of the 1930s and 40s a distant memory, boomers grew up in a time of prosperity for much of the nation. Many embraced political activism and opposed the Vietnam War. The boomer generation also expressed a distrust of tradition and authority, which was expressed in popular
magazines like MAD. Rock-and-roll music shaped their worldview and set them apart from their parents, who had grown up in a very different world.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What accounts for the generational differences between baby boomers and their parents?
ELPS
ELPS LISTENING 2.D.2
With a partner, discuss your opinions of the 1960s counterculture. When you do not understand something your partner says, ask one of these questions: What do you mean? Can you be more specific? Can you say that another way? The Counterculture Shapes a Generation
Many people have used the so-called trinity of the counterculture—sex, drugs, and rock-and-roll—to define the youth generation. But the counterculture was also marked by an interest in spirituality.
A
Cultural Revolution in the Arts By the 1960s, rock-and-roll had become a defining characteristic of the baby-boom generation. When the Beatles made » The generation gap in dress: Ed Sullivan, the reserved TV host born in 1901, thanks the Rolling Stones’ Mick Jagger after the Stones’ performance on Sullivan’s show in 1969.
Interactive Gallery
An Era of Change 585	10-1 The Counterculture of the 1960s
a triumphant visit to the United States in 1964, more than 70 million Americans watched the English rock band perform on Ed Sullivan’s television show. The Beatles also had an impact on folk musicians like Bob Dylan, whose protest songs highlighted the civil rights and peace movements.
As radical poet and activist John Sinclair put it, rock became “a weapon of cultural revolution,” that urged listeners to reject conventions and, in many cases, the political policies of the government. Even after the counterculture had declined in significance, rock music remained popular among baby-boomers as well as their children.
The art and literature of the 1960s and 1970s also displayed a rebellious side. Andy Warhol’s realistic paintings of ordinary grocery items, such as Campbell’s soup cans, questioned traditional ideas of art and mocked the values of consumerism. In literature, the novels of Tom Wolfe and Hunter S. Thompson blurred the lines between reporting and political activism.
Experiments in Living and the Sexual Revolution
Members of the counterculture rejected many traditional restrictions on sexual behavior in what became known as the “sexual revolution.” They called for the enjoyment of sex for its own sake and often advocated new living
» Members of the Hog Farm commune gather to prepare a meal. Living off the land, they created a community of like-minded people.
patterns. For example, many hippies lived together in communes, or small communities in which the people have common interests and share resources.
The sexual revolution was one of the strongest indicators of the generation gap. One poll showed that nearly two-thirds of all Americans over the age of 30 opposed premarital sex, whereas a majority of those under age 29 did not. Eventually, however, the sexual revolution led to a more open discussion of sex in the mainstream media.
Impact of the Hippie Culture in San Francisco In
1967, as many as 2,000 people flocked to the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco, a center of the counterculture. Hippies there experimented with drugs, wore unconventional clothing, and listened to rock music and speeches by political radicals such as Timothy Leary, a one-time Harvard researcher. He preached that drugs could free the mind, and he encouraged American youths to “tune in,” "turn on" to drugs, and “drop out” of mainstream society. The hippies of San Francisco attracted a great deal of media attention, much of it critical of the lifestyles they advocated. Life in Haight-Ashbury did lead to negative consequences. As in other enclaves of hippie culture, it experienced high rates of drug abuse that led to increased crime.
Seeking New Forms of Spirituality Some members of the counterculture sought spiritual enlightenment outside of the Judeo-Christian traditions in which they had been raised. Many explored Buddhism and other Eastern religions, while others sought spirituality by living in harmony with nature. Particularly in the late 1960s and early 1970s, some hippies established rural communes, seeking to live off the land as Native Americans had in the past. These beliefs had a lasting impact on the budding environmental movement.
Positive and Negative Effects of the Counterculture By the end of the 1960s, many people, even those within the counterculture, had become disillusioned with some of its excesses. The utopian urge to discover a more authentic way of living had an unfortunate underside. Drug addictions and deaths from overdoses rose. The hedonism and violence of rock-and-roll seemed to be having a negative effect, as a number of rock musicians, most famously Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin, died of drug overdoses while only in their twenties. The downward spiral continued in 1969 with a tragedy at a music festival in Altamont, California.
While the Rolling Stones played, members of the Hells Angels, a motorcycle gang that had been hired
Interactive Gallery
An Era of Change
10.1 The Counterculture of the 1960s
to provide security, stabbed to death a black man who had approached the stage. The ugly violence contradicted the values of “peace and love” that many hippies embraced.
At the same time, the movement's values were becoming increasingly shallow and self-centered. When the counterculture fell apart, most hippies abandoned their social experiments and melted right back into the mainstream. Still, the seeds of protest they had planted would influence the growing “rights revolution.”
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
In what ways was the music of artists like Bob Dylan relevant to the time?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Contrast the values of the baby boomers with those of the “silent generation.”
2.	Describe the defining characteristics of the counterculture movement.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain how earlier social and political movements influenced the counterculture movement of the 1960s.
4.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss significant events that led to the decline of the counterculture movement.
5.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the lasting effects of the counterculture movement.
An Era of Change
587	10.1 The Counterculture of the 1960s
9.B, 9.C, 10.E, 10.F, 17.D, 23.A, 23.B, 26.A
» Objectives
Analyze why a movement to expand women’s political rights arose in the 1960s.
Identify the goals and methods that political organizations used to promote women’s rights.
Assess the impact of the women’s movement on American society.
» Key Terms
feminism Betty Friedan National
Organization for Women (NOW)
Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)
Gloria Steinem Phyllis Schlafly
The Women’s Rights Movement
A
New Feminist Movement Pushes for Equality
Historians often refer to the women's movement of the 1960s and 1970s as the second wave of feminism, or the theory of political, social, and economic equality of men and women. The struggle for women’s rights in the United States has had a long history, going back at least to the 1840s, when women drafted the Declaration of Sentiments at Seneca Falls, New York.
The phrase second wave of feminism also reminds us that the first wave, which culminated with women winning the right to vote in 1920, ended well before the nation addressed the call for full equality In the decades that followed, women made little legal or social headway in the battle for equal rights. In fact, after World War II, most women gave up their jobs to returning servicemen and went back to their homes to take care of their families. During the 1950s, social analysts and popular culture portrayed women, especially suburban housewives, as the personification of America’s achievement of the good life. By the 1960s, attitudes like these had begun to change.
PEARSON I
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
588
Seeking to Redefine Traditional Roles Several factors influenced the rebirth of the women’s movement in the 1960s and 1970s. The civil rights struggle prompted women to look at the ways in which society judged and discriminated against them as a group. As Casey Hayden and Mary King, two veterans of that movement, put it: “Sex and caste. There seem to be many parallels that can be drawn between the treatment of Negroes and the treatment of women in society as a whole.” Hayden and King used the phrase "Jane Crow” to emphasize a link between racial and gender discrimination.
The civil rights movement both inspired women to demand gender equality and taught them how to achieve it. It also brought black and white women together, strengthening their shared cause.
Women also wanted to redefine how they were viewed. Many women objected to the inaccuracy of the housewife stereotype. Some needed to work to support themselves or their families. Others wanted more opportunities than their lives as housewives could offer. Betty Friedan powerfully articulated this message in her groundbreaking book The Feminine Mystique.
The problem lay buried, unspoken, for many years in the minds of American women. It was a strange stirring, a sense of dissatisfaction. .
. . Each suburban wife struggled with it alone.
As she made the beds, shopped for groceries, matched slipcover material, ate peanut butter sandwiches with her children, chauffeured Cub Scouts and Brownies, lay beside her husband at night—she was afraid to ask even of herself the silent question—‘Is this all?’
—Betty Friedan, The Feminine Mystique, 1963
Fighting Workplace Discrimination Despite the stereotypes, the number of women in the workforce grew throughout the 1950s and 1960s. Yet working women often found themselves in dead-end jobs. Regardless of the quality of their work, women found it difficult to advance or even retain their positions. Pregnancy, for example, was all too often seen as grounds for dismissal or demotion. In many cases, pregnant women were routinely denied leave or forced to take unpaid leave.
Even women with advanced training and education had their access to careers or advancement blocked, in many cases, by blatantly discriminatory employers. Sandra Day O’Connor, who ultimately became the first female Supreme Court Justice, graduated near the top of her class at Stanford Law School in the early 1950s.
» The 1960s and 1970s witnessed a broad-based struggle for equal rights among women in the United States.
» Betty Friedan, president of the National Organization for Women (NOW), claimed that it was not simply men, but society in general, that kept women unequal.
An Era of Change
589
10.2 The Women’s Rights Movement
Yet while she found few employment opportunities upon graduation, her male counterparts won job offers at prestigious law firms. Facing such restrictions, women increasingly demanded equal treatment in the workplace.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What was an essential goal of the feminist movement?
The Role of Women’s Civil Rights Organizations
Several years after she wrote The Feminine Mystique, Betty Friedan helped establish the National Organization for Women (NOW). The organization— which dedicated itself to winning “true equality for all women” and to attaining a “full and equal partnership of the sexes”—galvanized the women’s movement.
NOW
Works to Expand Rights Through Lobbying NOW was formed to compel the federal government to enforce the part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that outlawed sex discrimination in employment. The organization set out to break down barriers of discrimination in the workplace and in education. It attacked stereotypes of women in the media and called
» In 1978, over 100,000 women marched in
Washington, D.C., to demand that Congress extend the deadline for ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment.
for more balance in roles in marriages. Its major goal in the 1970s was to bring about passage of the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), an amendment to the Constitution that would guarantee gender equality under the law. The ERA initially had been proposed in the early 1920s but had never passed. NOW also wanted to protect reproductive rights, especially the right to an abortion. NOW worked within the existing political system, lobbying for political reforms and readying court cases to compel the government to enforce existing legislation that banned discrimination. For some women, NOW seemed too extreme; for others, it was not extreme enough. Still, NOW served as a rallying point to promote equality for all women.
Feminists Raise Society’s Awareness Through Different Methods Finding NOW too tame, radical feminists sought a more fundamental restructuring of society. Rather than seeking legislative change, these protesters sought to show the way society trapped women into adopting restrictive roles. Like the civil rights campaigners, they adopted a variety of nonviolent methods. In addition to public protests of the Miss America Pageant, radical feminists engaged in small-scale consciousness-raising efforts. Other feminists sought to raise public awareness by making personal issues political. Charlotte Bunch, for example, wrote that “there is no private domain of a person’s life that is not political and there is no political issue that is not ultimately personal.”
Some feminists, like Gloria Steinem, tried to change awareness through the mass media. After graduating from college, Steinem worked as a freelance writer, including a stint of undercover work at a club run by Playboy magazine. While society tended to view Playboy bunnies in glamorous terms, Steinem revealed how much humiliation they had to endure to make a living. In 1972, she helped co-found Ms., a feminist magazine. Its title was meant to protest the social custom of identifying women by their marital status rather than as individuals.
Phyllis Schlafly and Conservatives Oppose the Women’s Movement Some Americans—both men and women—openly challenged the women’s movement. Phyllis Schlafly, for example, is a conservative political activist who denounced women’s liberation as "a total assault on the family, on marriage, and on children.” She worked hard to defeat the ERA, arguing that the act would compel women to fight in the military, end sex-segregated bathrooms, and hurt the family. Her argument resonated with many conservatives. Due to conservative opposition, the
©
Interactive Timeline
An Era of Change
590	10.2 The Women’s Rights Movement
ERA fell three states short of becoming a constitutional amendment.
El RECALL What was the purpose of the proposed
Equal Rights Amendment?
The Impact of the
Women's Movement
The women’s movement affected all aspects of American society. Women’s roles and opportunities expanded. Women gained legal rights that had been denied them. And feminists sparked an important debate about equality that continues today. Yet the issues they raised continue to divide Americans. Some say that women haven’t made enough gains. Others fear that the movement has actually harmed society.
Achieving Equality of Political Rights Through Litigation Before the 1960s, there were no federal laws prohibiting gender discrimination. The Civil Rights Act of 1964, however, gave feminists a legal tool. It included a clause, called Title VII, that outlawed discrimination on the basis of sex. The clause was actually inserted by civil rights opponents, who thought it was so outlandish that it would make the entire bill look ridiculous.
When the bill actually passed, however, women used Title VII to challenge discrimination. The bill also set up the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) to enforce the federal prohibition on job discrimination.
Enforcing Title VII, even with the EEOC, was often difficult. Still, NOW and other feminist organizations tirelessly filed suits against employers who refused to hire women or to pay them fairly, compelling the federal government to act. President Kennedy established the Commission on the Status of Women in 1961 to examine workplace discrimination. Title IX of the Higher Education Act of 1972 banned discrimination in education. The Equal Credit Opportunity Act, passed in 1974, made it illegal to deny credit to a woman just because of her gender.
Title IX applied to many facets of educational opportunities but had an especially profound impact on collegiate athletics. In effect, Title IX said that the ratio of women to men participating in collegiate athletics had to mirror the ratio of women to men enrolled in the school.
Participation by women in college athletics has increased dramatically since 1972. Since then, however, the number of women coaches has decreased significantly. As women’s sports gained in popularity and became revenue-generating sports, male coaches
» The battle for women’s rights took place in many venues. In 1973, tennis player Billie Jean King demonstrated women’s equality with men by defeating Bobby Riggs in The Battle of the Sexes.
» As a result of Title IX, women’s athletics increased dramatically in the 1980s. Many, like the Women’s USA Basketball Team, now dominate international competitions.
An Era of Change 591	10.2 The Women’s Rights Movement
were drawn to these higher-profile positions. In 1972, the number of women coaching collegiate women’s sports was over 90 percent. By 2010, that number was down to approximately 42 percent. This is one of the ways in which Title IX created unintended consequences that have been difficult to counteract.
Some feminists considered their most important legal victory to be the 1973 Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade, which assured women the right to legal abortions. Prior to Roe, most states outlawed or severely restricted abortion. Some women turned to illegal and often dangerous ways to end their pregnancies. The case and its decision were highly controversial at the time and still are today.
Expanding Economic and Employment Opportunities The women’s movement fostered a shift in attitudes among both men and women, and the American workplace today reflects this change. The percentage of women in the workforce has grown, from about 30 percent in 1950 to more than 60 percent in 2000. So, too, has the number of married female workers. Fields long closed or severely limited to women—such as medicine, law, and accounting—have opened up as well. The general shift in attitudes symbolized by these
changes has created a world of possibilities for many young women who never knew a time when women were not allowed to do these things.
Despite these gains, the average woman still earns less than the average man, partly because many women continue to work in fields that pay less. Some people have referred to this situation as a “pink-collar ghetto.” Whether this is because of discrimination, or because women who shoulder family responsibilities often have limited job choices, remains a matter of debate. Many studies suggest that a “glass ceiling” exists, limiting the advancement of even the most highly educated and skilled women workers.
Most troubling, the United States has witnessed a feminization of poverty over the past 30 years. This means that the majority of the nation’s poor people are single women. These are the women in the lowest-paying jobs, with the fewest benefits. Many of these poor women are single mothers, who must bear the costs and responsibilities of raising children alone while also working.
IDENTIFY
What was the purpose of Title IX of the Higher Education Act of 1972? THE LEGACY TITLE IX FOR WOMEN
EDUCATIONAL PROFILE *
wage equality WOMEN IN THE WORKFORCE MANAGEMENT, PROFESSIONAL,
AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
70%
SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
60%
eno/	ADUTTT
SALES AND OFFICE OCCUPATIONS
40%
OFFICE AND ADMINISTRATIVE
SUPPORT OCCUPATIONS
20% - '• '
NATURAL RESOURCES, CONSTRUCTION,
AND MAINTENANCE OCCUPATIONS
PRODUCTION, TRANSPORTATION, AND
1970	1980	1990	2000	2010 material moving occupations
» Analyze Data What data support the conclusion that the women’s rights reform movement affected women’s opportunities outside the home environment?

An Era of Change 592 ,	10.2 The Women's Rights Movement
ASSESSMENT
Compare and Contrast Identify similarities and differences between the first and second waves of feminism.
Generate Explanations Explain how the civil rights movement influenced the women’s rights movement of the 1960s.
3.	Compare Points of View Discuss both the support and criticism that the National Organization for Women received in the 1960s.
4.	Identify Central Issues Discuss the achievements of Title IX, as well as its unintended consequences.
5.	Describe the feminization of poverty that has occurred in recent decades.
An Era of Change
10.2 The Women's Rights Movement
Interactive Flipped Video
Successes in the civil rights and women's movements signaled a growing rights revolution in the United States. Latinos, Native Americans, and Asian Americans engaged in their own struggles for equality during the 1960s and 1970s, fighting to influence laws and government. Meanwhile, activists worked to expand rights for two broad groups: consumers and people with disabilities.
! I h
9.A, 9.B, 9.C, 9.1,13.B, 23.A, 23.B, 25.B, 26.A, 26.D
» Objectives
Analyze the causes of the growth of the Latino population after World War II.
Evaluate significant leaders and the methods they used to achieve equality in political rights for Latinos.
Evaluate the means by which Native Americans sought to expand their rights.
Describe the expansion of rights for consumers and the disabled.
» Key Terms
Cesar Chavez migrant farmworker United Farm
Workers (UFW) Chicano movement American Indian
Movement (AIM) Japanese American
Citizens League Ralph Nader Hector R Garcia Dolores Huerta
Expanding the Push for Equality
Latino Immigration Surges
After World War I, the United States passed legislation limiting European immigration. Yet during and after World War II, the country faced a growing demand for cheap labor. At the same time, the populations of Mexico and other Latin American nations grew steadily while job opportunities there declined. The combination of these factors created a steady stream of new immigrants to the United States. Some immigrants came legally, but others crossed the border illegally.
Latinos in the United States People whose family origins are in Spanish-speaking Latin America are called Latinos or Hispanics. They come from many different places, but they share the same language and some elements of culture. Spanish-speaking people lived in many parts of western North America before settlers from the United States arrived, and their numbers have grown steadily. Mexican Americans, known as Chicanos, have always made up the largest group of U.S. Latinos.
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
594
Impact of Legal and Illegal Immigration Beginning in 1942, Mexican immigrants came to the United States under the bracero, or farmhand, program. This program granted Mexican migrants temporary guest worker status, and over a period of 25 years, more than 4 million entered the United States. The braceros played a crucial role in sustaining American agriculture during and after World War II.
Along with Mexicans who had migrated to the United States illegally in search of work, braceros who had outstayed their permits were targeted for deportation in the 1950s. In 1965, however, the government passed the Immigration and Nationality Act Amendments, eliminating national-origin quotas for immigrants. In the decades that followed, the number of legal Mexican and Asian immigrants surged. More than 400,000 Mexicans arrived during the 1960s, another 630,000 in the 1970s, and more than 1.5 million in the 1980s.
Latino Communities on the East Coast After World War II, large numbers of Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, and Cubans migrated to the United States. As citizens of a United States territory, Puerto Ricans came legally, leaving their homeland in search of better-paying jobs. In contrast, most Cuban and Dominican immigrants came to America as political refugees, fleeing their countries to escape the harsh rule of dictators. Most Puerto Rican, Cuban, and Dominican immigrants
settled in urban areas, especially in New York City and Miami, Florida, which had notable effects on the demographic patterns in these cities.
S&l DESCRIBE How did the farmhand program
encourage Mexicans to legally migrate to the United States?
Latino Organizations Fight for Rights
Like other minorities, Latinos had long faced discrimination. After World War II, Latino veterans began agitating for equal treatment. Veteran Hector P. Garcia, for example, formed the American G.I. Forum to battle discrimination. In the 1960s and 1970s, influenced by the growing civil rights movement, Latinos increasingly fought for equal rights. They demanded better working conditions, salaries, and educational opportunities. Like African Americans, they sought federal protection of their right to vote and campaigned to elect politicians who represented their interests.
The Role of Cesar Chavez in Organizing Farmworkers The most influential Latino activist was Cesar Chavez. Chavez fought for rights for
United States Latino Population
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010*2020*
* Projected growth. Percentages indicate proportion of total U.S. population that is Latino. SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau	___________
» Analyze Data Based on the information in the chart, how much did the Latino population increase in the United States between 1970 and 2010?
An Era of Change 595	10.3 Expanding the Push for Equality
farm laborers, who were among the most exploited workers in the nation. Because they migrated from farm to farm—and often from state to state—to pick fruits and vegetables, they were known as migrant farmworkers. They labored for long hours in deplorable conditions, with no benefits.
Dolores Huerta was another activist who shared Cesar Chavez’s concerns about migrant farmworkers. Huerta worked as a leader of a community service organization in Stockton, California. During this time she founded the Agricultural Workers Association, which organized voter registration drives and worked to improve Hispanic neighborhoods. In 1962, Chavez and Huerta organized a farmworkers’ union in Delano, California. In the late 1960s, Chavez and Huerta merged the union with a separate union of Filipino farm laborers to form what became the United Farm Workers (UFW).
Committed to nonviolent tactics, the UFW implemented a workers’ strike and consumer boycott of table grapes. With the help of Huerta, Chavez’s top aide, the UFW urged people across the nation to boycott California grapes in order to win recognition from the growers. In 1975, California passed a law requiring collective bargaining between growers and
» To celebrate aspects of Mexican-American culture, Chicano artists painted colorful murals on the walls of city buildings, churches, housing projects, and schools throughout the Southwest.
Interactive Gallery
union representatives. Farmworkers finally had a legal basis to ask for better working conditions.
Actions Taken to Improve Economic, Educational, and Political Opportunities While Chavez focused on farmworkers’ rights, a broader Mexican American social and political effort grew, which came to be known as the Chicano movement. Part of it was dedicated to increasing Latinos’ awareness of their history and culture. The Chicano Mural Movement, in which Mexican-American culture was celebrated in large, outdoor paintings, sprang up at this time. At California colleges and high schools, and in other states with a Mexican American population, Chicano students demanded that educators teach more about their heritage. Others in the movement focused on quality-of-life issues. For example, the National Council of La Raza was founded in 1968 with the goal of reducing poverty and discrimination and providing better opportunities for Latinos.
Much of the movement’s energy was concentrated on attaining political strength for Latinos, or what some called “brown power.” In Texas, Jose Angel Gutierrez organized the political party La Raza Unida. The party worked for better housing and jobs, and it successfully supported Latino political candidates. By 1980, six Hispanics sat in Congress, representing districts from New York to California. Moreover, Hispanics gained greater representation in state, county, and city governments.
E2 IDENTIFY CENTRAL
ideas Why was the United Farm Workers (UFW) formed in the 1960s?
Native Americans and Asian Americans Battle Discrimination
Native Americans had a long history of discrimination and suffered high rates of poverty, unemployment, and suicide. Inspired by the struggle for civil rights, they forged their own protest movements in the 1960s and 1970s. At the same time, Asian Americans fought longstanding discrimination.
American Indian Civil Rights Organizations Emerge As with the civil rights movement, the movement demanding change for American Indians was led by young people. In 1961, the National Indian Youth Council (NIYC) formed, with the goal of preserving native fishing rights in the Northwest. Over time, the group expanded its aims to include broad civil rights for Native Americans.
An Era of Change : 596 ;	10.3 Expanding the Push for Equality
In 1968, the Chippewa activists Dennis Banks and George Mitchell helped found the American Indian Movement (AIM). At first, AIM focused on helping Indians living in urban ghettos. Before long, however, AIM was addressing all civil rights issues, particularly the securing of land, legal rights, and self-government for Native Americans.
Activism Leads to Confrontation As Indians dissatisfaction with the government grew, their activism became more militant. In late 1969, a group of American Indians occupied the island of Alcatraz, the site of a federal prison in San Francisco Bay that had closed in 1963. Members of the Sioux tribe asserted that the island belonged to them under a treaty provision granting them unused federal land. About 100 American Indians representing 50 tribes joined the occupation. In spite of efforts by the Coast Guard and other federal authorities to evict them, the Indians maintained control of the island until mid-1971.
The 1970s saw another series of confrontations. In 1972, led by Dennis Banks and Russell Means, AIM orchestrated a “long march” from San Francisco to Washington, D.C. Upon arriving in the capital, they took control of the Bureau of Indian Affairs building. They temporarily renamed it the Native American Embassy, suggesting Native Americans are treated as foreigners.
Tragedy Returns to Wounded Knee In 1970, Dee Brown published Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee, which includes a chapter about the 1890 massacre of Sioux at Wounded Knee, South Dakota. Brown noted that in all the history of the American West,
Only occasionally was the voice of an Indian heard, and then more often than not it was recorded by the pen of a white man. The Indian was the dark menace of the myths, and even if he had known how to write in English, where would he have found a printer or a publisher?
The best-selling book raised public consciousness about the historic mistreatment of Native Americans. Building on this momentum, AIM planned a dramatic confrontation at Wounded Knee.
In late February of 1973, AIM took over the village and refused to leave until the government agreed to investigate the condition of reservation Indians. Federal authorities put Wounded Knee under siege, and
» Russell Means (center), and Dennis Banks (right), early leaders of the American Indian Movement (AIM), brought the struggle for Native Americans rights to the public's attention.

Interactive Gallery
two AIM members died in the resulting gunfire. The standoff ended in May when the government pledged to reexamine native treaty rights.
Fighting Discrimination Through Litigation
Several landmark cases in the 1940s paved the way for Native Americans to fight discrimination through litigation. In 1947, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the decision in Mendez v. Westminster, ruling that the segregation of Mexican American students in schools in California was unconstitutional. The 1948 decision in Delgado v. Bastrop I.S.D. ended segregation in the Texas public school system. The ruling stated that the segregation of children of Mexican descent in Texas was illegal.
Native American activism spurred the passage of several laws in the 1970s. The Indian Self-Determination Act of 1975, for instance, fulfilled one of the main demands of the American Indian movement by granting tribes greater control over resources and education on reservations. Native Americans also continued to win legal battles to regain land, mineral, and water rights. Yet the protests staged by AIM and other militant groups also provoked a political backlash, with some contending that the federal government gave special treatment to American Indians. While politicians
An Era of Change 597	10.3 Expanding the Push for Equality
debated how the government should treat Native Americans, the Indians themselves continued to suffer from disproportionately high rates of unemployment and other social ills.
Asian Americans Fight Discrimination Prejudice against people of Japanese and Chinese ancestry, who had come to the United States as laborers, had long been part of the American social and economic climate. The Japanese American Citizens League, founded in 1929 to protect Japanese Americans' civil rights, worked for decades to receive government compensation for property lost by Japanese Americans interned in camps during World War II.
In the 1960s and 1970s, in the wake of the expanding rights revolution, many other groups formed to combat discrimination and protect the rights of all Asian Americans. The Immigration and Nationality Act Amendments (1965) also aided Asian immigrants.
U DESCRIBE
What was the significance of the Mendez v. Westminster court decision?
Activists Win Rights
for Consumers and the Disabled
In the same way that many activists worked to extend rights to women and minorities and to protect the environment, others worked to protect the rights of consumers and Americans with disabilities.
A
New Movement for Consumer Rights During the Progressive Era, reformers had pushed for measures to protect consumers, ranging from the Pure Food and Drug Act to the Meat Inspection Act. The consumer rights movement reemerged during the 1960s and 1970s. It was led by Ralph Nader, a lawyer who began to investigate whether flawed car designs led to increased traffic accidents and deaths. His book, Unsafe at Any Speed (1965), attacked automakers whose thirst for profits produced unsafe vehicles that endangered the public. Nader’s best-selling book stirred the nation and prompted Congress to pass the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act in 1966. Among other things, the act made safety belts standard equipment in all cars. Nader went on to form several consumer advocacy groups. Under his influence, consumer advocacy adopted many of the practices that shape it today, including research and government lobbying. Advocacy for workers began to gain more prominence as well. The Nixon administration proposed the idea
Rights-Expanding Legislation
LEGISLATION OR PANEL
PLANNED OR ACTUAL EFFECT
Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)
(First proposed 1921; never passed) Panel on Mental Retardation (1961)
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act (1964)
Immigration and Nationality Act (1965)
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act (1966)
Indian Self-Determination Act (1975)
Proposed constitutional amendment to guarantee gender equality
Explored ways the government could help people with disabilities Outlawed sex-based discrimination
Eased restrictions, making immigration easier for Latinos and Asians
Mandated safety equipment in cars
Gave Native Americans control over resources on reservations
» Analyze Charts How did legislation enacted during the 1960s lead to the expansion of rights for minorities?
An Era of Change 598 ?	10.3 Expanding the Push for Equality
for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), which mandated workplace safety regulations.
Historically the nation had treated people with disabilities as defective. FDR hid the fact that he could not walk because he did not want society to assume he was incapable of serving as President. Yet by the 1970s, Americans with disabilities were making great strides toward expanding their rights. Disabled veterans from the Korean and Vietnam wars took part in this activism. The Kennedy administration called for change by establishing the Panel on Mental Retardation in 1961 to explore ways for the government to help people with intellectual disabilities.
The next year, Eunice Shriver, President Kennedy’s sister, began an athletic camp for young people with disabilities that eventually became the Special Olympics. Over the next few years, the government passed a number of Congressional acts guaranteeing equal access to education for people with disabilities.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What effects did the publication of the book Unsafe at Any Speed have on public safety?
ASSESSMENT
» Japanese Americans wait for water at an internment camp during World War II. Hypothesize Why would the United States later pay $1.6 billion dollars to Japanese Americans who had been interned?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Generate Explanations Explain why the United States experienced a new wave of immigration after World War II.
Summarize Discuss the role of the United Farm Workers in securing civil rights for Mexican Americans.
Identify Central Issues Describe the American Indian activism that occurred during the 1960s and 1970s, and explain why this activism often led to confrontations with the U.S. government.
Identify Steps in a Process Discuss changes that altered the treatment of disabled people during the 1960s and 1970s.
Describe Ralph Nader’s contributions to the consumer rights movement of the 1960s and 1970s.
» Disabled athletes carry the torch during the opening ceremony of the 2013 Special Olympics Winter Games. The first Special Olympics was held in Chicago in 1968.
An Era of Change
599
10.3 Expanding the Push for Equality
Many people hoped nuclear energy would provide a safe alternative to fossil fuels, but the accident at Three Mile Island, in 1979, created resistance to nuclear energy production.
10.4
The “rights revolution” of the 1960s and 1970s eventually influenced all aspects of American life—including people’s right to a clean and safe environment. In 1962 a book called Silent Spring by biologist Rachel Carson pointed out that human actions were harming not only the environment but people themselves. Public awareness of environmental issues prompted an important debate about the government’s role in environmental regulations.
Interactive Flipped Video
14.B, 14.C
» Objectives
Assess the causes and effects of the environmental movement.
Analyze why environmental protection became a controversial issue.
» Key Terms
Rachel Carson toxic waste Earth Day Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA)
Clean Air Act Clean Water Act Endangered
Species Act
The Environmental Movement
Environmental Activists Sound the Alarm
In the 1920s, Progressives had worked to conserve public lands and parks. But few worried much about the ill effects of industrialization. In 1952, however, a blanket of deadly smog, caused by coal fires, engulfed the city of London, killing some 12,000 people. Ten years after London’s Great Smog, a book sparked the modern environmental movement.
Silent Spring Launches a Movement Coal smog is just one kind of toxic waste, or poisonous byproduct of human activity. Another is acid rain, or moisture in the air caused by the mixing of water with chemicals produced by the burning of fossil fuels. Toxic wastes are also produced when nuclear power is generated. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, scientists learned more about toxic wastes and other environmental threats.
Rachel Carson’s book Silent Spring described the deadly impact that pesticides were having on birds and other animals. Her book caused a sensation. Though the chemical industry fought back, the public was convinced by her argument. Carson did more than point
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
600
to the dangers of chemicals and toxic waste. She also insisted that human activity drastically altered the environment and that humans had a responsibility to protect it. Her work eventually compelled Congress to restrict the use of the pesticide DDT. It also spurred widespread environmental activism among Americans.
When a fire erupted on the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, Ohio, in 1969, activists instantly spoke out. The fire occurred when a spark ignited floating oil and debris—byproducts of industrialization—on the river’s surface. Time magazine reported that the river "oozes, rather than flows.” Even more luridly, the magazine remarked that in the Cuyahoga, a person “does not drown but decays.”
A
Grassroots Movement Creates Earth Day Events like the Cuyahoga River fire seemed to confirm the dire predictions of Silent Spring. One response to growing environmental concerns was a nationwide protest called Earth Day. Wisconsin senator Gaylord Nelson, who played the leading role in organizing the protest, wanted "to shake up the political establishment and force this issue [the environment] onto the national agenda.” On April 22,1970, close to 20 million Americans took part in Earth Day events across the nation. The yearly event attracted the support of many of the same people who had advocated civil and women’s rights.
It was also backed by a number of grassroots groups, including the Sierra Club, founded by John Muir in 1892, and the Wilderness Society, established in 1935. Historically, these groups had focused on conservation. With the rise of the environmental movement, however, they called for broader environmental protections.
Nixon Creates Government Entities to Manage the Environment In 1969, President Nixon declared that the 1970s “must be the years when America pays its debts to the past by reclaiming the purity of its air, its water and our living environment.” Nixon had not come into office as an environmental activist. But the public’s increasing concern with protecting the environment convinced him to support environmental reforms.
Under Nixon’s leadership, Congress created the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in
1970. This federal agency’s mission was to protect the "entire ecological chain.” In addition to cleaning up and protecting the environment, the EPA sought to limit or to eliminate pollutants that posed a risk to the public’s health, such as toxic substances that cause cancer. Nixon also signed a number of environmental laws.
The Clean Air Act (1970) combated air pollution by, among other things, limiting the emissions from factories and automobiles. The Clean Water Act
MANAGING ENVIRONMENT
CLEAN AIR ACT..
i W L t: i li t
CLEAN WATER ACT.
ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT
'	' overall reduction in fine
particle and ozone pollution since 1970.
U ' 6” premature deaths prevented due to particulate pollution. (Estimated)
heart attacks prevented. (Estimated)
j cases of chronic bronchitis prevented.
plant/animal species managed
ENDANGERED SPECIES LISTINGS
of lakes in the U.S. are still too polluted for swimming and fishing. ,s.	1923-1977 1927-1981 1981-1989	BY ADMINISTRATION ■ <7
	1989-1993	
Americans whose water supply is		
supported by wastewater treatment plants.	1993-2001	
1972	2001-2009	jjljl tiisB
2008	2009-	■ sa
» Analyze Data Use the tables to determine whether 1970s environmental legislation had a positive, neutral, or negative effect on the environment and the American public.

An Era of Change 601-	10.4 The Environmental Movement
(1973) sought to limit the pollution of water by industry and agriculture. This law built on the Water Quality Act enacted by President Johnson. The Endangered Species Act (1973) promoted the protection of endangered plants and animals.
President Gerald Ford continued in Nixon’s footsteps. In 1974, he created the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to make sure nuclear materials would be handled safely without harmful impacts on people or the environment.
K2 EXPLAIN
How did the modern environmental movement develop?
Impact of Environmental Regulations
As the 1970s drew to a close, a series of environmental crises made the headlines. They reinforced the public’s concern about the environment and produced calls for even more far-reaching actions. Yet, at the same time, a number of people began to wonder if the government had enacted too many regulations and was threatening property rights. Rather than calling for more federal actions, they tried to limit the government's role in environmental protection.
The EPA Investigates Love Canal In 1978, a resident of Love Canal, a community near Niagara Falls in upstate New York, hung a sign from his home that read: “Give me Liberty. I’ve Already Got Death.”
This sign referred to the fact that residents of the community had exceptionally high rates of birth defects and cancer. Newspaper reporters and EPA investigators determined that these illnesses were caused by thousands of tons of toxic chemicals, which industries had been dumping in the ground for decades. One EPA administrator recalled the scene he witnessed following a heavy rain that sent toxic chemicals percolating up through the ground.
I visited the canal area at that time.
Corroding waste disposal drums could be seen breaking up through the grounds of backyards. Trees and gardens were turning black and dying. . . . Puddles of noxious substances were pointed out to me by the residents. Some of these puddles were in their yards, some were in their basements, others yet were on the school grounds. Everywhere the air
Superfund Sites
Northern
Mariana
Islands
KEY
Region 1 Region 2 Region 3 Region 4 Region 5 Region 6 Region 7 Region 8 Region 9 Region 10
Puerto Rico
Virgin ggftsa Islands
> Analyze Maps This is how the EPA organizes its work by region. In what ways night hazardous waste vary by region?
I
Interactive Map

An Era of Change 602	10.4 The Environmental Movement
had a faint, choking smell. Children returned from play with burns on their hands and faces.
—Eckhardt Beck, EPA Journal, 1979
The Love Canal contamination, along with other events involving hazardous waste, prompted Congress to establish Superfund in 1980.
Meltdown at Three Mile Island Alters Public Opinion Shortly after the investigation at Love Canal, an accident occurred in the nuclear energy industry. On March 28, 1979, the core of the nuclear reactor at Three Mile Island outside Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, began to melt after the reactor malfunctioned. When the plant threatened to release radioactive gas, the governor declared a state of emergency and shut it down. To reassure the public that plant managers had contained the accident, President Jimmy Carter and his wife traveled to Three Mile Island and toured the reactor.
Even though the incident was contained and there proved to be no health risks, it had profound effects on America’s energy policy. In the wake of the accident, public opinion shifted against nuclear energy, as Americans became fearful of possible disasters. The government temporarily stopped building new nuclear power plants. Even though it later lifted the ban, no new American nuclear plants were ordered for more than a quarter of a century. In the 2000s, with the nation threatened by energy shortages, many Americans began to call for building new nuclear plants.
Governmental Actions Challenge Fifth Amendment Rights As more environmental regulations were passed, opposition to them grew. Based on an understanding of the Fifth Amendment, which holds that citizens shall not be deprived of property without due process of law, many complained that environmental regulations stripped individuals, the businesses they owned, and the communities they lived in of their property rights by restricting what they could or could not do with their land. Some argued that private property owners would do a better job of protecting the environment than the government because the owners had an interest in preserving the profitability of their land. Many people—and especially industry leaders—also worried that too much environmental regulation would hamper business and jobs by diverting funds to cleaning up the air and water. Therefore, as the 1970s came to a close—and, indeed, to this day—Americans remained divided about what
"WHAT wep UKE15 ABOUT a TWENTT-MIIE IStW
» Analyze Political Cartoons What do you think the palm trees on the island suggest about the release of radiation at Three Mile Island?
role the government should play in regulating industry and protecting the environment.
Id EXPLAIN What arguments were raised against the
environmental movement?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Describe the environmental disasters of the 1960s and 1970s that strengthened environmental activism in the United States.
2.	Identify Patterns Explain how the written word helped the environmental movement to gain momentum during the 1960s and 1970s.
3.	Compare and Contrast Discuss the relationship between the environmental movement and other campaigns such as civil and women’s rights movements.
4.	Identify Cause and Effect Determine the causes of the Love Canal contamination, and explain its effects on the American public.
5.	Determine Point of View Explain why some opposed the environmental movement.
An Era of Change 603	10.4 The Environmental Movement
i
» Objectives
Describe Richard Nixon’s leadership in foreign policy.
Define Nixon’s foreign policy toward China and the Soviet Union.
Describe Richard Nixon’s attitude toward “big” government.
Analyze Nixon’s southern strategy. Describe the effects of the Watergate
10.5
110 5i
Vj/ In the 1970s, President Nixon introduced many environmental reforms. Along with his leadership on environmental issues, Nixon took the nation in a new direction in foreign affairs. As a presidential candidate, Nixon had promised to end U.S. military involvement in the Vietnam War. Recognizing the potency of Soviet power and the increasing unwillingness of many Americans to pay the costs of containing communism everywhere, Nixon developed a new approach to the Cold War. His bold program redefined America’s relations with the two titans of global communism, China and the Soviet Union.
political scandal.
» Key Terms
Henry Kissinger realpolitik Zhou Enlai Strategic Arms
Limitation Treaty (SALT I)
detente
silent majority
stagflation
Organization
of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)
southern strategy
affirmative action
Watergate
Twenty-fifth
Amendment executive privilege
The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
Nixon’s New Approach to Foreign Policy
Nixon’s Cold War Foreign Policy During his years in office, Richard Nixon fundamentally reshaped the way the United States approached the world. Before Nixon took office, most American leaders shared a common Cold War ideology.
They stressed that a basic conflict existed between democratic, capitalist countries and totalitarian, communist ones. They divided the world into “us” and “them,” and they established policies based on an assumption commonly held that “the enemy of my enemy is my friend.” Therefore, a country opposed to communism was, by this definition, a friend of the United States. In a number of ways, Nixon and Henry Kissinger, his leading advisor on national security and international affairs, altered this Cold War policy approach.
At first glance, Richard Nixon's partnership with Henry Kissinger seemed improbable. Nixon was a conservative California Republican, suspicious of the more liberal East Coast Republicans and exhausted with the political and strategic theories of Ivy League intellectuals. Kissinger was a Harvard-educated Jewish emigre from Germany and

www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.

604
a prominent figure in East Coast intellectual circles. In several prior presidential campaigns, Kissinger had actually worked against Nixon. However, both men were outsiders, equipped with an outsider’s readiness to question accepted orthodoxy.
Kissinger and Realpolitik In foreign affairs, Nixon and Kissinger embraced the idea of realpolitik, a German word meaning “real politics.” According to realpolitik, political goals should be defined by concrete national interests instead of abstract ideologies. The two statesmen argued that if Americans would put aside their Cold War biases and look at the world with fresh eyes, U.S. global interests could be surveyed not in black and white but in shades of gray. For example, China and the Soviet Union—America’s ideological enemies—had the potential to become excellent trading partners. At the same time, West Germany and Japan—America’s ideological friends—were fast developing into economic rivals.
Nixon and Kissinger also questioned some lingering Cold War assumptions. For instance, they concluded that there was no united worldwide communist movement, as Lyndon Johnson and other Presidents had believed. There were important differences between the unique ideologies of the Soviet Union and China and other communist countries, such as Yugoslavia, North Korea, and North Vietnam, which often behaved quite independently. As President, Nixon insisted on a flexible, pragmatic foreign policy that avoided ideological absolutes.
E3 EXPLAIN
How did Nixon and Kissinger reshape America’s approach to foreign affairs?
Opening Relations With China
From his first days in office, Nixon seemed determined to leave his mark on the nation’s international affairs. Lyndon Johnson focused primarily on domestic affairs—the nuts and bolts of legislation and political deal-making. Nixon was more a man of the world, fascinated by global politics and shifting alliances. Johnson believed his Great Society would solidify his reputation as a great President. In stark contrast, Nixon thought his reorientation of American foreign policy would cement his legacy in the annals of U.S. history.
Reaching Out to China “You’re not going to believe this,” a Nixon aide told a journalist in 1969, “but Nixon wants to recognize China.” It was an odd, almost unbelievable, statement. At the time, the communist
» As head of the National Security Council (1969-1975) and as secretary of state (1973-1977), Henry Kissinger had a massive influence on American foreign policy.
» In 1969, a parade in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square celebrated the 20th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China.
An Era of Change 605
10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
People’s Republic of China was the most populous country in the world, but it was not officially recognized by the United States. Nor had it been admitted to the United Nations. The China that the United States recognized as the official representative body of the Chinese people was the Nationalist Chinese government exiled on the island of Taiwan. Nixon built his impressive career as a hard-line “Cold Warrior,” a vigilant opponent of communism. He was the last politician Americans could imagine to extend the olive branch of recognition—and thus peace—to the communists.
Ever the political realist, however, Nixon knew that the People’s Republic of China could not be ignored forever. He recognized that establishing diplomatic relations with the Chinese communists would benefit the United States. From an economic standpoint, improved relations would bring significant trade agreements, especially benefiting California and the Pacific Coast. Politically, U.S. normalization would drive a wedge between China and the Soviet Union, who had strayed from their traditional alliance and become rivals for territory and diplomatic influence. Finally, if the United States forged stronger relations with the Chinese, they might pressure North Vietnam to accept a negotiated peace to end the conflict still raging at the time.
Normalizing U.S.-China Relations With so much to gain and so little to lose, Nixon quietly pushed ahead
with his plans. In public, the Chinese made symbolic overtures toward a meeting. In April 1971, China invited an American table-tennis team to play against its athletes. This small action demonstrated China’s willingness to talk. Henry Kissinger worked behind the scenes, talking with Chinese leaders and ironing out sensitive issues with Premier Zhou Enlai. Then, in July 1971, Nixon announced that he would make an official state visit to China.
In February 1972, the President made the trip and toured the Great Wall, the Imperial Palace, and other historic sites. Nixon sat down for lengthy talks with Zhou Enlai and Communist Party Chairman Mao Zedong. He even learned enough Chinese to make a toast in the language of his host country. The visit was a great success and an important step toward normalizing diplomatic relations with China.
The following year, American tourists started visiting and American companies set up a thriving trade with China. Nixon’s China trip was the high point of his presidency. It bridged, as Zhou Enlai said, “the vastest ocean in the world, twenty-five years of no communication.” In 1979, the United States and China established full diplomatic relations.
H LIST
Why did Nixon reach out to China? 
		
• Created a stronger front		• Upset anti-communist
against the Soviet threat		American allies
• Strengthened economic ties		* Increased tensions temporarily
between both countries		between the United States
• Lifted the 22-year ban on		and the Soviet Union
travel to China		, • Eventually created a rift
• Formed stronger bond		between the United States
between East and West and		and China over the political
greater cultural exchange		status of Taiwan
» Analyze Charts Based on the information in the chart, why was Nixon’s policy toward China likely to be supported by American businesses?
An Era of Change 606	10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
Key Points of the SALT I Treaty, 1972
OFFENSIVE WEAPONS
DEFENSIVE WEAPONS
•	Froze the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs>
•	Limited nuclear warheads to 5,700 each
•	Limited nuclear submarines to 42 each
•	Prevented further development of antiballistic missiles (ABMs)
•	Limited ABMs to 200 each
•	Limited the ABM deployment area to 1 each
•	Limited the sites protected by ABMs to 2 each
» Analyze Charts Based on the information in the chart, what was the purpose of the Salt I treaty?
Nixon’s Policy of Detente
Nixon’s trip to the People’s Republic of China prompted an immediate reaction from the Soviet Union, which had strained relations with both countries. Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev feared that improved U.S.-Chinese relations would isolate Russia. Therefore, he invited Nixon to visit Moscow. Nixon made the trip in May 1972. Afterward, the President reported to Congress that he and Brezhnev had reached agreements in a wide variety of areas:
Recognizing the responsibility of the advanced industrial nations to set an example in combating mankind’s common enemies, the United States and the Soviet Union have agreed to cooperate in efforts to reduce pollution and enhance environmental quality.
We have agreed to work together in the . . . conquest of cancer and heart disease.
—Richard Nixon, speech to Congress, June 1, 1972
Nixon also announced plans to conduct a joint U.S.-Soviet space mission. However, by far the high point of the summit was the signing of the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty. Otherwise known as SALT I, the treaty froze the deployment of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and placed limits on antiballistic missiles (ABMs), but it did not alter the stockpiling of the more dangerous multiple independent reentry vehicles (MIRVs). SALT I did not end the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union. But it was a giant step in the right direction.
The importance of SALT I stemmed first and foremost from U.S. and Soviet efforts to reduce tensions
between them. A policy aimed at easing Cold War tensions, detente, had replaced previous diplomatic efforts based on suspicion and distrust. With his visits to China and the Soviet Union coming within six months of each other, Richard Nixon dramatically altered America’s global strategy. He relaxed the nation’s inflexible stance toward communism and applied a more pragmatic approach to foreign policy. In the short term, the new relationships he forged helped the United States to end the Vietnam War. In the long term, Nixon’s foreign-policy breakthroughs moved the world a step closer to the end of the Cold War.
U EXPLAIN
How did SALT I support Nixon’s new policy for dealing with the Soviet Union?
Nixon’s Domestic Policy
Having eased tensions with the nation’s two great Cold War adversaries, Richard Nixon stood at the summit of his long government career when he was reelected President in a landslide in November 1972. Yet, less than two years later, Nixon left office in disgrace—the first time a President of the United States had resigned. The Watergate scandal gripped the nation and shaped the values and attitudes toward government that many Americans hold today.
Nixon’s Long Political Career Richard Nixon’s political career had more ups and downs than a roller coaster ride. Brought up in hard times, he worked his way through college and law school. After service in the navy during World War II, Nixon was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946 and then to the Senate in 1950. As Dwight Eisenhower’s running mate in 1952, he became Vice President with Eisenhower’s victory. Nixon was not yet 40 years old.
An Era of Change f 607 >	10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
» A 1972 re-election campaign poster of President Nixon suggests that the country urgently needs his leadership.
» Richard Nixon displays his signature victory signal to supporters during a 1968 rally. After he took office, he proposed to establish “new federalism,” that would restructure American government.
Then came the defeats. In 1960, Nixon narrowly lost to John F. Kennedy in the race for the White House. Two years later, Nixon’s career hit bottom when he lost an election to become governor of California. In 1968, however, Nixon made a dramatic comeback. Calling himself “the new Nixon,” he narrowly defeated Democrat Hubert Humphrey to win the presidency.
Nixon’s “New Federalism” During the campaign for President, Nixon cast himself as the spokesperson for those he called Middle Americans, or the silent majority. As Nixon put it at the 1968 Republican convention, he sought to speak for the “non-shouters, the non-demonstrators,” the men and women who “work in America’s factories . . . run America’s businesses . . . serve in the Government . . . provide most of the soldiers . . . [and] give life to the American dream.”
Winning the support of Middle America proved a tricky task. Nixon believed that Americans had tired of the “big” government of Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society. However, he also believed that the American people still wanted the government to address various social ills, ranging from crime to pollution.
Nixon’s solution was to call for the establishment of a “new federalism.” As he explained in his 1971 State of the Union address, the nation needed “to reverse the flow of power and resources from the States and communities to Washington and start power and resources flowing back from Washington to the States and communities.” Nixon proposed revenue sharing with the states. Under revenue sharing, the federal government gave the states the money to fund social programs. The states then controlled the operations of these programs.
Increasing the Size and Role of Government
However, while returning power and money to the states, Nixon also sponsored many programs that increased the size and role of the federal government. During his presidency, a number of powerful new federal agencies and laws came into existence. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSH A) regulates workplaces to make them safer for workers. The DEA, or Drug Enforcement Administration, administers the federal war against illegal drugs. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) enforces federal environmental standards. The Clean Air Act, signed into law in 1970, gives the EPA the power to set air quality standards.
Nixon’s welfare policies also reflected his complicated domestic strategy. To decrease the power of the federal government, Nixon began to dismantle the Office of Economic Opportunity, the cornerstone of Lyndon Johnson’s “war on poverty.” Yet, Nixon also
An Era of Change
10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
Federal Agencies Established Under Nixon
AGENCY
PURPOSE
Minority Business Development Agency (1969)
The MBDA fosters minority business enterprise.
In 2012, the MBDA helped create and maintain 16,730 jobs.
Environmental Protection Agency (1970)
The EPA establishes federal standards to protect the environment. Today, the EPA continues working toward reducing water and air pollution and promoting human health. In 2009, the EPA made the first official finding regarding greenhouse gases and their detrimental effects on human health and the environment.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (1971)
OSHA's goal is to protect citizens from death, illness, and injury sustained on the job. Between 1970 and 2013, employment in the United States has doubled; meanwhile, workplace fatalities have fallen more than 65 percent and on-the-job injuries and illnesses have been reduced by 67 percent.
Drug Enforcement Administration (1973)
The DEA provides a unified front against the global war on drugs. At its inception, the DEA had a budget of $75 million with 1,470 special agents. Today, these figures have risen to $2.02 billion and 5,000 special agents.
» Analyze Charts Based on the information in the table, how did the creation of OSHA affect American workers?
proposed creating a Family Assistance Plan (FAP), which called for providing a guaranteed or minimum income to every American family. Although the FAP did not become law, federal spending on other social programs, such as Social Security, Medicare, and public housing, grew steadily.
A 1970 reform added yearly cost-of-living increases to the checks of Social Security recipients. In 1972, Nixon signed legislation that increased the Social Security benefits of widows and widowers of retirees. He also signed the largest expansion of Medicare in the program’s history. The legislation extended Medicare coverage to nearly 2 million Americans under age 65 who were receiving Social Security disability payments. The costs of these programs continues to rise, prompting many to voice their concerns about the long-term solvency of Social Security and Medicare.
The Struggling Economy As his presidency progressed, Nixon grappled with an increasingly troublesome economy. After decades of strong growth and low inflation, the U.S. economy experienced both recession and inflation at the same time. These symptoms began during the Johnson administration, but they grew stronger during the Nixon years, thanks partly to Vietnam War defense spending under both administrations. The combination of recession and inflation baffled economists and led them to coin a new
term, stagflation, to describe the dual conditions of a stagnating economy and inflationary pressures.
Stagflation had several causes. Expanding federal budget deficits caused by spending for the Vietnam War produced inflation. Another cause was rising foreign competition, which cost thousands of Americans their jobs. Heavy industries such as steel and auto production, which had enjoyed a dominant position since World War II, proved especially vulnerable to foreign competition. Yet the factor that caused most Americans pain was the rapid increase in the price of oil.
In 1973, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), a multinational organization that sells oil to other nations and cooperates to regulate the price and supply of oil, raised oil prices by 70 percent. Then, in October, in response to the United States’ support of Israel during the 1973 Arab war against Israel, OPEC’s Arab members, who had formed OAPEC (Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries), placed an embargo on Israel’s allies, including the United States. Dependent on imports for nearly one third of their energy, Americans soon felt the sting of this embargo as oil prices skyrocketed 400 percent in a single year. The embargo lasted until the spring of 1974 and resulted in gas lines at the pumps that stretched for blocks. With the end of the embargo, gas prices remained high.
An Era of Change 609	10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
Nixon fought stagflation in a variety of ways. In August 1971, he ended the Bretton Woods system of monetary management, in which other countries’ currencies were pegged to the U.S. dollar, which in turn was pegged to a set amount of gold. Because this system was increasingly difficult to maintain and was unbalancing the U.S. economy, Nixon ended the convertibility between dollars and gold, meaning that dollars were no longer tied to gold prices. To fight stagflation, Nixon also placed a 90-day freeze on all wages and prices. The controls worked for a short time, causing a spurt of economic growth. However, price controls do not work well in a free economy, and the economy went into a tailspin in the mid-1970s.
U IDENTIFY
What was the goal of President Nixon’s “new federalism”?
Nixon’s “Southern
Strategy”
Having narrowly won the presidency in 1968, Richard Nixon set out to expand his base of support. He targeted blue-collar workers and southern whites, both of whom had traditionally voted for Democrats. Even before the election, he nominated Spiro Agnew, a relatively unknown Governor from Maryland, to serve as his
running mate, in order to attract southern voters. By winning the support of southern whites, Nixon hoped to make the Republican Party a powerful force in the South. Commentators called this Nixon’s southern strategy.
As part of his southern strategy, Nixon tried to place a number of conservative southerners as judges in federal courts. Most prominently, he nominated Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell to serve on the U.S. Supreme Court. Both men failed to win Senate confirmation, in part because both had supported segregation in the past.
The School Busing Controversy Criticizing court-ordered busing of children to schools outside their neighborhood was another way Nixon reached out to southern whites and urban blue-collar workers. For years, many school districts in both the South and the North had resisted desegregation. In 1971, federal courts ordered school districts to bus students to achieve greater racial balance. Recognizing the unpopularity of busing, Nixon made a nationally televised address in which he called for a moratorium, or freeze, on court-ordered busing. By speaking forcefully, Nixon won the support of many busing opponents.
New Civil Rights Initiatives Yet, as with much else that he did, Nixon’s stance on civil rights was
________THE INFLUENCE or OPEC
AVERAGE U.S. CRUDE OIL PRICES
effects RATE OF INFLATION ( “-------------------------------------
Embargo on oil exports to U.S. begins
Amount of U.S. oil imports to meet demand in 1973
\_______________________________________)
OF THE
EMBARGO
Sales of small cars
increased
55 mph became
the speed limit
Daylight savings
time is year-round
standard	1974
Thermostats set at sixty-five degrees
10-gallon limit on
gas purchases
1975
1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
U.S. UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
» Analyze Graphs How did the 1973 oil embargo affect the price of gasoline in the United States?
An Era of Change 610	10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
Presidential Election of 1972
» In 1972, a majority of voters in the American South were Democrats. Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, what was significant about the presidential election of 1972?
f	Electoral	Popular	% Electoral	% Popular^
Candidate (Party)	Vote	Vote	Vote	Vote
Richard M. Nixon (Republican)	520	46,740,323	96.7	60.7
HB
George S. McGovern (Democrat) 17 28,901,598 3.1 37.5 Other	1	1,341,502	0.2	1.7 		/
mixed. In 1969, the Nixon administration initiated the Philadelphia Plan, a program that required labor unions and federal contractors to submit goals and timetables for the hiring of minorities. It was a type of affirmative action, a policy that gives special consideration to women and minorities in the fields of education and employment, in order to make up for past discrimination.
Nixon’s Assistant Secretary of Labor, Arthur Fletcher, who designed the Philadelphia Plan, argued:
The Federal Government has an obligation to see that every citizen has an equal chance at the most basic freedom of all—the right to succeed. . .
. Segregation didn’t occur naturally—it was imposed. . . . The gap . . . between black and white . . . was growing wider and wider. . . . Visible, measurable goals to correct [these] imbalances are essential.
—Arthur Fletcher, Assistant Secretary of Labor, speech on affirmative action, 1969
Nixon’s Strategy Succeeds By the 1972 election, Nixon enjoyed high approval ratings. Some of this popularity was based on his trips to the Soviet Union and China. Some was based on his domestic policies.
Nixon ran a masterful political campaign in 1972, positioning himself as a moderate. He portrayed his opponents—George McGovern, an antiwar senator from South Dakota, and Alabama governor George Wallace—as extremists.
(Wallace’s campaign was cut short when he was shot and left paralyzed by a would-be assassin.) Nixon and his Vice President, Spiro Agnew, successfully cast themselves as spokespersons for the silent majority. On election day, Nixon won almost 61 percent of the popular vote and nearly all of the electoral votes. He became the first Republican presidential candidate to sweep the entire South.
B EXPLAIN
In what ways did Nixon appear to send mixed messages about civil rights?
An Era of Change 611	10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
;	The Watergate Scandal
i	Brings Nixon Down
I	■	As a triumphant Richard Nixon stood before the
i	i	cameras on election night 1972, he had no idea that the
I	seeds of his downfall had already begun to sprout. The
s	botched burglary of Democratic Party headquarters
at the Watergate complex in June 1972 received little s	attention at first. But as investigators began to unravel
I	the connections between the burglars and the White
House, Watergate, as the scandal become known,
,	came to dominate the national news.
• :'!	The Watergate burglars were tried in 1973. After
! H	the trial, one of them, James McCord, charged that
j i	administration officials had been involved in the break-
HUh	in.
1	This led to a Senate investigation and to televised
!	hearings, where numerous witnesses charged that
I !	the President and his top aides had taken part in a
i	coverup. From the first news of the break-in, President
, s	Nixon denied any wrongdoing. Yet, as time went on,
investigators discovered important links between the
,	burglars and top Nixon administration officials.
The Watergate Break-in Goes Public Two young Washington Post journalists, Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, played a crucial role in lifting the veil of
» Watergate Committee Chair Senator Sam Ervin sits with other members of the committee as they listen to testimony at the 1973 Watergate hearings.
secrecy from the Watergate scandal. The two reporters followed tips provided by a secret government informant known as “Deep Throat," who was later revealed to be a top official of the FBI. Woodward and Bernstein reported that the men who had attempted to burglarize the Watergate hotel had close ties to Nixon’s reelection committee.
Nixon repeatedly proclaimed his innocence. For example, in November 1973, long after evidence had implicated his top aides and forced them to resign, Nixon declared, “I am not a crook.” Yet the polls indicated that the public disagreed. One poll, taken the next month, showed that fewer than one in five Americans believed that he was being honest about the Watergate affair.
The Watergate scandal created a crisis in the relationship among the three branches of government. How far would Congress go to investigate the President? Would the courts demand that the President turn over information that might implicate him? And if the courts sided with Congress, would the President comply with its decisions?
The Limits of Executive Privilege The Watergate scandal came to a climax with a dizzying array of developments. In the fall of 1973, Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned in the face of an unrelated corruption scandal. According to the procedures established by the Twenty-fifth Amendment, which deals with presidential succession, Nixon nominated Gerald Ford to become his new Vice President.
Nixon’s troubles multiplied when, in the summer of 1973, it was revealed that he had been secretly taping Oval Office conversations for many years. Many commentators speculated that these tapes would show that the President had played a leading role in trying to cover up the break-in.
Nixon refused to turn over these tapes to the special prosecutor investigating the scandal. The President justified withholding the tapes by claiming executive privilege. Executive privilege is the principle that the President has the right to keep certain information confidential. It took almost a year for the courts to sort out the matter. On July 24, 1974, in the case of United States v. Nixon, the Supreme Court disagreed that the tapes fell under the principle of executive privilege and ordered Nixon to turn them over. Chief Justice Warren Burger made it clear that the Court rejected Nixon’s claim of executive privilege in this instance:
The expectation of a President to the confidentiality of his conversations and correspondence . . . has all the
Interactive Chart
An Era of Change 612
10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
values to which we accord deference for the privacy of all citizens. . . . But this presumptive privilege must be considered in light of our historic commitment to the rule of law [the principle that all citizens are bound by the same laws]. . . .
The very integrity of the judicial system and public confidence in the system depend on full disclosure of all the facts, within the framework of the rules of evidence.
—U.S. Supreme Court, United States v. Nixon, 1974
Nixon Resigns When investigators listened to the tapes, they found that crucial parts of the conversations were missing. Nixon claimed his secretary had mistakenly erased them. Still, the tapes provided enough evidence of Nixon’s involvement in the coverup to lead the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives to vote to impeach the President. The committee charged Nixon with obstructing justice in the coverup of the Watergate break-in, misuse of power, and refusing to comply with House subpoenas. A number of Republican committee members joined the Democrats in voting for impeachment.
Recognizing that the full House of Representatives would vote in favor of impeachment and that many Republicans would vote to convict him in a trial in the Senate, Nixon decided to resign. In a speech to the American public on August 8, 1974, Nixon informed the nation that he would step down the following day in the hope that he “will have hastened the start of that process of healing which is so desperately needed in America.” The long ordeal of Watergate had finally come to an end. With it, Nixon became the first and only President to resign the presidency.
Historians disagree about whether Nixon knew beforehand of the decision to burglarize Democratic Party headquarters. Few doubt, however that he took part in the coverup. Testimony by his top aides, the Watergate tapes, and evidence gathered in the prosecution of the burglars all show that Nixon sought to quash the investigation.
Moreover, investigations revealed that Nixon had committed other abuses of presidential power. His reelection team had engaged in dirty tricks to secure his election. He had developed an “enemies list
» On August 9, 1974, Richard Nixon waved farewell as he prepared to leave the grounds of the White House, after resigning as President of the United States.
and used federal agencies to go after his enemies. The President had ordered the FBI to place wiretaps on the telephones of those government employees and reporters he suspected of leaking information unfavorable to the administration.
Watergate’s Lasting Impact In pursuit of personal power, Richard Nixon damaged the reputation of the presidency and shook the public’s confidence in government. One conservative commentator, formerly a supporter of Nixon, echoed the disillusionment of many Americans:
The lies, the lies, the lies! . . . What a pity, what a pity! Here was a President who got us out of Vietnam, ended the draft . . . and by his bold overtures to Red China opened new avenues toward world peace. Now the good vanishes in the wreckage of the bad. The swearing-in of Gerald Ford can’t come one hour too soon.
J.
Kilpatrick, National Review, August 30, 1974 An Era of Change
10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
Polls revealed that from the late 1950s to the mid-1970s, the percentage of Americans who believed in the truth of government statements plummeted from 80 percent to 33 percent.
In the wake of Watergate, Congress enacted numerous reforms to try to restore the public’s confidence in government and to prevent abuses of power in the future. It established a procedure for naming an independent counsel to investigate charges against the White House. The Federal Election Campaign Act of 1974 sought to limit the amount of money that individuals could give candidates, in order to prevent the corruption of the political process.
Yet, the Watergate affair also demonstrated that the nation could weather such a crisis. It showed the strength of the system of checks and balances. Both Congress and the Supreme Court had successfully checked the power of the President. According to Time magazine, Nixon’s resignation represented an "extraordinary triumph of the American system.” Watergate demonstrated that no person, not even
a President, is above the law. As Gerald Ford said when he became President: "Our great republic is a government of laws and not of men.”
H DESCRIBE
What role did Richard Nixon and his top aides play in the Watergate scandal? ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare and Contrast the backgrounds and beliefs of Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger.
2.	Generate Explanations Explain why President Nixon decided to recognize China.
3.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain why gas prices skyrocketed during Nixon’s presidency.
4.	Describe President Nixon's position on civil rights.
5.	Make Generalizations Discuss the lasting effects of the Watergate scandal.
An Era of Change 614	10.5 The Two Sides of the Nixon Presidency
10.6
The Watergate scandal of the early 1970s took place during a decade that witnessed significant social, economic, and cultural changes.
These changes contributed to a growing sense among Americans that something had gone wrong, that the nation had gotten off the right track. This sense of disquiet is even now a part of the nation’s political dialogue.
Ford and Carter
Struggle
Ford Governs Through Difficult Times
Gerald Ford had been Nixon’s Vice President and became President when Nixon resigned. Although only recently appointed as Vice President following the resignation of Nixon’s two-term Vice President, Spiro Agnew, Ford brought a long record of public service to the presidency. A star football player at the University of Michigan, Ford enlisted in the United States Navy and fought in World War II. Following the war, Ford successfully ran for a seat in the U.S.
Congress, where he served for 25 years, rising to the position of House Minority Leader in 1965. Democrats as well as Republicans supported Ford’s nomination for Vice President because he had a stellar reputation for hard work, integrity, and dependability.
Ford stepped into a delicate situation when he became President after Richard Nixon’s resignation. Watergate had scarred the public's faith in government. Furthermore, the nation struggled with the most severe economic problems it had faced since the Depression. Ford wrestled with these problems but not very successfully. He left office with the economy still suffering and the public’s distrust of government still high.
10.C, 10.D, 10.E, 10.F, 13.A, 13.B, 19.D, 19.E, 21.A
» Objectives
Evaluate the presidency of Gerald Ford. Evaluate Ford’s foreign policies.
Assess the domestic policies of Jimmy Carter.
Discuss changing U.S. foreign policy in the developing world.
Analyze how American society changed in the 1970s.
» Key Terms
Gerald Ford pardon Jimmy Carter Christian
fundamentalist amnesty televangelist Helsinki Accords human rights SALT II boat people sanctions developing world Camp David
Accords
Community Reinvestment Act
Ayatollah Lahore Khomeini
Wisconsin v. Yoder
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
615
» President Ford pardoned Richard Nixon on September 8, 1974. Identify Cause and Effect Why did this act reduce public support for Ford as President?
» President Ford’s “WIN,” or Whip Inflation Now, strategy called for a combination of personal saving and discipline coupled with government action to stabilize the economy.
Pardoning Nixon Ford moved quickly to try to restore confidence in government. He selected Nelson Rockefeller, a former governor of New York State, to serve as his Vice President. He also promised to continue the foreign policy approaches of the Nixon administration.
Whatever support he gained from these steps was lost when Ford announced that he had pardoned, or officially forgiven, Richard Nixon for any crimes he may have committed as President. Though the pardon was meant to heal the nation’s wounds, in some ways it achieved just the opposite. Ford's critics accused him of having made a secret deal, promising Nixon the pardon in exchange for the vice presidential nomination. Though Ford strongly denied this, his popularity declined dramatically.
The congressional election results of 1974 indicated the public’s disapproval of the pardon and the impact of Watergate in general. The Republicans lost 48 seats in the House of Representatives, including Ford’s longtime district in Grand Rapids, Michigan.
Stagflation Continues President Ford might have overcome this backlash if not for the troubled economy. The stagflation that plagued the nation during Nixon's presidency continued under Ford. Inflation hit double digits in 1974 and early 1975. To fight skyrocketing prices, Ford promoted a mostly voluntary plan known as WIN, or Whip Inflation Now. Unfortunately, WIN was a clear failure. Instead of improving, the economy took a turn for the worse. Factories closed down, consumer demand for goods dropped sharply, and the rate of unemployment rose steadily. Ford’s popularity plummeted.
U EXPLAIN
How did President Ford’s WIN program try to address inflation?
Ford Continues Nixon’s Foreign Policies
The ordeal of the Vietnam War led many to question the direction of American foreign policy. They asked: Why was the United States so concerned with fighting communism that it ended up supporting oppressive anticommunist governments? Should the United States continue to pursue detente with the Soviets? Or should it instead demand that the Soviet government grant its people more freedoms? Although the Soviet Union no longer exists, similar debates over the relationship between foreign policy and human rights continue to be heard today.
An Era of Change 616	10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
Relations with the Soviet Union remained central to U.S. foreign policy during the Ford administration. Upon assuming the presidency, Gerald Ford made clear that his foreign policy would differ little from that of Richard Nixon’s. He retained Henry Kissinger as his Secretary of State and continued to pursue detente with the Soviet Union and China.
Continuing to Pursue Detente Ford and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev met in late 1974 and again the next year, when the two leaders endorsed the Helsinki Accords. This document put the nations of Europe on record in favor of human rights, or the basic rights that every human being is entitled to have. Some thought that President Ford would try to compel the Soviet Union to allow more political freedoms, but Ford decided to put arms control ahead of human rights. At his direction, the United States continued disarmament talks with the Soviets. These talks eventually led to an agreement known as SALT II, in which the two nations pledged to limit nuclear arms production. However, the U.S. Senate never ratified the treaty.
Trouble in Southeast Asia Under Ford, the United States sought to put the turmoil of the Vietnam War behind it. When the communist Khmer Rouge government of Cambodia began a genocidal slaughter of civilians, killing about 1.5 million people between 1975 and 1979, the United States did not intervene.
The main exception to this policy of noninvolvement came in May 1975, when the Khmer Rouge seized an American merchant ship, the Mayaguez, which had been steaming just outside Cambodian waters. Ford responded by sending in some United States Marines, who freed the ship.
South Vietnam fell to North Vietnam during Ford’s presidency. As the communists took over, hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese, many of whom had worked with the United States, tried to escape. Many refugees took to the seas in rickety, unseaworthy boats. These boat people represented the largest mass migration of humanity by sea in modern history. Over a 20-year period, more than one million men, women, and children braved storms, pirates, and starvation in search of refuge abroad. Their immediate destinations were in other nations of Southeast Asia, but many eventually found refuge in the United States and Canada.
Q DESCRIBE
How did Ford deal with foreign policy challenges during his presidency?
» The Soviet Union continued to limit its people’s freedoms. Alexander Solzhenitsyn was expelled from the Soviet Union in 1974 for writing novels that exposed the harsh conditions in Soviet labor camps.
» Hundreds of Vietnamese refugees were stranded for months on the freighter Tung An, waiting for a country to give them permission to disembark.
An Era of Change 617
10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
A
New President Faces Challenges Prior to the mid-1970s, few Americans outside Georgia had ever heard of Jimmy Carter, a one-time governor of that state. But on election day 1976, Americans elected Carter President of the United States. He won a slim popular majority, receiving slightly more than 50 percent of the vote to Ford’s 48 percent. In the electoral college, Carter won 297 votes compared to 240 for Ford.
Carter’s rise was the result of several factors. Most important was the turmoil of the 1960s and Watergate, which created a backlash against professional politicians. Carter seized this opportunity by casting himself as a fresh face, a “Washington outsider” with no ties to Washington, D.C. A born-again Christian who taught Sunday school, Carter won the support of many Christian fundamentalists, people who believe in a strict, literal interpretation of the Bible as the foundation of the Christian faith. This group became increasingly involved in politics in the 1970s.
The Cost of Inexperience From the beginning of his presidency, Jimmy Carter sought to portray himself as a “citizens’ President.” He became the first President since William Henry Harrison to walk all the way from
» Both during and after his presidency, Jimmy Carter, shown here with his mother, portrayed himself as an average American and political “outsider" who could help “clean up" Washington.
the Capitol to the White House during the inaugural parade. He held town meetings, wore casual clothes, and carried his own suitcase.
However, Carter’s inexperience, which helped him get elected, hurt him during the early days of his presidency. As an outsider, he did not have close ties with the Democratic leadership in Congress. He also surrounded himself with aides whose experience in Washington was limited. Carter submitted numerous bills to Congress, but few of them passed without major changes by his own party.
Just one day after his inauguration, Carter fulfilled one of his campaign pledges by granting amnesty, or political pardons, to Americans who had evaded the draft during the Vietnam War. Carter hoped this act would help the nation move beyond the divisions caused by that war.
Yet the war remained an emotional issue, and many Americans criticized the President for forgiving those who had refused to fight. Republican senator Barry Goldwater called the amnesty “the most disgraceful thing that a President has ever done.”
Economic Problems Sap Confidence Like Ford, Carter contended with the energy crisis and severe inflation. Inflation ate away at people’s savings, raised the prices of necessities, and made American goods more costly abroad. The U.S. automobile industry, long a symbol of the nation’s economic power, became a symbol of its ills. Japanese car companies vastly expanded their sales in the United States by selling better-built and more fuel-efficient cars at reasonable prices. The situation grew so bad that Chrysler, one of the three major American automobile companies, needed a federal loan to survive.
At the center of the nation’s economic ills lay the ongoing energy crisis. In 1973, a gallon of gas cost about 40 cents. By the end of the decade, it cost close to $1.20. To make matters worse, the winter of 1976-1977 was an especially bitter one in parts of the United States, increasing the need for heating oil.
Fuel shortages caused factory closings and business losses. The 1979 Oil Crisis caused another spike in gas prices and inflation.
Carter responded to the oil crisis by calling on Americans to conserve and by asking Congress to raise taxes on crude oil, which he hoped would encourage conservation. However, the bill that finally passed in the Senate had few of the President’s ideas in it. Critics saw this as one more example of Carter’s poor leadership skills.
Carter did implement several domestic policies that his successors would build on during the 1980s. To fight inflation, Carter nominated Paul Volcker to head
An Era of Change 618	10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
Carter's Sanctions Against the Soviet Union, 1979-1980
RESPONSES TO THE SOVIET INVASION OF AFGHANISTAN
Asked the U.S. Senate not to ratify SALT II Imposed a grain embargo on the Soviet Union in 1980 Called for a boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow Revoked export licenses for high-technology items Recalled the U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union Increased aid to Afghan resistance fighters
.	a .	. ■	-	....... ■■'	'
» Analyze Charts What can you infer about the United States’ relationship with the Soviet Union during the Carter administration?
the Federal Reserve Board. Under Volcker’s lead, the Federal Reserve began raising interest rates. In the long term, this policy helped to bring an end to the inflation that had plagued the nation for so long.
The Community Reinvestment Act which Congress passed and Carter signed into law in 1977, also helped address the nation’s economic woes.
In order to create economic opportunity for citizens, this law required banks to make loans in the same neighborhoods where they took deposits. This requirement enabled many low- to moderate-income Americans, especially ethnic minorities, to become homeowners for the first time. The law remains in effect today. Whether it has had unintended consequences, possibly contributing to the mortgage crisis that triggered the Great Recession of 2007 to 2011 is an issue hotly debated in the business community.
E2 LIST
What challenges did President Carter face? Foreign Policy Changes Under Carter
Early in his presidency, Jimmy Carter proclaimed that as much as possible, American foreign policy would be guided by a concern for human rights. Carter hoped to make his foreign policy into a tool to end acts of political repression such as torture, murder, and imprisonment without trial. This policy direction helped reaffirm the position of the United States as a nation of freedom and justice. However, it undercut the goal of better relations with the Soviet Union.
Soviet-American Relations Cool At first, Carter continued Nixon’s and Ford’s policies toward the Soviet Union. He worked to achieve detente. He continued efforts at arms control, meeting with Leonid Brezhnev in June 1979 and signing the SALT II treaty.
However, relations between the two superpowers soon took a decidedly frosty turn. The SALT II treaty was bitterly debated in the United States Senate, where its opponents argued that it put the national security of the United States in jeopardy. Then, in December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded the neighboring country of Afghanistan to prop up a tottering communist government. Carter responded by withdrawing the SALT II treaty from Senate consideration and by imposing sanctions, or penalties, on the Soviets. The sanctions included a U.S. boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympic Games held in Moscow as well as a suspension of grain sales to the Soviet Union.
Attempts to Protect Human Rights Since the end of World War II, American Presidents had tended to see the developing world—the less developed nations of Asia, Africa, and Latin America—as another stage for the Cold War. Carter broke with that approach and insisted that foreign policy toward the developing world should revolve around the expansion of human rights. Carter believed that U.S. relations with foreign countries should be determined by how a country treated its citizens.
Carter’s emphasis on human rights led him to alter the U.S. relationship with a number of dictators. In Nicaragua, the Somoza family had ruled the country with an iron grip since the mid-1980s, most of the time with the support of the United States. In 1978, a leftist group known as the Sandinistas began a
An Era of Change 619	10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
» Sandinistas celebrate on the streets of Managua, Nicaragua’s capital, after their defeat of the dictator Anastasio Somoza and his troops in July 1979.
» President Carter helped to ease tensions in the Middle East by inviting Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Egyptian President Anwar Sadat to Camp David for peace talks in 1978.
rebellion against the country’s ruler, General Anastasio Somoza. His brutal response to the rebellion helped convince Carter to withdraw U.S. support. Without U.S. aid, General Somoza had to flee Nicaragua, and the Sandinistas came to power.
Other Foreign Policy Initiatives in Latin America
The Carter administration briefly sought to improve relations with communist Cuba, ruled by Fidel Castro since 1959. U.S.-Cuban relations soured in 1980, however, when Castro announced that any Cuban could leave the island from the port of Mariel for the United States. However, Castro insisted that any boats headed to the United States would also have to take criminals from Cuba’s prisons.
Because of this requirement, the Mariel boatlift developed a bad reputation in the eyes of many Americans. Fewer than 20 percent of the people transported had spent time in prison, and many of those were political prisoners. Still, Americans were repelled by Castro’s lack of concern for the welfare of the emigrants and by the idea that he would send criminals to the United States.
Carter’s most controversial foreign policy move involved his decision to return the Panama Canal Zone to Panama. You will recall that in 1903, Panama had given the United States control of a wide strip of land across the middle of the country that later became the site of the Panama Canal. In 1977, Carter negotiated a set of treaties to return the Canal Zone to Panama by 1999. Many Americans worried that the loss of control over the canal would threaten American shipping and security. Nonetheless, the United States Senate narrowly ratified the treaties in 1978, and all control of the canal was ultimately turned over to Panama.
Ki IDENTIFY In what way did President Carter’s
policies differ from those of Ford?
Success and Setback in the Middle East
Carter’s greatest achievement in foreign policy came in the region that also saw his greatest setback. He helped negotiate a historic peace agreement between Israel and Egypt, but he failed to win the release of Americans held hostage by Iranian radicals.
The Camp David Accords Egypt had opposed Israel’s existence since Israel’s founding in 1948. As recently as 1973, Egypt and Syria had attacked Israel. By 1977, eager to improve relations, Egyptian President Anwar
An Era of Change : 620 J 10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
el-Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin met in Jerusalem to negotiate a peace agreement.
To help continue the negotiations, Carter invited the two leaders to Camp David, the presidential retreat. For nearly two weeks, the three leaders carried on the difficult negotiations that produced what is known as the Camp David Accords. These agreements provided the framework for a peace treaty in which Egypt formally recognized the nation of Israel, becoming the first Arab nation to do so. In return, Israel withdrew its troops from the Sinai Peninsula, which it had controlled since the 1967 war. The preamble to the Accords states:
After four wars during 30 years, despite intensive human efforts, the Middle East, which is the cradle of civilization and the birthplace of three great religions, does not enjoy the blessings of peace. . . . [Israel and Egypt] recognize that for peace to endure, it must involve all those who have been most deeply affected by the conflict. They therefore agree that this framework, as appropriate, is intended by them to constitute a basis for peace not only between Egypt and Israel, but also between Israel and each of its other neighbors. . . .
—Camp David Accords, September 19, 1978
The Iran Hostage Crisis Carter hoped that the Camp David Accords would usher in a new era of cooperation in the Middle East. Yet, events in Iran showed that troubles in the region were far from over. Since the 1950s, the United States had supported the anticommunist rule of the Shah, or emperor, of Iran. In the 1970s, however, opposition to the Shah began to grow within Iran. Anger toward the nation that had long propped up the Shah's repressive regime—the United States—would soon boil over as well.
Dying of cancer, the Shah fled Iran in January 1979. Fundamentalist Islamic clerics, led by the Ayatollah Khomeini (i yuh TOH luh koh MAYN ee), took power. Carter allowed the Shah to enter the United States to seek medical treatment. Enraged radical Iranian students invaded the U.S. Embassy and took 66
» Ayatollah Khomeini is shown here in exile in France in 1978. A leader of the Iranian Revolution, he became the Supreme Ruler of Iran after the Shah was overthrown.
Interactive Timeline
Americans as hostages. The Khomeini government took control of both the embassy and the hostages to defy the United States.
The hostage crisis consumed Carter’s attention during the last year of his presidency. To many Americans, his failure to win the hostages’ release was evidence of American weakness. As Peter Bourne put it in his biography of Jimmy Carter, “Because people felt that Carter had not been tough enough in foreign policy ... some bunch of students could seize American diplomatic officials and hold them prisoner and thumb their nose at the United States.”
The hostage crisis began to change the way Americans viewed the world outside their borders. Nuclear war between the two superpowers was no longer the only threat to the United States. Although the Cold War still concerned Americans, the threats posed by conflicts in the Middle East threatened to become the greatest foreign policy challenge of the United States.
B DESCRIBE
How did the seizure of the U.S. Embassy by Iranian students affect Americans’ view of the world? An Era of Change 621	10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
Unease Over Changing Values
Social and cultural changes that had begun in the 1950s and 1960s continued unabated in the 1970s. As a result, by the end of the decade, the United States was a very different society from the one it had been a generation earlier. These differences gave rise to an ongoing debate about the nation's values.
Migration, Immigration, and Politics After World War II, there had been a demographic shift as American moved to the southern and western states, in search of jobs and a better climate. The migration of Americans to the Sunbelt and the continued growth of the suburbs, both of which had begun in the post-World War II years, continued during the 1970s. As northern industries suffered, many blue-collar workers and their families moved from the Rust Belt states of the Northeast and Midwest to the Sunbelt of the South and West.
They sought work in the oil fields of Texas and Oklahoma and in the defense plants of southern California, the Southwest, and the Northwest. These changing demographic patterns changed the face of the United States.
The elections of Richard Nixon and Jimmy Carter demonstrated the growing political power of the
Sunbelt. Earlier in the century, Presidents tended to come from the large northern industrial states, such as New York and Ohio. In the latter decades of the twentieth century, Presidents tended to come from the Sunbelt.
The influx of immigrants from Latin America and Asia represented a different kind of demographic change. Even before the 1970s, hundreds of thousands of Cubans, Puerto Ricans, and Mexicans had migrated to the United States in search of work and a better life. This migration, both legal and illegal, especially from Mexico and other Latin American countries, showed continued strength in the 1970s. The growing power of the Latino vote did not escape the notice of politicians. Richard Nixon was the first presidential candidate to seriously court the Spanish-speaking vote.
Countercultural Styles Spread in the “Me Decade” During the 1960s, radicals had challenged many of society's traditional values. They questioned restrictions on premarital sex and drug use. They sported casual clothing and long hairstyles that many of their parents’ generation found improper. Yet the counterculture remained a relatively isolated phenomenon during the 1960s. By the end of the 1970s, in contrast, these behaviors had become more widespread. Nationwide, the divorce rate had more than doubled between 1965 and 1979, and twice as many
Sunbelt Migration, 1970-1980
WEST
NORTHEAST
KEY
Population Change
: l -20% to 0% loss BP 0% to 10% gain (71 10% to 30% gain IB 30% to 50% gain ' ' 50% to 70% gain
Rhode Island onnecticut New Jersey
Delaware Maryland District of Columbia
» Analyze Maps Which regions of the United States most likely suffered economically as a result of population loss during the 1970s and 1980s?
10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
An Era of Change
children were born out of wedlock. To some Americans, the new ways were a sign of troubled times.
Some critics called the 1970s the "me decade” because many Americans appeared to be absorbed with improving themselves. This trend was reflected in the rise of movements like Transcendental Meditation (TM), a practice based in Eastern religious ideas. Those who practiced TM sought to find inner relaxation and vitality by chanting their personal mantras for about half an hour twice a day.
The seventies also witnessed an increasing interest in personal fitness and health. Millions began to jog for exercise and to eat natural, or less processed, foods. In 1970, just over 100 men and women ran in the New York City Marathon. Ten years later, more than 14,000 ran in the race. Body building took off, too, largely due to the influence of Arnold Schwarzenegger. A charismatic personality, Schwarzenegger went on to become one of Hollywood's most popular actors and, later, governor of California.
Conservatives Call for a Return to Traditional Values The 1970s witnessed a resurgence of fundamentalist Christianity, partly as a response to the shift in values. To some commentators, it seemed as if the nation was experiencing another Great Awakening, like the great religious movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Although the total number of Americans who attended church on a regular basis did not change much, the number of men and women who belonged to evangelical churches rose rapidly. One in five Americans considered himself or herself a religious fundamentalist by 1980.
Religious conservatives firmly opposed many of the social changes begun in the 1960s that had gone mainstream in the 1970s. They opposed the Supreme Court's rulings that legalized abortion and restricted prayer in school. Religious conservatives saw the latter as an unfair curtailment of religious freedom. In 1972, however, the Court upheld religious freedom in Wisconsin v. Yoder when it ruled that the state could not compel Amish children to attend school beyond the eighth grade because doing so violated Amish religious principles.
In opposing some Supreme Court rulings and what they believed were the negative effects of social change, evangelical ministers used the media to gain a broader following. Those who preached on television, such as Jerry Falwell, Oral Roberts, and Marion “Pat” Robertson, became known as televangelists. These preachers reached millions of television viewers. Falwell’s weekly television show, for example, was broadcast to 1.5 million viewers.
» Televangelists, such as Reverend Jerry Falwell, were opposed to social changes that began in the 1960s and took root in the 1970s. They felt America was deviating from its moral path.
©
Interactive Chart
In 1979, Falwell formed a prominent Christian conservative organization known as the Moral Majority. He voiced the concerns of many fundamentalists:
We must reverse the trend America finds herself in today. Young people . . . have been born and reared in a different world than Americans of past worlds. . . . They have learned to disrespect the family as God has established it. . . . They have been taught that the Bible is just another book of literature. . . . They have been introduced to the drug culture.
—Reverend. Jerry Falwell, Listen America, 1980
During the 1970s, religious conservatives began forming alliances with other conservatives. They worked with economic conservatives, who sought to cut taxes and government spending, as well as with supporters of a stronger foreign policy, who favored increasing defense spending. Together, they began forging a new political majority. By 1980, Ronald
An Era of Change
(623 1
10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
Reagan, another political outsider, would use this alliance to win election to the White House.
Ki LIST In what ways did the United States change
socially and culturally during the 1970s?
ASSESSMENT
1. Generate Explanations Explain why President Ford faced significant disapproval from the American public.
2.	Summarize Discuss President Ford’s efforts to pursue detente with the Soviet Union.
3.	Describe the crises that occurred in Southeast Asia during Ford’s presidency, and discuss the role of United States in these events.
4.	Draw Conclusions Explain how President Carter’s support for human rights influenced his foreign policy.
5.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss some of the factors that influenced a resurgence of Christian fundamentalism during the 1970s.
An Era of Change 624
10.6 Ford and Carter Struggle
TEKS ASSESSMENT
Presidential Election of 1972
1.	Describe Effective Leadership Analyze information 3. by drawing conclusions to describe qualities of effective leadership. Write a paragraph analyzing what the 1972 presidential election results indicate about the public’s
view of Nixon’s leadership during his first term in office.
Use the map above to describe the 1972 election results and draw a conclusion about what this evidence implies about the public’s view of Nixon’s leadership qualities. 24.A, 29.B
2.	Describe Social Issues of the 1960s Describe
significant societal issues of the 1960s, such as the	4.
counterculture. Write a paragraph describing the counterculture and its values. Define what is meant
by counterculture, use the quotation below and text information to describe the values of the counterculture, and explain the political and social roots of the counterculture. 10.F
Young kids identify short hair with authority, discipline. . . . Wherever we go, our hair tells	$
people where we stand on Vietnam, Wallace, campus disruption, dope. . . . Yesterday I was walking down the street. A car passed by, parents in the front seat and a young kid, about eight, in the back seat. The kid flashed me the clenched fist sign.
-.Jerry Rubin, America, in the Sixties
Describe Positive and Negative Impacts of Rock Music Describe the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in music, such as rock-and-roll, on American society. Write a paragraph describing the positive and negative impacts of rock music. Consider the popularity and influence of the Beatles on rock music, the role of rock music as a “weapon of cultural revolution” during the 1960s, the negative impact of the rock-and-roll lifestyle, and the lasting impact of rock music on American society. 25.B
Evaluate Congressional Acts Evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights, including congressional acts, and explain actions taken by people to expand political rights, including those for women, in American society. Write a paragraph evaluating Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Consider what Title VII outlaws, the purpose of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and its effectiveness, and how NOW and other feminist groups used Title VII. 23.B, 26.A
Identify and Analyze Title IX Identify actions of government and the private sector such as Title IX to create economic opportunities for citizens; and analyze the unintended consequences of these actions. Write a paragraph identifying the purpose of Title IX of the Higher Education Act of 1972 and analyzing its intended and unintended consequences. Describe what Title IX was meant to do and the intended and unintended consequences the act has had on collegiate athletics. 17.D
(625)
J
An Era of Change
TEKS ASSESSMENT
United States Latino Population
Causes and Effects of Changing Demographic Patterns Analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the United States. Write a paragraph describing the causes of legal and illegal immigration from Latin America and its effect on the U.S. population. Consider the causes and effects of the bracero program; the effect of the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act Amendments on immigration numbers; immigration from Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic; and what the graphs above indicate about the growth of the Latino population in the United States over time. 13.B Identify Contributions of Dolores Huerta Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Dolores Huerta to American society. Write a paragraph identifying how Dolores Huerta fought for the political, social, and economic rights of Latinos. Identify who Dolores Huerta was and what she did to promote political, social, and economic opportunities for Latinos. 26.D Identify Role of Betty Friedan Identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements, including Betty Friedan, and identify a point of view on a social studies issue or event. Write a paragraph identifying the role Betty Friedan played in the women’s right movement. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: Who was Betty Friedan and how did she contribute to the women’s rights movement? What point of view is Friedan expressing in the quotation below? 9.C, 29.G
The problem lay buried, unspoken, for many years in the minds of American women. It was a strange stirring, a sense of dissatisfaction. . . .
Each suburban wife struggled with it alone. As she made the beds, shopped for groceries, matched slipcover material, ate peanut butter sandwiches with her children, chauffeured Cub Scouts and Brownies, lay beside her husband at night—she was afraid to ask even of herself the silent question—Ts this all?’
—Betty Friedan, The Feminine Mystique, 1963
9.	Identify and Analyze Methods of Nonviolent Protest Identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including nonviolent protesting. Write a paragraph identifying and analyzing the nonviolent methods the United Farm Workers (UFW) used to bring about better conditions for migrant farmworkers. Identify the nonviolent methods the UFW used, analyze the steps in their strategy, and identify what legislation resulted from the UFW’s efforts on behalf of farmworkers. 23.A
10.	Describe Impacts of Chicano Mural Movement Use a variety of primary and secondary valid sources to acquire information to describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples
of cultural movements in art, such as Chicano Mural Movement, on American society in order to create written presentations of social studies information. Create a written presentation describing the positive and negative impact of the Chicano Mural Movement. Be sure to describe the purpose of the movement, the positive impact mural art might have on the Latino community, and the negative impact mural art might have on the community. 25.B, 29.A, 30.A
An Era of Change 626
11.	Describe Political Organizations Promoting American Indian Civil Rights Describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from American Indian civil rights movements. Write a paragraph describing the role political organizations played in the American Indian civil rights movement. Be sure to describe the focus and activities of the National Indian Youth Council (NIYC) and the American Indian Movement (AIM). 9.B
12.	Describe Landmark Court Cases Describe how litigation such as the landmark cases of Mendez v. Westminster and Delgado v. Bastrop I.S.D. played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement. Write a paragraph describing how Mendez v. Westminster and Delgado v. Bastrop I.S.D. laid the groundwork for Native Americans to fight discrimination through litigation. Be sure to describe the Court rulings in each case. 9.1
13.	Trace Development of Civil Rights Trace the historical development of the civil rights movement.
Write a paragraph tracing the historical development of civil rights for the disabled. Consider the roles played by returning war veterans, President Kennedy, and Eunice Shriver. 9.A
14.	Identify Roles in Managing the Environment Identify the roles of private citizens in managing the environment, and evaluate the validity of a source based on language, corroboration with other sources, and information about the author, including points of view, frames of reference, and historical context. Write a paragraph describing who Rachel Carson was and the impact her book, Silent Spring, had on concerns over the environment. Identify how Rachel Carson’s background and the historical context of the era might have influenced the public and government response to Silent Spring; Carson’s frame of reference and point of view in the quotation below and what the language of the quotation indicates about Carson’s intent in writing Silent Spring; and the impact of Silent Spring and whether scientific evidence supported her point of view. 14.B, 29.E
Only in the moment of the time represented by the present century has one species—man— acquired significant power to alter the nature of his world.
During the past quarter century this power has not only increased to one of disturbing magnitude but it has changed in character.
The most alarming of all man’s assaults upon the environment is the contamination of air, earth, rivers, and sea with dangerous and
even lethal materials. This pollution is for the most part irrecoverable; the chain of evil it initiates not only in the world that must support life but in living tissues is for the most part irreversible. In this now universal contamination of the environment, chemicals . . . [are] changing the very nature of the world—the very nature of its life.
—Rachel Carson, Silent Spring
15.	Compare Impact of Energy Over Time Compare the impact of energy on the American way of life over time. Write a paragraph describing the effect of Three Mile Island on U.S. energy policy. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What was the Three Mile Island incident? What immediate effect did Three Mile Island have on energy policy? How did changing energy needs affect the public’s view over time? 10.C
16.	Understand the Effects of Government Actions Understand the effects of governmental actions on individuals, industries, and communities, including the impact on Fifth Amendment property rights, and identify the roles of private citizens in managing the environment. Write a paragraph describing the arguments used by opponents of environmental regulations. Consider arguments based on the Fifth Amendment property rights, arguments that property owners would do a better job than
the government of protecting the environment, and arguments concerning the impact of regulations on businesses. 14.B, 14.C
17.	Describe Effective Leadership Describe qualities of effective leadership. Write a paragraph describing how President Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger showed effective leadership qualities in their approach to foreign policy. Consider what realpolitik is and its role in their approach; what Nixon and Kissinger meant when they argued that U.S. global interests could be surveyed not in black and white but in shades of gray; and how Nixon and Kissinger’s views about a united worldwide communist movement differed from traditional Cold War assumptions, and what this meant for their approach to foreign policy. 24.A
18.	Describe Detente Describe Richard M. Nixon’s leadership in the policy of detente. Write a paragraph describing the effects of President Nixon’s policy of detente. Be sure to describe what detente was, why Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev invited Nixon to visit Moscow in May 1972, what SALT was and why it was important, and how detente affected the Vietnam War and the Cold War. 10.A
An Era of Change 627
TEKS ASSESSMENT
19.	Analyze Sunbelt Migration Analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including the Rustbelt to the Sunbelt. Write a paragraph describing the causes and effects of the continued migration to the Sunbelt in the 1970s. Consider what caused people to migrate from the Rustbelt to the Sunbelt, what the map above shows about changing demographic patterns during the decade, and what effect this migration had on presidential elections. 13.A
20.	Discuss Solvency of Medicare Discuss the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Medicare. Write a paragraph discussing how changes to Social Security and Medicare enacted during the Nixon administration affected the long-term solvency of these programs. Discuss what reforms were enacted and why these reforms affected solvency. 11.FA
21.	Describe Economic Impact of Defense Spending Describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle from 1945 to the 1990s. Write a paragraph describing how spending on the Vietnam War contributed to stagflation. Be sure to describe what stagflation is and how defense spending contributed to stagflation. 17.C
22.	Evaluate International Treaties Evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international treaties. Write a paragraph evaluating President Carter’s change of position on SALT II. Consider Carter’s original position on SALT II, what domestic and international events
caused Carter to change his position on SALT II, and what recommendation Carter finally made to Congress concerning SALT II. 19.E
23. Describe OPEC Oil Embargo Describe the
dynamic relationship between U.S. international trade policies and the U.S. free-enterprise system, such as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil embargo. Write a paragraph describing the impact of the oil embargo on the United States.
Be sure to describe what OPEC and OAPEC are, what actions OAPEC took in 1973, and what the graph below and the text indicate about why and how these actions affected the U.S. economy. 17.E
AVERAGE U.S. CRUDE OIL PRICES
PER BARREL)
Embargo on oil exports to U.S. begins
Amount of U.S. oil imports to meet demand in 1973 \/
1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
Source: British Petroleum
An Era of Change 628
24.	Describe Effects of Watergate Scandal Use a
variety of primary and secondary valid sources to acquire information, and then analyze and answer historical questions related to the effects of the Watergate scandal on the views of U.S. citizens concerning trust in the federal government. Use the information from the lessons in this topic and other primary and secondary sources to acquire information about the Watergate scandal. Then use the information you have acquired to analyze and answer the following historical questions: What actions by the Nixon administration led to the Watergate scandal? How did President Nixon react when confronted with charges of wrongdoing? What justification did the Supreme Court give when it ruled against Nixon in United States v. Nixon? What views did conservative commentator James J. Kilpatrick express about Nixon’s actions?
What evidence is there that Watergate weakened the public’s trust in the federal government? 19.C, 29.A
25.	Discuss Community Reinvestment Act Discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, and analyze the unintended consequences of actions meant to create economic opportunity for citizens. Write a paragraph discussing the Community Reinvestment Act. Be sure to consider the intended purpose of the Community Reinvestment Act and what unintended consequences some people in the business community think the act has had. 17.D, 19.D
26.	Describe Camp David Accords Describe U.S. involvement in the Middle East, such as support for Israel and the Camp David Accords. Write a paragraph describing the Camp David Accords and the role that the United States played in the negotiations. Be sure to describe the conflict the Accords were meant to help resolve, the role the United States played in the Accords, and what the Accords provided a framework for. 10.D
27.	Analyze Wisconsin v. Yoder Analyze the effects of U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Wisconsin v. Yoder. Write a paragraph analyzing the Supreme Court case Wisconsin v. Yoder. Describe what the case was about and analyze the Supreme Court ruling. 21 .A
28.	Describe Moral Majority Describe key organizations of the conservative resurgence of the 1980s and 1990s, including the Moral Majority, and describe significant societal issues of 1970s that concerned the Moral Majority. Write a paragraph describing the Moral Majority and the organization’s views. Be sure to describe who founded the Moral Majority, what kind of organization it was, and what the quotation below and the text indicate about the social issues that concerned the Moral Majority. 10.E, 10.F
We must reverse the trend America finds herself in today. Young people . . . have been born and reared in a different world than Americans of past worlds. . . . They have learned to disrespect the family as God has established it. . . . They have been taught that the Bible is just another book of literature.
. . . They have been introduced to the drug culture.
..Reverend Jerry Falwell, Listen America, 1980
29.	Identify Bias Identify bias in written, oral, and visual materials describing the leadership qualities of President Nixon, Ford, or Carter. Use the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to learn about the leadership qualities of President Nixon, Ford, or Carter. Next, find one written source, one oral source, and one visual source that is related to the President’s leadership qualities. Then, write a paragraph evaluating the material for bias using the following steps: Identify the author of the source and the author’s purpose. Identify the main idea, and check whether the main idea is supported with facts or opinions. Look for the use of emotional language or one-sided opinions. Draw conclusions about the author’s bias, if any. 24.A, 29.F
30.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What are the challenges of diversity? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
An Era of Change \ 629
1 This photograph from the 1960s illustrates the—
A younger generation’s respect for the status quo B generation gap between younger and older people C older generation’s values of individuality and activism D importance of fashion to both the older and younger generations
Strategies for Expanding Women’s Rights
•	Lobbying the government
•	Using mass media, such as magazines, to educate the public
What option best replaces the question mark in the list above? F Staging public protests G Writing letters to business leaders H Circulating petitions to local governments J Canvassing door-to-door to build awareness

An Era of Change 630
3 What role did Hector Garcia play in supporting and advancing Latino rights?
A
He was a politician who made moving speeches about equality for Latinos. B
He was a Mexican leader who lobbied for immigration reforms for migrant workers. C
He was a businessman who tried to improve working conditions in Latino factories. D
He was a Latino veteran who established the American G.I. Forum to battle discrimination. 4 What option below best fits in the flowchart to explain additional opposition to environmental regulations based on Fifth Amendment rights?
F
Strip individuals of full property rights by restricting land use G Take private land away from individuals to create national parks H Compel individuals to use his or her land for government projects J Pay individuals to use land in ways dictated by the Environmental Protection Agency If you have trouble with...					_	,					
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	10.1	10.2	10.3	10.4
TEKS 10.F 26.A 9.C 14.B
An Era of Change
5	How did the Watergate scandal affect the public’s trust of government and its leaders? A Americans lost trust in the government in general.
B
Americans gained more faith in the U.S. government. C
Americans trusted the President, but they lost faith in Congress. D
Americans trusted Congress, but they lost faith in the President. 6	How did President Carter help Egypt and Israel work toward peace?
F
He flew to Jerusalem to meet with leaders of the two countries to try to persuade Egypt to formally recognize Israel. G
He met with leaders of all the Arab states in the region to hear their arguments for and against recognizing the state of Israel. H
He invited leaders of the two countries to Camp David and helped them negotiate a peace treaty called the Camp David Accords. J
He offered the leader of Israel financial assistance from the United States in return for withdrawing its troops from the Sinai Peninsula. An Era of Change 632
7	During the Vietnam War, college campuses became centers of antiwar protests due to—
A a backlash against strict police control of campus activities and a desire to give peace a chance
B new laws requiring the drafting of college students and reports of racial inequality in the military
C students’ concerns about the war’s economic impact, pacifism, and a desire to avoid military service
D government infiltration of student organizations and support for political candidates who claimed to be “doves”
Sergeant Benavidez’ gallant choice to join voluntarily his comrades who were in critical straits, to expose himself constantly to withering enemy fire, and his refusal to be stopped despite numerous severe wounds, saved the lives of at least eight men. His fearless personal leadership, tenacious devotion to duty, and extremely valorous actions in the face of overwhelming odds were in keeping with the highest traditions of the military service, and reflect the utmost credit on him and the United States Army.
These words describe why Sergeant Roy Benavidez was awarded — F a promotion to general G the Purple Heart medal H an honorary degree for courage J the Congressional Medal of Honor
If you have trouble with...	_		,				
Question		6	7	8
See Lesson	10.5	10.6	9.3	9.4
teks	r	i9.c	10.D	8.F	26.F
An Era of Change
633
* TOPIC 11 TEKS Master
America in the 1980s and 1990s
In this Topic, you will learn about America in the 1980s and 1990s. You know the TEKS are very important, and this course will make it fun to learn about the things that will help you master them. Keep reading to see how.
Your study will help you master	j
these TEKS:	f
TEKS
2.D, 9.1,10.B, 10.C, 10.D, 10.E, 10.F, 11.A, 11.B, 11.C,
11.D, 13.A, 17.D, 18.A, 19.C, 19.E, 24.A, 24.B, 27.A, 28.C, 29.G, 30.A, 30.B
• Connect
; You will start by connecting with the Topic ; through a video that tells a personal story about the ; times. You will start to think about how the Topic : connects with your own experience or to what : you already know. And you’ll get a chance to think : about a really big question, or Essential Question:
: What makes a government successful?
Begin your study by trying the following;
NBC LEARN
Watch My Story Video: Conflict in the Gulf
LESSON OUTLINE
11.1: The Conservative Movement Surges 10.E, 10.F, 13.A, 17.D
11.2: The Reagan Era 9.1,10.B, 10.E, 10.F,
D, 24.B
11.3: The Cold War Ends 2.D, 10.B, 10.D, 11.A
A
New Era of Foreign Policy 10.C, 10.D, 11. A, 11.D, 19.E 11.5: Clinton and the 1990s 10.E, 11.B,
A, 19.C, 24.B, 27.A, 28.C
Launch your Civic Discussion:
• Laissez Faire?
634i
• Investigate
; Then you will investigate : the Topic through a group ; of lessons. The story of the : 1980s and 1990s will come to ; life as you read and interact : with key content. You will get ; a chance to read about what ; happened and why. And you’ll i be able to interact with a lot of \ fascinating online materials.
Introduction and instructions HHHHj
identifying Political Views
Public assistance, or welfare, prevents people from taking care of themselves.
Immigration is a part of our history and newcomers should be welcomed without limits.
The death penalty has done little to reduce crime, and it should never be used.
fossil fuels cause pollution, and we should increase the use of alternative energy.
People should be considered for college or jobs on the basis of merit, not race.
OPINION TILE:
• You'll also keep working i on your Civic Discussion as i you build further mastery of o the Topic.
1 of 3
>
» Digital interactivity from the online course
* Synthesize
: Next you will pull it all together by : reflecting on the Essential Question. : This will give you a chance to be ; the storyteller, to show how you • would answer the big question.
• Demonstrate
; Finally, you can show what you : know. You can write an essay,
: hold a discussion, or make a
•	presentation. You can answer
; questions about every TEKS on
•	the Topic Review and Assessment
•	pages. Or you can take part in the
•	Civic Discussion on Laissez Faire
•	politics..............................
635
F
The year 2000 brought an end to Clinton’s two terms as President. Clinton’s legacy of a strong economy coupled with personal scandal polarized voters. As candidates geared up for the 2000 presidential race, it promised to be a close election.
On October 17, 2000, Republican candidate George W. Bush (left) and Democratic candidate A1 Gore (right) appeared in their third and final debate of the presidential campaign.
Interactive Flipped Video
2.D, 11.A, 11.C, 11.F, 12.A, 18.A, 18.B, 19.B, 19.D, 19.E, 20.B
» Objectives
Assess the outcome of the 2000 presidential election.
Explain the goals and achievements of George W. Bush’s domestic policy.
Explain the significance of terrorist attacks on the United States and U.S. involvement in world affairs.
Summarize the important issues of Bush’s second term.
Understand the causes and effects of the 2008 financial crisis and economic recession..
» Key Terms
George W. Bush No Child Left Behind
Act
Taliban
USA PATRIOT
Act Department of Homeland
Security
weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
habeas corpus Lionel Sosa
The George W. Bush Presidency
Controversy in the 2000 Election
The Candidates Clinton’s Vice President, A1 Gore, Jr., of Tennessee, ran for the Democrats. Gore selected Connecticut Senator Joseph Lieberman as his Vice President. Lieberman was the first Jewish person to be on the ticket of a major party.
The Republicans chose George W. Bush as their candidate. A son of George H.W. Bush and a former governor of Texas, Bush was popular with conservatives. As governor, Bush had worked with Democrats as well as Republicans. He struck many Americans as sincere.
Ralph Nader, a third-party candidate from the left-of-center Green Party, also joined the presidential race in 2000. Many Democrats urged Nader to withdraw from the race, pointing out that any vote for him would likely be a vote taken away from Gore. Nader’s candidacy would end up having a profound impact on the election.
A
Close Vote The campaigns focused mainly on how to spend the federal budget surplus. Bush favored widespread tax cuts. Gore proposed strengthening Social Security and paying down the national debt. On election night, Americans voted mainly by party affiliation. PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
690
The vote margin in the Electoral College was razor thin. Although Gore received a half million more votes than Bush, both fell short of winning the 270 electoral votes needed to capture the presidency. The issue was Florida’s 25 electoral votes. The popular vote in Florida was so close that a state law mandated an automatic statewide recount. Bush led by a margin of 537 popular votes. He was awarded 271 electoral votes, one more than was needed to win the election. Ralph Nader received more than 97,000 votes in the state of Florida. If, as many Democrats believe, the vast majority of votes for Nader would have otherwise gone to Gore, then Gore would have garnered Florida’s 25 electoral votes and won the presidency.
The Supreme Court Steps In Given the extreme closeness of the votes, Democrats demanded a hand recount in several Florida counties. Republicans countered by suing in a Miami court to prevent the recount.
For more than a month, confusion reigned. The election was now affecting the relationships among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government.
Finally, the Supreme Court ruled on the issue. In the case of Bush v. Gore, the court ended the re-recounting by a 5-to-4 decision. On December 12, 2000, Gore
ELPS
conceded defeat, and Bush delivered a conciliatory victory speech.
The election showed an interesting geographical pattern. The Democrats captured votes in their traditional strongholds: the two coasts and large cities. Republicans won a large bloc of voters in the Midwest and the South.
ET CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why was a Supreme Court decision necessary to determine the winner of the 2000 election?
ELPS READING 4.C.2
Look at the photograph of protesters at the end of this section. With a partner, restate the meaning of these signs in your own words: “This is America. Count every vote,” and “Politics triumphs 5 to 4.”
The Bush Domestic
Agenda
Once in office, Bush turned his attention to domestic issues. Like most Republicans, Bush believed that tax cuts would stimulate the economy and create new jobs. In 2001, Bush pushed a highly controversial $1.3 trillion tax cut through Congress. The tax cut put more money in the hands of consumers. But most of the benefits of the tax cut went to the wealthiest Americans. As a result, the federal budget deficit increased.
Presidential Election of 2000
Massachusetts 12
^'Rhode Island 4 Connecticut 8
New Jersey 15 Delaware 3 Maryland 10 Washington, D.C. 3*|
» Analyze
Which voted
Maps In
for Gore?
Candidate (Party)
| George W. Bush (Republican) | Albert Gore (Democratic)
8 Ralph Nader (Green)
|	| Other
State name (4) - Number of electoi
Electoral	Popular	% Electoral	% Popular
Vote	Vote	Vote	Vote
271	50,456,062	50.5	47.9
266	50,996,582	49.5	48.4
0	2,858,843	0	2.7
0	1,051,811	0	1.0
votes			
ined from voting			
general, which regions of the United States voted for Bush?

America in the Twenty-First Century 691	12.2 The George W. Bush Presidency
» In 2002, President Bush signed the No Child Left Behind Act, fulfilling his campaign promise to pursue a domestic agenda that improved educational opportunities for America’s children.
Focus on Education Bush’s other domestic priority was education. He supported legislation that tied the federal funding of schools to academic achievement. The 2002 No Child Left Behind Act penalized schools that did not reach federal performance standards. It also called for improving teacher quality and other reforms.
Bush also addressed the concerns of older Americans who faced rising costs for prescription drugs. In 2003, Congress extended Medicare to cover prescription drugs for senior citizens. The measure was controversial. It was expensive, and many seniors found its provisions confusing and its coverage inadequate.
Reforming Entitlements In his inauguration address, Bush promised to reform Social Security and Medicare, the government-run health plan for senior citizens. Together these programs account for about one third of the federal budget. Bush was concerned that because of a rapidly aging U.S. population and the rising cost of Medicare, these government programs would eventually become insolvent unless changes were made. Bush was able to make some progress on Medicare with the Medicare Act of 2003. But Democratic opposition to Social Security reform thwarted Bush’s efforts.
» On September 11, 2001, the north tower of the World Trade Center (left) was already on fire when a second airliner crashed into the south tower (right).
RECALL
What two benefits did Bush claim his tax cut would provide?
The September 11, 2001 Attacks and the War on Terror
As the first anniversary of Bush’s election victory approached, the nation faced a number of important but typical problems. No one was expecting a devastating attack that would stun the nation and usher in a new era in U.S. history. Shortly before 9 a.m. Eastern time on September 11, 2001, American Airlines Flight 11 slammed into the north tower of the World Trade Center in New York City. Soon another hijacked plane hit the World Trade Center. Just over an hour after the first crash, the World Trade Center towers began to collapse, spewing dust and debris over the city, and trapping the hundreds of firefighters and police who had gone into the towers to rescue people. As panicked people fled the area around the site, stunned Americans watched the horrific scenes unfold on their televisions. These two crashes were not accidents, but part of a carefully planned assault on the United States
At 9:40 a.m. a third airliner that had been hijacked after leaving Washington, D.C., crashed into the Pentagon. Meanwhile, passengers on a fourth hijacked
America in the Twenty-First Century
; 692 ; 12.2 The George W. Bush Presidency
plane learned of the earlier crashes on their cellphones. They bravely stormed the cockpit, refusing to allow the hijackers to target another building. At 10:03 a.m., this fourth airliner crashed in a field near Pittsburgh. That same day, it was confirmed that the al Qaeda Islamist terrorist group had spearheaded the attacks. In time, Americans also learned that nearly 3,000 people had died as a result of the attacks on 9/11.
Al Qaeda’s Campaign of Terrorism The suddenness, surprise, and cruelty of the 9/11 attacks against thousands of defenseless people was unprecedented in American history. However, Americans soon began to realize that the 9/11 attacks were the most destructive in a series of attacks that al Qaeda had launched against the United States. Al Qaeda, led by Osama bin Laden, the son of a wealthy businessman from Saudi Arabia, was a terrorist group committed to an extreme form of Islam. One of its goals was to end all American involvement in Muslim countries.
Throughout the 1990s, al Qaeda had been targeting Americans at home and abroad, and in fact, it had attempted to blow up the World Trade Center once before. In 1993 it exploded a bomb at the site, killing six people and injuring more than a thousand. In 1998, the organization set off car bombs at American embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, killing 225 people and injuring more than 5,500. In 2000, al Qaeda bombed the , an American ship anchored off the coast of Yemen, killing 17 American sailors. In 2001, al Qaeda chose to attack the World Trade Center and the Pentagon because these buildings represented American economic and military power.
Americans responded to the 9/11 attacks as a unified, determined people. On the day of the attacks, President Bush addressed the nation:
“Today, our fellow citizens, our way of life, and our very freedom came under attack in a series of deliberate and deadly terrorist acts. .
. . Thousands of lives were suddenly ended by evil, despicable acts of terror.
. . . These acts of mass murder were intended to frighten our nation into chaos and retreat. But they have failed.
. . . Terrorist attacks can shake the foundations of our biggest buildings, but they cannot touch the foundation of America. These acts shatter steel,
» In addition to the September 11 attacks in New York City, hijackers crashed a plane into the Pentagon in northern Virginia, taking the lives of more than one hundred government employees.
» Osama bin Laden was a member of a wealthy Saudi Arabian family and a founder of the al Qaeda terrorist network.
Interactive Gallery
©
America in the Twenty-First Century 693	12.2 The George W. Bush Presidency
but they cannot dent the steel of American resolve.”
—President George W. Bush, September 11, 2001
Americans Unite in Troubling Times Americans were shocked by the 9/11 attacks, but they rallied to defend their nation. Millions of Americans rushed to donate money, supplies, services, and their own blood. Throughout the country, Americans put up flags to show their patriotism and determination. Many held candlelight vigils and prayer services for the dead and bereaved. Continued fears of more terrorist attacks, however, kept the nation on edge. In October 2001, a newspaper editor in Florida died from an anthrax infection. Anthrax is a type of bacteria that has been used by several countries to create biological weapons. Traces of anthrax then appeared in news offices in New York City and in the office of a U.S. senator in Washington. Two postal workers who had handled materials containing anthrax died. Although the FBI investigated, no terrorists were caught.
The Legacy of 9/11 September 11, 2001, became a watershed in modern American history, when
» Flags lined a freeway overpass in California on September 11, 2006, the fifth anniversary of the attacks. Identify Cause and Effect How does this photograph express the continuing impact of the September 11 attacks on American society?
Americans’ confidence in their nation’s security was deeply shaken. Americans came together to grieve, rebuild, and decide how to deal with the threat of terrorism. The name “9/11” quickly entered the national lexicon, with people viewing historical events and even ideas as “before 9/11” or “after 9/11.”
The 9/11 attacks also had great impact on the nation’s economy. Despite increased airport security, some Americans remained wary of air travel, which hurt the airline and travel industries. Businesses and households entered a period of uncertainty during which spending decreased. Estimates indicate that the attacks cost the economy one million jobs and reduced the country’s output by three percent.
The War on Terror and the Invasion of Afghanistan
President Bush had been in office less than a year when these attacks occurred. The al Qaeda terrorist attack against the nation challenged the new President in unforeseen ways and led to a major shift in American foreign policy. In the wake of September 11, Bush and his advisers agreed that the most important priority should be finding and prosecuting the people behind 9/11. This would be just the first step in what Bush called the “war on terror.” American government officials had determined that Osama bin Laden’s al Qaeda network had been behind the attacks. Bin Laden opposed the presence of American troops in Saudi Arabia, the U.S. economic boycott against Iraq, and U.S. support for Israel. Bin Laden and other al Qaeda leaders were in Afghanistan, where the Islamist Taliban government allowed them to operate training camps for terrorists.
Bush believed that any government that sponsored terrorism should be held accountable. He demanded that the Taliban turn bin Laden over to U.S. custody. When the Taliban refused, American forces, joined by Great Britain, invaded Afghanistan. Allied forces quickly overthrew the Taliban. Although American troops captured several of al Qaeda’s leaders, Osama bin Laden escaped.
Ensuring National Security Bush moved quickly to prevent future terrorist attacks. Soon after September 11, Congress passed the USA PATRIOT Act to give law enforcement broader powers to monitor suspected terrorists. Critics claimed that the USA PATRIOT Act violated civil liberties. But many Americans were willing to give up some freedoms in return for improved security. Congress also approved Bush’s call for the creation of a new Cabinet-level Department of Homeland Security to coordinate security matters among federal, state, and local agencies.
The Bush administration exercised broad powers fighting the war on terror. The U.S. operations in

merica in the Twenty-First Century 694 S 12.2 The George W. Bush Presidency
Afghanistan led to the capture of alleged members of the Taliban and others fighting against the United States. These prisoners were sent to a U.S. base located at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Many of these prisoners were held for years without formal charges brought against them.
Controversy surrounded the holding of the prisoners, mostly on the grounds that their detentions violated the writ of habeas corpus. Because of the constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes, the Supreme Court heard a series of cases dealing with this issue and the Bush administration’s use of military tribunals rather than civilian courts to prosecute enemy combatants. In Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, the Court ruled that the Bush administration’s use of military courts violated the Geneva Conventions and U.S. federal law, including the U.S. Uniform Code of Military Justice.
War on Terror Moves to Iraq Bush next contemplated invading Iraq as part of his wider war on terrorism. Many people believed that Iraqi president Saddam Hussein was building nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons of mass destruction (WMD). Despite many Americans’ belief that UN weapons inspectors should be allowed to continue their search for Iraqi WMD, Congress authorized Bush to use military force against Iraq. On March 19, 2003, American and British military forces invaded Iraq in Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Saddam’s forces collapsed almost immediately. As the Iraqi capital of Baghdad fell, Saddam and other Iraqi leaders went into hiding.
B RECALL
Why did the fourth hijacked plane not reach its target on 9/11?
Bush’s Second Term
The Iraq war, terrorism, and the federal budget deficit weighed heavily on Americans’ minds as they voted in the 2004 presidential election. Bush campaigned as a “war president,” saying he had proved his competency as commander-in-chief. Bush defeated the Democratic candidate for president, Massachusetts senator John Kerry, by a comfortable margin.
Among those casting ballots for Bush in 2004 were the nation’s Latino voters. The Bush campaign turned to a Texas advertising agency run by Lionel Sosa. With Sosa's help, Bush captured an estimated 40 percent of Latino voters in 2004. Just 8 years earlier, Republican candidate Bob Dole could attract only 21 percent of Latino voters.
Problems Surface in Iraq Iraq remained a major focus of Bush’s second term as the war raged on.
» In Baghdad, Iraq’s capital city, Saddam Hussein’s statue was torn down following the U.S. invasion in 2003.
©
Interactive Map
However, by late 2005, Iraq had a new constitution and the beginnings of a democracy. The following year, Saddam Hussein was tried and executed. Saddam’s brutal rule had kept fighting in check among Iraq's three major groups: Sunnis, Shi’a, and Kurds. Now these groups fought bitterly for power. An American troop surge in 2007 lessened the violence. However, Iraq’s democracy remained fragile.
In 2008, a Senate Intelligence Committee report determined that there was no credible evidence to support claims that Iraq was developing WMD or had ties to terrorist groups. Some accused the Bush administration of deliberately misleading Congress and the American people to win support for the war.
Troubles at Home Meanwhile, Bush faced domestic challenges. In August 2005, Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast. Katrina caused much destruction in New Orleans. As fierce as the winds and rains of Katrina had been, New Orleans suffered even more after the storm passed. Rising waters soon breached levees protecting the low-lying city. Citizens were forced onto rooftops to await rescue and thousands of others sought shelter at the Superdome stadium. The government’s slow response to the damage was widely criticized. National discontent was reflected in the 2006 elections. For the
America in the Twenty-First Century ? 695 }	12.2 The George W. Bush Presidency
first time in 12 years, Democrats won control of the House and the Senate.
Bush Reaffirms American Sovereignty In February 2005, the Kyoto Protocol went into effect around the world. The treaty signed by 140 nations is aimed at controlling global warming linked to carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. Negotiations took place in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997, with the help of the United States. Just months after assuming the presidency in 2001, George W. Bush announced that the United States would not abide by the treaty. The Bush administration argued that the treaty did not place emission limits on developing countries and that it could harm the U.S. economy. Many considered the Kyoto Protocol as yet another example of an international treaty undermining U.S. sovereignty.
H EXPLAIN
how discontent with the government’s response to Hurricane Katrina was reflected in the 2006 elections.
The Financial Crisis of 2008
During the autumn of 2008, Americans faced a potentially disastrous economic crisis centered on the financial industry. The crisis stemmed in part from “subprime" home mortgage loans that banks had made to less-qualified, low-income borrowers. The higher interest rates on these loans made them more profitable for banks. The loans were then sold as mortgage-backed securities to investors.
The U.S. Slides into Recession After the U.S economy slid into a recession in late 2007, unemployed Americans could no longer pay their mortgages. Foreclosures—seizures of property from borrowers who are unable to repay their loans—increased.
As a result, housing prices fell and mortgage-related investments lost their value. Several large banking and investment firms collapsed or were sold.
Too Big to Fail—The Financial Industry Bailout
In September 2008, the stock market plunged. The country faced its worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke proposed a $700 billion bailout of the banks that had engaged in risky lending practices. The Troubled Asset Relief
» Analyze Data The blue line shows the foreclosure rate, while the purple line shows the delinquency rate. In what year did trouble begin in the housing market?
America in the Twenty-First Century ? 696	12.2 The George W. Bush Presidency
The First Years of Recession, 2007-2008
2007
2008
•	January 25 - Home sales reach their lowest point since the late 1980s.
•	February 21 - The rising default rate hits the subprime mortgage industry.
•	August 10 - The Federal Reserve pumps $38 billion into the banking system.
•	November 12 - A $75 billion superfund is approved to help build confidence in the credit markets.
•	November 15 - The House passes the Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Act of 2007.
: * December 12 - The Federal Reserve pumps $40 billion into the U.S. financial system.
•	January 21-22 - Global stock markets collapse.
•	June 26 - Crude oil hits a peak of $140 per
•	September 7 - The federal government takes over Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
•	October 6 - The federal government lends banks $900 billion.
•	November 4 - Barack Obama wins the presidential election.
SOURCE:
California Department of Finance » Analyze Information Based on the timeline, how did the federal government respond to the initial rise in default rates on home mortgages?
§1 Interactive Chart
Program (TARP) was supported by Bush and approved by Congress.
TARP funds were used to make multibillion-dollar loans to at-risk banks. Public outrage over the taxpayer-funded bailout grew after executives at some of these companies received multimillion-dollar bonuses. However, many credit the bailout with preventing a financial meltdown.
B RECALL
What was the source of public outrage at the taxpayer-funded bailout of the financial industry?
ASSESSMENT
2.	Describe the key components of President Bush’s domestic agenda, and explain why some of these initiatives were controversial.
3.	Support a Point of View with Evidence Explain why the United States opposed the Taliban.
4.	Compare Points of View Describe the purpose of Operation Iraqi Freedom, and explain why it was controversial among Americans.
5.	Generate Explanations Discuss the intentions of the Kyoto Protocol, and explain why President Bush refused to abide by the treaty.
1. Compare and Contrast the 2000 presidential campaigns of George W. Bush and Al Gore.
12.2 The George W. Bush Presidency
America in the Twenty-First Century
Barack Obama takes the oath of office as his wife Michelle holds the Bible and daughters Malia (left) and Sasha (right) look on.
The 2008 election broke new ground in American politics. Democratic senator Barack Obama of Illinois became the first African American to be nominated for president by a major party. Arizona senator John McCain, the Republican nominee for president, chose Governor Sarah Palin of Alaska to be his running mate. Palin was only the second woman to be selected as a vice-presidential nominee. The first, Geraldine Ferraro, ran with Walter Mondale in 1984.
BS1
Interactive Flipped Video 2.D, 11.A, 11.B, 11.E, 19.D, 24.B, 26.D
» Objectives
Assess the outcome of the 2008 presidential election.
Explain the goals of Barack Obama’s economic and healthcare policy.
Describe Barack Obama’s involvement in world affairs.
Summarize Obama’s Second Term.
» Key Terms
Barack Obama Tea Party Movement Hillary Clinton
The Barack Obama Presidency
The 2008 Election
Contrasting Candidates John McCain, the son and grandson of navy admirals, served as a pilot in the Vietnam War. He endured six years as a prisoner of war after his plane was shot down. He won election to the House of Representatives in 1982. McCain was elected to the United States Senate in 1986.
A graduate of Columbia University and Harvard Law School, Barack Obama had been a community organizer in Chicago. The son of a white woman from Kansas and a black man from Kenya, Obama served in the Illinois state legislature before being elected to the United States Senate.
A
Historic Moment On January 20, 2009, Barack Obama became the 44th U.S. President and the first African American to hold the office. At a huge victory rally in Chicago in November, his words captured the historic moment: “If there is anyone out there who still doubts that America is a place where all things are possible, who still wonders if the dream of our founders is alive in our time, who still questions the power of our democracy, tonight is your answer.” www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
698
The election drew a large voter turnout, with 62 percent of voters citing the economy as their main concern. Bush’s low approval ratings, combined with McCain's missteps, made a Republican victory seem almost impossible. In Congress, Democrats expanded their majority.
Id RECALL Describe Barack Obama’s background
before he assumed the presidency in 2008.
President Obama Takes Action
Before taking office, President Obama had developed an economic stimulus package to pump money into the sinking economy. The $787 billion bill, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, was approved by Congress in February 2009. The stimulus package included tax cuts, aid to state and local governments, and funds for infrastructure projects.
Obama’s Appointments Elected with the help of a coalition of minority voters, women, and young voters, President Obama sought to reflect the country's diversity in his cabinet appointments. Perhaps his most prominent appointment was that of Hillary Clinton,
his former Democratic primary opponent. Clinton, the wife of President Bill Clinton and a senator from New York, served as Secretary of State during Obama’s first term in office.
President Obama’s first Supreme Court nomination added diversity to the Court. He nominated Sonia Sotomayor, the daughter of Puerto Rican parents. Sotomayor grew up in a public housing project in the Bronx and had overcome a difficult childhood. A federal judge since 1992, Sotomayor was confirmed in 2009, becoming the first Hispanic to serve as a Supreme Court justice. In 2010, Obama nominated Elena Kagan to fill a vacancy in the Court. Kagan was known for working with both conservatives and liberals and had built a reputation as a passionate advocate of civil rights, including gay rights.
Healthcare Reform In 2008, more than 46 million Americans had no health insurance. During the campaign, Obama had pledged to create a national health plan to provide affordable coverage. He assigned Congress the job of fixing the healthcare system.
In November 2009, the House approved an overhaul of the nation’s healthcare system. The Senate passed its own healthcare bill in December. However, after Democrats lost their filibuster-proof majority in the Senate, healthcare reform was in jeopardy. President
AMERICAN RECOVERY & REINVESTMENT ACT (ARRA)
bfsoos r
L
&2G1.4
bli.llON
ESTIMATED 1 GROWTH IN GDP J

$812
BILLION
S
0.7°
s
e ««
s
• ||h7HU
2009
2010
2011
2012
o, i
2013
ESTIMATED JOB GROWTH
(IN MILLIONS)

» Unemployment benefits are classified as social welfare. Analyze Data Based on
the information in the pie chart, what inference can you make about the unemployment	L—"J"""""*"""""""""*
rate in 2009?
America in the Twenty-First Century 699	12.3 The Barack Obama Presidency
B
Obama campaigned for the bill and won the support of wavering Democrats. In March 2010, in a dramatic vote, the House approved the Senate's healthcare bill. Despite unanimous Republican opposition in the House and Senate, it was the most significant federal healthcare legislation since Medicare was passed in 1965.
The bill, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, quickly became known as “Obamacare.”
It extends coverage to the uninsured, prevents insurance companies from denying coverage to patients with pre-existing medical conditions, and provides subsidies to help low-income earners buy insurance. Still, many Americans opposed the new plan. They argued that it cost too much, put too great a burden on small businesses, and gave the federal government too much power.
Iraq, Afghanistan, and Libya In August 2010, Obama announced, “The American combat mission in Iraq has ended.” When the final pull-out took place in late 2011, more than 4,000 Americans had been killed and more than 31,000 wounded. During the American troop surge, Iraq was significantly more stable, although acts of terrorism continued. About 50,000 American troops remained behind in support roles.
» Some Americans hoped that “Obamacare” would quickly be repealed. They felt it was not only too expensive but that its provisions went beyond the powers given to the government by the Constitution.
Interactive Chart
At the same time, Obama increased the American military presence in Afghanistan. American and allied troops had gone into Afghanistan shortly after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, but they had never rid the country of the Taliban forces that had protected Osama bin Laden. Now, Obama asserted, American forces would focus on the Taliban in Afghanistan and their allies in Pakistan.
In May 2011, President Obama announced the death of al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden. In a secret operation lasting less than an hour, Navy SEALS raided a compound in Pakistan and killed bin Laden, the mastermind behind the 9/11 terrorist attacks. However, Americans were well aware that the death of bin Laden did not end the threat of terrorism. Intelligence officers examined computer files and other evidence seized at bin Laden’s compound in the hopes that such materials would aid the continuing war on terrorism.
During the spring and summer of 2011, the United States also participated in an international coalition aiding the rebels who were fighting to overthrow the Libyan dictator Muammar al-Qaddafi. Qaddafi had long supported terrorist groups, and was finally overthrown and executed by rebel fighters.
Economic Issues and Reforms America’s economic problems continued. Unemployment had risen throughout 2009, peaking at 10.2 percent. Although the economy had stabilized by the spring of 2010, sluggish economic growth and a high unemployment rate left many Americans fearful about the future.
In July 2010, Obama signed into law a sweeping financial reform bill aimed at changing the Wall Street practices that had contributed to the 2008 financial crisis. The new law increased federal oversight of banks, hedge funds, and other financial institutions. It also created a consumer protection agency to oversee credit card rates, bank fees, mortgages, and car loans. Critics argued, however, that the 2,300-page bill was too complex and too confusing to yield significant results. They said it would tighten credit and lead to further economic woes.
The 2010 Congresssional Elections As the
2010 congressional elections approached, the nation seemed increasingly divided. While many Americans supported President Obama, others were angered by his actions. The strongest challenge came from the Tea Party Movement which emerged during Obama’s first year in office. The movement took its name from the Boston Tea Party, a colonial protest against British taxes. The Tea Party Movement was made up of many local groups, united by a common desire to reduce the size and scope of the federal government.
America in the Twenty-First Century
(7001
12.3 The Barack Obama Presidency
House of Representatives, 112th Congress
» Infer Based on the pie chart, what can you infer about the political power of the Tea Party?
Although they ran as Republicans, they were not traditional party candidates. They criticized many other Republicans as big spenders and urged a phase-out of programs such as Social Security and Medicare. In the 2010 elections, more than 40 candidates endorsed by the Tea Party were elected to the House and Senate.
Republicans won back control of the House of Representatives in the 2010 mid-term elections. Leaders of the new Republican-controlled House announced that their first priority would be to repeal Obama’s healthcare bill. Meanwhile, in the final months of 2010, Congress passed a number of important measures, including extensions of the Bush tax cuts and an arms-control treaty with Russia.
H IDENTIFY
What did the different Tea Party groups across the country have in common?
ELPS READING 4.C.3, 4.D.1
Look up these words’ definitions: appointment, nomination, diversity, advocate. Then read the section titled Obama’s Appointments. Where were the words used? Did you understand what they mean?
ELPS
Obama’s Second Term
As the 2012 presidential election approached, the nation’s economy remained a major concern. Continued economic worries led to political polarization, and the
established political parties were criticized by activists on the left and right. On the right, the Tea Party Movement urged Republicans to reduce taxation and the power of the federal government. On the left, critics from the Occupy Movement claimed that democracy was threatened by the accumulation of wealth and power in the hands of 1 percent of the population. For several months in late 2011 and early 2012, the mainly young people of the Occupy Movement set up tented encampments in American cities to draw attention to their cause.
Although the economic situation did not seem to be improving, the Obama administration received good news on another front. In June 2012, the Supreme Court, in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, granted Obama a judicial victory by ruling that it was within Congress’s power to introduce most provisions of the Affordable Care Act. The ruling surprised many observers who were convinced that the Act was unconstitutional.
The Election of 2012 The Democrats used the issue of income inequality in President Obama’s 2012 election campaign against the Republican candidate Mitt Romney, whom they portrayed as out of touch with ordinary people. After a deeply divisive campaign, Romney was defeated by Obama, who received 51.1 percent of the popular vote and 332 electoral votes. Exit polls offered an insight into America’s changing
America in the Twenty-First Century I 701 >	12.3 The Barack Obama Presidency
demographics: Obama’s victory rested partly on a coalition of minority voters and the young. With surveys showing a shrinking white population, some suggested that the Republican party would have to broaden its appeal to minority voters and young people in order to win future elections.
Obama began his second term amidst a continuing economic recession at home and lingering military problems abroad, his power weakened by a divided electorate. Many conservative voters still questioned the wisdom of his universal healthcare act and leadership in the war against terrorism.
Continuing Economic Problems With an unemployment rate of just under eight percent, and job creation lagging behind presidential expectations, Obama faced a difficult task. The problems were significant. America imported more than it exported, creating an unfavorable balance of trade. In addition there were charges, and some evidence, that the country’s economic competitors were guilty of unfavorable trade practices. Slow economic growth and failure to significantly reduce spending added to the woes.
Although the stock market moved steadily upward, so did gas prices, home prices, and overall consumer
» Protesters march in front of Chicago’s Federal Building Plaza during the government shutdown in 2013. Many citizens felt that Congress’s actions hurt the economic recovery.
debt. Yet Democrats and Republicans in Congress showed little incentive to negotiate in order to pass effective legislation. In the autumn of 2013, negotiations to raise the borrowing limit for the government stalled as Republicans demanded a number of political concessions that Democrats refused to give. Among these Republican demands were a postponement of the Affordable Care Act, tax reform, and energy deregulation. As the parties could not agree on a budget bill to fund the government, certain government services were forced to shut down temporarily.
Foreign Policy During Obama’s Second Term
Revolutions and civil wars in the Middle East continued to challenge American policy. Although the scheduled pull-out of American troops from Iraq was completed in 2011, the country remains politically unstable and wracked by sectarian violence. In Afghanistan, U.S. combat troops may leave at the end of 2014, but military personnel may remain in that country indefinitely. Meanwhile, as civil war raged in Syria, the Obama administration found itself in a difficult position, wary of sending arms that might find their way into the hands of terrorists and reluctant to become involved in another war in the Middle East. Tensions also remained high over Iran’s nuclear program, which many observers believe is intended to produce weapons rather than domestic energy. In November 2013, President Obama and other Western leaders persuaded Iran to accept an interim agreement to halt elements of its nuclear program and agree to weapons inspections in exchange for Western nations lifting some sanctions against that country.
The Boston Marathon Bombings The issue of America’s involvement in the Middle East was cited as the motive behind a horrific terrorist attack in Boston. On April 15, 2013, two pressure cooker bombs exploded near the finish line of the Boston Marathon.
The explosions transformed a day of celebration into grief, as Americans mourned the three people who were killed and the 264 who were injured. Authorities soon identified the bombers as two brothers, Islamist extremists upset by America’s wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. One of the brothers died as he fled from authorities. Police captured the other, who was an American citizen. The attack traumatized and stunned millions of American citizens who followed the events on the news and social media.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What foreign policy challenges did President Obama face in his second term?
America in the Twenty-First Century 702	12.3 The Barack Obama Presidency
ASSESSMENT
Check Understanding Discuss the goals and beliefs of the Tea Party Movement.
Describe the economic concerns and political actions of the Occupy Movement.
Generate Explanations Explain how changing demographics led to President Obama's reelection in 2012.
4.	Draw Conclusions Explain how U.S. involvement in the Middle East led to violence in the United States during President Obama’s second term.
5.	Identify Central Issues Explain how the issue of income inequality influenced the 2012 presidential election.
America in the Twenty-First Century
703
12.3 The Barack Obama Presidency
America’s civic unity and ethnic diversity continue to be a source of strength as young Americans look to the future.
As the twenty-first century dawned, American society looked very different from the way it had during the previous century. It also faced different challenges. As the nation entered the new millennium, it sought ways to preserve its heritage while at the same time adapting to rapid social, political, and technological change.
Interactive Flipped Video
9.A, 9.B, 11.B, 11.F, 13.B, 14.A, 14.B, 17.D, 22.C, 23.C, 25.D,
» Objectives
Analyze the causes and effects of immigration on American society.
Summarize the causes and effects of changing demographics.
Discuss the environmental issues facing Americans.
Explain the effects of communications technology on the economy.
Understand the issues Americans face in the 21st century.
» Key Terms
Immigration Act of
1990
bilingual education Immigration Reform
and Control Act of
1986
affirmative action Violence Against
Women Act privatizing Oprah Winfrey
Americans Look to the Future
Immigration Changes American Society
It is often said that the United States is a nation of immigrants. Over the centuries, American protection of religious and personal freedom, along with opportunities for social and economic mobility, has attracted huge numbers of immigrants, both legal and illegal. Such a steady flow of immigrants has ensured that American demographics are in a state of constant change. Over time, however, the nature of immigration has changed.
Expanding Immigration For years, the government limited immigration to mainly northern and western Europeans. In the 1960s, however, laws began to relax immigration limitations. The Immigration Act of 1990 increased quotas by 40 percent and eased most remaining restrictions. As a result, the period from the 1990s to the 2000s saw the largest numbers of immigrants in the country's history. During that time, almost one million immigrants arrived in America each year from all over the globe, representing a wide variety of cultures and religions. Today, immigrants account for more than 10 percent of the total American population.
T®
PEARSONl t ™ realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
704
Latinos Exert Their Influence Most of the new immigrants were Latinos. In 2000, 27 percent of the total immigrant population were Mexicans, with people from the Caribbean and Central America making up almost 17 percent. Mexicans and Central Americans settled largely in the South and Southwest. Caribbean immigrants, many of them Cubans, settled in Florida. The census of 2000 showed that a third or more of the residents of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California were Latinos.
Like all immigrants, Latinos have varying educational and employment backgrounds. Often they are forced to take lower-paying jobs with no healthcare benefits. However, Latino immigrants have had a profound social, cultural, and political impact. By 2001, Latinos held about 5,000 political offices and 4 percent of the seats in Congress, primarily as Democrats. Cuban Americans in Florida, generally Republican, have had an enormous influence on American political policy concerning Cuba.
The Growing Asian Population Asians make up the second-largest source of the new immigration. In 2000, they were nearly 23 percent of the total immigrant population, with the largest numbers coming from China, the Philippines, and India. The majority of Asian immigrants have settled in California, adding to the large Asian population in that state.
As a group, Asian immigrants have come from widely varying backgrounds, but overall they have the highest level of education. Some came to America with college degrees and marketable skills and found professional jobs. Others came from war-torn countries, with very little education.
Effects of Immigration on American Society
Immigration has long been debated in this country. People who would restrict it worry that immigrants take jobs and social services away from native-born Americans. They generally oppose bilingual education, in which students are taught in their native languages as well as in English, as they believe that immigrants should learn English in order to assimilate into American society. Proponents point out that immigrants contribute to the economy, often by taking jobs no one else wants. They also argue that with the U.S. birthrate falling, immigrants help the country by maintaining its population.
Much of the debate concerns illegal immigrants. A large number of immigrants to the United States, especially Latinos, have come illegally. They labor in low-paying jobs, such as migrant farmwork, and receive no benefits. The goal of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 was to stop the flow of immigrants who were entering the country illegally by penalizing employers who hired them and by granting
Sources of Immigration, 2000-2010
» Analyze Graphs Given what you’ve learned about immigration during the early 20th Century, how have the sources of immigration to the U.S. changed over the last 100 years?
America in the Twenty-First Century 705	12.4 Americans Look to the Future
resident status to those living in the United States since 1982. But immigrants still regularly cross U.S. borders illegally. How to treat these unauthorized workers is an ongoing debate. In 2008, the Bush administration proposed changes that would make it easier for farm employers to legally hire immigrant workers. Bush also proposed a process by which immigrants who entered illegally or whose visitation documents expired could eventually gain citizenship.
Immigration reform became a significant political issue again in 2013. A new comprehensive immigration reform bill brought before Congress provided a conditional path to citizenship for many of the estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants already living in the country.
It also provided money to secure the borders against future illegal immigration as well as strategies for fixing various aspects of visa programs. But while the bill passed in the Senate, the House of Representatives declined to vote on it. House Republicans were not in favor of the bill. President Obama continued in 2014 to call immigration reform a priority, but prospects for the bill’s success were not good. However, as with so many other difficult issues that Americans have faced
throughout their history, time will surely bring about some kind of resolution.
B GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
Why do some Americans oppose bilingual education? American Demographics in Transition
At the beginning of 2000, Americans were on the move more than ever. Coastal cities as well as the Sunbelt, or the region of warm southern and southwestern states, saw rapid population and economic growth as people left the cold Northeast and the Rust Belt. Meanwhile, the family itself was changing.
New and Diverse Families In 1960, more than 70 percent of American households were headed by a working father and a nonworking mother, neither of whom had ever been divorced. By 2000, fewer than 15 percent of households fit this model.
In 2000, one out of every two marriages ended in divorce, and in a high percentage of households both parents worked outside the home. Single-parent households were far more common, with a quarter of all children growing up in a single-parent household. The number of children born to unmarried mothers
AMERICA’S CHANGING FAMILIES
vs. AVERAGE LIFE EXPECTANCY AVERAGE NUMBER OF PEOPLE PER HOUSEHOLD MARRIED COUPLE FAMILY HOUSEHOLDS
imii! Ml®8| iisiwiisii	UNMARRIED
|f||Il IliilllSl lllllllllll	COUPLE -’J	.o-
ftsiifififi	HEADS CM HOUStnOtD
	UNDER 25
» Analyze Data Using the information in the graphs, describe how the American family has changed over the past several decades.
vtpau FAMILY size
America in the Twenty-First Century . 706	12.4 Americans Look to the Future
also rose. In I960, only 5 percent of children were born out of wedlock. In 2011, one out of every four white babies, one out of every three Latino babies, and two out of every three African American babies were born to unmarried mothers.
Debating and Challenging Affirmative Action In
the 1960s, President Johnson introduced the idea of affirmative action, or improving opportunities for women and minorities by giving preference to them in school admissions and job applications. Since that time, affirmative action has been hotly debated. Proponents argue that without such initiatives, minorities cannot overcome generations of discrimination. Opponents say that the policy is unfair and that one of its unintended consequences is that it discriminates against nonminorities. In 1996, Californians voted to end affirmative action in state hiring and education.
That same year, a federal court struck down an affirmative action admissions program at the University of Texas. In 2003, however, the Supreme Court decided in two cases involving the University of Michigan that while race could not be the deciding factor in admissions, it could be one of several factors. One of these cases was Grutter v. Bollinger, in which it was decided that such considerations did not constitute a quota system.
In 2013, the Supreme Court allowed affirmative action to survive in college admissions Fisher v. University of Texas but imposed a tough legal standard, ruling that schools must prove that “available, workable race-neutral alternatives” are failing before race can be taken into account in admission decisions. The case was sent back to a federal appeals court for review.
During this same session, the Court heard a case that tests whether voters can ban affirmative action programs through a referendum. The successful referendum at issue in this case was passed in Michigan in 2006, and it was a backlash to the University of Michigan rulings in 2003.
Expanding and Protecting the Rights of All Americans Social advocacy groups such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and the National Organization for Women (NOW) continued the fight to ensure African Americans and women continued to make social and political gains. By 2002, 33 percent of African American families enjoyed incomes of at least $50,000, placing them in the middle class. Also in 2002, 17 percent of African Americans over the age of 25 held bachelor’s degrees. At the same time, legislation to enforce equal pay for equal work, address child-care needs for working women, and end sexual harassment in the workplace
• K
» Supreme Court cases involving the University of Michigan and the University of Texas continue to explore the role race plays in college admission policies.
has improved the lives of working women. Outside of the world of work, women have also achieved victories. Issues such as spouse abuse and date rape are now widely discussed. Incidents of violence against women are more often reported and more often punished than ever before. The 1994 Violence Against Women Act increased federal resources to apprehend and prosecute men guilty of violent acts against women.
Civil rights are also expanding for members of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Community (LGBT), helped by social and political advocacy organizations such as the Human Rights Campaign, the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force and Lambda Legal. In 2011, the ban against openly gay service members in the U.S. military was lifted. An increasing number of states and towns have passed laws against anti-gay discrimination, while many states now allow same-sex couples to marry. In 2013 a major supreme court case, the United States v. Windsor, resulted in the Supreme Court striking down part of a law that banned federal recognition of same-sex marriages. The ruling means that same-sex couples who are married in states that allow gay marriage are now entitled to the same rights enjoyed by heterosexual married couples. These rights include Social Security benefits, hospital visitation rights, healthcare benefits, and military family benefits.
America in the Twenty-First Century 707	12.4 Americans Look to the Future
An Aging Population While the life expectancy of an American born in 1900 was less than 50 years, an American born in 2011 can expect to live to age 79. By 2000, older Americans tended to retire earlier, live longer, and exert more political influence. These factors have strained the country’s social welfare system, especially Social Security and Medicare. In 1960, the federal government spent less than $100 billion on social welfare. By 2013, the amount had increased to $1.9 trillion.
With the large baby-boom generation reaching retirement age, the issue of elder care has become critical. Falling birthrates over the past two decades have meant that when the huge population of baby boomers retires, there will not be enough workers to cover their Social Security benefits. Politicians have been debating how to deal with this impending reality.
In his second term, President Bush called for privatizing Social Security by allowing younger workers to invest some of their earnings in individual retirement accounts. Critics defeated the measure, saying that it would put younger workers at the mercy of fluctuating stock market returns without addressing the shortfall of funds. Today the debate continues.
Id DESCRIBE why politicians have been debating the
issue of Social Security.
ELPS READING 4.D.1
With a partner, read the text’s title and subheadings. Look up the meaning of unfamiliar words. Then read aloud the text together.
ELPS
Energy and the
Environment
On June 25, 2013, President Obama addressed an audience at Georgetown University on the subject of the environment. Briefly mentioning that the twelve warmest years in recorded history had occurred over the course of the previous fifteen years, he focused on the problems of global warming:
Last year, temperatures in some areas of the ocean reached record highs, and ice in the Arctic shrank to its smallest size on record—faster than most models had predicted it would. These are facts.
—President Obama, Georgetown University, June 25,
2013
In his speech, Obama suggested that the answer to the problems rested in stronger federal environmental legislation, including higher pollution standards and reducing the dumping of carbon pollution from the nation’s power plants. Ending his address, he called on Americans to “stand up and speak out” and to do what “this moment demands.” His speech seems to call on both government entities and private citizens to manage the environment.
Legislating to Protect the Environment In recent years, environmental issues have aroused political controversy. Some deny that our planet is experiencing a period of warming temperatures. Others, while
President Obama's Climate Action Plan
EPA REGULATORY GOALS
• Speed up the process of implementing regulations on greenhouse gas emissions	• Work with foreign, state, and local governments to solve issues	
• Issue flexible regulations to individual states to help reduce emissions	• Improve the EPA's internal management	
• Replace use of hydrofluorcarbons (HFCs) in the United States with alternatives	• Empower communities to advance the cause of environmental protection	
• Promote scientific research and development	• Support the Presidential Council for an Advanced Energy Economy	
SOURCE:
Presidential Climate Action Project » Analyze Information How would President Obama’s Climate Action Plan lower carbon-based emissions?
America in the Twenty-First Century f 708 I 12.4 Americans Look to the Future
accepting global warming as fact, deny that such warming is the product of human activity. Those who believe that human activity is the cause of global warming have urged the Obama administration to move forcefully to pass environmental legislation. But given the variety of opinion on environmental matters, it is not surprising that the administration’s policies have attracted plenty of opposition. The main argument against environmental legislation is that it hurts the economy and the nation’s industries.
Regulations have been passed to control emissions from power plants, prompting many coal industry officials to condemn the administration for waging a “war on coal.” In 2013, a major battle was brewing as Obama prepared to limit greenhouse gas emissions from existing utilities. Many Republicans also criticized the president’s efforts to support renewable energy. In recent years, billions of dollars have been invested in the renewable energy industries, although Republicans accuse the government of wasting taxpayers’ money, for example by supporting the failed solar manufacturer Solyndra.
Environmental Protection, Energy, and the Economy Most Americans, including Democratic and Republican politicians, agree that environmental protection is an important concern. However, environmental problems require a global response. But how does one reach a global consensus? Populous countries such as China, India, and Russia are largely immune to American calls for environmental protection. Nations that are developing economically have made little effort to improve air and water quality. Many point out that the destruction of the rain forest in Brazil will have a potentially greater catastrophic impact on the planet than anything done—or not done—in the United States.
As the world’s population increases, and living standards rise, there is also mounting pressure on the physical environment and resources such as oil. And as the human dependency on oil increases, so do the possibilities of accidents. Throughout the world, oil drilling has led to oil spills that have had devastating effects. The 2010 Deepwater Horizon spill in the Gulf of Mexico (often referred to as the BP oil spill) created environmental problems in Louisiana, Alabama, Mississippi, and Florida. Such spills are even more of a problem in more underdeveloped oil nations.
The Deepwater Horizon spill has helped intensify the controversy surrounding the Keystone XL pipeline project, which would transport crude oil from Canada to the oil refineries of the Gulf of Mexico. Critics have condemned this project for its possible damage to the
» Wind farms, like this one near Palm Springs, California, can produce electricity without releasing harmful carbon-based emissions, although some claim such farms are dangerous to wildlife.Check Understanding Are there any negative aspects of wind power?
©
Interactive Gallery
environment, while the project's supporters promise that it will bring jobs and a reliable oil supply.
Controversies like these will no doubt continue, however, as no economically viable alternative to oil has been discovered. In fact, scientists and engineers are busy developing other ways of extracting and transporting oil. Fracking (or hydrofracturing) has increased the amount of oil and gas extracted from the earth and in the United States, has helped to reduce American dependency on imported oil. It has had positive economic results. So has the use of pipelines to move oil from one section of America (or Canada) to another. But the long-range ecological impact of fracking is still under debate, and the use of pipelines comes with the risk of spills and accidents. In short, the United States and the world face a delicate balancing act between the need to maintain the environment and the necessity of promoting the economy and boosting people's standard of living.
Recycling and Green Architecture Although controversies over energy use remain, the environmental movement has achieved victories at a local level. These have often focused on the strategy of “reduce,
(7091
y
12.4 Americans Look to the Future
America in the Twenty-First Century
reuse, recycle” to conserve resources and decrease the amount of waste going into landfills. State and local governments drive recycling efforts. Several states have a deposit policy on recyclable cans and glass bottles to encourage recycling. In addition, by 2011, more than 9,800 communities in the United States had curbside recycling programs, and the United States recycled nearly 35 percent of its total trash.
The 2000s also saw a heightened interest in "green architecture,” or architecture that integrates technology with environmental concerns to lesson the human impact on the environment. Green buildings might feature recycled materials, increased insulation to cut down on heating and cooling energy use, and alternative sources of energy, such as solar or wind power.
For example in Boston, Massachusetts, a rooftop farm has been installed on top of the huge Design Center building beside the harbor. A layer of rooftop soil in which crops grow also insulates the building. The crops will be distributed to local stores where fresh produce is hard to come by.
As buildings become more energy-efficient, environmental groups are working to make cities healthier places to live. After decades of urban decline, American cities have become safer and more
» Crops are grown on the top of this “green” building in the Brooklyn Navy Yards in New York City. The produce is sold to local restaurants and grocers and at farmers’ markets.
prosperous, attracting new residents and businesses. Larger concentrations of population means less dependence on cars, as more commuters walk or use public transportation. Parks are being restored and waterways cleaned. In many places, urban agriculture is taking off, providing local residents with fresh produce.
fid EXPLAIN why a global response to environmental
challenges is difficult to achieve.
# ELPS
ELPS READING 4.C.4
Read the sentence beginning In his speech...following the quotation by President Obama. What two things does the word stronger compare? What does the word higher compare?
Technology Transforms Life
The United States continues to benefit from its free enterprise system, which applies technological innovation in the marketplace. Digital technology in the form of cellphones, laptops, and tablet devices have all brought about rapid change in our way of life and have improved our standard of living. The microchips that were developed for computers have become essential components of modern televisions, CD players, VCRs, fax machines, dishwashers, refrigerators, washing machines, and hundreds of other appliances. This technology helps to regulate traffic, entertain millions of people, and facilitate shopping through home shopping sites.
Computers, telephone and satellite communications have shaped the economic development of the United States. Technological innovation, driven by the free enterprise system, has changed all of our lives in countless ways. It has also created new industries and employment opportunities at home, while increasing the competitiveness of American products in world markets. For example, the Dell Corporation uses just-in-time inventory management, an innovation that helps the company maintain lower inventories. Minimizing excess inventory helps businesses such as Dell run more efficiently and be more responsive to market demands. Various technological and management innovations such as robotics and computer management allow American companies to produce high-tech exports including computers, pharmaceuticals, electrical machinery, and scientific instruments, as well as products for the aerospace industry. In the years to come, America’s renewable-energy industry may surpass China’s. The United States is now profiting from its solar, wind, and smart-grid technology exports.
Interactive 3-D Model
America in the Twenty-First Century
710 J 12.4 Americans Look to the Future
-
That’s good news for the American economy and for the planet!
Mobile Technology Connects America and the World A revolution in information technology is underway as technology transforms the ways we obtain information. More and more people are getting their news online rather than through traditional print media such as newspapers and magazines. This has led to major disruptions and transformations in the media industry. The information revolution is not only limited to world news. We can now access social media sites for information about friends or celebrities. Never in human history has so much information been so easily obtained.
Meanwhile, technology is also changing the way we gain access to entertainment. Music, movies, and television shows can be retrieved in seconds on a personal computer linked to the Internet or with a smart phone. At times it seems as if streaming videos and podcasts are helping the Internet replace television as our main entertainment machine. But the Internet is also spreading that entertainment wider than television ever could, by making American culture accessible to much of the world’s population. Through films and videos, American freedoms and economic opportunities are being broadcast to a growing audience worldwide. This trend is not without its dangers, as it has provoked violent reactions from radical groups who fear that local culture and traditions are being overwhelmed by American political and social ideals.
The American civic values of religious tolerance, respect for diversity, and freedom of speech are particularly threatening to extremists worldwide. Many foreign governments are also alarmed by this diffusion of American culture. But the open nature of the Internet has made it difficult for authoritarian regimes to block the flow of information.
As American culture continues to be broadcast throughout the world via various media, people abroad are inspired by the example of individuals who have made important political, social, and economic contributions to society. One of these is Oprah Winfrey, the influential television host. Although Winfrey was born into poverty in Mississippi, she overcame the trauma and hardships of her early life to become a world-famous talk-show host and producer. She is now a billionaire, philanthropist, social leader and role model for people everywhere who long to improve their lives and the lives of others.
Advances in Science The application of scientific discoveries and technological innovations by the free enterprise system continues to improve the standard
» Oprah Winfrey stands as testament to the American ideal that one’s social origins or race should not limit life’s opportunities. Born into poverty, Winfrey is now a billionaire, a media mogul, and a philanthropist.
of living in the United States. Just as American high-tech research has made the country the leader in computer and other digital technology, American research and development laboratories have ensured that the country remains on the cutting-edge of medical and scientific innovation. No country spends more on medical research, and none has introduced more advances in the field. In particular, new research in genetics is opening up promising new possibilities for the treatment of cancer and other ailments. Genetic research will lead to safer pharmaceutical drugs.
Today, Americans have a wider range of medical options than ever before. From heart, kidney, and other organ transplants to microsurgery using micro video and fiber-optic cameras, American advanced medical treatment is the envy of the world. In addition, such American companies as Johnson & Johnson, Merck, Eli Lilly, and Pfizer have ensured that the United States leads the world in pharmaceutical innovation.
Concerns and Hopes Americans today are concerned about jobs and the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare, In addition, the nation is passing through a confusing time of rapid technological change. The revolution in digital and information technologies is
America in the Twenty-First Century 711	12.4 Americans Look to the Future
comparable to the earlier industrial revolutions of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. These eras of change were characterized by disruption, anxiety, and fears but also by hopes and opportunities. Americans today are particularly worried about changing patterns of employment, and the growing strength of economic competitors. But the shifting ground is also providing new perspectives and opportunities for innovation and entrepreneurship, activities that have always stood the nation in good stead. Throughout the country’s history, America’s resourcefulness and initiative have always been one of its greatest strengths.
The American ethos, or character, is made up of many other strengths that will continue to guarantee success in these changing times. U.S. citizens, whatever their origins or ancestry, hold a common bond in standing for certain self-evident truths. In a world torn apart by sectarian strife, America’s great advantage lies in its religious and ethnic diversity and tolerance, and in its concept of a nation based not on a single, monolithic religious or ethnic identity but on civic virtues and ideals. These virtues and ideals are the foundation of the republic. In contrast to many other countries, whose governments retain power through brutal political repression, the American political system provides a unique advantage. American representative democracy allows great flexibility—to decide what policies to adopt or when to change political course. Unlike more authoritarian political systems, where
only one party or group remains in control, America is open to diversity of thought and action and to peaceful political change. "We, the people” have the civic and patriotic responsibility to participate in this democratic process, and the commitment to political education and voting is a reflection of this patriotism.
In a very real sense, Americans work together to make a "more perfect union.” These are the civic ideals that will continue to ensure success in a changing world.
Id EXPLAIN Why has the role of print media in daily life
diminished in the 21st century?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Explain how immigration has affected American society in recent decades.
2.	Describe how the American family has changed.
3.	Identify Central Issues Discuss new civil rights initiatives that have affected the United States.
4.	Compare Points of View Compare and contrast opinions about environmental issues.
5.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain how changes in technology have affected American culture.
America in the Twenty-First Century J 7121 12.4 Americans Look to the Future
TEKS ASSESSMENT
1.	Describe NAFTA Describe the dynamic relationship between U.S. international trade policies and the U.S. free-enterprise system, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international treaties. Write a paragraph describing the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Describe what NAFTA
is, what NAFTA’s supporters claimed the pros of the agreement would be, and what NAFTA’s opponents claimed the cons of the agreement would be. 17.E,
19.E
2.	Evaluate U.S. Participation in International Organizations Evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international organizations, and evaluate efforts by global organizations to undermine U.S. sovereignty through the use of treaties. Write a paragraph evaluating the pros and cons of participating in a global organization such as the World Trade Organization. Consider the argument that global organizations undermine U.S. sovereignty and consider such factors as the power of the World Trade Organization to negotiate and enforce trade agreements and how trade treaties might affect environmental efforts and workers’ rights in the United States. 11.C, 19.E
3.	Explain Economic Impact of Technological Innovations Explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as telephone communications and computers on the economic development of the United States. Write a paragraph explaining the effects of satellites and computers on globalization. Identify what globalization is and explain how computers and satellites have assisted in the globalization of business. 27.A
4. Identify Impact of Multinational Corporations
Identify the impact of multinational corporations on the twenty-first century economy. Write a paragraph identifying the economic impact of the rise of multinational corporations and globalization. Identify what a multinational corporation is; the positive economic impact of multinational corporations and globalization, including what the graph below shows about multinational sales; and the negative economic impact of multinational corporations and globalization. 18.B
U.S. MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS
2010
DOMESTIC Q3 FOREIGN SALES
WAL-MART
EXXON-MOBIL
GENERAL ELECTRIC
FORD
IBM
DOW CHEMICAL
INTEL
AMAZON
MCDONALD'S
NIKE
$311 BILLION
$188 BILLION
BILLION K
BILLION H
$36 BILLION | BILLION I I $109 BILLION
___________| $154 BILLION
^1 $80 BILLION m $66 BILLION | $64 BILLION I $36 BILLION
Source: U.S. News and World Report
BILLION H
$37 BILLION $19 BILLION || $15 BILLION $8 BILLION || $16 BILLION $10 BILLION II $11 BILLION
5.	Understand Applications of Innovations Understand the applications of technological and management innovations in the workplace, and understand
the productivity enhancements that result from technological and management innovations for business and for labor. Write a paragraph discussing how computer technologies have enhanced productivity and management in American industry. Consider how computer technology has been applied in industry, the effect on productivity and competitiveness, and the effect on management and inventory. 27.C
6.	Describe U.S. Involvement in World
Affairs Describe U.S. involvement in world affairs, including 9/11. Write a paragraph describing how U.S. involvement in world affairs played a role in terrorist justifications for 9/11. Consider how Bin Laden used U.S. involvement in world affairs as a justification for attacking the United States and previous attacks by al Qaeda against the United States. 11 .A
r
TEKS ASSESSMENT
Presidential Election of 2000
Massachusetts 12
Rhode Island 4 "Connecticut 8
New Jersey 15 Delaware 3 Maryland 10 Washington, D.C. 3*|
Candidate (Party)
■ George W. Bush (Republican)
H
Albert Gore (Democratic) M
Ralph Nader (Green) I | Other
State name (4) - Number of electoral votes
*One elector from Washington, D.C., abstained from voting
Electoral Vote	Popular Vote	% Electoral Vote
271	50,456,062	50.5
266	50,996,582	49.5
0	2,858,843	0
0	1,051,811	0
% Popular Vote 47.9 48.4
2.7
1.0
Analyze 2000 Presidential Election Analyze the impact of third parties on presidential elections, and evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative, executive and judicial branches of government, including the presidential election of 2000. Write a paragraph analyzing the presidential election of 2000 and the tensions it caused among the legislative, executive and judicial branches of government. Consider why Democrats urged third-party candidate Ralph Nader to withdraw from the race, what the map above indicates about the effect of Ralph Nader’s candidacy on election results, why Florida and Ralph Nader’s candidacy in the state were significant to the election outcome, and why a Supreme Court decision was necessary to determine the winner of the election. 11.D, 20.B
Explain Constitutional Issues Surrounding 9/11 Explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including 9/11. Write a paragraph explaining the constitutional issues surrounding the treatment of prisoners detained at Guantanamo Bay. Consider the issue of habeas corpus and the Supreme Court case Hamdan v. Rumsfeld. 19.B
9.	Discuss Lionel Sosa Discuss the role of American entrepreneurs such as Lionel Sosa. Write a paragraph discussing how entrepreneur Lionel Sosa assisted
in President Bush’s 2004 presidential campaign.
Identify who Lionel Sosa is and how he assisted in the campaign. 18. A
10.	Analyze Geographic Factors of Hurricane Katrina Analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. Write a paragraph analyzing how physical and human geographic factors contributed to the devastating effects of Hurricane Katrina on New Orleans. Consider the physical geographic factors
that contributed to the breaching of the levees and the human geographic factors that contributed to the situation. 12. A
11.	Evaluate Participation in International Treaties Evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international treaties. Write a paragraph evaluating the pros and cons of the United States participating in the Kyoto Protocol. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What is the Kyoto Protocol? What might be the benefit of the United States participating in the treaty? What arguments did some people, including President Bush, make for not abiding by the treaty? 19.E
1
America in the Twenty-first Century i 714
12. Explain 2008 As Turning Point Explain the historical significance of the 2008 election of the first black president, Barack Obama, as a turning point. Write a paragraph explaining why the election of Barack Obama as President in 2008 was a turning point. Explain Obama’s background before running for President, why the 2008 presidential race was a historical turning point, and what Obama means in the quotation below. 2.D, 11.E
If there is anyone out there who still doubts that America is a place where all things are possible, who still wonders if the dream of our founders is alive in our time, who still questions the power of our democracy, tonight is your answer.
15.	Identify Social Advocacy Groups Identify significant social advocacy organizations across the political spectrum. Write a paragraph identifying different groups across the political spectrum that critiqued
the traditional political parties that led up to the 2012 presidential election. Consider the position of the Tea Party Movement and the position and activities of the Occupy Movement. 11.B
16.	Analyze Illegal Immigration Analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from illegal immigration to the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing the causes and effects of illegal immigration to the United States. Consider why immigrants risk coming to the United States illegally, the goal of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 and its effectiveness, and efforts at immigration reform. 13.B
—Barack Obama, November 2008
13.	Evaluate Contributions of Hillary Clinton Evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the United States such as Hillary Clinton.
Write a paragraph evaluating the contributions of Hillary Clinton as part of President Obama’s cabinet. Consider Clinton’s background before joining Obama’s cabinet and the role Clinton played in Obama’s cabinet. 24.B
14.	Identify Contributions of Sonia Sotomayor Identify the political contributions of women such as Sonia Sotomayor to American society. Write a paragraph identifying the political contributions of Sonia Sotomayor. Identify who Sotomayor is and how she has contributed to American society. 26.D
17.	Identify Consequences of Affirmative
Action Identify actions of government and the private sector such as affirmative action to create economic opportunities for citizens, and analyze the unintended consequences. Write a paragraph describing the debate over affirmative action and identifying court cases related to unintended consequences. Identify what affirmative action is, describe the arguments of supporters and opponents of affirmative action, and identify court cases involving affirmative action. 17.D
18.	Discuss USA PATRIOT Act Discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001. Write a paragraph discussing the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001. Discuss the purpose of the act and use the chart below to discuss how the act impacts the private and public sector. 19.D
USA
Patriot Act of 2001 TITLES
PURPOSE I TITLES
Enhanced
Surveillance
Procedures
Protecting the Border
Providing for Victims of Terrorism, Public Safety Officers, and Their Families
L
Increased Information Sharing for Critical
Infrastructure
Protection
Improved
Intelligence
SOURCE:
Congressional Research Service America in the Twenty-first Century 715 ;
19.	Trace Development of Civil Rights Movement Trace the historical development of the civil rights movement
in the twenty-first century, and identify significant social advocacy organizations across the political spectrum. Write a paragraph describing advances in civil rights for African Americans, women, and the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Community (LGBT). Identify the advocacy groups working for change and some of the progress that has been made. 9.A, 11.B
20.	Discuss Social Security and Medicare Solvency Discuss the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare. Write a paragraph discussing why the solvency of Social Security and Medicare has become an important political debate. Consider demographic changes, the effect of demographic changes on spending, and the on-going debate about how to keep these programs solvent. 11 .F
21.	Create Visual Presentations on Immigration Create visual presentations analyzing the effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal immigration to the United States, using different forms of media
to convey information, including written to visual and statistical to written or visual, using available computer software as appropriate. Use computer software and the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to create a visual presentation about immigration to the United States since 2000. Be sure to use statistics from the lessons and other sources to create charts and graphs showing the characteristics of immigration and provide captions that explain what the charts and graphs show. 13.B, 30.A, 30.C
22.	Analyze Free-Enterprise System and Standard of Living Analyze how the application of scientific discoveries and technological innovations by the free-enterprise system, including those in communication, improve the standard of living in the United States, and understand how the free-enterprise system drives and applies technological innovation in the marketplace, such as cell phones. Write a paragraph analyzing how the free-enterprise system helps drive and apply scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as cell phones in the marketplace. Consider the effects of digital technologies such as cell phones on the standard of living and how digital technology has been applied in the marketplace. 28.A, 28.C
23.	Identify Global Impact of American Culture Identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest of the world over time, and analyze the global diffusion of American culture through the entertainment industry via various media. Write a paragraph identifying and analyzing the spread of American culture around the world. Consider what forms of media are assisting
in the spread of American culture and why some radical groups and governments oppose the spread of American culture. 25.C, 25.D
24.	Explain Innovations in Medicine Explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in medicine, including vaccines. Write a paragraph explaining how medical needs have led to new scientific discoveries and technological innovations in medicine. Consider the American emphasis on research and development, how research leads to innovations in the treatment of diseases, and how technological innovations lead to a wider range of medical options. 27.B
Z'"’
America in the Twenty-first Century t 716 >
>z::
AMERICA’S CHANGING FAMILIES
LIFE EXPECTANCY /YVO’OXO
OOiOBPK Of PEOPLE PER HOUSEHOLD FAMILY SIZE Sill ■	■■	MARRIED COUPLE	
ISSIlll - a ■ ■■ SillSil ■	: SialffSi	< J	rAISiVHO.V iO'OL 1	
	UNMARRIED	
III I'' COUPLE
lllill	i."	HtA'.OO! BOHStOOi.P	
	UNDER 25	
25.	Identify Defining Characteristics of Eras Identify the major eras in U.S. history from 1877 to the present, and describe their defining characteristics. Use the graphs above and text information to write a paragraph identifying the family characteristics that distinguish the present era. Identify changes in life expectancy between 1980 and 2010; family size between 1980 and 2010; make up of households between 1980 and 2010; and the divorce rate, the number of single-parent households, and the number of babies born out of wedlock. 2.B
26.	Describe the Bond of Self-Evident Truths Describe U.S. citizens as people from numerous places throughout the world who hold a common bond
in standing for certain self-evident truths. Write a paragraph describing how certain self-evident truths bond U.S. citizens, regardless of their place of origin or ancestry. Identify the self-evident truths and explain how they provide a common bond. 22.C
27.	Explain Participation in the Democratic Process Explain how participation in the democratic process reflects our national ethos, patriotism, civic responsibility, and progress to build a “more perfect union.’’ Write a paragraph describing how participation in the democratic process reflects our American ethos, patriotism, civic responsibility, and progress to build a “more perfect union.” 23.C
28.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What are the benefits and costs of technology? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
America in the Twenty-first Century 717
i
i
TV
NM'
i
U.S. MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS
DOMESTIC Q FOREIGN SALES
2010
WAL-MART
EXXON-MOBIL
GENERAL ELECTRIC
FORD
IBM
DOW CHEMICAL
INTEL
AMAZON
MCDONALD'S
NIKE
$311 BILLION
$188 BILLION
$109 BILLION $154 BILLION | $80 BILLION $66 BILLION $64 BILLION
$36 BILLION $37 BILLION
Source: U.S. News and World Report
BILLION |
BILLION $36 BILLION $18 BILLION
$7 BILLION _____
$19 BILLION || $15 BILLION $8 BILLION || $16 BILLION $10 BILLION II $11 BILLION
1 Based on this graph, what statement below best describes the impact of U.S. multinational corporations on the 21st century economy?
A
Manufacturing and selling goods worldwide is a better idea for electronics companies than it is for retail outlets. B
Manufacturing and selling goods worldwide has benefited the American automobile industry, but not the oil and gas industry. C
Manufacturing and selling goods worldwide has increased productivity and sales, sometimes more internationally than nationally. D
Manufacturing and selling goods worldwide has led to a decrease in retail and gas sales, but has increased domestic sales of food and athletic equipment. t
!
I
2	How did Ralph Nader’s candidacy for the Green Party affect the 2000 presidential election in the United States?
F
As the candidate of a centrist third party, Nader had very little effect on the outcome of the election. G
As the candidate of a centrist third party, Nader inspired Republican Bush to embrace bipartisanship to secure an easy win. H
As the candidate of a right-leaning third party, Nader took votes away from Bush, causing the election to be the closest in U.S. history. J
As the candidate of a left-leaning third party, Nader took votes away from Democratic candidate Gore, who very narrowly lost the electoral vote. Access additional practice questions
3	Despite its important goal and worldwide support, why did President George W. Bush refuse to honor the Kyoto Protocol treaty?
A
Because the treaty put undue emphasis on the United States and Europe, it undermined the economy of the free world. B
He did not believe the United States had a problem with greenhouse gases, and limiting them would harm U.S. manufacturers. C
The treaty was negotiated and signed by Bush’s predecessor in office, and Bush wanted to bring his own views on climate control to the table. D
Because it did not place emission limits on all countries, he believed it could hurt the U.S. economy and undermine the sovereignty of the United States. If there is anyone out there who still doubts that America is a place where all things are possible, who still wonders if the dream of our founders is alive in our time, who still questions the power of our democracy, tonight is your answer.
—Barack Obama, November 2008
To what turning point in U.S. history is Barack Obama referring?
F
Americans elected Barack Obama, the youngest president ever to serve. G
The Republicans named Sarah Palin as the first female vice-presidential candidate. H
Americans elected Barack Obama, the United States’ first African American president. J
Congress passed the Dream Act, allowing rights to the children of undocumented immigrants. If you have trouble with...				
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	12.1	12.2	12.2	12.3
TEKS 18.B 11.D 19.E 2.D
America in the Twenty-First Century (719
5	How has recent immigration affected the demographics of the United States?
A
Latino immigrants now hold more than ten percent of Congressional seats. B
Most Asian immigrants are now choosing to live in Midwestern cities and suburbs. C
Immigration to the United States has declined lately due to the troubled economy. D
Immigrants now account for more than ten percent of the population of the United States. 6	How does this concept web reinforce the idea that free enterprise drives technological innovations?
F
Computers have made it easier to develop new technology without the expense of building scale models and running lengthy tests. G
As the price of computer chips dropped, the companies that make the appliances that use them can collect higher profits from their sale. H
The U.S. government has pledged to subsidize computer-related research to add more high-profile manufacturing jobs to the economy. J
Profit motives have inspired entrepreneurs, inventors, and researchers to compete to develop new technology and find new uses for existing technology. America in the Twenty-First Century 720
access additional practice questions
7	Which of the following best represents the political views of liberals?
A
Government should support a free, unregulated market. B
Government intervention is necessary to help the needy. C
Citizens should solve their own problems through individual effort. D
Private organizations should take responsibility for solving social problems. 8	During the Persian Gulf War, where were most of the U.S.-led Allied air bases located? F Iran G Iraq H Syria J Saudi Arabia
If you have trouble with...										
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	12.4	12.4	11.1	11.4
teks	13.B	'	28.C	10.E	11.A
America in the Twenty-First Century

l^|B Mini.
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
What makes a government successful? reele
esident Ronald Reagan at
iction
campaign rally.
11 America in the 1980s and 1990s
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
*
2.D, 9.1, 10.B, 10.C, 10.D, 10.E, 10.F, 11.A, 11.B, 11.C, 11.D, 13.A, 13.B, 17.D, 18.A, 19.C, 19.E, 24.A, 24.B, 27.A, 28.B, 28.C, 29.G, 30.A, 30.B
President Clinton was impeached, but not convicted, for perjury and obstruction of justice
PEARSON
■
of Irene Zoppi, a Gulf War veteran.
•aNBC LEARN
to learn more about the experiences
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
Enduring Understandings
•	In the 1970s, a conservative movement strengthened, leading to the election of Ronald Reagan as President in 1980.
•	"Supply-side economics” aimed to improve the economy by cutting taxes.
•	Reagan's policy of Peace Through Strength helped end the Cold War.
•	During the 1980s and 1990s, the U.S. acted as a peacekeeper worldwide.
•	Republicans announced their “Contract with America,” calling for a reduction of government and a balanced budget.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
637

At the 1980 Republican National Convention, presidential candidate Ronald Reagan and running mate George H. W. Bush emphasized the need for tax cuts, a balanced budget, and increased defense spending.
ItOl Interactive Flipped Video^M
The two major political parties in the United States in the late twentieth century were the Democrats, many of whom were “liberals,” and the Republicans, who were often labeled “conservatives.” Liberals generally favored government intervention to help the needy, whereas conservatives generally favored allowing the free market, private organizations, and individuals to do that. Although the two parties did agree on many basic issues, including core American values such as freedom and equality, they diverged on many others. In addition, individual members within both parties did not always conform to the views of their party’s majority.
10.E, 10.F, 13.A, 17.D
» Objectives
Describe the differences between liberal and conservative viewpoints.
Analyze the causes behind the conservative resurgence in the early 1980s.
Explain why Ronald Reagan won the presidency in 1980.
» Key Terms
liberal
conservative New Right unfunded mandate Moral Majority Ronald Reagan
The Conservative
Movement Surges
Liberals and Conservatives
Diverge
In order to understand the Republican party of the late twentieth century, one has to revisit the 1964 election, which marked a low point for conservatives. Republican Barry Goldwater, a favorite of the conservative movement, lost the election in a landslide to liberal Democrat Lyndon Johnson. Nonetheless, conservatives were not discouraged by this loss at the polls. On the contrary, they set out to build an organization and to put forth a clear vision of their goals and values that would enable them to win in the future.
Meanwhile, Goldwater returned to the Senate, where he continued to be the voice of conservatism and to forcefully advocate for conservative views. Goldwater found a supporter in California Governor Ronald Reagan, who was emerging as a conservative leader. By 1980, the conservatives' efforts had paid off. Their new standard bearer, Ronald Reagan, was elected president. The modern conservative movement that Reagan spearheaded shaped the nation’s policies for decades.
ifi realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
638
Liberalism’s Ideas and Goals In the late 1970s, liberals tended to believe that the federal government should play a significant role in improving the lives of all Americans. They valued social programs that helped the poor, unemployed, elderly, and others. They also sponsored laws that protected the rights of minorities and women, especially in the post-World War II period. They supported greater government regulation of industry. In the foreign policy realm, liberals tended to favor cooperating with international organizations like the United Nations.
Conservatism’s Ideas and Goals In contrast, some conservatives felt that a large central government endangered economic growth and individual choice. They felt the liberal policies of the 1960s and 1970s left a legacy of rising inflation and enormous waste. Furthermore, some conservatives criticized the liberal solution of “throwing money” at social problems. They sought to reduce taxes and limit government regulation of industry in order to promote economic growth.
As conservative economist Milton Friedman and his wife Rose Friedman wrote in their book Free to Choose, “The story of the United States is the story of an economic miracle. . . . What produced this miracle? Clearly not central direction by government.”
Other conservatives, neoconservatives or traditionalists, warned about the dangers posed to society by abandoning traditional values in favor of the new freedoms exemplified by the counterculture and advertised by the mass media. This concern with
social issues, such as the perceived degeneration of modern youth, dovetailed with many conservatives’ religious beliefs.
Anticommunism formed the third leg of modern conservatism. Most anticommunists focused on the dangers posed to the United States by the Soviet Union. They questioned the wisdom of the detente policy followed by Republican presidents Nixon and Ford, and by Democrat Jimmy Carter. They also fought against the SALT II treaty in the Senate.
U IDENTIFY
According to conservatives, what is the best way to promote economic growth?
The Increasing Popularity of the New Right
During the 1940s and 1950s, the lines separating Republicans and Democrats had blurred. The two parties had developed a bipartisan foreign policy aimed at containing communism. Both favored a relatively significant role for the government in domestic affairs. However, during the 1960s and 1970s, many Republicans became increasingly critical of the liberal policies of the Democrats. They advanced a new conservative agenda. The differences between the two major parties grew more pronounced. The New Right, as the resurgent conservative movement was called, grew rapidly and was a coalition of several different groups with varying ideas and goals.
Liberal Viewpoints in the 1980s
ISSUE
VXEWPOIN
SmBM
Role of
government in the economy
Foreign policy
Healthcare
Energy
Favored more government involvement to lessen extreme economic inequalities through
•	social programs (often leading to higher taxes)
•	government regulation of industry
Favored international diplomacy to combat communism in other countries
Favored government regulation of healthcare and believed everyone had a right to healthcare
Favored exploring alternatives to oil and believed the government should regulate the gas and electric industries
SOURCE:
The road from here: Liberalism and realities in the 1980s » Analyze Information In the 1980s, what might a liberal have believed about government involvement in the economy?
@1 Interactive Chart
J *-
America in the 1980s and 1990s	639	11.1 The Conservative Movement Surges
The Decline of Liberalism One reason for the revival of the Republican Party was the unraveling of the Democratic Party. The Vietnam War and urban riots of the 1960s divided the same people who had rallied around President Johnson’s vision of the Great Society.
The rise of the counterculture alienated many midwestern Americans and white conservative Christians in the South. Feminist advances were opposed by social leaders like Phyllis Schlafly. Watergate, the oil crises of the 1970s, and the Iran hostage crisis further weakened the public’s faith in the federal government.
Just as importantly, the shifts in the economy of the 1970s, including the decline in northern industries, dampened America’s optimism about the future. America had supported the Great Society, in part, because Johnson had suggested that the war on poverty and other new programs would not demand higher taxes. When the economy stagnated, liberal ideas lost their pull and conservative beliefs became more attractive.
Criticizing Liberal Programs Many conservatives believed that liberal policies were responsible for stagflation and other economic problems of the late 1970s. They believed that the government taxed citizens and businesses too heavily and spent too much on the wrong programs. They complained about
unfunded mandates, programs required but not paid for by the federal government.
Some conservatives also criticized federal welfare programs, arguing that they rewarded lack of effort. Furthermore, they thought that Great Society programs did not work and that these programs had made the problem of poverty worse, not better. They pointed to other unintended consequences of such programs. For example, they charged that welfare contributed to the rise in the number of children born out of wedlock and therefore encouraged the decline of the traditional family—consisting of a married father and mother and their children. They also felt that affirmative action programs went too far and contributed to reverse discrimination.
Another group that supported the conservative platform was the “sagebrush rebels.” Sagebrush rebels were activists who believed that the federal government controlled too much land in Western states. They thought the federal government should give control of this land to the states, to be used to their best economic advantage. Most environmentalists opposed the movement, because they did not want to expose preserved lands to possible development.
The Religious Right Emerges At the same time, concern with cultural change caused more religious groups to become actively involved in politics. The Moral Majority, founded by Reverend Jerry Falwell
U.S.
Inflation, 1978-1980 .d^ .<& .d^ d^ .d^ d^ d^


SOURCE:
Bureau of Labor Statistics » Analyze Data During which years did the inflation rate rise steadily?


America in the 1980s and 1990s	640	11.1 The Conservative Movement Surges
in 1979, was a political organization working to fulfill religious goals. It also worried about the decline of the traditional family. The Moral Majority opposed the 1962 Supreme Court decision Engel v. Vitale, which forbade government-written prayers in public schools, as well as the historic 1973 Roe v. Wade decision, which legalized abortion. It also condemned the Equal Rights Amendment and gay rights.
The Moral Majority boosted the Republican Party’s chances of winning the presidency by reaching out to Americans who had traditionally not participated in the political process. With other groups like it, the Moral Majority registered at least 2 million new voters before the 1980 presidential election. One of their tactics was to distribute Moral Majority “report cards” on candidates, which almost always favored Republicans.
Changing Demographic Patterns Boost Conservatism Demographic, or population, trends also strengthened the conservative movement. Historically, northern cities stood as strongholds of liberal Democrats. When an increasing number of Americans moved to the suburbs, their attachment to liberalism waned as they struggled financially during the tough economic days of the late 1970s. At the same time, Republicans emphasized issues that they believed would convince moderate liberals to switch their party allegiance. For instance, Republicans attacked school busing as a form of social engineering that threatened the long-cherished ideal of neighborhood schools.
Republicans benefited from the migration of Americans from the Rust Belt to the Sunbelt. This demographic shift, which began in the 1950s and continued through the 1970s, had many causes, including the sunny climate and opportunities for jobs in aerospace, technology, and other growing industries. Republicans also benefited from a historical realignment of white voters in the Deep South. Since the Civil War, most white southerners had voted for the Democratic Party.
Following the enactment of civil rights legislation in the mid-1960s, however, many white southerners began to shift their party allegiance. The effect of these shifts in demographics and voter loyalties was that by the 1980s, the Republicans had become the dominant political party in the South.
RECALL
Why did the Moral Majority oppose the 1962 Supreme Court Engel v. Vitale decision?
» Ronald Reagan, shown here in a 1951 Hollywood studio shot, originally supported New Deal policies. He later became a conservative, believing that Americans should oppose the expansion of the federal government.
A
Conservative Wins the White House The growing conservative movement swept the Republican presidential candidate Ronald Reagan, to victory in the 1980 election. Much more charismatic and polished than Goldwater, Reagan made clear his opposition to big government, his support for a strong military, and his faith in traditional values. Just as importantly, he radiated optimism, convincing Americans that he would usher in a new era of prosperity and patriotism.
Reagan’s Path to the Presidency Born in Tampico, Illinois, in 1911, Reagan suffered the hardships of the Great Depression as a young adult before landing a job in Hollywood as a movie actor. Never a big star, Reagan appeared in many “B” or low-budget films. His most famous starring role was in Knute Rockne, a film based on the life of Notre Dame’s legendary football coach.
When his acting career began to wane, Reagan became a spokesperson for General Electric and toured the nation giving speeches. Although once a staunch New Dealer, Reagan had become a Goldwater conservative. In these speeches he began to criticize big government and high taxes and warned of the
America in the 1980s and 1990s	641 H-l The Conservative Movement Surges
dangers of communism. In 1964, near the end of Goldwater's presidential campaign, Reagan delivered a nationally televised address in which he spelled out these views:
“This is the issue of this election, whether we believe in our capacity for self-government or whether we abandon the American Revolution and confess that a little intellectual elite in a far-distant capital can plan our lives for us better than we can plan them ourselves.”
—Ronald Reagan, “A Time for Choosing,” 1964
While the speech failed to bolster Goldwater’s campaign, it won the admiration of many conservatives. Two years later, Reagan won the governorship of California. He served for two terms as governor and nearly won the Republican presidential nomination in 1976. In 1980, he won the nomination by a landslide. His opponent was Jimmy Carter, the Democratic incumbent.
inflation, the Iran hostage crisis, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan made it easy for Reagan to cast the Carter presidency in a negative light. “Are you better off than you were four years ago?” Reagan asked audiences on the campaign trail, knowing that most Americans would answer, “No.”
The race remained relatively close until about one week before the election, when Reagan and Carter held their only presidential debate. In this debate, Reagan’s gifts as a communicator shone. He appeared friendly and even-tempered and calmed fears that he did not have enough experience to serve as president. On Election Day, Reagan won 50.7 percent of the popular vote. Because most states award electoral votes on a “winner-takes-all” basis, Reagan won an overwhelming majority of electoral college votes despite the narrow margin by which he won the popular vote. Even though the Democrats maintained control of the House of Representatives, Republicans captured the U.S. Senate for the first time since 1955. The conservatives were back.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
What policies made Ronald Reagan attractive to conservative voters?
The 1980 Election As the 1980 presidential election approached, Carter looked like a lame duck. Persistent
1980 Presidential Election
» Analyze Information Some describe the 1980 presidential election as a close contest. In what way was this true? In what way was it not true?
Interactive Timeline
©
America in the 1980s and 1990s	642	11.1 The Conservative Movement Surges
ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare and Contrast the beliefs of liberals and conservatives in the late twentieth century.
2.	Describe the factors that contributed to the decline of liberalism in the late 1970s.
3.	Apply Concepts Discuss the emergence of the Moral Majority and explain its connection to the Republican Party.
4.	Generate Explanations Explain how Ronald Reagan rose to prominence within the Republican Party.
5.	Identify Patterns Explain how changing demographics contributed to the rise of conservatism in the 1970s.
America in the 1980s and 1990s
643	11-1 The Conservative Movement Surges
" " President Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan celebrate his reelection at an inaugural ball in January 1985. A rebounding economy helped Reagan win election to his second term in office.
(1L2)
11.2
Conservatives celebrated Ronald Reagan’s election as the fulfillment of their dreams. Some even referred to his coming to power as the “Reagan Revolution.” The Reagan Revolution would bring a significant shift in the political direction of the nation.
Interactive Flipped Video
9.1, 10.B, 10.E, 10.F, 13.B, 17.D, 24.B, 28.B
The Reagan Era
» Objectives
Analyze Reagan’s economic policies as President.
Examine Reagan’s leadership and how he strengthened the conservative movement.
Evaluate the steps taken to address various issues in the 1980s and early 1990s.
» Key Terms
supply-side
economics
deregulation
budget deficit
national debt
Savings and Loan crisis
voucher
Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS)
Sandra Day O’Connor
A
New Direction for the American Economy Tax Cuts and Deregulation Reagan and his advisors based their economic policies on the theory of “supply-side economics,” sometimes called "Reaganomics.” The theory of supply-side economics rests on the assumption that if taxes are reduced, the wealthy would invest more and thus create jobs.
The new jobs would give people more money to spend, causing the economy to grow. The government will then collect more in taxes. To cut taxes while still balancing the federal budget, however, Reagan also needed to reduce federal spending on programs favored by both Democrats and Republicans.
Congress approved most of Reagan’s plan to institute supply-side economics by passing the Economic Recovery Act of 1981, which reduced taxes by 23 percent over three years. The richest Americans received the largest tax cuts. Reagan justified this move by saying that the wealthy would use the money they saved to invest in new businesses, which would help everyone. Reagan also convinced Congress to cut about $40 billion from the federal budget, mostly by cutting spending for social programs.
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
PEARSON 1
realize
644
In addition to cutting taxes, Reagan also reduced the government’s role in the economy by calling for deregulation, or the removal of government control over industry. By the mid-1980s, Congress had deregulated the airline, telecommunications, and banking industries. The Reagan administration also cut funding for federal agencies that oversaw many other industries.
Significant Societal Issues Shortly after Reagan took office, the economy experienced a severe recession from 1980 to 1982. Unemployment rose to more than 10 percent in 1982. The recession hit blue-collar workers particularly hard. Many farmers, facing overseas competition, lost their farms. The policies that Paul Volcker, as head of the Federal Reserve Board, had introduced to tame the great inflation of the 1970s contributed to the recession in the early 1980s. Beginning in early 1983, however, the economy began to turn around. Inflation fell dramatically. The Gross National Product, or the annual income earned by Americans and American businesses, expanded at a healthy pace. America's economy seemed revitalized.
Despite this, the number of poor people, including the working poor, actually increased. In addition, immigrants from Latin America and Asia, attracted by employment prospects and political freedom, continued to pour into the United States. Among the
Asian immigrants were the Sikhs, a religious group that originated in the Punjab, a region in Pakistan and northern India. In the 1980s, more than 7.3 million legal immigrants and hundreds of thousands of undocumented immigrants entered the country. Many of these newcomers worked in low-paying jobs and struggled to make ends meet. Meanwhile, the richest Americans grew richer.
In Texas, tensions from this economic disparity reached a head in 1984 when a poor, largely Mexican American school system sued the state commissioner of education over inequalities in the education of minorities. After a nearly 10-year struggle, the case, Edgewood I.S.D. v. Kirby, led to a school funding system where some tax money from more affluent, largely white school districts was transferred to less affluent, largely minority districts to help these poor districts provide better education to their students.
Problems With Deficits Reagan increased defense spending but failed to win the huge cuts in government spending that he wanted in other areas. These were some of the factors, along with a recession, that caused the federal budget deficit, or the shortfall between the amount of money spent and the amount taken in by the government, to skyrocket from about $79 billion in 1981 to more than $221 billion in 1986. The national debt,
GOALS AND IMPACT
Or REAGANOMICS FOUR PILLARS
REAGANOMICS TACKLES
JANUARY 1980 TO NOVEMBER 1982
Reduce the	Reduce the	Reduce	Control the	
growth of	federal income	government	money supply	22
government	tax and capital	regulation	to reduce	
spending	gains tax		inflation	20
EC0K01IC RECOVERY TO HU
marginal tax rates by 23% over 3 years
maximum
individual tax rate to W *
18
16
14
12
10
maximum
estate tax rate from 70% to
S0% over 4 years
maximum
capital gains rate to
•> Ronald Reagan had to find a way to deal with inflation and stimulate the economy. Analyze Data How effective were Reaganomics in tackling inflation?
ruiasamisn
America in the 1980s and 1990s	645	11.2 The Reagan Era
the amount of money the federal government owes to owners of government bonds, rose to $2.5 trillion.
In response to persistent budget deficits, Congress passed the Gramm Rudman-Hollings Act in 1985. The act sought to balance the budget by 1990 by requiring automatic cuts in federal spending if the deficit exceeded a certain amount. The federal budget deficit set new records, however, into the early 1990s.
The Savings and Loan crisis (also called the S&L crisis) in 1989 exacerbated deficit problems. In the late 1980s, about 1,000 Savings and Loan banks failed, some because of fraudulent behavior and others because they made too many risky loans. Critics blamed Reagan’s deregulation policies for encouraging the banks to invest in riskier propositions. To prevent a broader panic, the federal government spent upwards of $200 billion to bail out depositors at the failed banks.
In the 1980s, the rising cost of Social Security also caused concern. As the number of elderly people in America grew, the Social Security system began to collect less money than it paid out. In 1983, Reagan signed the Social Security Reform Act, which raised the minimum retirement age and increased payroll taxes for Social Security. It provided a temporary fix but did not solve the long-term problems of the Social Security program.
Trade Imbalance With Japan Another deficit that alarmed Americans was the nation’s growing
imbalance in world trade. American exports had been falling steadily since the 1970s due to a decline in domestic automobile, electronics, and other manufacturing industries.
Japan began to dominate the American market in televisions, automobiles, and other consumer products. At the same time, Japan’s markets remained closed to many American-made goods.
When Japan refused to ease its restrictions on American imports, Reagan placed a tariff on Japanese electronics that doubled their price in American stores. Japanese trade restrictions eased in a deal to get this tariff removed. However, the United States continued to import many more Japanese products than American companies were able to sell in Japan.
Reagan and Organized Labor In 1981 when thousands of air-traffic controllers went on strike, Reagan refused to negotiate with the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) and fired the striking workers because they were violating a law forbidding federal employees from striking. Many Americans admired Reagan's strong, decisive stance. Some union supporters, however, claimed that Reagan’s action represented an assault on the labor movement.
The PATCO strike marked a turning point for organized labor. As the nation became more conservative, anti-union feelings grew. By 1980, the labor movement was already shrinking from its high
» Analyze Data What happened to the trade deficit with Japan between 1980 and 1990?
America in the 1980s and 1990s
11.2 The Reagan Era
levels of memberhip in the 1950s and 1960s. After the PATCO strike’s highly visible failure, however, the decline became more rapid. Reagan's actions also signaled that it was acceptable for businesses to get tough with unions.
The Private Sector Creates Economic Opportunities Reagan believed that volunteerism and private initiative could create economic opportunities for citizens. In 1981, he praised an organization called the Clearinghouse on Corporate Social Responsibility for their work in improving Americans’ quality of life. The Clearinghouse had evolved from the committee of insurance company CEOs who had first met in response to the urban riots of the late 1960s. One of the unintended consequences of this meeting was that by 1981, the organization had expanded to include life and health insurance trade associations. It actively supported community projects, employment of women and minorities, environment and energy conservation, and socially responsible investments. In 1982 it changed its name to the Center for Corporate Public Involvement.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What is the central theory of Reaganomics, or supply-side economics?
Conservative Momentum Continues
Despite budget and debt problems, the economic recovery improved the national mood and helped Ronald Reagan’s popularity. Reagan used his time in office to strengthen the conservative cause. Private conservative educational and research groups, such as Washington D.C.’s Heritage Foundation, supported Reagan and lobbied Congress on behalf of his programs.
Winning a Second Term During his 1984 campaign for reelection, President Reagan used the phrase “It is morning in America” as a campaign slogan:
“It’s morning again in America. In a town not too far from where you live, a young family has just moved into a new home. . . . Right down the street, one of the neighbors has just bought himself a new car with all the options. The factory down the river is working again. . . . Life is better, America is
» Members of the air traffic controllers union, PATCO, picket at New York’s LaGuardia Airport in August 1981.
back. And people have a sense of pride
they never felt they’d feel again.”
—Campaign commercial for the reelection of Ronald Reagan, 1984
This theme dovetailed nicely with Reagan’s upbeat spirit, which he displayed even in his darkest moments. For example, on March 30, 1981, a disturbed man named John Hinckley, Jr., tried to assassinate the president. One bullet from Hinckley’s gun lodged in Reagan’s chest. According to one account, Reagan joked to his doctors, “I hope you are all Republicans.”
Americans voted overwhelmingly to reelect Reagan in 1984. He easily defeated Walter Mondale, the Democratic presidential nominee, and his running mate, Geraldine Ferraro, the first woman to be nominated for vice president by a major political party. However, Reagan’s momentum did not lead to a total triumph for conservatives, as Democrats retained control of the House of Representatives.
Creating Conservative Courts During his two terms, Reagan appointed judges who he hoped would reverse the liberal drift of the federal courts. He appointed three new Justices — Sandra Day O’Connor, Antonin Scalia, and Anthony Kennedy—to the Supreme Court and elevated William Rehnquist, a well-
America in the 1980s and 1990s	647	11.2 The Reagan Era
» In 1981 Sandra Day O’Connor became the first woman on the Supreme Court. To offset what he saw as liberal bias, President Reagan appointed three conservative judges to the Court during his presidency.
» In 1988 after serving for eight years as Vice President, George H.W. Bush ran for President against Democrat Michael Dukakis.
known conservative, to the position of Chief Justice in 1986. Sandra Day O’Connor, nominated in 1981, was the first female Justice and a moderate conservative. Although she voted with other conservatives on many issues, she consistently voted to uphold Roe v. Wade, which Reagan opposed.
Near the end of Reagan’s first term, Congress passed the Equal Access Act. This act required public secondary schools to allow any group equal access to school facilities. Conservative Christian groups supported the act’s passage because many public schools did not allow religious groups to meet on school property. The Supreme Court confirmed the constitutionality of the Equal Access Act in 1990 in Board of Education of Westside Community Schools v. Mergens.
George H.W. Bush Becomes President Reagan used his personal popularity to promote George H.W. Bush, his Vice President for eight years, as Bush campaigned for the presidency against Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis in 1988. Bush had enjoyed a long and distinguished political career. He had served the nation in many ways: as a member of Congress from Texas, ambassador to the United Nations under Nixon, American envoy to China under Ford, and head of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Despite these impressive credentials, Bush lacked the support of conservatives in the Republican Party, who questioned his commitment to their cause.
Although Bush called for a “kinder, gentler nation” in his campaign, both candidates attacked each other in negative campaign ads. Bush cemented his support among conservatives by promising not to raise taxes and by casting himself as a defender of traditional values. Although Bush defeated Dukakis in the presidential election, Democrats won a majority of seats in both houses of Congress.
President Bush sought to control federal spending by encouraging Americans to volunteer. Government, he asserted, could take a smaller role in daily life if, “like a thousand points of light,” community organizations and volunteers provided more help to the disabled, illiterate, and poor.
When Congress passed the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) in July 1990, Bush signed it into law. The act ensured that persons with disabilities would receive the same opportunities in employment as well as access to public places and transportation that other Americans took for granted. It benefited
America in the 1980s and 1990s	648	H-2 The Reagan Era
more than 43 million people and represented another step in the quest to protect the rights of all Americans.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Did President Reagan’s appointees to the Supreme Court follow his conservative agenda in full? Explain.
Culture, Challenge, and Change
Despite Reagan’s vision of “morning in America” and Bush’s “thousand points of light,” in truth a great cultural and economic divide existed in 1980s society—a division partially defined by race, ethnicity, and gender. The economic recovery of the mid-1980s did not affect all segments of society equally. As the number of poor increased, so did violence and drug use in the nation’s inner cities. At the same time, a culture of acquisition intensified among Americans.
Material Culture in the 1980s “I am a material girl,” sang Madonna in her 1985 hit. For many Americans, her anthem to acquiring things characterized the decade.
Material acquisition especially defined a segment of society that came to be known as young urban professionals, or “yuppies”—Americans born in the baby boom that followed World War II and who made $40,000 a year or more in the 1980s. Because there were so many people in this demographic, their spending habits were noticed and often criticized by the media. Yuppies were characterized by their attachment to flashy cars and other possessions and for their obsession with making and spending money.
Another trend of the 1980s was a new obsession with physical fitness. Being “fit,” however, meant more than just being healthy. It also meant looking good. Americans spent more than ever before on diet drinks and vitamins, sportswear, health club memberships, and home fitness videos and equipment. Some large companies, recognizing that healthy employees were more productive, opened in-house fitness facilities. They also sponsored programs and provided other incentives to help their employees get healthier. By the mid-1980s, nearly half of Americans exercised daily, compared to just 24 percent 20 years earlier. Critics observed that these trends embodied the materialistic values of the 1980s. They complained that instead of trying to improve society, Americans were focused on improving themselves both physically and financially.
The Space Program in the 1980s The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) added
» President Bush signs the Americans With Disabilities Act on the South Lawn of the White House in 1990. Signing ceremonies often include key participants involved with the legislation.
» A young urban professional, or yuppie, speaks on an early model of a cell phone in 1983.
America in the 1980s and 1990s	649	11.2 The Reagan Era
a new type of spacecraft to its fleet in 1981. Unlike rockets that fell to earth and were discarded after a single use, the new space shuttle looked and landed like an airplane. It could take off again and again to complete multiple missions.
The promising shuttle program suffered a disastrous setback in January 1986, however, when the space shuttle Challenger exploded in midair less than 2 minutes after takeoff from Cape Canaveral in Florida. Its entire crew of seven astronauts was killed. The crew included New Hampshire schoolteacher Christa McAuliffe, the first private citizen to go into space. The explosion halted NASA’s shuttle program for two years while scientists worked to eliminate technical problems. Nevertheless, space program technology continued to inspire many products—such as improved radial tires, the portable cordless vacuum cleaner, and better firefighting gear—that improved Americans’ quality of life.
Cold War Culture in the 1980s The ongoing Cold War also shaped the 1980s culture in the United States. The Olympic Games were held in Los Angeles in 1984. It was the first time the summer Olympics had come to this country in nearly 50 years. The festive opening
» On January 28, 1986, millions of Americans watched on television as the space shuttle Challenger exploded minutes after takeoff. The tragedy shocked the nation, but the U.S. space program continued.
ceremonies typified the Reagan era’s emphasis on the renewal of America’s greatness and patriotism.
The Olympics became a tool in the nation’s Cold War rivalry with the Soviet Union. Along with most other communist countries, the Soviet Union boycotted the Los Angeles games. The Soviet-led boycott was in retaliation for President Carter’s boycott of the 1980 games in Moscow to protest the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The United States won an unusually high number of medals at the Los Angeles games, an outcome that contributed to the Reagan era's sense of a revival in American strength and patriotism.
Confronting Challenging Issues at Home One of
the most troubling problems the nation faced in the 1980s was a dramatic increase in the use of illegal drugs. The main culprit in this increasing drug use was the spread of cocaine. Once a problem largely confined to crime-infested areas of the nation’s inner cities, cocaine use became much more widespread among other classes of American society during this time.
Reformers called for stopping the seemingly unrestricted flow of drugs into the United States and for harsher penalties for drug dealers. President Reagan responded by enlisting the Army and Navy to help stop the cocaine smuggling route into south Florida. The effort was successful. But by 1985, drug smugglers had shifted their operations to the U.S. border with Mexico. In 1986, Congress made the possession of drugs for sale an offense punishable by a minimum of 10 years in prison.
Many Americans also worried about the state of America’s public education system. In 1983, the Department of Education issued A Nation at Risk. This study showed that students were consistently scoring lower on standardized tests as time passed. The report argued that America’s schools failed to prepare students adequately to compete with students around the globe.
Even before the report appeared, conservatives called for providing vouchers, or government checks, that could be used by parents to pay tuition at private schools. Conservatives argued that vouchers would force public schools to improve in order to attract and retain students. Liberals in Congress argued that vouchers would take much-needed money away from public schools.
In addition, the nation faced the threat of a new disease, Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS), which first came to doctors’ attention in 1981. AIDS is the last stage of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), which attacks the immune system of its victims. There is no known cure. When AIDS first
Interactive 3-D Model
America in the 1980s and 1990s
650	11.2 The Reagan Era
reached the United States, it spread mainly among homosexual men and intravenous drug users. Later, the virus began infecting various other groups of people. By 1994, AIDS had killed more than 250,000 Americans.
President Reagan was criticized for the government’s lack of response to the AIDS epidemic. Congress consistently felt that Reagan’s requests for funds to battle the epidemic were too low and nearly doubled the money earmarked for AIDS research and education.
Meanwhile, AIDS activist groups demonstrated throughout the country. In Washington, D.C., they unveiled a memorial quilt containing the names of some 2000 people who had died of AIDS. But not until George H.W. Bush’s presidency did funding for research on the disease rise substantially.
The attempt on Reagan’s life in a 1981 shooting and the serious wounding of his aide, James Brady, renewed calls for stronger controls on handguns. These efforts were opposed by the National Rifle Association (NRA), led by Harlon Carter, which casted itself as the defender of Americans’ Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms. In spite of the efforts of this powerful conservative group, attempts in the 1980s to ban armor-piercing bullets and plastic handguns that could get by airport metal detectors were eventually passed by Congress.
E? DESCRIBE
How did the 1984 summer Olympics in Los Angeles help to bolster confidence during the Reagan era?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Cause and Effect Describe the causes and effects of the economic recession that occurred from 1980-1982.
2.	Describe the significant cultural changes that emerged during the 1980s.
» Prison inmates were guarded outdoors at the New Mexico State Penitentiary, where rioting due to overcrowding left the prison buildings destroyed.
3.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the significance of President Reagan’s use of the phrase “It is morning in America.”
4.	Identify Central Issues Discuss the significance of the 1984 summer Olympics in relation to the Cold War.
5.	Generate Explanations Explain why President Reagan received criticism for his administration’s response to the AIDS epidemic.
America in the 1980s and 1990s
651	11.2 The Reagan Era

2.D, 10.B, 10.D, 11.A
» Objectives
Analyze the ways that Ronald Reagan challenged communism and the Soviet Union. Explain the end of the Cold War.
Describe other foreign policy challenges that faced the United States in the 1980s.
» Key Terms
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI)
Contras
Mikhail Gorbachev glasnost perestroika Iran-Contra affair
11.3
President Ronald Reagan believed that the United States had lost its way in the wake of the Vietnam War. Rather than detente, he felt the United States should seek to roll back Soviet rule in Eastern Europe and elsewhere. Reagan believed that peace would come through strength. Although Reagan’s foreign policies initially increased tension between the two superpowers, they contributed to the end of the Cold War.
The Cold War Ends
Reagan Leads with “Peace
Through Strength”
President Reagan believed that the United States needed to weaken communism by challenging it as much as possible without provoking war. To this end, he devised policies aimed at toppling communist nations, ranging from building new nuclear missile systems to funding covert operations against Soviet troops and allies around the globe.
Reagan Decides on U.S. Military BuildupUnder Reagan, the United States committed itself to the largest peacetime military buildup in its history. Reagan dedicated billions of dollars to the development and production of B-l and B-2 bombers, MX missile systems, and other projects. In spite of massive protests by the nuclear freeze movement in the United States and abroad, the Reagan administration placed a new generation of nuclear missiles in Europe.
Reagan supported this massive military buildup, in part, because he did not believe that the Soviet Union could afford to spend as much on defense as the United States could. Reagan felt this applied particularly to the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a proposed program in which land and space-based lasers would destroy any missiles aimed at the United States before they could reach their targets. Some dubbed the missile program “Star Wars,” after the
pearson i
'91 realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
652
popular science-fiction movie trilogy, and claimed that it was unrealistic.
Reagan Involves the U.S. in the Middle East and Central America Reagan also sought to weaken the Soviet Union by supporting anticommunist rebellions around the globe. To this end, the United States funded and trained the mujahadeen (moo jah huh deen), anti-Soviet rebels in Afghanistan. Reagan’s advisors believed that with U.S. help, these guerrillas could drive the Soviets out of Afghanistan. In 1988, Soviet forces finally began to withdraw after years of fierce Afghan resistance.
Closer to home, Secretary of State Alexander Haig feared that the newly formed Sandinista government in Nicaragua provided the Soviets with a “safe house” in America’s backyard. To counter this threat, the administration backed a group of anticommunist counterrevolutionaries, known as the Contras. At the same time, the United States supported a right-wing government in El Salvador that was battling leftist rebels.
Many human rights activists strongly objected to this policy; even U.S. Ambassador Robert White described the legal system in El Salvador as “rotten” and called for the United States to suspend aid to the nation. Instead, Congress made funding for El Salvador’s
government dependent on the nation making progress on human rights.
In 1983, Reagan acted to counter another perceived threat in the Western Hemisphere. Members of a radical leftist movement, with some help from Cuba, had violently ousted the Grenadian prime minister. On October 25,1983, U.S. troops invaded Grenada to prevent the island nation from becoming a communist outpost and to protect the lives of American medical students. Even though the legal grounds for this invasion proved questionable, most Americans approved of Reagan’s decision.
Economic Pressures Force Gorbachev to Pursue Reforms In 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev (mee kah eel GOR buh chawf) became the president of the Soviet Union. Gorbachev ushered in a new Soviet era by pursuing the twin policies of glasnost and perestroika. Glasnost means “a new openness,” and perestroika refers to reforming the Soviet system—for instance, by moving away from a socialist, or state-controlled, economy. Gorbachev’s reforms created an opening for a shift in relations between the two superpowers. Gorbachev started these reforms mostly because the Soviet Union’s economy had fundamentally failed. The nation faced regular shortages of food. Its factories and workers could not compete with their Western counterparts. A huge chunk of the Soviet economy’s
» Analyze Data Based on the information in the graphic, summarize Reagan s “peace through strength” approach to national defense.
America in the 1980s and 1990s	653	11.3 The Cold War Ends
money went toward paying for the military. The war in Afghanistan had drained Soviet resources. Gorbachev realized that his nation could not match the military buildup initiated by the Reagan administration.
Reagan and Gorbachev Reevaluate Their Positions Gorbachev’s policies and personality helped soften the Soviet Union’s international image. Reagan responded to this change by moderating his own stance toward the Soviet Union. While the two nations had held no summits during Reagan’s first four years in office, their leaders met four times between 1985 and 1989.
During their final meeting in Moscow, Reagan and Gorbachev toasted each other at a state dinner, toured the sights like old friends, and held a joint press conference. At the press conference, a reporter asked Reagan about his description of the Soviet Union as an “evil empire.” Reagan responded, “I was talking about another era.” Then, Gorbachev allowed President Reagan to address students at Moscow State University on the benefits of the free-enterprise system and democracy:
“Your generation is living in one of the most exciting times in Soviet
» President Reagan meets for the first time with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1985.
history. It is a time when the first breath of freedom stirs the air and the heart beats to the accelerated rhythm of hope, when the accumulated spiritual energies of a long silence yearn to break free. . . . We do not know what the conclusion of this journey will be, but we’re hopeful that the promise of reform will be fulfilled . . . leading to a new world of reconciliation, friendship, and peace,”
—Ronald Reagan, May 31, 1988
Even before this summit, the two nations had signed a historic nuclear arms pact and had begun negotiations on the START I Treaty, which would reduce the number of nuclear weapons in the world.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Aside from his overall idea of “peace through strength,” what other motivation did Reagan have for his massive military spending?
Impact of the End of the Cold War
1991 was a turning point in American and world history. In a little over three years’ time after Reagan’s speech in Moscow, the Cold War had come to an end. The Berlin Wall came down; Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary held democratic elections; and the Soviet Union disintegrated into numerous separate republics. Time magazine observed: “It was one of those rare times when the tectonic plates of history shift beneath men’s feet, and nothing after is quite the same.”
Communist Governments Fall in Eastern Europe
More so than any other event, the fall of the Berlin Wall symbolized the end of communism in Europe. For decades, the wall had blocked travel from communist East Berlin to democratic West Berlin. Guards shot those who attempted to escape over the wall to West Berlin. Then, in November 1989, following the fall of East Germany’s communist government, East German authorities opened the wall’s gates.
Thousands climbed atop the wall; some even took sledgehammers and chipped away at the barricade. Within a year, East and West Germany would reunite as one single nation. Communists also lost power in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and
Interactive Chart
America in the 1980s and 1990s	654	11.3 The Cold War Ends
The Fall of Communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union
» Analyze Maps Compare this map to a current map of eastern Europe. What has	i-——
happened to these former communist countries since 1991?	I 09
400 km
lie
Projection
Interactive Gallery
Romania in 1989; in Albania in 1990; and in Yugoslavia in 1991.
The Soviet Union Disintegrates In August 1991, hard-liners in the Soviet Union attempted to stage a coup in a last-gasp attempt to maintain communist rule. But when millions of Russians, led by Boris Yeltsin, rallied in the streets of Moscow in support of Gorbachev, the coup fell apart. Not long afterward, the Communist Party lost power, and the Soviet Union separated into 15 independent republics. Boris Yeltsin became the new leader of the largest new republic, the Russian Federation.
Historians do not totally agree on what caused the Soviet Union to collapse. Most acknowledge that Gorbachev’s policy of glasnost opened the floodgates to rebellions against Soviet domination of Eastern Europe. Likewise, they note that his policy of perestroika fostered a challenge to communist rule within the Soviet Union.
Yet, a number of scholars give Reagan credit for bringing an end to the Cold War. By dedicating America to a massive arms buildup, they argue, he hastened the collapse of the Soviet economy. In turn, this compelled Gorbachev to promote reform at home and relinquish control of Eastern Europe.
The key rival, competitor, and enemy of the United States for so many years had suddenly disappeared.
President George H.W. Bush met and signed agreements with first Gorbachev and then Yeltsin to scale down and even eliminate certain types of nuclear weapons. Bush and Yeltsin issued a joint statement in 1992 pledging friendship and cooperation. The long Cold War, which had absorbed so much of the energy and resources of the Soviet Union and the United States since 1945, was finally over.
fed DESCRIBE What happened to the Soviet Union in
the immediate aftermath of its breakup?
U.S.
Involvement in the Middle East and the Iran-Contra Affair Conflicts in the Middle East in the 1980s tested political relationships throughout the world. The Iran-Iraq War from 1980-1988 and increasing incidents of terrorism brought the United States into direct confrontation with several countries in the region.
The U.S. Retaliates Against Libya During the 1980s, the United States often clashed with Libya. The countries had once had a mutually beneficial trading relationship. Libya was ruled by Muammar al-Qaddafi
11.3 The Cold War Ends
America in the 1980s and 1990s
» The explosion at the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon, in 1983 resulted in more than 240 casualties, including over 200 marines—the most killed in a single day since the Battle of Iwo Jima in 1945.
» Colonel Oliver North testifies to Congress about the Iran-Contra affair in 1987. He was responding to allegations that the Reagan administration had illegally funded anticommunist Nicaraguan rebels.
(moo uh mahr al kuh dah fee), whom Reagan described as the “mad dog of the Middle East."
U.S.-Libya relations fell apart as American leaders became increasingly frustrated with Qaddafi’s support of terrorist groups. In response, the United States placed economic sanctions on Libya.
In April 1986, following a terrorist attack on a Berlin nightclub, which Reagan blamed on Qaddafi, U.S. warplanes bombed Libya. Although Qaddafi survived unharmed, the air raid killed one of his family members. In the period following the attack, Qaddafi’s criticism of the United States dwindled. Tensions between the countries continued through the early 1990s, though, as U.S. leaders suspected the Qaddafi regime of producing chemical weapons.
Reagan Sends Marines Into Lebanon Even as the Soviet Union collapsed and conflicts with Libya ignited, the United States faced additional problems in the Middle East. In 1982, Reagan sent a group of 800 United States Marines to Lebanon as part of an international force trying to bring peace to that nation, which was torn by civil war.
On October 23,1983, a truck loaded with thousands of pounds of explosives smashed through barriers at the headquarters of the United States Marines in Beirut (bay root), Lebanon's capital, and into a four-story building that housed hundreds of military personnel. The explosion killed 241 marines. Reagan withdrew the remaining marines in February 1984. The incident illustrated, once again, the complicated and dangerous nature of Middle Eastern politics.
The Iran-Contra Affair Shakes the Presidency
Reagan's presidency started with a breakthrough in the Middle East. Twenty minutes after he took the oath of office on January 20, 1981, Iran released all 52 Americans it had held hostage since 1979. But during his second term, the Iran-Contra affair tarnished Reagan’s reputation.
The Iran-Contra affair began when the United States sold weapons to Iran in 1985 in exchange for Iran’s promise to pressure terrorist groups in Lebanon to release some American hostages. The plan didn’t work, and it contradicted the administration's policy of refusing to negotiate with terrorists.
Then, the administration used the money from the sale to fund the Contras in Nicaragua, despite the fact that in 1983 Congress had banned sending funds to the Contras. News of these deals became public in 1986. Although President Reagan accepted responsibility for the actions of his administration, he never admitted to ordering his aides to support the Contras. Ultimately several leading administration officials and a top aide,
America in the 1980s and 1990s	656	11.3 The Cold War Ends
Oliver North, were convicted on charges stemming from the scandal, although many of the convictions were later overturned on technical grounds. In spite of this, Reagan left office with high approval ratings.
B RECALL
Why did the Iran-Contra affair threaten the credibility of the Reagan administration?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss the components of President Reagan’s “peace through strength” policy, and identify its effects.
2.	Identify Central Issues Describe reasons for and responses to U.S. involvement in Central America during the 1980s.
3.	Generate Explanations Explain how economic hardships and changing political relationships gave rise to a new era for the Soviet Union during the 1980s.
4.	Describe events that altered the relationship between Libya and the United States during the 1980s.
5.	Sequence Events Discuss the events that occurred during the Iran-Contra affair and explain how they affected Reagan’s presidency.
America in the 1980s and 1990s	657	11.3 The Cold War Ends
Interactive Flipped Video
11.4
When the Cold War came to an end, many Americans hoped that a new era of peace would dawn. Yet, America’s foreign policy during the Bush years demonstrated that the end of the Cold War would not lead to a new era of peace, but instead to a dangerous era of regional conflicts.
A, 11.D, 19.E
» Objectives
Analyze why George H.W. Bush decided to use force in some foreign disputes and not in others.
Summarize the Persian Gulf War and its results.
Explain why Bill Clinton won the presidency in 1992.
Assess the foreign policy goals and actions of the Clinton administration.
Describe U.S. relations with various Middle Eastern countries and groups.
» Key Terms
Manuel Noriega.
Tiananmen Square
apartheid
Nelson Mandela
divest
Operation Desert Storm
William Jefferson Clinton
H.
Ross Perot ethnic cleansing
al Qaeda
A
New Era in Foreign Policy Bush Forges a New Role in the World
When the Soviet Union collapsed, the United States became an unopposed superpower—poised to take a leading role in world affairs under the leadership of President George H.W. Bush. Few leaders entered the White House with as much foreign policy experience as Bush. A graduate of Yale and a veteran of World War II, Bush had served as the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, as director of the CIA, and as Ronald Reagan’s vice president. His experience would be put to the test as the United States faced a series of difficult international crises during the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Political Changes and the War on Drugs in Latin America In
the late 1980s and early 1990s, Latin America experienced a wave of democracy. In Central America, a peace plan devised by Costa Rican leader Oscar Arias (ah ree uhs) brought free elections in Nicaragua and the end of a long civil war in El Salvador. In Chile, the notorious military dictator Augusto Pinochet (ah GOO stoh pee noh shay) gave up power.
c
PEARSON 1
ESI realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
658
Not all developments in Latin America, however, pleased the Bush administration. Since the Nixon administration, the government had been waging a "war on drugs,” or an attempt to stop illegal drug use by going after both sellers and users. Groups of racketeers in Latin America supplied a significant amount of the illegal drugs in the United States. The Bush administration arrested and tried several international drug figures, including Eduardo Martinez Romero, the reputed financier of a Colombian drug cartel.
Even more spectacularly, in December 1989, Bush sent more than 12,000 U.S. troops to invade Panama and arrest Panama’s military strongman Manuel Noriega. Brought to the United States for trial, Noriega was convicted of several charges of drug trafficking and sentenced to 40 years in prison.
China Resists Calls for Democracy Meanwhile, in the spring of 1989, Chinese students captured the world’s attention by staging pro-democracy protests in Tiananmen Square in the heart of Beijing. Many Americans hoped that these protests might result in the fall of communism in China. Instead, on June 4, Chinese tanks rolled into Beijing, killed hundreds of protesters, crushed the demonstrations, and imprisoned many pro-democracy activists.
The Bush administration condemned this action and suspended arms sales to China. However, Bush did not believe that stiffer penalties would influence Chinese leaders. He made the pragmatic choice to remain engaged with China economically and diplomatically, rather than cut off ties with the country.
Pressures Force Changes in South Africa
While China resisted changes, long overdue ones were taking place in South Africa. For years, the South African government, controlled by whites, had maintained an oppressive system of rigid segregation known as apartheid. The leader of the antiapartheid movement, Nelson Mandela (man dehl uh), had been imprisoned since 1962. In the late 1980s, protests against apartheid within South Africa and around the globe grew. In the United States, many private firms divested, or withdrew investments, from South Africa. Congress imposed economic sanctions instead of fully divesting, not wanting to destabilize the struggling nation. President Bush met with Mandela after his release from jail in 1990 and endorsed the drive to bring democracy to South Africa. Soon after, apartheid began to be dismantled, and in 1994, South Africans elected Mandela as their leader in their first free elections.
» President Bush and First Lady Barbara Bush visit American troops in Saudi Arabia in 1990.
» In 1990, President Bush welcomed Nelson Mandela to the White House to discuss ways to bring an end to apartheid in South Africa.
U.S.
Works for Peace and Human Rights With the fall of communism in 1991, the nation of Yugoslavia America in the 1980s and 1990s	659
A
New Era in Foreign Policy disintegrated into a bloody civil war. During this new crisis in the Balkans, Bush chose not to send troops because he feared that the tangled conflict could embroil the United States in another Vietnam. Not until 1992, however, did he back a modest UN plan to restore peace in Bosnia, one of the new republics carved out of Yugoslavia. By then, more than 150,000 civilians had died.
The Bush administration acted more swiftly to protect human rights in Somalia. As part of “Operation Restore Hope,” United States Marines landed in this East African nation in December 1992 to help establish a cease-fire between rival warlords and to deliver food to hundreds of thousands of starving people. The American humanitarian mission reinforced UN efforts at peacekeeping and relief. Even some of Bush’s most persistent critics applauded his decision to intervene in Somalia.
H EXPRESS IDEAS CLEARLY
Explain the Bush administration’s reaction to the Chinese government’s crackdown on prodemocracy protests in Tiananmen Square.
» Hypothesize Why was Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990 considered such a threat by so many nations?
The Persian Gulf War
The most important foreign-policy challenge faced by the Bush administration took place in the Persian Gulf. On August 2, 1990, Iraq invaded its tiny neighbor Kuwait. Nearly 150,000 Iraqi troops quickly overran Kuwaiti forces.
A
Dictator’s Thirst for Power Leads to War Saddam Hussein, Iraq’s ruthless dictator, had run the Middle Eastern nation with an iron fist since 1979. By invading Kuwait, Hussein sought to take over Kuwait’s rich oil deposits. With Kuwait in his power, Hussein would control nearly 20 percent of the oil produced around the world. The United States feared how Hussein would use the influence that controlling such a large amount of oil would give him. In addition, nearby Saudi Arabia possessed even greater oil reserves. The United States did not want Hussein to seek to gain control of those reserves next. Oil drove much of the world’s economies, including America’s. In 1970, the United States consumed around 14 million barrels of oil each day. By 1990, that number had increased to 17 million barrels a day.
President Bush made it clear that he would not tolerate Iraq’s aggression against its neighbor. He worked to build an international coalition and backed a UN resolution demanding that Iraqi troops withdraw.
U.S.
Spearheads Operation Desert Storm By late fall, about 700,000 troops had assembled in Saudi Arabia, including nearly 500,000 American forces. Britain, France, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia, among others, also sent troops. Other nations, for example Japan, agreed to help pay for the costs of the operation. Initially, Bush hoped that the presence of these troops, along with the economic sanctions against Iraq, would convince Hussein to withdraw his soldiers. At the same time, the president asked for and received from Congress the authority to use force, if necessary, to back up the UN’s resolution that Iraq leave Kuwait.
Operation Desert Storm, the name given to the American-led attack on Iraqi forces, began on January 16, 1991. General Colin Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and General Norman Schwarzkopf devised and executed a strategy that began with five weeks of devastating aerial bombardment on Iraqi forces. Iraq countered by launching Scud missiles on both coalition forces and Israel. Although these missiles did little serious damage, they struck terror in the hearts of many who feared they were armed with chemical warheads.
Lasting Effects of the War On February 24, coalition troops stormed into Kuwait. Completely overwhelmed,
America in the 1980s and 1990s	660	11.4 A New Era in Foreign Policy
The Persian Gulf War, 1991
200 km Miller Cylindrical Projection
» Analyze Maps What nations did Saddam Hussein retaliate against during the Persian Gulf War?
Interactive Gallery

Iraqi troops surrendered or fled, setting fire to Kuwaiti oil rigs along the way. Less than five days after the ground war began, Iraq agreed to a UN-brokered cease-fire. It had lost an estimated 25,000 soldiers. American deaths totaled 148. "We’ve kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all,” proclaimed Bush. He then chose to limit American actions to enforcing the UN resolution. The coalition’s forces would compel Iraq to leave Kuwait but would not continue on to Baghdad, Iraq’s capital, to topple Saddam Hussein. As a result, Hussein and his regime survived the war. Bush’s public approval rating skyrocketed.
The United States remained in the region to help Iraqi refugees, establishing no-fly zones over northern and southern Iraq. However, Saddam Hussein and his supporters resented the U.S. presence. During Operation Desert Storm, similar resentment toward U.S. forces also grew in Saudi Arabia, where many troops were stationed. This resentment may have helped attract new recruits to the anti-American propaganda of the terrorist organization al Qaeda.
H DRAW CONCLUSIONS
Why did Saddam Hussein’s regime survive the war?
Clinton Wins the 1992 Election
After the 1991 Persian Gulf War ended, President George H.W. Bush's approval rating reached 91 percent. In less than one year, however, public opinion had changed. Saddam Hussein had stayed in power, continuing to threaten peace in the Middle East. The American economy had gone into recession and the federal deficit had risen. People were angered by Bush’s betrayal of his 1988 campaign pledge not to raise taxes. Bush's sinking popularity opened up the way for the Democratic challenge.
“New Democrats” Emerge The Democrats nominated William Jefferson Clinton, governor of Arkansas, as their presidential candidate. Clinton was born in 1946 into a humble home and had worked his way through college and law school before being elected governor of Arkansas in 1978. To widen his appeal and distance himself from the stereotype of “tax and spend” liberals, Clinton promoted himself as a “New Democrat.” New Democrats were centrists who sought to reconcile liberal and conservative ideals. They believed in strong national defense, tough stands on crime, free trade, welfare reform, and closer ties with corporations. They believed that government was necessary and important but that it had grown large
jr
America in the 1980s and 1990s
661
A
New Era in Foreign Policy and inefficient. Clinton’s centrist position attracted conservative and liberal Democrats as well as moderate Republicans. His position as a moderate, practical Democrat had broad appeal for a wide range of voters.
Winning the White House By 1992, Clinton was poised to capitalize on Bush’s political problems. He entered the presidential race along with Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot, who led a self-funded independent party and promised to govern by sound business principles. Ross Perot, a self-made billionaire, built his campaign on economic populism and an appeal to Americans dissatisfied with the traditional two-party political system.
Clinton’s campaign focused on economic and social opportunity. Clinton charged that Bush’s economic policies had made the rich richer. He also pointed out that, unlike Bush, he came from a family that had struggled through hard times and knew what it was like to worry about paying bills. Bush responded by attacking Clinton’s character. Republicans accused the governor of draft-dodging, marital infidelity, and other moral laxities. Bush also suggested that Clinton and his vice presidential candidate, A1 Gore, were too inexperienced to lead the nation. Unlike his opponents, Perot opposed free-trade agreements with Mexico and Canada and stressed the importance of eliminating the U.S. government’s budget deficit and national debt.
In the end, Clinton’s message carried the election. In the largest voter turnout since 1960, more than 100 million Americans turned out at the polls. Clinton received 43 percent of the popular vote to Bush’s 37 percent and Perot’s 19 percent. Democrats also retained control of the House of Representatives and the Senate. Although Perot and his third party did not win any electoral votes, he garnered nearly 20 million votes. Some historians think Perot’s presence on the ballot may have cost Bush the election by attracting voters who otherwise would have voted for the Republican candidate.
IDENTIFY
According to some, what was the effect of a third party candidate on the 1992 presidential election?
Clinton Intervenes With Mixed Success
When Bill Clinton became president, the more than 40-year-old American foreign policy of fighting communism had just ended. The United States needed to develop a role for itself in the post-Cold War world. Americans were willing to provide economic aid, as they did to nations of the former Soviet Union. But many of them questioned military intervention abroad, fearing a costly commitment like the Vietnam War.
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
★ THE LEGACY OF
ROSS PEROT
----IN 1992--
Source: The Polling Report, January 30, 2012
• First third-party candidate to gain a significant share of votes since 1912
• Used the economy as the main campaign issue
• Perot won 30% of independent voters,
17% of Republican voters, and 13% of Democratic voters
» Analyze Information What was Ross Perot’s impact on the 1992 election?
America in the 1980s and 1990s : 662 -	11.4 A New Era in Foreign Policy
Breakup of Yugoslavia
» Analyze Maps From the map, which republic appears to have the potential to be the strongest? Consider not only size, but location of the former capital of Yugoslavia.
With violence surging in regional conflicts throughout the world, however, Clinton found it necessary to intervene. He did so with mixed success.
U.S.
Intervention in Somalia and Haiti In the late 1980s, civil war broke out in Somalia. By 1991, the government had disintegrated and the fighting had caused widespread famine. In 1992, the United States led a multinational force, later joined by the UN, to bring about peace and distribute food. The coalition fell apart in 1994 when several countries, including the United States, suffered steep casualty rates and withdrew their troops. Eventually, the UN also withdrew, and civil war dragged on for several more years in the devastated country.
Meanwhile, conflict was simmering in Haiti. In 1990, Haitians brought Jean Bertrand Aristide to the presidency, in the nation's first free elections. Less than a year later, a military coup overthrew Aristide, plunging the country into turmoil. Thousands of Haitians left the country by boat to immigrate to the United States as political refugees. Many were sent back by American immigration officials, causing a public outcry. In 1994, Clinton sent American troops to Haiti to restore Aristide to power. Although American action improved the situation, within a decade Haiti faced a sinking economy and rising rates of disease and crime.
U.S.
Involvement in the Balkans Crisis In the Balkans, the collapse of communism broke up the country of Yugoslavia. For decades, the communist leader Josip Broz Tito had contained ethnic and religious strife.
But his death in 1980, and the collapse of communism in 1989, left the country with no unifying forces. Soon, four of Yugoslavia’s six major republics broke away and became independent nations, and long-suppressed ethnic and religious hostilities came boiling to the surface.
In newly independent Bosnia and Herzegovina, ethnic and religious rivalries among Eastern Orthodox Serbs, Catholic Croats, and Bosnian Muslims eventually led to civil war. Serbs, with the help of Serbia-dominated Yugoslavia, attacked Bosnians and Croats. In many cases, they forcibly removed Bosnians and Croats from their homes and later murdered them. This state-sanctioned mass murder, violence, and rape, known as ethnic cleansing, shocked the world. The UN intervened with humanitarian aid. Yet atrocities continued on all sides of the struggle, and years went by before the world community intervened to stop the slaughter.
Clinton Galvanizes NATO Forces Finally in the late summer of 1995, Clinton encouraged NATO to bomb Serbian strongholds. This was the first time
America in the 1980s and 1990s	663	11.4 A New Era in Foreign Policy
the organization had gone into combat, and its use of force quickly brought about a cease-fire. In December 1995, the Dayton Accords established a federated, multinational Bosnia. Although the ethnic cleansing had ended, the enforced peace had not solved the problems of the region. In 1998, violence flared up anew—this time in Kosovo, a province in southern Serbia that borders on Albania. The fighting once again involved ethnic cleansing and also spread to the neighboring countries of Macedonia and Albania. NATO forced Serbs to withdraw from Kosovo.
The Rwanda Genocide As ethnic hatred led to atrocities in the Balkans, mass murder was also underway far to the south in the African nation of Rwanda. Between April and July of 1994, Rwanda’s majority Hutu population committed genocide as they exterminated more than 800,000 members of the Tutsi population. The bloodbath in turn forced 2,000,000 people to flee Rwanda, creating a major humanitarian crisis. The UN was unable to bring about a cease-fire, and President Clinton and other world leaders were criticized for their silence on this tragedy. Eventually, Tutsi-led forces gained ground and established a
government of national unity, bringing the genocide to an end.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What happened to Yugoslavia soon after the death of its long-time communist leader?
America and the Middle East in the 1990s
In the 1990s, Israel’s military responded to attacks by Palestinians. The level of violence grew increasingly fierce. Meanwhile, instability had increased in the region as a whole. As Clinton worked to address it, violence originating in the region spread outward, with the United States increasingly a target.
Small Steps Toward Peace in Israel In 1993, Palestinians and Israelis conducted secret negotiations in Oslo, Norway. The resulting Declaration of Principles promised Palestinian self-rule in Jericho and the Gaza Strip, as well as security for the Israelis. The declaration did not adequately address the issues of Israeli settlements in the West Bank, nor did it placate extremists on either side, who had no interest in compromise.
» Analyze Maps What city is located on the border between Israeli and Palestinian territory?
America in the 1980s and 1990s	664	11.4 A New Era in Foreign Policy
Chronic violence continued even though Israel withdrew from much of the West Bank, and later from Gaza. Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who had agreed to the declaration, fell victim to the fury in 1995 when an Israeli religious extremist assassinated him.
In 2000, Clinton invited Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat and Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak to Camp David to work on a peace agreement. They came close to signing one, but Arafat was not satisfied with any of the proposals. Back in Israel, Barak was replaced as prime minister by Ariel Sharon, a “hawk” who once opposed any concessions to the Palestinians. In 2005, however, Sharon withdrew all Israeli settlers from Gaza. Nonetheless, Palestinian suicide bombings increased, and with them so did crackdowns by the Israeli military.
Terrorists Hit U.S. Targets In 1993, an Islamist terrorist group called al Qaeda exploded a truck bomb in the parking garage beneath the World Trade Center in New York City, killing six people and injuring more than one thousand others. Al Qaeda was led by a wealthy man from Saudi Arabia named Osama bin Laden.
Bin Laden had fought in Afghanistan in the 1980s on the side of Islamists who sought to expel the Soviet Union. By the late 1990s, he had formed al Qaeda with the purpose of ending American involvement in Muslim countries.
Five years after the 1993 bombing at the World Trade Center, al Qaeda set off car bombs within minutes of each other at American embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The blasts killed 225 people and injured more than 5,500 others. In 2000, al Qaeda bombed the USS Cole an American warship anchored off the coast of Yemen, killing 17 American sailors. In spite of these attacks, most Americans remained much more focused on domestic issues than on the threat of international terrorism. No one fully understood the threat that al Qaeda posed to American interests and world peace.
B RECALL
Where did Osama bin Laden establish his credentials as an Islamic fundamentalist fighter in the 1980s?
» In 1993, Islamist terrorists detonated a bomb in the parking garage of the World Trade Center in New York City, intending to destroy the buildings.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Describe the political changes that occurred in Latin America during the 1980s and 1990s.
2.	Generate Explanations Explain how U.S. policies influenced the fall of apartheid in South Africa.
3.	Identify Cause and Effect Describe the events that led to Operation Desert Storm, and discuss the campaign’s lasting effects.
4.	Generate Explanations Explain why President Bush’s popularity declined after the Persian Gulf War, and determine how this influenced President Clinton’s election.
5.	Express Problems Clearly Explain why Yugoslavia collapsed after the Cold War, and describe the problems that occurred as a result.
America in the 1980s and 1990s	665
A
New Era in Foreign Policy 
Computers revolutionized industry and the workplace in the last half of the twentieth century. Workers around the globe were required to learn new skills to remain competitive.
Jld Interactive Flipped Video
When Bill Clinton took the presidential oath of office on January 20,1993, he faced a great challenge. Since 1968, Americans had chosen Republican presidents in five out of six elections. The Republican argument that government needed to be smaller and less intrusive resonated with many Americans. Clinton therefore needed to chart a middle course between the limited role for government advocated by Republicans and the traditional Democratic reliance on government programs to address social problems.
10.E, 11.B, 18.A, 19.C, 24.B, 27.A, 28.C
» Objectives
Assess the success of Clinton’s domestic policies.
Describe the Contract With America and its impact.
Analyze the Clinton impeachment.
Evaluate the changes that new technological innovations brought to the economy and daily life in the 1990s.
» Key Terms
Family Medical
Leave Act Brady Bill Newt Gingrich Contract With
America Kenneth Starr impeachment personal computer biotechnology satellite Internet
Robert Johnson
Clinton and the 1990s
Clinton Enacts New Domestic Policies
Family Medical Leave Act Becomes Law Early in his presidency, Clinton signed the Family Medical Leave Act, which had been vetoed by President Bush despite having bipartisan support. The act guaranteed most full-time employees 12 workweeks of unpaid leave each year for the birth and care of a newborn child, to recover from a serious illness, or to care for an immediate family member with one. The Clinton administration also raised the minimum wage, increased access to college loans, and expanded tax credits for higher education.
An Uphill Battle on Healthcare Reform Healthcare reform headed Clinton’s list of priorities. The United States was the only developed country without national healthcare. Though Clinton did not advocate socialized medicine, he wanted a program that would guarantee care for all Americans. His wife, Hillary Clinton, was appointed to head a healthcare task force to investigate the issue. The task force conducted highly publicized hearings and produced a long, detailed proposal that attracted immediate criticism from diverse interest groups. The bill never won congressional support and was ultimately dropped after about a year of debate.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
666
Clinton had miscalculated Americans’ faith in the federal government to solve the country's social problems. Many Americans simply did not feel that enlarging the federal bureaucracy and allowing the government to run healthcare was a good idea.
Fighting Crime and Violence Clinton also tried to address the issue of violence in American society. In 1993, he signed the Brady Bill, a gun-control act named for presidential aide James Brady, who had been wounded in the 1981 assassination attempt on Ronald Reagan. Under Clinton, Congress also passed a $30 billion anticrime bill that increased funding for police and banned several kinds of assault weapons.
Still, violence continued to haunt the nation. In 1995, Americans were horrified by the bombing of a government building in Oklahoma City that killed 168 people and injured more than 800 others. The mass murder was not committed by foreign terrorists, but rather by homegrown anti-government extremists.
To ward off similar terrorist attacks, federal buildings in major cities were surrounded with barriers. New laws were passed to deter terrorism and impose stiffer penalties.
In 1999, yet another act of senseless violence stirred nationwide debate. At Colorado’s Columbine High School, two heavily armed students killed 12 fellow students and a teacher, as well as wounding 24 others, before taking their own lives. In the aftermath of this tragedy, many schools across the nation installed metal detectors and other security measures. Still other schools instituted new anti-bully policies and “zero tolerance” approaches to school violence.
Q DESCRIBE
Describe what the Clintons’ healthcare reform package sought to supply for Americans.
Republicans Lead a
Conservative Resurgence
After two years in office, Clinton had achieved a few lasting legislative victories. Yet the failure of his healthcare initiative signaled that his popularity, and his control of Congress, was waning. With the 1994 midterm elections approaching, congressional Republicans seized the opportunity to advance their own ideas.
Gingrich’s Contract With America Georgia congressman Newt Gingrich led the opposition to Clinton. Gingrich was bold and aggressive and not interested in compromising with the Democrats: We will cooperate, but we won’t compromise. Many
» In April 1995, domestic terrorist Timothy McVeigh detonated a bomb in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City. The attack killed more than 160 people and injured several hundred others.
» In 1994, Congressman Newt Gingrich organized Republican opposition to Democratic policies around his Contract With America campaign.
Interactive Gallery
©
America in the 1980s and 1990s	667	11.5 Clinton and the 1990s
people thought that Gingrich’s goal of the Republicans gaining control of the House of Representatives in 1994 was a nearly impossible task. After all, the Democrats had controlled the House for 58 of the previous 62 years.
Gingrich, however, galvanized Republicans around his Contract With America, a plan that attacked big government and emphasized patriotism and traditional values. The Contract With America called for congressional term limits, reduction of the federal bureaucracy, a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution, and large tax cuts, as well as increased defense spending, significant welfare reform, and tough anti-crime legislation. The idea was to capture the votes of Americans who felt the federal government was too big, too wasteful, and too liberal.
Republicans Sweep the 1994 Elections Although most eligible voters did not vote in 1994, there was a strong turnout among Republicans. For the first time in 40 years, the Republicans won control of the House. They also captured the Senate and most of the governorships.
Newsweek magazine observed:
“Last week in one of the most profound electoral routs in American history, Republicans won the right to occupy the Capitol and mount what their . . . commanders think of as a counterrevolution: a full-scale attack on the notion that a central government should play a central role in the life of the nation.”
Once in office, Republicans in the House passed most of Gingrich’s program. Getting the program
through the Senate and signed by Clinton was not as successful, with only a handful of contract points becoming law. In addition, Republican attempts to slash Medicare and other government programs proved unpopular. Many Americans were also upset when the government shut down in 1995 because Congress would not pass Clinton’s budget. Meanwhile, Clinton incorporated some of the conservative agenda into his own 1996 reelection bid. He signed a bill to reform welfare, passed legislation that appropriated more money for law enforcement, and called for stiffer sentencing for criminals. Finally, he made balancing the budget and reducing the federal deficit a priority.
A
Strong Economy Lifts Clinton to Reelection Beginning in the mid-1990s, the American economy broke out of recession and began to soar, starting the longest period of sustained growth in the country’s history. Americans benefited from low unemployment, low inflation levels, and the government’s efforts to balance the budget and reduce the deficit. In 1994, Clinton’s disapproval rating had exceeded 60 percent, and few expected him to win a second term. As the 1996 election approached, however, the booming economy meant that few Americans had a compelling reason to change leadership.
The Republicans nominated Senate Majority Leader Robert Dole, a World War II hero and a moderate Republican. H. Ross Perot entered the race as the Reform Party candidate. Clinton skillfully captured the middle ground, labeling Dole as out-of-touch and Perot as a political quack. On election day, Americans chose Clinton by a wide margin. The House of Representatives and Senate, however, retained their Republican majorities.
fed RECALL Why did large numbers of Americans
vote for Republican congressional candidates who supported the Contract With America?
'Republican Revolution" of 1994
PARTY
AFFILIATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
CHANGE
SENATE
CHANGE
REPUBLICANS
DEMOCRATS
230
204
+54
-54
52
48
+9
-9
SOURCES: U.S,
House of Representatives; The Washington Post » Analyze Charts How did the Republican Revolution affect the balance of power between Democrats and Republicans in the federal government?

Interactive Chart
America in the 1980s and 1990s
(668 |
11.5 Clinton and the 1990s
Federal Budget, 1990-2000
» Analyze Charts What effect did President Clinton’s economic policies have on the federal budget between 1993 and 2000?
Scandals, Impeachment, and Trial
President Clinton had dodged scandals from his first days in office. One, a sexual harassment suit, had stemmed from his years as governor of Arkansas. Another concerned investments that Bill and Hillary Clinton had made in the Whitewater Development Corporation, an Arkansas real estate company, in the 1970s and 1980s.
Investigating Clinton Leads to New Scandal A
special prosecutor appointed by Attorney General Janet Reno investigated the Whitewater investment case and recommended that no criminal charges be filed. However, in July, Congress passed a new law requiring that special prosecutors be selected by a three-judge panel from the U.S. Court of Appeals. As a result, in August of 1994, special prosecutor Kenneth Starr was appointed to investigate the case again. In seven years of investigation, Starr failed to uncover any conclusive evidence of the Clintons’ guilt, though some of their associates were convicted.
In the process of prosecuting Whitewater, Starr began investigating Clinton’s relationship with o White House intern. Clinton had denied under oath that the two had an affair. Eventually, Clinton admitted that he had lied. The Whitewater case was
quickly overshadowed by the new scandal. In 1998, Starr recommended impeachment proceedings on a number of counts, all related to the intern scandal rather than to Whitewater.
Impeaching and Acquitting the President Most Americans condemned Clinton’s actions but opposed impeachment. Congressional Democrats, similarly, did not believe his behavior met the standard of “Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors” required by the Constitution for the impeachment and removal of a president. Nevertheless, the House of Representatives, led by the Republican majority, impeached Clinton on the charges of perjury and obstruction of justice.
In January 1999, the Senate tried the president. The removal of a president requires a two-thirds majority of senators, and from the beginning, it was clear that Clinton’s opposition did not have the necessary votes. After a short trial, the president was acquitted on both counts on February 12. However, the political scandal shook the trust of U.S. citizens in the federal government and its leaders.
H IDENTIFY
What led to the appointment of Kenneth Starr as a special prosecutor to investigate the Whitewater case?
America in the 1980s and 1990s	669	115 Clinton and the 1990s
Digital Technology
Changes American Life
During the twentieth century, the rate of technological change sped up dramatically. New technology touched every aspect of life, including how Americans worked, played, and communicated. At the same time, globalization transformed the American economy, bringing both new challenges and new opportunities.
The 1900s was a century of unparalleled change. In 1903, Orville Wright flew the first airplane. Less than 70 years later, astronaut Neil Armstrong walked on the moon. During that same span of time, television went from a novelty at a World’s Fair to a standard household possession, and sophisticated microscopes and telescopes unveiled previously hidden worlds. One of the most important innovations was the development of the computer.
Microchips and Microprocessors Lead to the Modern Computer Intense rivalry between enemies during World War II brought about a life-and-death race to develop new technologies, such as the computer. The U.S. government funded research that led to the creation of the first modern computer in 1946. This huge machine occupied the entire basement of the research
» Popular computers of the 1980s and early 1990s were produced by Commodore, Texas Instruments, and Coleco.
lab. It calculated artillery ranges and performed computations for the atomic bomb.
Soon after World War II, universities and corporations joined government agencies to develop smaller, faster, more powerful computers that could perform a range of functions. The IBM company developed one of the first commercially successful computers in 1954. In the 1960s, a few companies located south of San Francisco, California, focused on developing improved technology for running the computer. Their efforts led to the microchip, a tiny fragment of silicon containing complex circuits, and the microprocessor, a silicon chip that held a central processing unit. These chips made possible the development of small computers, called personal computers.
Transforming Business and Industry At first, personal computers were a novelty item, used mainly by hobbyists. But by the 1980s, computers were transforming industries, research labs, and businesses. Personal computers could perform many different tasks but were small and simple enough for the average person to use. The technology that created them eventually spread to many other industries. Video games, cellular telephones, and other electronics all depended on microchips and microprocessors. Entrepreneurs played a large role in accelerating the use of personal computers. Steve Jobs’s Apple Computers and Bill Gates’s Microsoft made computers and software affordable for millions of Americans. Jeff Bezos’s Amazon.com ushered in buying and selling products by computer. Like Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller a century before, these entrepreneurs amassed great fortunes by pioneering new technologies.
The great demand for newer, faster, and more versatile digital devices—coupled with the potential fortunes awaiting those who successfully delivered them—motivated a new breed of inventors and entrepreneurs. Improvements in technology and manufacturing helped develop faster-working and smaller components that drove down costs, allowing a great number of people to use these new technologies.
Science and Agriculture Innovations Medical science also moved ahead by gigantic leaps in the late twentieth century, often aided by computer technology. Scientists developed drugs that extended patients’ lives, reduced pain, and battled a huge number of diseases. They made artificial hearts and learned how to successfully transplant body organs. Such advancements, along with biotechnology, or the use of living organisms in the development of new products, produced a level of healthcare far above that known to
America in the 1980s and 1990s
< 670 1 11.5 Clinton and the 1990s
The Rise of Technology
any previous generation. Many of the advances in the biological sciences were spurred by federal research grants, such as those from the National Institute of Health and the National Science Foundation.
Advances in agricultural technology, including improved machinery, irrigation techniques, and growing methods, have brought profound changes to American society. While farms have grown larger and more productive, fewer people are needed to work them. In 1900, 50 percent of the labor force worked on farms. At the end of the century, only 2 percent did.
Satellite Technology Transforms Communication and Navigation Satellite technology increased the speed of global communications. Satellites are mechanical devices that orbit Earth in space, receiving and sending information-filled signals that are then relayed to televisions, telephones, and computers. Originally developed for military purposes during the Cold War, satellite technology was used in the 1970s by businessman Ted Turner to run the first “superstation.” In 1980, Robert Johnson launched BET (Black Entertainment Television) using technology to broadcast into cable-equipped households across the country. Also in 1980, Turner began the 24-hour-per-day, all-news Cable News Network (CNN). Cellular telephones used similar satellite technology, allowing people to communicate away from their homes.
Scientists and engineers in the U.S. Department of Defense also applied satellite technology to develop the first Global Positioning System (GPS). They developed the system for use in the American military, but nonmilitary use later became widespread.
In GPS, a receiver on Earth measures how long radio signals from multiple satellites take to arrive at its location. Using this information, the receiver performs the necessary calculations to determine the user's latitude, longitude, or even altitude. Since its inception, the accuracy of GPS (and the fact that its signals are available for free) has caused a massive change in navigation for industrial and everyday users.
Creating the Internet In the 1970s, various branches of the U.S. government along with groups in several American universities led efforts to link computer systems together via cables and satellites. By the 1980s, the Internet, or World Wide Web, had been born, reaching the general public in the 1990s.
The Web made communication and access to information almost instantaneous. This breakthrough completely and profoundly transformed commerce, education, research, and entertainment. Email provided great advantages over the delays of postal mail and the expense of telephones. The impact has been especially great on people living in rural areas. The Internet’s immense storage capacity also changed the world of
America in the 1980s and 1990s f 671 i 11.5 Clinton and the 1990s
DOT.COM BOOM
INITIAL PUBLIC STOCK OFFERINGS
VALUE OF ISSUED SHARES COMPANIES VA LINUX
FOUNDRY NETWORKS*
$156 $115 $102 WEBMETHODS*	$65	$56
CONOCO	
$103	$94
METLIFE
KRISPY KREME
*No longer trading or acquired
» Analyze Data What does the information on net operating profits and initial public stock offering suggest about investment in technology companies in the late 1990s?
research. In the 1980s, scientists and scholars primarily used the Internet to share information. By the early 1990s, they were using it as a research tool and an online database.
The Tech Boom Fuels Economic Growth In many ways, the free enterprise system drives technological innovation and has filled the marketplace with inexpensive personal computers, global positioning products, and cell phones. Such technological innovations have improved the standard of living in the United States. Fueled in part by the high-tech boom, the U.S. economy in the 1990s flourished. The strong economy produced the lowest unemployment rate in 30 years and high home-ownership rates. In addition, the federal government operated on the first balanced budget since the late 1960s and held the largest budget surplus in U.S. history. The era became America’s longest peacetime expansion.
U DESCRIBE
What was the original inspiration for the development of the Internet?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations Explain how the passage of new legislation reformed employment and education during Bill Clinton’s presidency.
2.	Describe the major acts of terrorist violence that occurred in the United States in the 1990s.
3.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the impact of the conservative resurgence and determine its effect on the 1996 presidential election.
4.	Identify Cause and Effect Discuss the causes and effects of President Clinton’s impeachment.
5.	Generate Explanations Explain how changes in technology affected the U.S. economy during the twentieth century.
America in the 1980s and 1990s	672	11-5 Clinton and the 1990s
TEKS ASSESSMENT
ISSUE |
VIEWPOINT
Role of	Favored more government involvement to lessen extreme
government in economic inequalities through
the economy * soc,al Pr°9rams (often leading to higher taxes)
• government regulation of industry
Foreian oolicv Favored international diplomacy to combat communism in y H y other countries
Healthcare
Energy
Favored government regulation of healthcare and believed everyone had a right to healthcare
Favored exploring alternatives to oil and believed the government should regulate the gas and electric industries
SOURCE:
The road from here: Liberalism and realities in the 1980s Identify Viewpoints Describe significant societal issues of the 1980s, and identify the points of view held by liberals and conservatives on the issues. Write a paragraph describing how the viewpoints of liberals and conservatives differed on significant issue in the 1980s. Identify whether the table above represents the viewpoints of liberals or conservatives and describe the corresponding viewpoints of the group not represented by the table. 10.F, 29.G
Analyze Causes and Effects of Changing Demographics Analyze the causes of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including migration from the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt, and describe the effects of these changes on the conservative resurgence of the 1980s. Write a paragraph analyzing the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns and how they helped the Republican Party achieve a conservative resurgence in the 1980s. Explain how migration from the cities to the suburbs helped Republicans in the North, evaluate why people moved from the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt, and analyze how these demographic changes and changes in party loyalties in the Deep South contributed to the conservative resurgence. 10.E, 13.A
Describe Reaganomics Describe Ronald Reagan’s leadership in domestic policies, including Reaganomics. Write a paragraph describing the supply-side economic theory embodied in Reaganomics and how President Reagan put the theory into practice. Be sure to describe the theory of supply-side economics, explain why Reagan also needed to cut federal spending, evaluate how Congress worked with Reagan to implement his plan, and analyze how Reagan justified the effect of his plan on the wealthy. 10.B
Describe Edgewood I.S.D. v. Kirby Describe how litigation such as the landmark case of Edgewood I.S.D. v. Kirby played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement. Write a
paragraph describing the significance of Edgewood I.S.D. v. Kirby. Explain what the case was about and describe the changes that resulted from the verdict in the case. 9.I
5.	Analyze Unintended Consequences in the Private Sector Analyze the unintended consequences of actions in the private sector meant to create economic opportunities for citizens. Write a paragraph analyzing how efforts by the Savings and Loan industry to make loans had unintended consequences for the federal budget deficit. Define what is meant by budget deficit, explain the causes of the increase in the budget deficit in the 1980s, and describe the Savings and Loan crisis and explain how it had an unintended consequence for the budget deficit. 17.D
6.	Evaluate Contributions of Sandra Day O’Connor Evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the United States such as Sandra Day O’Connor. Write a paragraph evaluating the contributions of Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor. Identify when she was appointed and by whom, explain why her appointment was significant, and describe how she voted. 24.B
7.	Describe End of Cold War Describe U.S. involvement in world affairs, including the end of the Cold War. Write a paragraph describing how the Cold War came to an end. Explain the reforms Soviet President Gorbachev instituted and why, describe how these reforms affected U.S.-Soviet relations, and identify the historical events in the Soviet Union and its sphere of influence that led to the end of the Cold War. 11 -A
8.	Explain Significance of 1991 Explain the significance of the following year as a turning point: 1991. Write a paragraph explaining why 1991 was a turning point in Cold War relations. Answer the following questions in your paragraph: What events occurred in the Soviet Union in 1991? How did these events impact U.S. foreign policy? 2.D
America in the 1980s and 1990s	673
9.	Describe Iran-Contra Affair Describe U.S. involvement in the Middle East, such as the Iran-Contra affair. Write a paragraph describing the Iran-Contra affair. Describe the events surrounding the Iran-Contra affair and the consequences of the Iran-Contra affair for the Reagan administration. 10.D
10.	Compare Impact of Energy Over Time Compare the impact of energy on the American way of life over time. Write a paragraph discussing the importance of oil at the time of the Persian Gulf War. Be sure to discuss the increasing importance of oil to the United States’ economy and why Saddam Hussein’s actions were a foreign policy concern for the United States and many other nations. 10.C
11.	Evaluate Pros and Cons Support with historical evidence a point of view on a social studies issue or event by evaluating the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international organizations and treaties, including how treaties might undermine U.S. sovereignty. Write a paragraph describing the pros and cons of the United States participating in UN peacekeeping and relief missions. Draw historical evidence from U.S. participation in UN missions during the Bush and Clinton administrations, evaluate the pros and cons of involvement, and consider the effect of involvement and treaties on U.S. sovereignty. 11.C, 19.E, 29.G
12.	Analyze Impact of Third Parties Analyze the impact of third parties on presidential elections. Use the graphs below and text information to write a paragraph analyzing the impact of Ross Perot on the 1992 presidential campaign. Consider what percentage of the popular vote Perot received, the party affiliations of the voters who supported Perot, and how these statistics may have influenced the outcome of the election. 11 .D
13.	Identify Newt Gingrich and the Contract With America Identify significant political leaders across the political spectrum, such as Newt Gingrich, and describe key organizations of the conservative resurgence of the 1980s and 1990s, including the Contract with America. Write a paragraph identifying Newt Gingrich and describing his Contract With America. Be sure to describe who Gingrich was and why he launched the Contract With America, what the Contract With America called for, and how successful Republicans were in implementing the plan. 10.E, 11.B
14.	Identify Issues Across Political Spectrum Identify significant political and social issues, leaders, and advocacy groups across the political spectrum and use the information to create an oral presentation. Create an oral presentation on the gun debate. Consider the political issues involved, such as Second Amendment protections and gun-control legislation; the social issues involved, such as concerns over violent crime and tragedies such as the Columbine High School shootings; and the positions of advocacy groups and their leaders across the political spectrum, including the National Rifle Association and gun-control advocacy groups. 11 .B, 30.A
15.	Describe Effects of Political Scandals Use correct social studies terminology to describe the effects of political scandals, including Bill Clinton’s impeachment, on the views of U.S. citizens concerning trust in the federal government and its leaders. Write a paragraph describing the personal scandals that President Clinton faced during his time in office. Be sure to identity the scandals; define impeachment, describe how one scandal led to impeachment proceedings, reactions to those proceedings, and the outcome of the proceedings; and consider how scandals and political reactions to scandals might affect the trust citizens have in the federal government and its leaders. 19.C, 30.B
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
★ Bill Clinton
Democrat
44,909,889
(43.01%)
Source: Federal Election Commission
George H.W. Bush
Republican
39,104,545
(37.05%)
George H.W. Bush
Republican
168
(31.2%)
Ross Perot
Independent
19,742,267
(18,91%)
THE LEGACY OF
ROSS PEROT
— IN 1992-------
Source: The Polling Report, January 30, 2012
* Used the economy as the main campaign issue
»First third-party candidate to gain a significant share of votes since 1912
► Perot won 30% of independent voters,
17% of Republican voters, and 13% of Democratic voters
America in the 1980s and 1990s
U.S.
Foreign Affairs Under George H.W. Bush PACIFIC
OCEAN
16.	Describe Effective Leadership Describe qualities of effective leadership. Write a paragraph exploring President George H.W. Bush’s leadership qualities by describing the actions he took to address disputes
in the areas shown on the map above. For each area highlighted on the map, describe the dispute or conflict, the action President Bush took, and how his actions demonstrate his qualities as a leader. 24.A
17.	Understand Global Positioning
Products Understand how the free-enterprise system drives and applies technological innovation in the marketplace, such as global positioning products. Write a paragraph describing how global positioning products entered the marketplace and their effect. Consider the purpose of the first Global Positioning System (GPS), how GPS works, and the effect of GPS products in the marketplace. 28.C
18.	Explain Effects of Satellite Communications on Economic Development Explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as satellite communications on the economic development of the United States, and discuss the role of American entrepreneurs, such as Robert Johnson. Write a paragraph explaining the effects of satellite communications on economic development. Explain what satellites are, the effect of satellites on communication, and how entrepreneurs like Ted Turner and Robert Johnson used satellite technology to start businesses. 18.A, 27.A
19.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What makes a government successful? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
America in the 1980s and 1990s
675
1 Which “standard bearer” of modern conservatism was elected to presidential power in 1980? A Jerry Falwell B Ronald Reagan C Barry Goldwater D Lyndon Johnson
Comparing Supply-Side and Keynesian Economics
SOURCE:
Pearson (2013) 2	What do Keynesian and Supply-Side economics, also called “Reaganomics,” have in common? F They both favor cutting taxes.
G
They have nothing in common. H
They both have the goal of economic recovery. J
They both favor increased government spending. America in the 1980s and 1990s	676
3	What social issue arose in the 1980s and led these citizens to protest? A Drug abuse B A new disease C Unemployment D Illegal immigration
4	Which of the following is an example of President Reagan’s “Peace Through Strength” policy? F Glasnost G Perestroika H Iran-Contra Affair J Strategic Defense Initiative
If you have trouble with...				
Question	1	2	3	4
jSee Lesson	11.1	11.2	11.2	11.3
TEKS 11.B 10.B 10.F 10.B
America in tile 1980s and 1990s	* 677
5	The third party candidate whose presence may have influenced the outcome of the 1992 election was—
A
Al Gore B Bill Clinton C H. Ross Perot D George H. W. Bush 6	The contract referred to in the image above was a response by— F Americans who opposed Soviet policies G Soviets who opposed Ronald Reagan’s policies H conservatives who opposed Bill Clinton’s policies J liberals who opposed George H.W. Bush’s policies
America in the 1980s and 1990s	678
7	One of the main goals of the women’s movement of the 1960s was to—
A secure women the right to vote, thereby expanding political opportunities
B end workplace discrimination based on gender, thereby expanding economic opportunities
C persuade white and black women to work together, thereby expanding social opportunities
D increase women’s access to higher education, thereby increasing the influence of women on college administrations
8	What event, pictured above, did the American Indian Movement (AIM) take part in at the village of Wounded Knee?
F AIM
used the village as a place to rest during the “long march” from San Francisco, CA to Washington, DC. G AIM
planned an attack on government employees as retaliation for massacring Sioux at the village in 1890. H AIM
recorded the experiences of Native American residents of the village and played a tape of the anecdotes to a large audience. J AIM
took over the village and refused to leave until the government agreed to investigate the condition of American Indians on reservations. If you have trouble with...__
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	11.4	11.5	10.2	10.3
TEKS 11.D 10.E 26.A 9.B
America in the 1980s and 1990s	679
America in the Twenty-First Century
In this Topic, you will learn about America in the twenty-first century. You will also find lots of interesting ways to master the TEKS associated
with this Topic.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
2.B, 2.D, 9.A, 11.A, 11.B, 11.C, 11.D, 11.E, 11.F, 12.A, 13.B,
17.D, 17.E, 18.A, 18.B, 19.B, 19.D, 19.E, 20.B, 22.C, 23.C,
24.B, 25.C, 25.D, 26.D, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 28.A, 28.C, 30.A, 30.C

• Connect
; Connect with this Topic by watching a video ; about a fascinating person or situation related to ; this Topic. You can think about how this Topic i connects to your own life. And you’ll encounter i an intriguing Essential Question: What are the : benefits and costs of technology?
; Begin your study by trying the i following:
LEARN
Watch My Story Video: ; Leslie Bradshaw, Guiding Innovation
Launch your Project:
6 Create a U.S. Citizenship Course
LESSON OUTLINE
12.1: America and the World Economy 11.B, 17.E, 18.B, 19.E, 27.A, 27.C
12.2: The George W. Bush Presidency 2.D, 11.A, 11.C, 11.F, 12.A, 18.A, 18.B, 19.B, 19.D, 19.E, 20.B
12.3: The Barack Obama Presidency 2.D, 11.A, 11.B, 11.E, 19.D, 24.B, 26.D
12.4: Americans Look to the Future 9.A, 11.B, 11.F, 13.B, 17.D, 22.C, 23.C, 25.D, 26.D, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 28.A, 28.C
680
9 Investigate
: The Lesson Outline lists : all the lessons you will : investigate in this Topic.
; As you read and interact : with key content, the story i of America in the twenty-; first century will come to ; life. Read the texts; try the : interactivities. Investigate the ; fascinating story of America’s ; recent history.
• And keep working on your : Project to help build your t mastery of the Topic TEKS.
O '
taSrodocte and instrwttcm JISMIf Jib	The U.S Role in the Global Economy		
	sji uj fg u si jj| Wb||t, JRjh, If	1985	
GDP MS % OF WORLD GDP *
	CHINA		
25.47%			
3.81%			11;=
	BRAZIL		
3.59%			
3.08%	IIBSlii.		
	luma		
y
» Digital interactivity from the online course
•	Synthesize
: You will get a chance to pull together : everything you have learned by : thinking again about the Essential : Question. How would you answer : the question now: What are the
•	benefits and costs of technology?
• Demonstrate
: Now you will get to show what : you know. You will get a chance : to complete the TEKS Review and : Assessment pages, answering : questions about every TEKS for : this Topic. Or you can write an ; essay, take part in a discussion,
; or share your Project. No matter j which you do, it will be a real-world ; demonstration of the things you now • understand about the Topic........«
681
J
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
What are the benefits and costs of technology? 12 America in the Twenty First Century
A /
If

*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
2.A, 2.B, 2.C, 2.D, 9.A, 9.B, 11.A, 11.B, 11.C, 11.D, 11.E, 11.F, 12.A, 13.B, 14.A, 14.B, 17.D, 17.E, 18.A, 18.B, 19.B, 19.D, 19.E, 20.B, 22.B, 22.C, 23.C, 24.B, 25.C, 25.D, 26.D, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 28.A, 28.C, 30.A, 30.C
Enduring Understandings
•	A revolution in technology continues to transform American business, industry, health, science, and lifestyles.
•	Globalization has changed the national economy and tied America more closely to the world.
•	The attacks of September 11, 2001 shaped domestic security and foreign policy in the early 2000s.
•	The United States faces challenges and opportunities in the 21st century.
PEARSON
NBC LEARN



lii
W<
aPpli,
orPan using Google Earth Cahon on a tablet computer
to learn more about Leslie Bradshaw,
a technology entrepreneur.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com

Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
683
Interactive Flipped Video
12.1
\2z With the end of the Cold War, the United States emerged as the sole superpower in a dramatically changing world. No longer defined by its role as the leading opponent of communism, the United States had to carve out new roles for itself in a world of globalization and increasing regional conflict. President Clinton, the nation’s first baby-boomer President, ushered in this new period of American soul-searching. The free trade agreements made during his presidency showed how clearly he understood the impact of government policies on the economy. These policies will continue to shape the American economy in the twenty-first century.
i
» Objectives
Understand how the United States is affected by emerging economic issues such as changes in the global economy.
Explain how globalization and the rise of the service sector affects the American economy.
Understand the productivity enhancements resulting from management innovations.
Understand the global economic challenges facing the United States.
» Key Terms
globalization
multinational
corporations service economy European Union (EU) The North American
Free Trade
Agreement
(NAFTA)
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
World Trade Organization (WTO)
America and the
World Economy
Free Trade and Treaties
In the 1990s, the United States was both an important promoter of global trade and an example for newly industrializing nations. As more nations participated in economic globalization, the United States adjusted its own policies to ensure it would remain an economic powerhouse.
U.S.
International Trade Policies and the Role of Free Trade As an economic leader and champion of the free enterprise system, America has had a major role in globalization. Free trade—the guiding principle of globalization—has been hotly debated in American politics. Americans want the lower costs that free trade creates but worry about the loss of American jobs to other countries. Generally, Republicans have supported the interests of business and free trade agreements. Democrats have been more sympathetic to labor interests and have often opposed legislation that would cost American workers’ jobs. Depending on which party has been in power, free trade has either been encouraged or opposed by social and political advocacy organizations across the political spectrum.
§1 realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
684
Bill Clinton challenged the traditional Democratic thinking by supporting free trade blocs, which in theory would increase the economic prosperity of particular regions. Europe is an example of a region in which such a bloc was setup. In 1993, a number of European nations established the European Union (EU) to coordinate monetary and economic policies. By the end of the century, the EU had adopted a single currency, the euro, to promote economic efficiency. The EU’s combined resources both encouraged trade among its members and challenged the economic leadership of the United States. North American free trade proponents believed a similar bloc would stimulate their own region.
The United States Joins NAFTA The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a
direct response to the EU, was originally proposed during the Bush administration. President Bush and leaders of the other nations signed the agreement in 1992, but Congress blocked it. It called for a gradual removal of trade restrictions among the United States, Canada, and Mexico. NAFTA’s supporters maintained that creating a free trade zone in North America would promote economic growth, reduce prices, increase exports, and encourage economic investment. Most labor leaders, environmentalists, and liberal Democrats argued that NAFTA would force American manufacturers to relocate to Mexico, where wages
were lower and environmental controls were less rigid. They feared that hundreds of thousands of American jobs would be lost. President Clinton embraced NAFTA and pushed it through Congress. It went into effect in 1994, and since then the three countries have also signed agreements covering environmental protection, safety standards, and workers’ rights. Fourteen years later, with the removal of remaining trade restrictions between the United States and Mexico, the final provisions of NAFTA went into effect in January 2008.
Expanding Global Trade Through the Free Enterprise System Clinton signed a total of 270 free trade agreements, including the revision of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994 and the accords of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995. GATT’s goal was to reduce tariffs to promote free trade. The WTO replaced GATT, expanding the organization’s authority to negotiate trade agreements, settle disputes, and enforce compliance with them. Clinton also continued the strong U.S. support of the World Bank.
Critics complain that the WTO and World Bank favor business interests over environmental concerns and workers’ rights. At the 1999 WTO meeting in Seattle, protesters filled the streets, disrupting the proceedings.
Yet most people agree that economic globalization has had a number of positive effects, such as exposing
The European Union
» Analyze Maps In which part of Europe has EU membership expanded in the 21st century?
Interactive Gallery
©
America in the Twenty-First Century 685	12.1 America and the World Economy
'V ELPS
people to new ideas, technologies, and communications. Another positive effect is that nations involved in free trade have often become more democratic. Normalizing trade—engaging in free trade with countries rather than imposing sanctions based on disagreements— can also tend to strengthen economic ties. For example, normalizing trade with China has encouraged that country to adopt free market reforms.
H EXPLAIN
why labor leaders, environmentalists, and liberal Democrats opposed NAFTA.
ELPS READING 4.C.1
Work with a partner to scan the text, writing down any words you see more than once, such as economy, globalization, and trade. Look up the meanings of these words before you start reading.
Technological and
Management Innovations in the American Economy
Today, technological changes continue to have a dramatic effect on the American economy, raising the standard of living. New technology influences how and where people do their jobs. In this changing economy, one sector—the service industry—has grown rapidly. A lower percentage of Americans than ever before work
on assembly lines or on farms. Instead, they provide services.
The Impact of Multinational Corporations on the 21st Century Economy New communications infrastructures—especially satellites and computers— have made it easier for companies to do global business. This has increased globalization, or the process by which national economies, politics, cultures, and societies become integrated with those of other nations around the world. Multinational corporations are one example of a globalized business. Such a corporation might have its financial headquarters in one country and manufacturing plants in several others and may obtain its raw materials from many different places. The company then sells the products it makes to a worldwide market. When properly implemented, these innovations in how business operations are managed can lead to greater productivity both for individual workers within the corporation and for the corporation as a whole.
Globalization has made more products and services available to greater numbers of people, often at lower prices. It has hastened the development of some nations. But it has also had some drawbacks. Industrial nations have seen their manufacturing jobs flow out to less developed nations. Steel that was once manufactured in Pittsburgh, for example, might now
THE UNITED STATES & GLOBAL BUSINESS
llBlSiiiM
IHM1 in 5 U.S. WORKERS
IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR WORKS FOR A U.S.
MULTINATIONAL CORPORATION
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
other 32%
Semiconductors,
telecommunications,
insurance, retail, technology hardware, investment services
BANKING
36%
Source: Forbes Global 2000 Leading Companies, 2013
OIL AND GAS
32%
U.S. MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS
2010
DOMESTIC E3 FOREIGN SALES
WAL-MART
EXXON-MOBIL
GENERAL ELECTRIC
FORD
IBM
DOW CHEMICAL
INTEL
AMAZON
MCDONALD’S
NIKE
$311 BILLION
$188 BILLION
$69 BILLION m $63 BILLION |
$36 BILLION | $18 BILLION
$109 BILLION $154 BILLION | $80 BILLION | $66 BILLION | $64 BILLION $36 BILLION
BILLION H
$37 BILLION $19 BILLION || $15 BILLION $8 BILLION || $16 BILLION $10 BILLION ||$11 BILLION
Source: U.S. News and Worid Report
» Analyze Data If you combine domestic and foreign sales, which is the largest multinational company in the U.S.?

Interactive Chart
%
America in the Twenty-First Century < 686 '<	12.1 America and the World Economy
be made in South Korea. In less developed nations, workers often do not enjoy the protections that workers have in industrial nations. Finally, the interconnection of world economies almost guarantees that economic problems in one region will be felt in others.
Technology Transforms Workplaces Computer technology has also changed the nature of the American economy. Many workers have found that they need computer skills to get jobs. Banking, stockbroking, programming, and the many other occupations dependent on information and computers have added millions of jobs to the service economy.
Many white-collar workers in the information economy have seen their jobs radically change. Professional workers are linked by a network of computers, fax machines, television screens, and cellphones. They often telecommunicate, holding meetings that involve participants sitting in offices around the world.
Computers have had a huge impact on American industry. Computer-driven industrial robots perform tasks such as welding, loading, packaging, and assembling cars and electronics. Because they can deliver high quality work around the clock, they have enhanced productivity, allowing many businesses to become more competitive. Computers also allow managers to accurately forecast demand for their goods. Applying just-in-time inventory strategies, producers can receive goods as they are needed, increasing efficiency by reducing their inventory costs and waste.
The Service Sector Expands With the production of services increasing faster than the production of goods, some economists say that America now has a service economy. Jobs in the service sector vary widely. Lawyers, teachers, doctors, research analysts, police officers, professional athletes, and movie stars are all service workers, as are salespeople and the people behind fast-food counters. Service workers are among the lowest paid and the highest paid people in the United States.
The transition from an industry-based economy to a service-based one has created opportunities for small business entrepreneurs to achieve the American dream. Sergey Brin and Larry Page launched Google in 1998 to help Internet users locate information as efficiently as possible. The success of Google has made both men billionaires. Mark Zuckerberg and several college roommates launched Facebook while still students at Harvard University. Facebook enables its users to build networks among people with similar interests, activities, and backgrounds. The worlds
» In the first decade of the twenty-first century, manufacturing was still an important source of employment, but an increasing proportion of U.S. jobs became available in service industries such as healthcare and education.

interest in social media made Zuckerberg one of the wealthiest people in America.
Individuals like Zuckerberg continue to have an impact on the twenty-first century economy. Computer and mobile communication technology continues to push small entrepreneurs to develop innovative products and services.
The Decline of Organized Labor The rise of the service economy and the decline in American coal mining, steelmaking, and automobile manufacturing has had a strong impact on organized labor. When union membership was at its peak in 1945, about 35 percent of all American workers belonged to unions. In 2013, less than 12 percent of workers did. Blue-collar jobs, once the mainstay of American labor, declined dramatically in the second half of the twentieth century. As a result, the political power of labor unions, as well as farm organizations, has fallen. At the same time, workers’ average wages—especially those of nonprofessional workers—have fallen.
B IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
What effect has the development of robotics had on American businesses and why? America in the Twenty-First Century 687	12.1 America and the World Economy
The Role of the United States in the Future Economy
Since the 1920s, the United States has had the world’s largest national economy. The reasons are many and varied, but include political stability, abundant natural resources, high worker productivity, favorable immigration policies, and a culture that emphasizes hard work, free enterprise, education, and innovation. All of these advantages have almost guaranteed America’s economic success. Today, however, the United States faces new challenges in a rapidly changing world economy.
New Economies Rise During the past decade, strong new economic competitors have emerged in China, India, and Brazil—large, populous nations with abundant natural resources and developing industrial bases. The United States has formed economic ties with these growing economies, while engaging in healthy competition with them. Of these three major competitors, China is the nation that causes the greatest concern. Because unlike Western European nations and Japan, which have democratic systems similar to that of the United States, China’s government is communist, with harsh restrictions on freedom of
expression. However, China has been moving rapidly toward a modified free market. Although there has been friction between the United States and China over issues such as patents and intellectual property, as well as industrial spying and computer hacking, the two powerful nations have forged mutually profitable trade agreements.
Competing in a Global Economy For more than a century, successful competition in the global economy has depended on three factors: producing better, less expensive goods; staying on the cutting edge of research and development; and educating and preparing students for work in high-tech industries. Ultimately competitions among nations are won by people of intelligence and strong work ethics who are encouraged by governments that value progress and innovation.
But winning does not mean that other nations must lose. Cooperation between nations is essential, especially in a global economy. Since the passage of NAFTA and GATT in the 1990s, economic borders have become more flexible. The outsourcing of jobs and the growth of multinational corporations have changed the nature of economic nationalism. To be sure, the new global economy is still in its infancy, and many problems remain to be resolved, but increasingly,
» The U.S. GDP increased from $9.9 trillion in 2000 to $15.7 trillion in 2012. Analyze Data Predict China’s GDP relative to the U.S. GDP in 25 years.
America in the Twenty-First Century (688 J 12.1 America and the World Economy
progress and success come from cooperation and international respect.
H IDENTIFY
the three factors that contribute to success in the global marketplace.
ASSESSMENT
1. Compare Points of View Discuss the positions of Democrats and Republicans with regard to free trade.
2.	Describe President Clinton’s position on free trade, and explain how this challenged traditional expectations.
3.	Identify Cause and Effect Describe the positive and negative effects of the World Trade Organization (WTO).
4.	Generate Explanations Explain why the United States experienced a shift from an industry-based economy to a service-based economy.
5.	Draw Conclusions Discuss the new economic competitors emerging in the world today, and explain how they affect the United States.
America in the Twenty-First Century (689}	12.1 America and the World Economy
