The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 269	6.1 The Age of Jackson
supported westward expansion to open up more land for frontier settlers.
Democrats were usually more tightly organized than Whigs. Members usually followed the direction set by party leaders. Democrats had strong support in the South and West, especially among small farmers and workers. These groups also supported Democrats in some parts of the Northeast. Small farmers and workers supported the Democrats because Democrats spoke up for small farmers, workers, and Westerners against bankers and Northeastern businessmen.
A
Bitter Campaign In 1828, Adams faced an uphill battle for reelection. This time, Andrew Jackson was Adams’s only opponent. The campaign was a bitter contest. The focus was not on issues, but on the candidates’ personalities. Jackson supporters renewed charges that Adams had made a “corrupt bargain” after the 1824 election. They also attacked Adams as an aristocrat, or member of the upper class. Adams supporters replied with similar attacks. They called Jackson a dangerous "military chieftain.” If Jackson became President, they warned, he could become a dictator like Napoleon Bonaparte of France.
Jackson won the election easily. His supporters cheered the outcome as a victory for the common people. By common people, they meant white people who worked for a living, including farmers and city
workers. For the first time, the politics of the common people were important.
Q SUMMARIZE
Why did Andrew Jackson win the election of 1828? Jacksonian Democracy
Like many who admired him, Jackson was born in a log cabin on the frontier. His parents had left Ireland to settle in the Carolinas. Both died before Jackson was 15. Jackson had to grow up quickly.
Although he was lean, he was a strong fighter. A friend who wrestled with him recalled, “I could throw him three times out of four, but he would never stay throwed.”
Always determined, Jackson showed his toughness at 13 when he joined the Patriots during the American Revolution. He was captured by the British while carrying messages for the Patriots. When a British officer ordered the young prisoner to clean his boots, Jackson refused. The officer took a sword and slashed the boy’s hand and face.
After the Revolution, Jackson studied law in North Carolina. He later moved to Tennessee and set up a successful law practice. Over time he became very wealthy by buying and selling land in Georgia and
Election of 1828
120°W
» This map shows the results of the 1828 presidential election. Synthesize How was the vote in each region influenced by the region’s economic interests?
6	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Art Projection
KEY
| Andrew Jackson I John Quincy Adai
•Massachusetts
x Rhode Island Connecticut New Jersey •Delaware Maryland
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
400 mi
Interactive Chart
©
£e Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 270	6.1 The Age of Jackson
Alabama. While still in his twenties, he was elected to Congress. He served for just a few years before becoming a judge and a major general in the Tennessee militia.
Jackson won national fame for his achievements during the War of 1812. He led American forces to a major victory over the British at the Battle of New Orleans. He was also known for his leadership during the Creek War. A group of Creeks, angered in part by white settlers moving onto their land, began to attack settlers. These Creeks massacred at least 250 people, including soldiers and their families, at Fort Mims, in present-day Alabama. Commanding an army sent to stop the attacks, Jackson’s victory at Horseshoe Bend forced the Creeks to give up vast amounts of land in what are now Georgia and Alabama.
Andrew Jackson was a complex person. He had led a violent and adventurous life. He was quick to lose his temper, and he dealt with his enemies harshly. When he became president, his opponents sarcastically called him "King Andrew.” Jackson intended to be a strong president by expanding the powers of the presidency. At the same time, Jackson's supporters admired his ability to inspire and lead others. They considered him a man of his word and a champion of the common people.
As Jackson traveled to Washington to be inaugurated, large crowds cheered him along the way. For the first time, thousands of ordinary people flooded the capital to watch the President take the oath of office. After Jackson was sworn in, the crowd followed the new president to a reception at the White House. One onlooker described the scene with amazement:
Country men, farmers, gentlemen, mounted and dismounted, boys, women and children, black and white. Carriages, wagons, and carts all pursuing [Jackson] to the President’s house.
—Margaret Bayard Smith, Tlia First Fatty Years ot
WaahiiKrtan Sea eatv
The crowds were so huge, the observer continued, that the President was “almost suffocated and torn to pieces by the people in their eagerness to shake hands.” Jackson’s critics said the scene showed that King Mob” was ruling the nation. Amos Kendall, a loyal Jackson supporter, viewed the inauguration celebration in a more positive way: “It was a proud day for the people. General Jackson is their own President.
» An artist drew this cartoon to criticize what he saw as Andrew Jackson’s hunger for power. Cite Evidence What features of this cartoon suggest that Jackson was hungry for power?
Interactive Chart
Causes of Jacksonian Democracy Andrew Jackson was elected in 1828 largely because white men without property could now vote. He drew much of his support from these people. In return, he promised to help less wealthy white men, and especially small farmers on the western frontier. The spread of political power to more people was part of what became known as Jacksonian democracy.
Effects of Jacksonian Democracy Jackson was the first westerner to occupy the White House. His election marked a shift of political power to the West. He was seen as a daring individualist. His image helped shape an American consciousness focused on individual freedom and daring.
Another effect of Jacksonian democracy was the growth in political parties and in citizen participation in the political process. It was one thing to make it legal for nearly all white men to vote. It was another thing to convince them to vote.
Jackson's Democratic Party introduced political campaigns that appealed to common people and their
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 271	6.1 The Age of Jackson
» A cartoonist drew this cartoon in 1877 to criticize the spoils system, which survived long after Jackson introduced it. Interpret How does the cartoon criticize the spoils system?
concerns. These campaigns motivated white men to cast their vote for the Democrats.
Id DRAW CONCLUSIONS Why was Andrew Jackson
seen as a champion of the common people?
The Spoils System
One of the biggest effects of Jacksonian politics was the development of the spoils system. After taking office, Jackson fired many government employees. He
replaced those employees with his supporters. Most 1 other presidents had done the same, but Jackson did it I on a much larger scale.	I
Critics accused Jackson of rewarding his supporters I instead of choosing qualified men. Jackson replied that giving government jobs to ordinary men would j prevent a small group of wealthy men from controlling the government. He felt that most Americans could fill government jobs. “The duties of all public officers are ... so plain and simple that men of intelligence may j readily qualify themselves for their performance,” he * said.
A
Jackson supporter explained the system another j way. “To the victor belong the spoils,” he declared. Spoils : are loot. The practice of giving supporters government j jobs became known as the spoils system. | M chfck understanding Why did Jackson adopt i
the spoils system?
ELPS

Although they had once been
friends and allies, President Andrew
Jackson and his Vice President, John Calhoun, were about to become fierce opponents. The issue that led them to quarrel was states’ rights, or the rights of states to powers independent of the federal government.
John Calhoun believed in nullification so strongly that he resigned as Andrew Jackson’s Vice President when Jackson opposed it.
ELPS READING 4.F.9
Locate the phrase government employees in the first paragraph. With a partner, discuss how the noun government acts as an adjective describing employees. Then locate three other phrases in the text that have nouns acting as adjectives. Help each other comprehend the meaning of each phrase. ASSESSMENT
| Interactive Flipped Video
1. Hypothesize about why expanding voting rights during the 1820s and 1830s also dramatically increased voter turnout.
Presidential Policies and Political Conflict
5.B, 7.A, 7.D, 10.A, 17.B
J
2.	Identify Central Issues What occurred that made Jackson’s backers believe that John Quincy Adams won the presidency as the result of a “corrupt bargain”?
3.	Summarize the views of the Whigs.
4.	Summarize the views of the Democrats.
5.	Draw Conclusions Today, it is illegal to fire a government worker because of whom he or she supported for the presidency, and government workers must take a civil service exam to be considered for a position. Why do you think these regulations became necessary?
A
Conflict Over States’ Rights The conflict over states’ rights divided the country along regional lines. The United States at the time was made up of three regions. The North included the New England and Middle Atlantic states. Manufacturing and trade were very important to the economy of the North. The West was the region we now know as the Midwest. Its economy was based mainly on farming to raise livestock and food crops. Finally the South consisted of today’s Southeast and South Central states. The South’s people relied heavily on farming to produce cash crops for export, such as cotton and tobacco.
Politically northerners generally favored a strong federal government, which they saw as necessary to promote manufacturing and trade. Southerners feared the domination of the North and national Policies that could hurt southern interests. Consequently, southerners tended to support stronger states’ rights. These differences often made it hard for people from the North and South to agree on political issues.
Westerners sometimes sided with the North and sometimes with the South. For example, westerners wanted internal improvements for transportation, which most northerners supported. Westerners also wanted to be free to move into new territories, which southerners also
» Objectives
Explain the issues of nullification and states’ rights.
Summarize arguments regarding the banking system.
Identify the economic problems Martin Van Buren faced.
Describe the election campaigns of 1840.
» Key Terms
states’ rights
nullification
Nullification Act
depression
Unemployment
caucus
nominating
convention John Calhoun Daniel Webster Martin Van Buren William Henry
Harrison John Tyler
PEARSON 1
realize
.ge of Jackson and Westward Expansion 272	6.1 The Age of Jackson
273
wanted. Some westerners supported slavery, while others did not. In general, westerners agreed with northerners about tariffs.
Anger Over Tariffs In 1828, with the support of then President John Quincy Adams, Congress passed the highest tariff in the history of the nation. Southerners called it the Tariff of Abominations.
An abomination is something that is wrong and evil. Just like earlier tariffs, the new law, which was passed before Andrew Jackson’s first term, protected manufacturers from foreign competition.
Most manufacturers lived in the North and were helped by the tariff. Southern planters, however, were hurt by it. Southerners sold much of their cotton to Britain and bought British manufactured goods in return. A high tariff would mean that southerners had to pay more for those British goods. Worse still, they feared that if the United States imposed a tariff on British manufactures, Britain could respond by imposing a tariff on American cotton. Many southerners thought the tariff was unconstitutional.
Debate Over Nullification A leader in the South's fight against the tariff was Vice President John Calhoun, whose home state was South Carolina. He claimed that a state had the right to nullify, or cancel, a federal law
» Trading ships brought southern cotton to England and finished goods back to the United States.
Interactive Map
that the state considered to be unconstitutional. This idea is called nullification. Calhoun believed that the states’ rights gave them power over the provisions of the Constitution.
He argued that states could reject federal laws that they thought violated the constitution, because the states had joined together to form the federal government based on their understanding of the Constitution.
Daniel Webster, a Senator from Massachusetts, disagreed. He made a speech in 1830 to the Senate attacking the idea of nullification. The Constitution, he said, united the American people, not just the states, as a nation. If states had the right to nullify federal laws, the nation would fall apart. The U.S. Supreme Court had also ruled against earlier attempts at nullification, arguing that the provisions of Article III of the U.S. Constitution gave federal courts, not states, the right to decide on the constitutionality of federal laws. President Jackson agreed with the views of Webster and the Supreme Court. Because Calhoun strongly disagreed with Jackson, he resigned from the office of Vice President. He was then elected as a senator from South Carolina. The debate over nullification would continue for years.
The Nullification Act Leads to Crisis Anger against the tariff increased in the South. Congress passed a new law in 1832 that lowered the tariff slightly. South Carolina was not satisfied. It passed the Nullification Act, declaring the new tariff illegal. It also threatened to secede, or withdraw, from the Union if challenged. Jackson was furious. He knew that nullification could lead to civil war.
To defuse the crisis, Henry Clay, now a senator from Kentucky, proposed a lower compromise tariff, which President Jackson supported. Jackson also asked Congress to pass the Force bill, which allowed him to use the army, if necessary, to enforce the tariff. Daniel Webster sided with Jackson on the Force bill but opposed Clay’s compromise tariff. However, Congress passed both the compromise tariff and the Force bill.
Faced with Jackson’s firm stand, no other state chose to support South Carolina. Calhoun supported the compromise tariff that Clay had proposed. South Carolina repealed its Nullification Act, and the Nullification Crisis passed. National identity had proven stronger than the claim of a single state.
However, tensions between the North and South would lead to increased sectionalism in the years ahead.
SUMMARIZE
Why did Webster and Jackson oppose nullification? The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
274	6.2 Presidential Policies and Political Conflict
i
or THE
OF THE UNITED STATES

n
BANK OF THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT
> • HoWs the government's - money
• Rays the government's bills
■
IWOWEY CREATOR
Issues paper money that people can use throughout the United States^ unlike state money
REGUtaTOR
•	Issues or redeems national money to keep economy stable
•	Monitors amount of money from state banks
COMMIT
BMSW
•Accepts deposits and makes loans
•Provides access to businesses and individuals at branches across the country
*
» The second National Bank was founded to help the federal government manage its income and expenses. Analyze Charts How was the Bank involved in the nation’s economy?

Interactive Chart
The Bank War
Another political battle President Jackson waged during his first term as President was one against the Second Bank of the United States. Like many westerners, he thought that the Bank was too powerful and needed to be eliminated. Jackson’s Democratic Party opposed the Bank. The Whig Party, however, supported the Bank. Whigs believed that the Bank was needed to regulate state banks' lending to prevent a buildup of debts that could not be repaid.
A
Controversial Bank The Bank of the United States had been a subject of dispute since its early days. The Bank had great power over the nation’s banking system because it controlled loans made by state banks. When the Bank’s directors thought that state banks were making too many loans, they limited the amount these banks could lend. The cutbacks angered farmers and Merchants who borrowed money to buy land or finance hew businesses. President Jackson and other leading Democrats saw the Bank as undemocratic. Although Congress created the Bank, it was run by private bankers. Jackson condemned these men as agents of “special privilege who grew rich with public funds. He especially disliked Nicholas Biddle, president of the Bank since 1823.
Biddle came from a wealthy Philadelphia family. He was well qualified to run the bank. Under Biddle, the
U.S. economy had experienced stability and prosperity. However, Biddle was arrogant and vain. Jackson felt that Biddle used the Bank to benefit the rich. He also resented Biddle’s influence over certain members of Congress.
The Bank Applies for Renewal Biddle and other Whigs worried that the President might try to destroy the Bank. Two Whig senators, Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, thought of a way to save the Bank and defeat Jackson in the upcoming election at the same time.
The Bank’s charter was not due for renewal by Congress until 1836. However, Clay and Webster wanted to make the Bank an issue in the 1832 election. They persuaded Biddle to apply for renewal early.
However, Clay and Webster wanted to make the Bank an issue in the 1832 election. They persuaded Biddle to apply for renewal early.
The Whigs believed that most Americans appreciated the role of the Bank in the nation’s prosperity. If Jackson vetoed the bill to renew the charter, they felt sure that he would anger voters and lose the election. Clay pushed the charter renewal bill through Congress in 1832. Jackson was sick in bed when he heard that Congress had renewed the Bank’s charter. “The Bank ... is trying to kill me,” Jackson fumed, “but I will kill it!”
Jackson Cuts Off the Bank In an angry message to Congress, Jackson vetoed the Bank bill. He gave two reasons for his veto. First, he said that the Bank was unconstitutional, even though in McCulloch v. Maryland the Supreme Court had ruled in the Bank’s favor. Like other Democrats, Jackson believed that the federal government could not charter a bank, because the Constitution did not explicitly give it the power to do so. However, the Supreme Court had ruled that the Constitution implicitly gave the federal government this right in the “necessary and proper clause.”
This clause states that the federal government has the power “To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the . . . Powers [already described], and all other Powers vested by this Constitution.” The Supreme Court had decided that the “necessary and proper” clause gave the government the power to charter a national bank. Jackson believed that only states had the right to charter banks.
Jackson also felt that the Bank helped aristocrats at the expense of the common people. He warned:
When the laws undertake ... to make the rich richer and the potent more powerful, the humble members of the society—the farmers, mechanics, and laborers—who have neither the
time nor the means of [getting] like favors for themselves . . . have a right to complain of the injustices of their government.
—Andrew Jackson, Veto Message, July 10, 1832
As planned, the Whigs made the Bank a major issue in the election of 1832. They chose Henry Clay as their candidate to run against Andrew Jackson.
When the votes were counted, however, they showed that Jackson had won a stunning election victory. The common people had surprised the Whigs by supporting Jackson and rejecting the Bank of the United States.
The Bank Loses Its National Role Without a new charter, the Bank would have to close in 1836. Jackson refused to wait. He ordered Secretary of the Treasury Roger Taney to stop putting government money in the Bank. Instead, Taney deposited federal money in state banks. They became known as pet banks because Taney and his friends controlled many of them. The loss of federal money crippled the Bank of the United States. Its elimination as a national bank was another effect of Jackson’s presidency. The end of the Bank's role in regulating lending contributed to an economic crisis that would have to be faced by the next President of the United States.
Without a national bank to regulate the country’s financial system, responsibility for regulating banks fell to individual states. The period from the late 1830s until the 1860s is known as the state banking era. During this time, each state set its own rules for banks.
Many banks issued loans in the form of paper money, and promised to redeem it with silver or gold. Because federal law defined the value of dollars in terms of silver and gold, state banks sometimes failed when they did not have enough silver or gold on hand to redeem the paper money they had issued.
fel RECALL What did Jackson do with the governments
money after he ordered that it should no longer be deposited in the second National Bank?
# ELPS
ELPS READING 4.F.10
With a partner, discuss what you already know about banks. Together, define the words bank, loan, borrow, lend, and deposit. Then read the text together.
jid Westward Expansion 276	6.2 Presidential Policies and Political Conflict
Economic Crisis and Political Changes
Following tradition, Andrew Jackson left office after two terms. Americans then elected Martin Van Buren as President. Although Van Buren did not have Jackson’s popularity, he was clever and intelligent. As President, however, Van Buren needed more than sharp political instincts.
The Panic of 1837 Two months after taking office, Van Buren faced the worst economic crisis the nation had known. After the Bank of the United States closed, state banks could lend money without limit. To meet the demand for loans, state banks printed more and more paper money. Often, they did not have enough gold or silver to back their paper money.
Before leaving office, Jackson was alarmed at wild speculation, or risky investment, in land. Speculators were borrowing more and more money to buy land and driving land prices up. To slow this process down, he ordered that anyone buying public land had to pay for it with gold or silver. Speculators and others rushed to state banks to exchange their paper money for gold and silver. Many banks had lent too much money. They did not have enough gold and silver and were forced to close.
The nation soon plunged into a deep economic depression, a period when the economy shrinks and many people lose their jobs. The depression lasted five years. During the worst period, 90 percent of the nation’s factories were closed. Unemployment was widespread. Hundreds of thousands of people were out of work.
Many Americans blamed Van Buren and his policies for the economic depression. Van Buren believed in laissez-faire economics—the idea that government should play as small a role as possible in the economy. As the depression wore on, Van Buren became increasingly unpopular. His opponents called him “Martin Van Ruin.”
Party Caucuses and Conventions By the time the next election for President occurred in 1840, Whigs and Democrats had developed more democratic ways to choose candidates for President. In the past, powerful members of each party held a caucus, or private meeting. There, they choose their candidate. Critics called the caucus system undemocratic because only a few powerful people were able to take part in it.
In the 1830s, each party began to hold a nominating convention, where delegates from all the states chose hie party's candidate for President. Party leaders might
» During the state banking era, Americans relied on currency issued by state or private banks. Money from banks with poor reputations might not be accepted by other banks or merchants. There were thousands of different kinds of money in circulation.
Interactive Timeline
still dominate a particular convention, hut the people could now have some influence in the nominating process. Also, state nominating conventions encouraged citizen participation in elections. Once citizens learned about the events of the convention, they would work for their party’s choices. Today, the major political parties still hold conventions.
Democrats Lose the Election of 1840 Although Van Buren had lost support, the Democrats chose him to run for reelection in 1840. The Whigs chose William Henry Harrison of Ohio as their presidential candidate and John Tyler of Virginia as their vice presidential candidate.
Harrison was known as the hero of the Battle of Tippecanoe, which was fought between the American military and a Shawnee-led alliance in 1811. To appeal to voters, the Whigs focused on Harrison’s war record. “Tippecanoe and Tyler too” became their campaign slogan. The Whigs created an image for Harrison as a “man of the people” from the western frontier. They presented him as a humble farmer and boasted that he had been born in a log cabin. In fact, the Whigs' candidate, Harrison, was a wealthy, educated man who, at the time of the campaign, lived in a large mansion.
Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
277	6.2 Presidential Policies and Political Conflict
The Whigs’ policies included creating a new Bank of the United States, improving roads and canals, and demanding a high tariff. However, Whig hopes were dashed when, soon after taking office, President Harrison died of pneumonia. John Tyler then became President. President Tyler failed to live up to Whig expectations. He opposed many Whig policies. In response, the Whigs threw Tyler out of their party just months after he took office.
U RECALL
How did President Jackson attempt to slow the land speculation that led to the Panic of 1837?
ASSESSMENT
1. Generate Explanations Why do you suppose Andrew Jackson supported Henry Clay’s
proposed compromise over nullification even though they had been enemies previously?
2.	Explain why John Calhoun and Daniel Webster had directly opposite views about nullification.
3.	Draw Conclusions What do you think happened to Secretary of the Treasury Taney and his friends who owned banks after the Bank of the United States was forced to close?
4.	Identify Central Issues Why did certain banks have to close during the Panic of 1837?
5.	Express Problems Clearly Why was it such a disaster for the nation when Andrew Jackson crippled the second National Bank?
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
6.2 Presidential Policies and Political Conflict
Native Americans on the Frontier
Native Americans and the
Frontier
A
History of Conflict and Prejudice On both sides, biases, stereotypes, and prejudices led to mistrust and hostility. White settlers saw Native Americans as dangerous and untrustworthy. Native Americans feared that settlers’ hunger for land could never be satisfied and that settlers meant to kill them off. These fears fueled many bloody conflicts.
Before the Revolution, the British had made peace with Native American groups by drawing the Proclamation Line of 1763 through the Appalachian Mountains, roughly along the frontier, or edge, of white settlement. The British forbade whites to settle west of this hne. The line gave Native Americans west of the line and east of the Mississippi River some protection.
Seeing the British as protectors, many Native Americans sided with them during the Revolutionary	Native American fears
were confirmed as more and more white settlers began moving into lands west of the Proclamation Line. After the war, Native Americans attacked white settlements in the new Northwest Territory. The Battle
279
5.G, 10.C, 18.A, 23.C
» Objectives
Describe the cultures of Native Americans between the Appalachians and Mississippi.
Explain the conflict over land occupied by Native Americans between the Appalachians and Mississippi.
Discuss the forced removal of Native Americans.
» Key Terms
frontier
Sequoyah Worcester v.
Georgia John Marshall Indian Removal Act Indian Territory Trail of Tears
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
c
of Tippecanoe was a major defeat for Native American leader Tecumseh and his forces during this time of unrest.
When conflict between Britain and the United States broke out again in the War of 1812, many, but not all, Native American groups again sided with the British. A group of Creek Indians in present-day Georgia and Alabama formed an alliance with both Tecumseh and the British. Meanwhile, other Creeks and the neighboring Choctaw people sided with the United States. As you have learned, forces led by Andrew Jackson defeated the Creeks allied with the British.
Tensions on the Frontier The Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, Seminole, and Cherokee nations lived in parts of what are now Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, and Tennessee. The Shawnee, Potawatomi, Sauk, and Fox nations lived in parts of present-day Michigan, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Wisconsin. Many hoped to live in peace with their white neighbors on the frontier.
Some tribes, like the Cherokee nation, had adopted European customs hoping to preserve their land. They created a legal system and government that blended European and Cherokee traditions. Others, like the Choctaw, believed they would be allowed to keep their
land because they had sided with the United States during the War of 1812.
In 1821, Sequoyah (suh KWOH yuh), a Cherokee man, created a writing system for his people. Using Sequoyah’s letters, Cherokee children learned to read and write. The Cherokees also published a newspaper.
The efforts of Native Americans to adopt European ways failed to end the conflict with white settlers. The Native Americans’ fertile land remained attractive to white settlers, and white settlers feared more violent conflict with Native Americans.
H GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
Why did tensions exist between Native American groups and white settlers?
Indian Removal
In the eyes of government leaders, Native Americans east of the Mississippi River stood in the way of westward expansion of the United States. At first, they aimed to convince Native Americans to rely less on hunting. They wanted them to start farming cash crops such as tobacco and cotton in addition to food crops. Government leaders thought that Native Americans would then sell any land that they weren’t farming to white settlers. While many Native Americans in the
I J
NewYork'------------rCA V^fgan Cerrito	\ LU*;/1,	, , ,
'	/ j <	)	Rhodejsland
Pennsylvaniaty Connecticut
Native American Groups, 1820
KEY
I
Native American territory Native American territory boundary U.S. national boundary U.S. state or territory boundary
is map shows the territories of several Native American groups in 1820. ;e Describe the location of each group on the map.
Interactive Map
r®"

The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 280	6.3 Native Americans on the Frontier
South did adopt cash-crop farming, they were not willing to sell their land. Meanwhile, prejudices on both sides stood in the way of white settlers and Native Americans living side by side.
Pressure on Native Americans Increases In 1825, President James Monroe had suggested a plan to move all Native Americans living east of the Mississippi to land west of the river. At this time, nothing came of the plan. Yet, year by year, the pressure on the Native Americans living along the frontier grew. Those in the North occupied land good for growing corn and wheat and raising livestock. Native Americans in the South occupied land that was good for growing cotton.
Around them, more and more white settlers arrived, many with enslaved African Americans, seeking land to grow cotton. Many white southerners were demanding that Native Americans be removed by force.
In 1825 and 1827, the state of Georgia passed laws forcing the Creeks to give up most of their land. Georgia then claimed the right to make laws for the Cherokee nation in 1828.
Worcester v. Georgia Decision Is Ignored
Georgia’s actions were challenged in two suits that reached the Supreme Court. The decision in the first suit went against the Cherokees. In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831), the Court refused to stop Georgia from enforcing its law. But in Worcester v. Georgia (1832), the Court ruled that Georgia had the right to enforce its law.
Chief Justice John Marshall wrote the Court’s majority opinion in Worcester v. Georgia. He quoted treaties that the United States had signed, guaranteeing certain territory to Native Americans. Under the Constitution, treaties are the supreme law of the land. Therefore, Marshall said, Georgia had no say over Cherokee territory, and Georgia’s action was unconstitutional.
President Jackson’s response to the ruling was stern. He wanted to remove Native Americans from their land, and was furious when he heard of the ruling in Worcester v. Georgia. “John Marshall has made his decision,” he is reported to have said. “Now let him enforce it!”
In the Nullification Crisis, Jackson defended federal power. In the Cherokee case, however, he backed states rights. He said that the federal government should not stop Georgia from controlling Cherokee lands, and he refused to enforce the Supreme Court’s decision. This wos a fateful step for the removal of Cherokees from their land.
A
Native American woman planting corn seeds. The Indian Removal Act In 1830, more than 100,000 Native Americans still lived east of the Mississippi River. At Jackson’s urging, the government set aside lands beyond the Mississippi River through the Indian Removal Act, which Congress passed in 1830. The law let the government give land west of the Mississippi to Native Americans in exchange for their lands to the east.
At the time of Worcester v. Georgia, Jackson was already applying this law. Jackson believed that moving Native Americans west would bring a permanent resolution to this conflict.
In the North, the Ottawa, Potawatomi, Sauk, and Fox peoples all signed treaties to move west to Indian Territories in what are now Kansas and Oklahoma. While most members of these groups moved west, a few stayed behind in what are now Michigan and Wisconsin.
The Indian Removal Act resulted in the forced migration of thousands of Native Americans from lands east of the Mississippi River. Among the groups affected included the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Cherokee, and Seminole. This human geographic factor from the 1800s has had an effect on contemporary events.
As a result of Jackson's policy, few Native Americans today live east of the Mississippi. Most live west of the Mississippi. As a result, that is where most
281	6.3 Native Americans on the Frontier
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
» At this gathering in 1833, the Potawatomi people signed a treaty with the United States agreeing to give up their lands and move west.
Choctaw in present-day Mississippi. The Trail of Tears brought them to a drier and less fertile region in present-day Oklahoma.
Interactive Map
events involving Native Americans take place in the contemporary United States.
U EXPLAIN
Why did Congress pass the Indian Removal Act? Southern Native
Americans on the Trail of Tears
Faced with threats of military action, most Native American leaders in the South saw no choice but to sign new treaties giving up their lands. They agreed to move to what was called the Indian Territory. Today, most of that area is in the state of Oklahoma.
The Choctaw The Choctaw signed the first treaty in 1830. The Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek stated that
the United States under a grant.
. . shall cause to be conveyed to the Choctaw Nation a tract of country west of the Mississippi river . . .
II,
Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek, 1830 The treaty allowed for Choctaw to remain in their homeland if they gave up their tribal organization and agreed to be governed as citizens of Mississippi. A few remained in Mississippi, but most agreed to leave to preserve their culture. Closely guarded by American soldiers, the Choctaw moved west between 1831 and 1833.
The federal government, however, did not provide enough tents, food, blankets, shoes, winter clothes, or other supplies. Heavy rain and snow caused enormous suffering. An army lieutenant wrote that one group “walked for 24 hours barefoot through the snow and ice” before reaching shelter.
The Chickasaw The Chickasaw people held out for payment for their lands east of the Mississippi before they would agree to move. Finally, in 1837, the United States government agreed to pay them $3 million for these lands.
Expecting to receive this money, the Chickasaw spent $500,000 to purchase land from the Choctaw in what is now Oklahoma. In fact, the U.S. government failed to pay the Chickasaw the agreed amount for 30 years. The Chickasaw set out for their new land. Along the way, as a result of hardships, many became ill and died.
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 282	6.3 Native Americans on the Frontier
Numbers Affected by Indian Removal
20
Shawnee* Potawatomi Sauk Choctaw Creek* Chickasaw Cherokee Seminole* and Fox*
Tribe
* For groups marked with an asterisk, the number of deaths during removal is unknown.
» Several groups affected by Indian removal are shown here. Identify Patterns Look at the groups whose number of deaths is known. About what proportion of those groups died during removal?
The Cherokee The Cherokee also tried to hold out. They were still on their land in 1836 when Jackson left office. A small group of Cherokee agreed to become citizens of North Carolina. As a result, they were allowed to stay. Other Cherokee hid in remote mountain camps.
Finally, in 1838, President Martin Van Buren forced the Cherokee who had not made agreements with North Carolina and those who were not in hiding to move. The United States Army forced more than 15,000 Cherokee to march westward. In the winter of 1838-39, they went to Indian Territory, patrolled by 7,000 soldiers. The Cherokee trekked hundreds of miles over a period of several months. Thousands perished during the march, mostly children and the elderly.
The Cherokee’s long, sorrowful journey west became known as the Trail of Tears. A soldier’s description helps explain why:
On the morning of November
17th, we encountered a terrific sleet and snow storm with freezing temperatures, and from that day until we reached the end of the fateful journey on March the 27th, 1839, the sufferings of the Cherokee were awful.
The trail of the exiles was a trail of death.
-—Memoirs of Private John G. Burnett, December 1890
The Seminole Resist In Florida, the Seminole Indians resisted the U.S. government. Led by Chief Osceola (ah see OH luh), they began fighting the United States Army in 1817. This conflict, known as the first Seminole War, ended in 1818. The second Seminole War lasted from 1835 to 1842. It was the costliest war waged by the government to gain Indian lands. In the end, after a third war ending in 1858, the Seminoles were defeated. The government forced the Seminole leaders and most of their people to leave Florida.
In their new homes in the Indian Territory, Native Americans struggled to rebuild their lives under very difficult conditions. Meanwhile, white settlers moved quickly into lands given up by Native Americans. While Jackson’s Indian removal cleared the area east of the Mississippi River for white settlement, settlers already had their eyes on lands west of the Mississippi.
B RECALL
Where was the land known as Indian Territory located? The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
283	Native Americans on the Frontier
a
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the reaction of Native American groups who sided with the Patriots during the Revolution only to find that, after the Revolution, whites were settling their land.
2.	Generate Explanations Explain why white settlers and Native Americans were typically unable to live peacefully in neighboring areas?
3.	Draw Conclusions How does Worcester v. Georgia illustrate that much of the Supreme Court’s power is based on the executive branch’s willingness to enforce its decisions?
4.	Summarize how Native Americans were removed from their land under the presidencies of Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren.
5.	Contrast the land the Choctaw and other Native American nations had to leave with the land they were allowed to live on in Indian Territory.
I f
Le Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 284
6,3 Native Americans on the Frontier

Settlers had been moving steadily westward from the Atlantic coast since the 1600s. In the early 1800s, the promise of new farmland and other work opportunities brought a flood of new migrants to the lands west of the Appalachian Mountains.
Westward Movement
Entire families gathered up all their possessions, including furniture and livestock, and made the long journey westward in their quest for a better life on the frontier.
Heading Into the West
Settlers took a number of routes west. People from important regions and places like New England, New York, and Pennsylvania pushed into a region northwest of the Ohio River called the Northwest Territory. Some traveled west from Albany, New York, along the Mohawk River, through the Appalachians, and then west along the plains south of Lake Ontario. Many then sailed across Lake Erie into Ohio.
Another well-traveled path was the Great Valley Road that ran southward from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, through Maryland and western Virginia. Some settlers would then continue south and west along the trail opened by Daniel Boone before the Revolution. Known as the Wilderness Road, it led through the Cumberland Gap into Kentucky.
Other settlers pushed west across the Appalachians to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. There, they loaded their animals and wagons onto flatboats, or flat-bottomed boats, and journeyed down the Ohio River into Ohio, Kentucky, Indiana, and Illinois. Flatboats were well suited to the shallow waters of the Ohio, which became known as the “Gateway to the West.” Even when carrying heavy cargoes, these barges rode high in the water.
Pioneers from Georgia and South Carolina followed other trails west to Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. Enslaved African Americans were forced to move with settlers or sold to new owners in
285
KM
Interactive Flipped Video 10.A, 11.B, 27.A, 27.B
» Objectives
Describe how settlers traveled west.
List the steps Americans took to improve their roads.
Explain how steamboats and canals improved transportation for Americans.
» Key Terms
flatboats
turnpikes
Lancaster Turnpike
corduroy roads
National Road
Erie Canal
Clermont
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
these territories. There, enslaved workers cleared fields and built plantations in the rich, fertile soil.
Before long, some western territories had populations large enough to apply for statehood. Between 1792 and 1819, eight states joined the Union: Kentucky (1792), Tennessee (1796), Ohio (1803), Louisiana (1812), Indiana (1816), Mississippi (1817), Illinois (1818), and Alabama (1819).
B COMPARE
How was travel during the early 1800s similar to and different from travel today? Building Better Roads
Settlers faced difficult journeys as they traveled to the West. Many roads were narrow dirt trails, barely wide enough for a single wagon. Trails often plunged through muddy swamps. Tree stumps stuck up in the road and often broke the wagon axles of careless travelers. The nation badly needed better roads.
Paying Tolls In the United States, as in Europe, private companies built gravel and stone roads. To pay for these roads, the companies collected tolls from travelers. At various points along the road, a pike, or pole, blocked the road. After a wagon driver had paid a toll, the pike
keeper turned the pole aside to let the wagon pass. As a result, these toll roads were called turnpikes.
Probably the best road in the United States was the Lancaster Turnpike. Built in the 1790s by a private company, the road linked Philadelphia and Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
Because the road was set on a bed of gravel, water drained off quickly. For a smooth ride, the road was topped with flat stones.
Other roads were more primitive. In swampy areas, roads were made of logs. These roads were known as corduroy roads because the lines of logs looked like corduroy cloth. Corduroy roads kept wagons from sinking into the mud, but they made for a very noisy and bumpy ride.
The First National Road Some states set aside money to improve roads or build new ones. Meanwhile, in 1806, Congress approved funds for the first national road-building project. The National Road was to run from Cumberland, Maryland, to Wheeling, on the Ohio River in western Virginia.
Work on the National Road began in 1811. Because of the War of 1812, it was not completed until 1818. Later, the road was extended into Illinois. As each new

New States, 1792-1819
Disputed between U.S. and Britain
Vermont
KEY
SIBM
Existing United States I | New states in the midwest [~ ] Frontier territories HB Disputed areas » By 1819, the United States had the dates of statehood of the new the western territories?
grown to 23 states. Analyze Maps What can states tell us about how settlers migrated into
Massachusetts
■^Rhode Island Connecticut New Jersey
Delaware Mainland Washington, D.C.
1
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 286	6.4 Westward Movement
section of road was built, settlers eagerly used it to drive their wagons farther and farther west.
BsuMMARIZE How did turnpikes and corduroy
roads make travel easier?
The Age of Steam
Whenever possible, travelers and freight haulers used river transportation. Floating downstream on a flatboat was both faster and more comfortable than bumping along rutted roads. It also cost a lot less.
Yet, river travel had its own problems. Moving upstream was difficult. People used paddles or long poles to push boats against the current. Sometimes, they hauled boats along the shore with ropes. Both methods were extremely slow. A boat could travel downstream from Pittsburgh to New Orleans in about six weeks. However, the return trip upstream took at least 17 weeks.
Steamboats Arrive Technology and innovations slowly began to effect transportation by making travel faster and cheaper. A new invention, the steam engine, started a new era in river travel. In 1787, John Fitch showed members of the Constitutional Convention how a steam engine could power a boat. He then opened a ferry service on the Delaware River. However, few people used the ferry, and Fitch eventually went out of business.
Inventor Robert Fulton may have seen Fitch’s steamboat while in Philadelphia. In 1807, Fulton launched his own steamboat, the Clermont, on the Hudson River. On its first run, the Clermont carried passengers from New York City to Albany and back. The 300-mile trip took just 62 hours—a record at the time.
A
Travel Revolution Fulton’s success ushered in the of steamboats. Soon, steamboats were ferrying passengers up and down the Atlantic coast. More important, steamboats revolutionized travel in the West. Besides carrying people, river steamboats gave farmers and merchants a cheap means of moving poods.
Because western rivers were too shallow for farger boats, Henry Shreve designed a flat-bottomed steamboat. It could carry heavy loads without getting stuck on sandbars.
Still, steamboat travel could be dangerous. Sparks from smokestacks could cause fires. High-pressure boilers sometimes exploded as steamboat captains raced each other in an effort to get to their destination
» Many pike keepers lived by the gate they tended and could be awakened in the middle of the night by travelers seeking to pay the toll and pass through.
Interactive Gallery
» Fitch’s steam engine was attached to a series of oars that paddled the boat through the water like a duck’s flippers. The boat could carry 30 paying customers across the Delaware River.
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 287	6.4 Westward Movement
first. Between 1811 and 1851, 44 steamboats collided, 166 burned, and more than 200 exploded.
H IDENTIFY
How did steamboats revolutionize travel in the West?
Canals Connect the
Country
Steamboats and better roads brought many improvements to transportation. But they did not help western farmers get their goods directly to markets in the East. To meet this need, Americans needed to modify the physical environment in a whole new way: they dug canals. A canal is an artificial channel filled with water that allows boats to cross a stretch of land.
The earliest American canals were no more than a few miles long. Some canals provided routes around waterfalls on a river. Others linked rivers to nearby lakes. By the early 1800s, however, Americans were building longer canals.
The Erie Canal In 1805, some New Yorkers developed a bold idea. They wanted to build a canal linking the Great Lakes to the Mohawk and Hudson rivers. Later known as the Erie Canal, this artificial waterway
would let western farmers ship their goods to the port of New York. It would also bring business to towns along the route.
To many people, the idea of such a canal seemed far-fetched. When Thomas Jefferson heard of the plan, he exclaimed:
Why, sir, you talk of making a canal
350 miles through the wilderness—it is little short of madness to think of it at this day!
—Thomas Jefferson to Joshua Forman of New York, 1809
New York's governor DeWitt Clinton ignored such criticism. He persuaded state lawmakers to provide money for the Erie Canal. Critics referred to the project as "Clinton’s Ditch.”
Work on the Erie Canal began in 1817. At first, thousands of workers dug the waterway using hand tools. To speed up progress, inventors developed new equipment. One machine, a stump-puller, could pull out nearly 40 tree stumps a day. In two places, the canal had to cross over rivers. Workers built stone bridges to carry the canal over the rivers.
» Steamboats became more powerful when their engines were used to turn paddle wheels. These wheels allowed larger boats to be built that could carry more passengers and cargo.
Interactive Gallery
©
and Westward
Expansion
288	6.4 Westward Movement
An Instant Success By 1825, the immense job was finished. On opening day of the Erie Canal, a cannon fired in Buffalo, New York. When the sound got to the next town along the route, that town fired a cannon. Town after town fired cannons, all the way to New York City. The thunderous salute took 80 minutes to complete.
The Erie Canal was an instant success. The cost of shipping goods dropped to about one tenth of what it had been before the canal was built. The canal also helped make New York City a center of commerce.
The success of the Erie Canal led other states to build canals. These canals created vital links between western farms and eastern cities, advancing the economic development of the United States. These links encouraged more growth, as people moved to the new cities in search of work.
B GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
How did the Erie Canal make New York City a center of commerce?
ELPS READING 4.G.2
After reading this passage, retell or summarize with a partner the purpose of the building of the Erie Canal. Be sure to explain what the builders of the canal hoped the canal would accomplish.
ELPS
» Locks allow canal boats to rise in steps. When a boat enters a lock chamber, the lower gates close, the upper gates open, and water flows into the chamber, raising the boat.
ASSESSMENT
Interactive Map
1.	Hypothesize why the Northwest Territory was not in what we call the Northwest today.
2.	Summarize the origin of the word turnpike.
3.	Compare westward travel today with travel in the early 1800s.
4.	Draw Conclusions The system of canals made it much easier to ship farm products to the East, which was beneficial to farmers in the West. How might this have affected westward expansion?
5.	Identify Central Issues How did improvements in transportation affect the number of states admitted to the Union? Explain.
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 289	6.4 Westward Movement
By the 1820s, white settlers had purchased and occupied much of the land between the Appalachians and the Mississippi River. Families in search of good farmland kept moving farther west. Many settlers, however, were not attracted to the Great Plains between the Mississippi and the Rockies. The plains were considered too dry to support farming. Instead, many of these settlers headed to lands in the Far West.
course, Native American groups had lived there for centuries. However, the United States and European nations gave little thought to Indian rights.
In 1818, the United States and Britain agreed to occupy Oregon Country jointly. Citizens of each nation would have equal rights there. Spain and Russia had few settlers there, so they withdrew their claims to Oregon Country.
B PREDICT CONSEQUENCES
How might the arrival of many U.S. settlers affect the agreement between Britain and the United States over Oregon Country?

The Far West Fur Trade
At first, only a handful of Europeans or Americans traveled to Oregon Country. Most were fur traders. Since furs could be sold for huge profits in China, merchants from New England stopped along the Oregon coast before crossing the Pacific. In fact, so many New England traders visited Oregon to buy furs that, in some areas, the Indian name for a white man was “Boston.”
Only a few hardy fur trappers actually settled in Oregon. These adventurous men hiked throughout the
region’s vast forests, trapping animals and living off the land. They were known as mountain men.
Mountain men were admired as rugged individualists. Even their colorful appearance set them apart from ordinary society. Their shirts and trousers were made of animal hides and decorated with porcupine quills. Their hair reached to their shoulders. Pistols and tomahawks hung from their belts.
A
Hard Life Mountain men could make fine profits selling their furs. They led dangerous lives, however. The long, cold winters demanded special survival skills. In the forests, mountain men had to watch out for bears, wildcats, or other animals that might attack. In winter, food was scarce. Faced with starvation, a hungry trapper would eat almost anything. “I have held my hands in an anthill until they were covered with ants, then greedily licked them off,” one mountain man recalled.
Trappers often spent winters in Native American villages. They learned trapping and hunting skills from Indians. Some mountain men married Indian women who helped the newcomers survive in the rugged mountains.
» Objectives
Explain the appeal of Oregon and the Far West.
Summarize how mountain men helped explore the Far West.
Describe the role missionaries played in Oregon.
Identify the hardships faced on wagon trains to the West.
Oregon Country
» Key Terms
Oregon Country mountain men rugged individualists Rendezvous Oregon Trail
In Search of New Territory
Americans first heard about the area known as Oregon Country in the early 1800s. Lewis and Clark had explored this area west of the Louisiana Purchase in 1805. Oregon Country was a huge region west of the Rocky Mountains. Today, it includes Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and parts of Wyoming, Montana, and western Canada.
Wild Country The geography of Oregon Country was varied. Along the Pacific coast, the soil was fertile.
Temperatures there were mild all year round, and rainfall was plentiful. Early white settlers found fine farmland in the valley of the Willamette River and the lowlands around Puget Sound.
Dense forest covered the Coastal Ranges and Cascade Mountains, which surrounded these lowlands. Beavers and other fur-bearing animals roamed these forests and the Rocky Mountains to the east. For this reason, fur trappers were the first settlers to head into Oregon Country.
Not all of Oregon Country attracted Americans. Between the Cascade Mountains and the Rockies is a dry plateau. This region attracted neither fur trappers nor farmers.
North America in 1830
PACIFIC
OCEAN
0	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
Florida
Gulf of Mexico Territory
KEY
f United States |	| U.S. territory
I | Unorganized U.S. territory Present-day state boundaries
» By 1830, the United States had a claim to part of the Pacific Coast. Analyze Maps Considering the distance of states and organized territories from Oregon Country, why might it have been difficult for the United States to control that region?
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Nations Compete In the early 1800s, four countries claimed Oregon. They were the United States, Great Britain, Spain, and Russia. Of
290
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 291
6.5 Oregon Country
» A rendezvous was a gathering for both business and pleasure. In the evening, trappers and traders would gather around camp fires and share stories.

Interactive Gallery
» James Beckwourth was a freed slave who became a fur trader and explorer. He guided settlers through the Sierra Nevada. Later, he worked for the army and ran his own hotel and store.
The Fur Trade During the fall and spring, mountain men tended their traps. Then in July, they tramped out of the wilderness to meet with fur traders. They headed to a place chosen the year before, called the rendezvous (RAHN day voo). Rendezvous is a French word meaning “get-together.
The first day of the rendezvous was a time for entertainment. A visitor to one rendezvous captured the excitement:
“[The mountain men] engaged in contests of skill at running, jumping, wrestling, shooting with the rifle, and running horses. . . . They sang, they laughed, they whooped; they tried to out-brag and out-lie each other in stories of their adventures.”
—Washington Irving, The Adventures ei Captain
Bonneville, U.S.A., in dun Reeky Mountains and the An
West, 1837
Soon enough, trappers and traders settled down to bargain. As long as beaver hats were in demand in the East and in Europe, mountain men got a good price for their furs. By the late 1830s, however, the fur trade was dying. Trappers had killed too many beavers, and the animals had become scarce. Also, beaver hats went out of style. Even so, mountain men found new uses for their skills. Some used their knowledge of the region to lead settlers along rugged mountain trails into Oregon Country.
Guides to the West In their search for furs, mountain men explored many parts of the West. They followed Indian trails through passes in the Rocky Mountains. Later, they used these trails to help guide settlers heading west.
Jedediah Smith led settlers across the Rockies through South Pass, in present-day Wyoming. Manuel Lisa, a Latino fur trader, led a trip up the Missouri River. In 1807, he founded Fort Manuel, the first outpost on the upper Missouri, in what is now North Dakota.
James Beckwourth, an African American freed from slavery, traveled west from Missouri to seek a new life. He worked as a fur trader and lived among the Crow Indians, who later accepted him as a chief. In his work as a guide, Beckwourth discovered a mountain pass through the Sierra Nevada mountain range that later became a major route to California.
INTERPRET
How did mountain men help open up Oregon Country to white settlement?
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
292	6.5 Oregon Country
ELPS READING 4.G.3
First, read with a partner the section titled A Hard Life . Next, you and your partner will write down two questions to ask about the reading. Share your questions and answer them together. The Oregon Trail
The first white Americans to settle permanently in Oregon Country were missionaries. In the 1830s, they began to travel west to bring their religious beliefs to Native Americans.
Missionaries Bring Settlers Among these early settlers were Marcus and Narcissa Whitman. In 1836, the couple married and set out for Oregon Country, where they planned to convert local Native Americans to Christianity.
The Whitmans built their mission near the Columbia River and began to work with Cayuse (kay-YOOS) people, setting up a mission school and a clinic. Soon, other missionaries and settlers joined them.
Missionaries like the Whitmans helped stir up interest in Oregon Country. Eager to have others join them, the missionaries sent back glowing reports about the land. People throughout the nation read these reports. By 1840, more and more Americans were making the long and difficult journey to Oregon Country.
As settlers spread onto Cayuse lands, conflicts arose. Worse, the newcomers carried diseases that often killed the Cay uses. In 1847, tragedy struck. A measles outbreak among the settlers spread to the Cayuses. Many Cayuse children died. Blaming the settlers, a band of angry Indians attacked the mission, killing the Whitmans and 12 others.
Wagons Ho! Despite these and other killings, pioneers still boldly set out for Oregon Country. They were attracted by tales of wheat that grew taller than a man and turnips five feet around. Stories like these touched off a race to get to Oregon Country. Americans called it "Oregon fever.” As Oregon fever spread, pioneers clogged the trails west.
Beginning in 1843, wagon trains left every spring for Oregon Country. They followed a route called the Oregon Trail. Families planning to go west met at Independence, Missouri, in the early spring.
By mid-April, the prairie outside Independence was packed with people and wagons. Somehow, the pioneers formed themselves into wagon trains. Each Toup elected leaders to make decisions along the way.
The Oregon-bound pioneers hurried to leave Independence in May. Timing was important. Travelers
» Settlers traveled in wagon trains for mutual assistance on their journey westward. A train would have about 20 to 40 wagons, although occasionally they could be much larger.

Interactive 3-D Model
had to reach the Oregon lowlands by early October before the snow fell in the mountains. This meant that pioneers had to cover 2,000 miles in five months. In the 1840s, traveling 15 miles a day was considered making good time.
Life in a Wagon Train On the trail, families woke at dawn to a bugle blast. Everyone had a job to do. Girls helped their mothers prepare food. Men and boys harnessed the horses and oxen. By 6 A.M., the cry of “Wagons Ho!” rang across the plains.
The wagon train stopped for a brief noonday meal. Then, it returned to the trail until 6 or 7 P.M. At night, wagons drew into a circle to keep the cattle from wandering.
Most pioneer families started the journey with a large amount of gear. As they crossed rivers and scaled mountains, they discarded belongings to lighten their wagons.
The trail west held many dangers. During the spring, travelers risked drowning as they floated their wagons across rain-swollen rivers. In summer, they faced blistering heat on the treeless plains. Early snows could block passes through the mountains. Getting the heavy wagons past these obstacles was hard work. The biggest threat was sickness. Cholera and other
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 293	6.5 Oregon Country
» The Oregon Trail was a 2,000-mile route that ran from the Missouri River to Oregon. Analyze Maps What were some of the difficulties that faced pioneers along the Trail?
Interactive Map
In the early 1800s, Texas was part of a Spanish province in the colony of New Spain, or Mexico. Texas had very few Mexican settlers. As a result, Spain had difficulty keeping order in the province, where settlers faced frequent raids by Comanche Indians. In 1820, Spain gave Moses Austin a land grant and permission to colonize Texas with 300 Catholic families. Although Austin died before he could set up a colony, his son, Stephen, took over the grant.
Often referred to as the “Father of Texas,” Stephen Austin was a major figure in the early history of Texas.
diseases could wipe out whole wagon trains. Because the travelers lived so close together, diseases spread quickly.
Meeting the Locals As they moved toward the Rockies, pioneers often saw Indians. Often, they traded with the wagon trains. Hungry pioneers were grateful for the food that the Indians sold in return for clothing and tools. A traveler noted:
“Whenever we camp near any Indian village, we are no sooner stopped than a whole crowd may be seen coming galloping into our camp. The [women] do all the swapping.”
S.
Unruh, quoted in The Plains Across: The Overland Emigrants and the Trans-Mississippi West,
1840-0860
Journey’s End Despite the many hardships, more than 50,000 people reached Oregon between 1840 and 1860. Their wagon wheels cut so deeply into the plains that the ruts can still be seen today.
By the 1840s, Americans outnumbered the British in Oregon Country. As you have read, the two nations had agreed to occupy Oregon Country jointly. Now many Americans wanted Oregon Country for the United States alone.
B IDENTIFY CAUSE AND EFFECT
How did missionaries attract settlers?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Explain why Britain and the United States agreed to occupy Oregon Country jointly.
2.	Generate Explanations How do you suppose the arrival of white settlers changed the environment of the Oregon Country?
3.	Contrast the lives of missionaries and mountain men in Oregon Country.
4.	Summarize the reason for the Cayuse attack on the Whitman mission.
5.	Identify Central Ideas Describe how settlers to Oregon Country made their trips from Independence, Missouri.
The Republic of
Texas
Americans Colonize Mexican Texas
In 1821, before Stephen Austin could establish his colony, Mexico won independence from Spain. Austin went to Mexico City to make sure that the new government still supported his land grant. The new leaders agreed to let Austin bring settlers to Texas. As Spain had been, Mexico was eager for settlers to develop the land and help control Indian attacks. At the time, only about 4,000 Mexicans lived in Texas.
By the 1820s, most of the good land in the United States was already occupied, and land there could be expensive. There was a scarcity, or short supply, of affordable, fertile land, or land that is good for growing crops. In Texas, by contrast, there was a large supply of fertile land that settlers could buy very cheaply. This pulled many Americans to settle beyond the frontier. The eastern portion of the Spanish province of Texas contained some very fertile soil. The physical geography of the land, especially the fertile soil, increased settlement to Texas, and agriculture remains important to this region in contemporary times.
Austin began to gather the 300 families who would settle his colony in Texas. Starting in late 1821, they began settling the colony. Many
KOI
Interactive Flipped Video » Objectives
Summarize the cooperation and conflict between American settlers in Texas and the Mexican government.
Explain how Texas gained independence.
Identify the challenges faced by the Lone Star Republic.
» Key Terms
dictator
Tejanos
Alamo
siege
Battle of San Jacinto annex
Stephen Austin General Antonio
Lopez de Santa Anna
Sam Houston
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 294	6.5 Oregon Country
295
settlers came from the cotton country of the Southeast. Some built large cotton plantations and brought in slaves to work the land. Austin’s land grant was located between the Colorado and Brazos rivers. He made sure to divide the grant so that each colonist purchased a parcel of land that bordered a river to allow access to water. Having access to water was vital for the settlers as well as their farms and livestock.
As Austin’s colony grew and succeeded, Mexico gave Austin several more land grants. Grants were also given to other entrepreneurs like Austin to attract settlers to Texas. Some of these settlers were from Mexico, but the largest number came from the United States. By 1830, about 20,000 Americans had moved to Texas.
B RECALL
What factors influenced where Americans settled in Texas?
» Americans were not the only immigrants to settle in Texas. Mexico also encouraged Europeans, like these Germans, to settle there. Infer How might the presence of so many people with cultures from outside Mexico have contributed to conflict in Mexican Texas?
Conflict With the Mexican Government
In return for land, Austin and the original American settlers agreed to become Mexican citizens and to worship in the Roman Catholic Church. Later American settlers, however, felt no loyalty to Mexico. They spoke little or no Spanish and most were Protestant. These and other differences led to conflicts between the settlers and the Mexican government.
Mexico Tightens Its Grip on Texas In 1830, Mexico barred any more Americans from settling in Texas. Mexico feared that the Americans would try to make Texas a part of the United States. It had good reason to fear this possibility. The United States had already tried twice to buy Texas from Mexico.
To assert its authority, Mexico began to enforce laws that had long been ignored. One was the law requiring Texans to promise to worship in the Catholic Church. Another law banned slavery in the region. American settlers resented these laws. The law against slavery was a serious problem for American settlers. Many American settlers had brought enslaved people with them and relied on enslaved workers to grow cotton. Settlers’ anger grew when Mexico sent troops to enforce its will.
In 1833, General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna gained power in Mexico. Two years later, he threw out the Mexican constitution and began governing the nation as dictator. A dictator is a ruler with absolute power and authority. Rumors began to spread that Santa Anna intended to drive the Americans out of Texas.
Texans Rebel With Santa Anna in power, Americans in Texas felt that the time had come for action. They had the support of many Tejanos (teh HAH nohs), people of Mexican descent born in Texas. Tejanos did not necessarily want independence from Mexico. However, they did want to be rid of the dictator, Santa Anna.
In October 1835, Texan settlers in the town of Gonzales (gahn Z AH les) clashed with Mexican troops. They forced the troops to withdraw. Inspired by that victory, Stephen Austin vowed to "see Texas forever free from Mexican domination.” Two months later. Texan settlers surrounded and then occupied the town of San Antonio. Determined to stamp out the rebellion Santa Anna marched north with a large army.
EXPLAIN
Why were U.S. settlers opposed 1° Mexican laws?
1 Interactive Map
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
296	6.6 The Republic of Texas
ELPS READING 4.G.4
Read the text with a partner. After every paragraph, pause to take notes with your partner by writing down the most important point you just read. Organize your notes as a bulleted list with an appropriate title. Independence for Texas
While Santa Anna was on the move, a group of Texans declared independence for the Republic of Texas on March 2, 1836. Sam Houston was given command of its army. Volunteers from the United States and from other nations, along with African Americans and Tejanos, joined the fight for Texan independence from Mexico.
Siege at the Alamo By the time Santa Anna reached San Antonio, the Texans had taken up positions in an old Spanish mission called the Alamo. There they waited for the Mexican attack.
The Texans were poorly equipped. Their supplies of ammunition, food, water, and medicine were low. Only about 150 Texans faced a force of 6,000 Mexican troops. Inside the mission, a young lieutenant colonel, William B. Travis, was in command. Among the volunteers at the Alamo were the famous frontiersmen Jim Bowie and Davy Crockett as well as several Tejano families, two Texan women, and two enslaved young African American men.
On February 23, 1836, Mexican troops began the siege of the Alamo. In a siege, enemy forces try to capture a city or fort by surrounding and often bombarding it. The Texan defenders barely held out as cannons pounded the walls. Travis knew that without help the defenders were doomed. He sent a messenger through the Mexican lines with a letter addressed “to the people of Texas and all the Americans in the World”:
I shall never surrender or retreat. . .
-1 call on you in the name of Liberty, of patriotism and everything dear to the American character, to come to our aid, with all [speed]. . . . Victory or Death. —William B. Travis. Letter, February 24, 1836
Travis also sent scouts to find more volunteers and food. About 40 men also managed to slip through enemy lines and joined the Texans in their fight inside the Alamo. Still, no large force arrived to help the defenders of the Alamo. For 12 days, the Mexican bombardment continued.
At dawn on March 6, Mexican cannons shattered the mission walls. Santa Anna now launched an all-
» Twelve feet high and two feet thick, the Alamo walls were good protection but unable to endure days of bombardment. Hypothesize How might the defenders’ confidence have changed during the siege?
©
Interactive Gallery
out attack. Thousands of Mexican soldiers poured over the broken walls, shouting “Viva Santa Anna!” (“Long live Santa Anna!”). Attackers and defenders battled in hand-to-hand combat. In the end, about 180 Texans and almost 1,500 Mexicans lay dead. Most of the few Texans who survived were executed.
The Battle of San Jacinto The fall of the Alamo sparked Texan cries for revenge. A few weeks later, Texan fury grew when Mexican troops killed several hundred soldiers fighting for the Texan cause after they had surrendered at Goliad. News of these events inspired new volunteers to join the Texan forces. Many came from the United States. Houston worked hard to turn the volunteers into an effective army. Even though the Texans were eager to attack, Houston held them back until the time was right.
Houston soon found the chance to attack Santa Anna. Scouts reported that the Mexican general and his army were camped near the San Jacinto (juh SIN toh) River. On the afternoon of April 21, 1836, the Texans caught their enemies by surprise. With cries of “Remember the Alamo!” and “Remember Goliad!” Texans charged into battle.
The Battle of San Jacinto lasted only 18 minutes. Although the Texans were outnumbered, the element
The Age of Jackson and
Westward Expansion 297	6.6 The Republic of Texas
of surprise was their greatest ally. They killed 630 Mexicans and captured 700 more. The next day, they captured Santa Anna, forcing him to sign a treaty granting Texas independence.
fi&2 RECALL What was the key to the Texan’s victory at
San Jacinto?
The Republic of Texas Is Born
In battle, Texans had carried a flag with a single star. After winning independence, they nicknamed their new nation the Lone Star Republic. A constitution was written using the United States Constitution as a model. In September 1836, voters elected Sam Houston president of the Republic of Texas.
The new country faced several serious problems, however. First, the government of Mexico refused to accept the treaty that Santa Anna had signed. Mexicans insisted that Texas was still part of Mexico. Second, Texas was nearly bankrupt.
Third, Comanche and other Indian groups threatened to attack small Texan communities. Most
Texans thought that the best way to solve these problems was to become part of the United States.
In the United States, people were divided about whether to annex, or add on, Texas to the Union. The arguments reflected sectional divisions in the country. White southerners generally favored the idea. Many northerners opposed it. The main issue was slavery. By the 1830s, antislavery feeling was growing in the North. Because many Texans owned slaves, northerners feared that Texas would join the Union as a slave-owning state, strengthening support for slavery in the U.S. government. In addition, President Andrew Jackson worried that annexing Texas would lead to war with Mexico. As a result, Congress refused to annex the Republic of Texas.
For the next nine years, leaders of the Republic of Texas worked to attract new settlers. The new Texas government encouraged immigration by offering settlers free land. During the Panic of 1837, thousands of Americans moved to Texas, where land was less expensive than in the United States.
Settlers also arrived from Germany and Switzerland. They helped the new nation grow and prosper. By the 1840s, about 140,000 people lived in Texas, including many enslaved African Americans and some Mexicans.
» After a brief yet bloody war, the Republic of Texas won its independence from exico. Analyze Maps Describe the movement of Mexican and Texan forces ;er the battle at the Alamo.
Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 298	6.6 The Republic of Texas
The Republic of Texas remained an independent country until the United States annexed it in 1845.
0OESCRIBE the three problems that faced the new
Republic of Texas.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Explain why Stephen Austin is often called the “Father of Texas.”
2.	Generate Explanations Why did some U.S. settlers disagree with Mexico’s insistence on enforcing the law banning slavery?
3.	Draw Conclusions Why did U.S. settlers not come to the aid of the fighters under siege at the Alamo despite William Travis’s plea for help?
4.	Identify Central Issues Why did the Republic of Texas remain an independent country for 9 years?
5.	Draw Conclusions Why do you suppose Texas is nicknamed “the Lone Star State”?
» The Lone Star flag was adopted by the Republic of Texas in 1839. It remains the Texas state flag to this day.
Interactive Timeline

The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
299	6.6 The Republic of Texas
Interactive Flipped Video

In the 1840s, New Mexico Territory included present-day Arizona, New Mexico, Nevada, and Utah, and parts of Colorado. This huge region was ruled by Mexico. This land was southwest of the unorganized territory belonging to the United States from the Louisiana Purchase.
A, 11.C
» Objectives
Describe life for the Spanish and Native Americans on the missions and ranches of California and New Mexico.
Analyze the relationship between the concept of Manifest Destiny and the westward growth of the nation.
List the causes and effects of the Mexican-American War.
Explain why the Mormons moved to Utah.
Describe how the gold rush affected California.
» Key Terms
New Mexico	Mexican Cession
Territory	Gadsden Purchase
Santa Fe Trail	forty-niners
self-sufficient	James Polk
vaqueros	Joseph Smith
Manifest Destiny	Brigham Young
Bear Flag Republic	Junipero Serra
Chapultepec	mission
Treaty of	
Guadalupe-	
Hidalgo	
cede	
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
» Native Americans did most of the labor on California missions, such as farming, cooking, and making everything the mission needed. Many Indians were overworked to the point of death.
Manifest Destiny in California and the Southwest
New Mexico Territory and California
Spain and New Mexico Territory The physical characteristics of this region vary depending on location. Much of this region is hot and dry desert. There are also forested mountains. In some areas, thick grasses grow. Before the Spanish arrived, the Zuni (ZOON yee) and other Indians farmed here using irrigation, while other Native Americans lived mainly by hunting and gathering.
The Spanish explorer Juan de Onate (ohnYAH tay) claimed the region for Spain in 1598. In the early 1600s, the Spanish built Santa Fe and made it the capital of the territory. By trading horses, fur, and wool, Santa Fe grew into a busy trading town.
Some Americans were eager to settle in New Mexico, which was thinly populated but had good physical characteristics, including many natural resources. Spain, however, would not let Americans settle in Santa Fe or anywhere else in the territory. Only after Mexico
c
PEARSON 1
SI realize
became independent in 1821 were Americans welcome there. William Becknell, a merchant and adventurer, was the first American to head for Santa Fe In 1821 he led some traders from Franklin, Missouri, across the plains to the New Mexico town. Other Americans soon followed Becknell’s route, which became known as the Santa Fe Trail
Spanish Settlements in California California, too, was ruled first by Spain and then by Mexico. Spanish explorers had reached California in 1542, long before the English settled in Jamestown.
In 1769, Captain Gaspar de Portola led an expedition up the Pacific coast.With him was Father Junipero Serra (hooNEE peh roh sehr rah). Father Serra built his first mission at San Diego. Later he and other missionaries set up a string of 21 missions long the California coast.
Each mission complex included a church and the surrounding land. Each became self-sufficient, producing enough for its own needs. Spanish soldiers built forts nearby.
Before the Spanish arrived, California Indians lived in small, scattered groups. As a result, they had little success resisting the Spanish soldiers who made them work on mission lands. Native Americans were forced to herd sheep and cattle and raise crops for the missions. They were also forced to live at the missions and practice the Roman Catholic faith. Many missionaries were dedicated to converting the Indians to Christianity. However, mission life was harsh. Indians were forced to give up their culture. Families were often separated, and people faced great distress. Thousands of Native Americans died from overwork and disease.
Life on Mexican Ranches In the 1820s, newly independent Mexico decided that California's economy was growing too slowly. Hoping to speed up growth, the government took land from the missions and gave it to wealthy individuals. These new landowners set up huge cattle ranches in California.
Native Americans did most of the work on the ranches as well, tending cattle and other animals. A new culture developed on the ranches—the culture of the vaqueros. Vaqueros were the Indian and Mexican cowhands who worked on the ranches. They were excellent riders and ropers, and their traditions strongly influenced later cowhands.
DESCRIBE
Who were the vaqueros? » This mission in San Diego was the first one built in California. Father Serra, shown in the sculpture, established this and many other California missions in the 1770s and 1780s.
300
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 301
6.7 Manifest Destiny in California and the Southwest
Manifest Destiny
In the mid-1840s, only about 700 people from the United States lived in California. Every year, however, more Americans began moving west. There were many economic, social, and political causes for this westward expansion. On several occasions, the United States government offered to buy California from Mexico. Some officials were eager to gain control of the ports at San Francisco and San Diego. Soon westward expansion became a major priority for the nation.
The Roots of Manifest Destiny There was another reason for wanting to purchase California. Many Americans saw their nation and its democratic government as the best in the world.
In the 1840s, a newspaper created the term Manifest Destiny to mean that the United States had the right to spread across the continent. Manifest means clear or obvious. Destiny means something that is fated to happen. The social roots of Manifest Destiny lay in the belief that Americans had the right and the duty of westward expansion to spread their culture across the continent all the way to the Pacific Ocean.
Americans who believed in Manifest Destiny thought that westward expansion would also open new opportunities for the United States economy. To many Americans, the fertile farmland and natural resources in the West were prime opportunities for economic growth.
Manifest Destiny and westward expansion had some negative effects, however. Many white Americans believed that they were superior to Native Americans and Mexicans. They used this belief to justify taking
Roots of Manifest Destiny
SOCIAL
•	Belief in America as an exceptional nation
•	Desire to spread American democracy and ideals
•	Belief that it was God's will for America to expand
. • View that white Americans were superior to Native Americans
POLITICAL
•	Monroe Doctrine warning against European colonization in the Western hemisphere
•	Desire to acquire Oregon from Britain
•	Desire to acquire Texas from Mexico
•	Success of Democrats, who supported expansion, over Whigs, who did not
» People had different reasons for supporting Manifest Destiny. Analyze Charts How might people’s values lead them to support Manifest Destiny?
[Interactive Map
lands belonging to people whom they considered inferior.
Polk and Westward Expansion The political roots of Manifest Destiny and westward expansion took hold during the election of 1844. The Whigs nominated the well-known national leader Henry Clay for President. Clay had opposed the annexation of Texas. The Democrats choose James Polk, a little-known candidate from Tennessee who wanted to add Texas and Oregon Country to the Union.
On Election Day, Americans showed their support for westward expansion by electing Polk president. He took office in March 1845 on a wave of support for expansion. Acting on his campaign promise, he took steps to gain control of Oregon Country. That move brought the possibility of war with Britain.
Polk did not really want to fight Britain, however. Instead, in 1846, he agreed to a compromise. Oregon Country was divided at latitude 49°N. Britain got the lands north of the line, and the United States got the lands south of the line. The United States named its lands the Oregon Territory. Later the states of Oregon (1859), Washington (1889), and Idaho (1890) were carved out of the Oregon Territory.
Texas proved a more difficult problem. The United States at first had refused to annex Texas. Then, in 1844, Texan president Sam Houston signed a treaty of annexation with the United States. However, the Senate again refused to ratify the treaty. Senators feared that annexing Texas would cause a war with Mexico.
Meanwhile, in a last effort to prevent annexation by the United States, Mexico offered to accept the , independence of Texas if Texas rejected annexation. |
ECONOMIC
•	Farmland for settlers
•	Access to rich resources
•	Land for Southern crops such as cotton
» The U.S.-Mexican War was fought over a vast amount of territory. Analyze Maps What were the similarities between American land and sea strategies?
--WUUIU nOt
_	awcvui. io pressu
the United States to annex Texas, he pretended th Texas might ally itself with Britain. The trick worke Americans did not want Britain to gain a footho. in Texas. In 1845, Congress passed a joint resolutic admitting Texas to the Union. This set the stage f( conflict with Mexico.
RECALL
Why did U.S. senators refuse to ratify the treaty to annex Texas? The U.S.-Mexican War
The annexation of Texas outraged Mexicans. They had not accepted Texan independence, much less annexation. They also worried that Americans might encourage rebellions in California and New Mexico as they had in Texas.
At the same time, Americans resented Mexico. They were annoyed when Mexico rejected President Polk’s offer of $30 million to buy California and New Mexico. Many Americans felt that Mexico stood in the way of the Manifest Destiny of the United States.
The Clash Begins A border dispute finally caused a war. Both the United States and Mexico claimed control over the land between the Rio Grande and
^oiicicu zsacnary ’Taylor to set up posts in the disputed area. Polk knew that the move might lead to war. In April 1846, Mexican troops crossed the Rio Grande and clashed with the Americans. At Polk’s urging, Congress declared war on Mexico.
Americans were divided over the conflict. Many people in the South and West were eager to fight, hoping to win new lands. Some northerners, however, opposed the war. They saw it as a southern plot to add slave states to the Union. Still, the war was generally popular. When the army called for volunteers, thousands of young recruits flocked to the cause.
------—un several rronts at
once. President Polk hoped that this strategy would win a quick victory.
General Taylor crossed the Rio Grande into northern Mexico. In February 1847, he met Mexican General Santa Anna at the Battle of Buena Vista. The Americans were outnumbered more than two to one, but they were better armed and better led. After fierce fighting and intense artillery fire, they forced Santa Anna to retreat. Meanwhile, a second army under General Winfield Scott landed at the Mexican port of Veracruz. After a long battle, the Americans took the city. Scott then headed toward Mexico City, the capital.
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 302 6.7ManifestDestinyinCaliforniaandtheSouthwest
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 303 6.7ManifestDestinyinCaliforniaandtheSoUthwest
A third army, led by General Stephen Kearny, captured Santa Fe without firing a shot.
Kearny then hurried on to San Diego. After several battles, he won control of southern California early in 1847.
Even before hearing of the war, Americans in northern California had begun a revolt against Mexican rule. The rebels declared California an independent republic on June 14, 1846. They nicknamed their new nation the Bear Flag Republic. Led by a young American officer, John C. Fremont (free mont), rebel forces then drove the Mexican troops out of northern California.
By 1847, the United States controlled all of New Mexico and California. General Scott, meanwhile, pushed closer to Mexico City. Blocking his way was the Mexican army in a well-protected position. At the Battle of Cerro Gordo, American troops went around this position to surprise the Mexican army. The Mexican army suffered heavy losses as it was forced to retreat. At the edge of Mexico City, Scott’s forces faced one last obstacle. Teenage Mexican cadets, or soldiers in training, made a heroic stand at Chapultepec (chahPOOL tuh pehk), a fort just outside the capital. Today, Mexicans honor those young cadets as heroes. At the battle’s end, however, the capital city was overtaken by the American forces
» Mexicans today remember the six young cadets who stood against U.S. forces by visiting this monument in Chapultepec Park, Mexico City.
When the American army captured Mexico City, the war was essentially over. Scott’s Mexico City campaign remains one of the most successful in U.S. military history. The war was a crushing defeat for Mexico. An outnumbered American army had caused significantly more casualties than it had suffered.
The War Ends The Mexican government moved to make peace with the United States. In 1848, Mexico signed the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo (gwah duh LOOP ay ih DAHL goh). Mexico suffered the effects of losing the war. It had to cede, or give up, all of California and New Mexico to the United States. These lands were called the Mexican Cession. In return, the United States paid Mexico $15 million and agreed to respect the rights of Spanish-speaking people in the Mexican Cession.
The war impacted the United States positively due to this new land. However, even more land was acquired later. In 1853, the United States paid Mexico an additional $10 million for a strip of land in present-day Arizona and New Mexico.
The Americans needed the land to complete a railroad. The land was called the Gadsden Purchase. With the Gadsden Purchase, many Americans felt that their dream of Manifest Destiny had been fulfilled.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why were Mexicans worried about the annexation of Texas by the United States?
Settling the Mexican Cession
Winning the U.S.-Mexican war had positive effects on westward expansion of the United States, which ushered in a whole new era of growth. New Mexico Territory, now the southwestern part of the United States, came to be known as the Southwest. After 1848, English-speaking settlers flocked to the Southwest. As the population of the country increased and affordable land in the east became scarce, more people decided to move. Americans migrated west for many reasons, from religious freedom to economic opportunities. The largest group of settlers to move into the Mexican Cession was the Mormons.
The Mormons Move West Mormons belonged to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. The church was founded by Joseph Smith in 1830. Smith, a farmer in upstate New York, attracted many followers to his new faith. Smith was an energetic, popular man.
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 304
6.7 Manifest Destiny in California and the Southwest
» By 1848, the United States extended from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean. Analyze Maps What was the impact of the U.S.-Mexican War on the growth of the United States?
Some of his teachings were different from other Christian churches’ teachings. These new teachings angered many non-Mormons, who forced the Mormons to leave New York.
The Mormons moved west and, in the 1840s, built a community called Nauvoo on the banks of the Mississippi River in Illinois. Once again, the Mormons and their neighbors clashed. In 1844, an angry mob killed Joseph Smith, and Brigham Young was chosen as their new leader.
A
New Home in Utah Young sought a place where Mormons would be safe from persecution. He had read about a valley between the Rocky Mountains and the Great Salt Lake in Utah. He hoped that this isolated valley might make a good home for the Mormons. In 1847, Young led an advance party into the valley of the Great Salt Lake. Soon, waves of Mormon families J followed. For several years, Mormon wagon trains I Juggled across the plains and over the Rockies to ' Utah. Once there, they had to learn how to survive in i the desert climate. Human geographic factors played an important role in this adaptation. Young planned an
ligation system to bring water to farms.
He also drew up plans for a large city, called Salt Lake City, to be built in the desert. The Mormon Wlements in Utah grew quickly. Congress recognized
Brigham Young as governor of the Utah Territory in 1850. Eventually, in 1896, Utah became a state.
The California Gold Rush Begins While the Mormons were making the long trek to what would become Utah, thousands of other Americans were racing even farther west to California. The great attraction came from a unique geographic feature of the land—gold.
In 1848, John Sutter was having a sawmill built on the American River, north of Sacramento, California. Sutter had hired James Marshall to supervise the job. Early on January 24, Marshall set out to inspect a ditch his crew was digging. He later recalled the events of that day:
As I was taking my usual walk, . . . my eye was caught with the glimpse of something shining in the bottom of the ditch. ... I reached my hand down and picked it up; it made my heart thump, for I was certain it was gold.
—James Marshall, quote in Hutchings’ Illustrated
California Magazine, 1857-1858
At first, Sutter tried to keep the news a secret. But within a few days, news reached San Francisco that
The
of Jackson and Westward Expansion
6.7 Manifest Destiny in California and the Southwest
gold had been found at Sutter’s Mill. Carpenters threw down their saws. Bakers left bread in their ovens. Schools emptied as teachers and students joined the rush to the gold fields.
The news spread across the United States and around the globe. Thousands of Americans caught “gold fever.” People from Europe, China, Australia, and South America joined in the great gold rush. More than 80,000 people made the long journey to California in 1849. They became know as forty-niners a nickname created in reference to the year they arrived.
Very few miners actually struck it rich. Many went broke trying to make their fortunes in the gold fields. Still, although many miners left the gold fields, they stayed in California. In time, they found jobs or took up farming.
Statehood for California The gold rush brought big changes to California. Almost overnight, San Francisco grew from a sleepy town to a bustling city, as newcomers poured in from all over the world. In the gold fields, towns sprang up just as quickly Greed led some forty-niners into crime. Murders and robberies plagued many mining camps.
Californians soon realized that they needed a strong government to stop such lawlessness. In November of 1849, they drafted a state constitution. They then asked to be admitted to the Union. Their request caused an
uproar in the United States. Many people wanted to know whether the new state would allow slavery. After a heated debate, California was admitted to the Union in 1850 as a free state. This was not the end of the issue. The question whether new states could allow slavery would end up causing bitter disagreements over the next ten years.
B EXPLAIN
why the Mormons had to leave New York and were persecuted on their journey to Utah.
The Effects of Migration to California
Westward expansion had many effects on the cultures and peoples of California. The gold rush brought diverse groups of people to the West.
A
Mix of Cultures Most of the newcomers were white Americans from the East. However, California’s mining camps included African Americans who had run away from slavery in the South, free African Americans, and Native Americans. There were also people from Hawaii, China, Peru, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Ireland, and Australia. Not all groups fared well, however. Before the gold rush, California’s population had included large numbers of Mexicans. Mexican
THE GROWTH OF SAN FRANCISCO "
60 50 -o S 40	800 PEOPLE	57,000
-3 0 I- 0	top} SEEKERS	■ A	
s j 20		
Q. O Q.
10 ■H| gEAW/ .... ,. .... ■ 25,000 36,000 PEOPLE 0	1848	1849	1852	1860
» The Gold Rush caused San Francisco to transform from a small port town into a major city. Analyze Charts How did immigration and migration impact the settlement of San Francisco?
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 306	6.7 Manifest Destinyin California and the Southwest
Americans faced serious hardships. During the 1850s and 1860s, many lost land that their families had owned for generations.
Native Americans fared even worse. Many were driven off the lands where they lived. Without any means to earn a living, large numbers died of starvation or disease brought by the newcomers. Still others were murdered. In 1850, about 100,000 Indians lived in California. By the 1870s, the state’s Indian population had dropped to 17,000.
The physical characteristics of California attracted the first settlers. Lured by the tales of a “mountain of gold,” thousands of Chinese immigrants sailed across the Pacific to California. At first, the Chinese were welcomed because California needed workers. When the Chinese staked claims in the gold fields, however, white miners often drove them off. Despite the harsh treatment, many Chinese Americans stayed in California. Their contributions helped the state to grow. They shaped the environment by draining swamplands and digging irrigation systems to turn dry land into fertile farmland.
Free blacks, too, joined the gold rush in California, hoping to strike it rich. Some became well-off by running businesses that contributed to the economy. In fact, by the 1850s, California had the richest African American population of any state. Yet, African Americans faced discrimination and were denied certain rights.
Changes to the Region In spite of these problems, California continued to grow and prosper. Settlers from other states and immigrants from all over the world kept arriving. With their diverse backgrounds, the newcomers added to California’s unique human characteristics. That is, the mix of people added to the identity of California as a place. The economy grew as commerce and mining expanded, and farms grew to feed the settlers. Cities and roads grew to accommodate the increase in people and goods. By 1860, the state s population was about 300,000.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did so many Native Americans die of disease as newcomers moved westward?
» By 1860, San Francisco was a well-established city, and California was a growing state.
Interactive Gallery
ASSESSMENT
©
1.	Contrast the treatment of Native Americans at most missions with how one would expect the missionaries to treat others.
2.	Summarize the justifications Americans used to support the idea of Manifest Destiny.
3.	Generate Explanations Briefly explain why and how the United States won the Mexican-American War.
4.	Draw Conclusions Why do you suppose Brigham Young chose the isolated valley of the Great Salt Lake as a new home for the Mormons?
5.	Explain why the Native American population in California decreases dramatically in the mid-1800s?
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 307 6.7ManifestDestinyinCaliforniaandtheSouthwest
TEKS ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare Effects of Political Factors Compare the effects of political factors on slaves and free blacks.
Write a paragraph comparing how the experiences of free African Americans and enslaved African Americans differed from white men when it came to expanded suffrage in the early 1800s. Consider what voting rights enslaved African Americans had, how voting rights changed for free African Americans by 1830, and how the voting rights of free African Americans differed from the rights of white men in New York. 7.B
2.	Explain Origin and Development of Political Parties
Explain the origin and development of American political parties. Write a paragraph explaining the origin and development of new political parties in the 1830s.
Explain how the election of 1824 contributed to the rise of new political parties, what parties developed and who led them, and how the new parties differed in what they supported. 5.C
3.	Identify Political Party Points of View Identify different points of view of political parties on important historical issues. Write a paragraph identifying the points of view the Whig Party and the Democratic Party held on major issues. Answer the following questions: What position did the Whigs take on internal improvements? How did the Whigs and the Democrats differ in their feelings about tariffs? What can you conclude from these positions about each party’s point of view on the government’s role in the nation’s economy? 21 .A
4.	Summarize Arguments About Tariffs Create an oral presentation summarizing arguments regarding the Tariff of 1828 and analyzing the tariff’s effect on the North and the South. Write a speech about the tariff of 1828 that you will deliver in Congress as a senator from a southern state. Express your state’s strong opposition to the protective tariffs and explain the reasons for your state’s position on this issue. 5.B, 7.A, 30.D
5.	Describe Environmental Interaction Describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the nineteenth century. Write a paragraph describing how Chinese immigrants interacted with the environment in California. Consider the experiences of Chinese miners and
how Chinese settlers shaped the environment of California. 11.C
6.	Identify Congressional Conflicts and Compromises
Identify the provisions of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster in the Nullification Crisis. Write a paragraph identifying the details of the conflict over tariffs that led to the Nullification Crisis and comparing the roles played by John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster in this conflict. In a second paragraph, identify the provisions of the compromise that Congress reached to resolve the Nullification Crisis and the roles of these three men in that compromise. Explain what nullification is; explain how nullification was connected to conflict over the tariffs of 1828 and 1832; identify the details of that conflict and the provisions, or terms, of the compromise that Congress reached; and identify the roles that Calhoun, Webster, and Clay each played in the conflict and the compromise. 7.D
7.	Analyze Contributions of Mormons to Westward Expansion Describe the causes and effects of westward expansion, and analyze the contributions of people of various religious groups to our national identity. Write a paragraph analyzing the contribution of the Mormons in settling Utah. Explain who the Mormons were, why they moved west, and the role Brigham Young played in settling Utah. 1.A, 23.D
8.	Analyze California Gold Rush Describe the causes and effects of westward expansion by analyzing the effects of human geographic factors on major historical events, such as the California gold rush. Using the quotation below and other sources, write
a paragraph describing the human geographic factor driving the California gold rush and the gold rush’s effect on westward expansion. Consider why the event described in the quotation is significant, what human geographic factor caused people to rush to California, and the effect of the California gold rush on migration to California. 1.A, 10.C
As I was taking my usual walk, ... my eye was caught with the glimpse of something shining in the bottom of the ditch. . . . I reached my hand down and picked it up; it made my heart thump, for I was certain it was gold.
—Janies Marshall,, quote in Hutchings1 Illustrated California Magazine, 1857-4858
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 308
pm'.hk.
<)( L\\
The Election of 1828
Oregon Country \
(Claimed by Britain and the United Starters)
MEXICO
Gutflof Mexii
KEY
M
Andrew Jackson B Quincy Adams 4£IOm 4<J0 km
Albers Ccr’K Equal-Area Projection
r
9.	Identify Racial and Ethnic Groups Identify selected racial and ethnic groups that settled in the United States, and explain their reasons for immigration. Write a paragraph identifying the racial and ethnic groups that settled in California in the years after 1848 and their reasons for coming. Consider migrants from within the United States and immigrants from other countries and the reasons they came to California. 23.A
10.	Describe Expanded Suffrage Describe the causes and effects of the Age of Jackson by explaining the impact of the election of Andrew Jackson, including expanded suffrage. Use the map above and other sources to write a paragraph describing the role increased suffrage played in Andrew Jackson’s victory in the presidential election of 1828 and how his election led to the growth of Jacksonian democracy during the Age of Jackson. Explain what the map indicates about which parts of the country supported Andrew Jackson in the election, describe how changes in suffrage help explain what the map shows about voting patterns, and describe the impact of Jackson’s election on the spread of Jacksonian democracy. (See map above.) 1.A, 5.F
11.	Explain States’ Rights Explain the causes of the Civil War, including states’ rights. Write a paragraph explaining how the issue of states’ rights affected the nation during the Age of Jackson. Explain what states’ rights are, why many southerners supported states’ rights, and how and why the principle of states’ rights divided the nation and threatened conflict. 8.B
12.	Explain Constitutional Issues in Nullification Crisis Explain constitutional issues arising over the issue of states’ rights, including the Nullification Crisis. Write a paragraph explaining the constitutional arguments for and against the idea that states’ rights include nullification of federal laws. Explain John C. Calhoun’s point of view on these issues and how Daniel Webster’s point of view differed from Calhoun’s. 17.B
13.	Analyze Leadership Qualities Analyze the leadership qualities of elected leaders of the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing President Andrew Jackson’s and President Martin Van Buren’s leadership qualities before and during the Panic of 1837. Consider what Andrew Jackson did to contribute to the Panic of 1837 and why people blamed Martin Van Buren and his policies for the length and depth of the depression. 22.A
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 309
14.	Summarize Arguments About Banking
System Summarize arguments regarding the banking system. Using the quotation below and other sources, write a paragraph summarizing Andrew Jackson’s opposition to the Second Bank of the United States and Whig Party members’ support for the Bank. Explain why Jackson disliked the Bank, including the reasons he gives in the quotation and arguments made by the Whig Party in support of the Bank. 5.B
When the laws undertake ... to make the rich richer and the potent more powerful, the humble members of the society—the farmers, mechanics, and laborers—who have neither the time nor the means of [getting] favors for themselves . . . have a right to complain of the injustices of their government.
—President Andrew Jackson, Bank Veto Message, 1832
15.	Identify Conflict Resolution Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial groups were resolved. Write a paragraph identifying why conflicts existed between Native Americans and white settlers on the frontier and how the Cherokee attempted unsuccessfully to live in peace. Identify why tensions existed between Native Americans and white settlers on the frontier, how the Cherokee changed their way of life in an attempt to end the conflicts and keep their land, and why these efforts proved unsuccessful. 23.C
16.	Analyze Effect of Worcester v. Georgia Analyze the reasons for the removal and resettlement of the Cherokee Indians during the Jacksonian Era, including Worcester v. Georgia and President Andrew Jackson’s response to the Supreme Court’s ruling. Write a paragraph analyzing the role of Worcester v. Georgia in the removal of the Cherokee from their lands. Describe the issue that brought the case to the Supreme Court, summarize the Court’s ruling, and explain President Andrew Jackson’s response to the ruling. 5.G, 18.A
17.	Analyze Indian Removal Act Analyze the reasons for the removal and resettlement of the Cherokee Indians during the Jacksonian Era, including the Indian Removal Act. Write a paragraph analyzing the impact of the Indian Removal Act. Consider the provisions of the Indian Removal Act, what effect the act had on Native Americans living east of the Mississippi River, and the effect Jackson hoped the act would have on the conflict over Worcester v. Georgia. 5.G
18. Identify Age of Jackson Create an oral presentation to identify the Age of Jackson as a major era in U.S. history. Create an oral presentation that identifies events, issues, and other characteristics that made the Age of Jackson a distinct period in U.S. history. Consider political developments such as expanded suffrage and the growth of political parties, political conflicts such as the Nullification Crisis and the conflict over the Second Bank of the United States, and issues surrounding the forced migration of Native Americans living east of the Mississippi River. 1.A, 30.D
19. Explain Effects of Innovations Explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations, such as the steamboat. Write a paragraph explaining how the invention of the steamboat started a new era in river travel. Consider how the technological innovation of using a steam engine to power boats made river travel faster and cheaper and the roles played by John Fitch, Robert Fulton, and Henry Shreve in developing these new technologies and innovations. 27.A
20. Analyze Impact of Transportation Systems Analyze
the impact of transportation systems on the growth and development of the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing how the Erie Canal and other canal systems contributed to the growth and development of the United States. Consider how the Erie Canal influenced the building of more canals, how these canal systems contributed to economic development, and how these canal systems contributed to the population growth. 27.B
21
Pose and Answer Questions About Geographic Distributions and Patterns Describe the effects of westward expansion by posing and answering questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on charts. Pose and answer questions about the geographic distributions and patterns shown on the chart below. Write and answer at least two questions. Consider questions such as the following: What conclusion can you draw about migration to Ohio and Illinois between 1810 and 1840? How might the Erie Canal have contributed to the population patterns shown for Ohio and Illinois? (See chart below.) 1.A, 29.J
State Populations, 1810-1840
STATE | POPULATION, 1810 I POPULATION, 1840
New York
Ohio
Illinois
Louisiana
Tennessee
959,049
230,760
12,282
76,556
261,727
2,428,921
1,519,467
476,183
352,411
829.210
22. Analyze Trail of Tears Analyze the removal and resettlement of Cherokee Indians during the Jacksonian Era, including the Trail of Tears, by using appropriate mathematical skills to interpret social studies information on a graph. Use the graph above and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing the effects of the Trail of Tears on the Cherokee. Answer the following questions: What was the Trail of Tears? According to the graph, about how many Cherokee were affected by removal? Based on the figures in the graph, what proportion of the Cherokee who were removed died along the way? What conditions led to the high death rate during removal? (See graph above.) 5.G, 29.C, 29.H
23. Describe Positive Consequences of Human
Modification of Physical Environment Describe the positive consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States, including the effect on economic activity. Write a paragraph describing the economic benefits of the Erie Canal. Consider the effect of the canal on shipping costs and on New York City. 11 .A, 11 .B
24.	Analyze Effects of Physical Geography Analyze the effects of physical geographic factors on major historical events in the United States, including how physical characteristics of the environment influenced economic activities in Oregon Country during the nineteenth century. Write a paragraph analyzing how the physical geography of Oregon Country attracted farmers and fur trappers. Consider what the geography of the region was like, what characteristics of the geography appealed to farmers, what characteristics of the geography appealed to fur trappers, and why the plateau region did not appeal to farmers or fur trappers. 10.C, 11.A
25.	Analyze Geographic Effects Analyze the effects of physical and geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing how the physical geography of Texas attracted settlers in the 1820s and how the region’s physical characteristics still influence human geography today. Consider why settlers in the 1820s were willing to to move beyond the U.S. frontier and settle in Texas; the physical characteristics of the eastern portion of Texas that appeal to farmers, both historically and today; and the growth in the American population of Texas during the 1820s. 10.C
Source: U.S. Censuses of Population and Housing
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
310
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 311
Growth ot the United States to 1853
i A
Identify Regions of Importance Identify areas that were acquired to form the United States, including the Louisiana Purchase, and locate regions of importance in the United States during the nineteenth century, including Oregon Country. Use the map above and other sources to write a paragraph identifying where Oregon Country was located in relation to the Louisiana Purchase and explaining its appeal to settlers. Use the map above to locate Oregon Country relative to the Louisiana Purchase, explain how Americans first heard about Oregon Country, identify what present-day states and regions occupy land that was once Oregon Country, and explain why white settlers moved past the Louisiana Purchase lands to Oregon Country in the 1820s. (See map above.) 6.E, 10.A
Compare Places and Regions Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical characteristics. Write a paragraph comparing the physical characteristics of the New Mexico Territory and Oregon Country. Consider how places within the regions differed in physical characteristics and how the two regions were similar and different. 10.B
28.	Explain Roots of Manifest Destiny Explain the political, economic, and social roots of Manifest Destiny. Write a paragraph explaining the roots of Manifest Destiny. Explain what Manifest Destiny means and describe its social, economic, and political roots. 6.B
29.	Analyze Manifest Destiny and Westward Growth Identify the major eras in U.S. history through 1877, including westward expansion, and analyze the relationship between the concept of Manifest Destiny and the westward growth of the nation. Use the map above and other sources to write a paragraph identifying the era of westward expansion and analyzing how Manifest Destiny and westward expansion were related. Use the map to identify the era of westward expansion by listing the order and dates of major expansion and indicate the relationship between Manifest Destiny and westward expansion. (See map above.) 1.A, 6.C
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 312
30. Explain Causes of War Explain the causes of the U.S.-Mexican War. Write a paragraph explaining the causes of the war between the United States and Mexico. Consider the long-term causes of the war and the immediate causes of the war. 6.D
31. Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: Why do people move? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
'he Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
313
1 During the presidency of Andrew Jackson, suffrage, or the right to vote, expanded in the United States. What impact did this have on American elections?
A
As more Americans gained the right to vote, fewer of them turned out for important elections. B
As more Americans gained the right to vote, the percent of eligible voters who turned out for elections rose. C
As more Americans gained the right to vote, states that allowed only landowners to vote were forced to change their laws. D
Women, Native Americans, and African Americans boycotted national elections until voting rights were extended to all U.S. citizens. The Constitution divides power between the states and federal government.
1814-1815
At the Hartford Convention, opponents of the War of 1812 insist that states have the right to secede.
Kentucky and Virginia claim that states can nullify laws deemed unconstitutional.
South Carolina claims the right to nullify tariffs, but it backs down when President Jackson threatens to use force against it.
What constitutional right did South Carolina attempt to claim in 1832? F the right to nullify federal tariffs G the right to secede from the Union H the right to tax the Second National Bank J the right to control the power of the federal government
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 314
I I
Access additional practice questions
3 Numbers Affected by Indian Removal
Examine the graph above. Based on the number of known deaths during the forced Indian removal, what statement below best describes the Cherokee “Trail of Tears”?
A
The Cherokees lost fewer members during the forced march than the Choctaws. B
Almost a third of all Cherokees who were forced to move west died during the journey. C
The Cherokees were the largest nation forced to move west under the Indian Removal Act. D
The Creeks suffered more deaths during the removal than the Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Cherokees combined. 4	Christian missionaries such as Marcus and Narcissa Whitman helped to shape the religious identity of the United States by—
F preaching the gospel in Washington, DC G encouraging white settlers to move to Oregon Country H converting millions of Native Americans to Christianity J calling for greater religious freedom for Native Americans
If you have trouble with...
Question	1	2
See Lesson	i	6.1	6.2
TEKS 5.F 17B
315
3
6.3
5.G
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
5 Should the United States Annex Texas?
• Texans voted for annexation.
• Statehood would guarantee defense against Mexican attacks and Native American raids.
• The Republic would not survive for long as an independent nation.
• The United States would benefit economically.
• Britain might annex Texas if the United States did not.
Review the chart above. During the 19th century Americans were debating whether to annex Texas because annexation meant Texas would—
A have to give up diplomatic ties with Mexico B side with the British against the United States C affect the balance between slave states and free states D expect special treatment because it used to be an independent nation
6	What relationship did the belief in Manifest Destiny have to the westward growth of the United States?
F
Many Americans believed it was their right and duty, or their Manifest Destiny, to spread their culture across the continent to the Pacific Ocean. G
Americans who wanted to abolish slavery believed it was their responsibility, or their Manifest Destiny, to establish free states across the continent. H
Many Americans believed that it was their duty, or their Manifest Destiny, to establish farms and towns on the empty lands west of the Mississippi River. J
Native Americans invited American settlers to come and share their lands in the west, claiming that it was their Manifest Destiny to live together in harmony and cooperation. The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 316
® PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access additional practice questions
7	Southern states were opposed to Alexander Hamilton’s plan for a protective tariff because it— A meant to protect local industry B made factories less competitive C made imported goods very expensive D meant to repay loans from the national bank
Reasons American Indians Fought Against White Settlers
•	White settlers cleared forests and built farms on Indian lands.
•	White settlers hunted animals the Indians needed for food and clothing.
•	?
What statement below best replaces the question mark in the list above?
F
White settlers routinely stole horses from Indians. G
White settlers knew the geography of the land better than Indians. H
White settlers ignored treaties the United States had signed with Native American nations. J
American Indians accused white settlers of interfering with the unification of Native American nations. If vou have trouble with...				
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	6.6	6.7	5.1	5.5
TEKS P 1.A 6.C 5.B 5.A
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
317
A
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
In this Topic, you will learn about life in the United States before the Civil War. You know the TEKS are very important, and this course will make it fun to learn about the things that will help you master them. Keep reading to see how.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
LESSON OUTLINE
7.1: The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North 11.A, 11.B, 12.C, 13.A, 13.B, 14.B.23.A,
B, 23.C, 23.E, 24.B, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 27.D, 28.A,
28. B 7.2: King Cotton and Life in the South 7.B, 10.B, 12.A, 12.D, 27.A
7.3: Reform Movements 1.A, 23.D, 23.E, 24.B,
25.B
7.4: Abolitionism 1.A, 7.C, 20.C, 21 .A, 22.B.24.A,
24.	B
7.5: Women’s Rights 21 .A, 22.B, 23.E, 24.B 7.6: Arts and Literature 20.C, 26.A, 26.B, 26.C
1.A, 5.D, 7.B, 7.C, 10.A, 10.B, 10.C, 11.A, 11.B, 11.C, 12.A, 12.B, 12.C, 12.D, 13.A, 13.B, 14.B, 20.C, 21 .A, 22.B, 23.A, 23.B, 23.C, 23.D, 23.E, 24.A, 24.B, 25.B, 26.A, 26.B, 26.C, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 27.D, 28.A, 28.B, 29.C, 29.D, 29.F, 29.J
Connect
You will start by connecting with the Topic through a video that tells a personal story about the times. You will start to think about how the Topic connects with your own experience or to what you already know. And you’ll get a chance to think about a really big question, or Essential Question: Why is culture important?
Begin your study by trying the following
LEARN
Watch My Story Video: Lucy Larcom, Weaving Opportunity
Launch your Document-Based Question:
Comparing Points of View on Slavery and Abolition

318

H!
•	Investigate
Then you will investigate the Topic through a group of lessons. The story of the United States in the years before the Civil War will come to life as you read and interact with key content. You will get a chance to read about what happened and why. And you’ll be able to interact with a lot of fascinating online materials.
You’ll also keep working on your Document-Based Question as you build further
•	mastery of the Topic TEKS.
o

New Inventions Improve Life
» Digital interactivity from the online course
• Synthesize
Next you will pull it all together by reflecting on the Essential Question. This will give you a chance to be the storyteller, to show how you would answer the big question.
• Demonstrate
Finally, you can show what you know. You can write an essay, hold a discussion, or make a presentation to the class. You can answer questions about every TEKS on the Topic Review and Assessment pages. Or you can finish your essay about slavery and abolition..............
TEKS in Topic 7	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 7
1.A	5, 29, 30	23.B
5.D	2	23.C
7.B	26	23.D
7.C	27,33	23.E
10. A	4	24.A
10.B	29	24.B
10.C	17	25.B
11.A	28	26.A
11.B	7	26.B
11.C	21	26.C
12. A	26, 27	27.A
12.B	24	27.B
12.C	2,10	27.C
12.D	26,27	27.D
13. A	2	28.A
13.B	10	28.B
14.B	3	29.C
20.C	38	29.D
21 .A	37	29.F
22.B	36	29.J
23.A	20	
Topic Review and Assessment Questions
19
"£3""'
21,30,32
6
12, 34, 35 13, 31 30 22 15
9,114
71-11 ”7
11,15,17 14
16,24
..~ 8....
...18....
13
12 ~ 34 13
319
1
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
Why is culture important? 7 Society and Culture Before the Civil War (1820-1860)
*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1.A, 5.D, 7.B, 7.C, 10.A, 10.B, 10.C, 11.A, 11.B, 11.C, 12.A, 12.B, 12.C, 12.D, 13.A, 13.B, 14.B, 20.C, 21.A, 22.B, 23.A,
23.B, 23.C, 23.D, 23.E, 24.A, 24.B, 25.B, 26.A, 26.B, 26.C, 27.A, 27.B, 27.C, 27.D, 28.A, 28.B, 29.C, 29.D, 29.F, 29.J
Enduring Understandings |
•	During the early 1800s, the Industrial Revolution	II
brought urban and economic growth to the North.	|, hl
•	Plantation agriculture and slave labor dominated	'! j,
the economy of the South, with cotton the leading	■[1 1
crop.	SU|
•	Reform movements aimed to improve society.	|, jl i
•	African Americans and some northern whites	J jj h
pushed for abolition, or an end to slavery.	j J
•	Women’s rights leaders organized a movement	|
calling for greater rights for women.
•	American arts, music, and literature drew	[
inspiration from the natural world and culture of
the young United States.
a girl who went to work in a Massachusetts textile mill at the age of 11.
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
321
Work in the textile mills in the early 1800s, such as the one shown here, was hard and dangerous. Workers faced long hours on their feet amid noisy machines and a risk of being caught and injured by moving parts.
In the early 1800s, busy factories and whirring machinery were part of a revolution that was reaching the United States. Unlike the American Revolution, this one had no battles or fixed dates. The new revolution—the Industrial Revolution—was a long, slow process that completely changed the way goods were produced and where many people worked and lived.
Interactive Flipped Video
11.A, 11.B, 12.C, 13.A, 13.B, 14.B, 23.A, 23.B, 23.C, 23.E,
» Objectives
Identify the Industrial Revolution and explain its effects.
Explain the impact of the Industrial Revolution on cities.
Describe how technological change affected the economy of the North.
Identify the impact of the Industrial Revolution on working conditions, social class, and daily life.
» Key Terms
Industrial Revolution
spinning jenny
capital
capitalist
factory system
interchangeable
parts
Lowell girls
urbanization
telegraph
locomotive
clipper ship
artisan
trade union
strike
famine
nativist
Know-Nothing party
discrimination
demand
supply
scarcity
credit
profit
The Industrial
Revolution and Life in the North
The Industrial Revolution Begins
Before the 1800s, most Americans were farmers and most goods were produced by hand. As a result of the Industrial Revolution, this situation slowly changed. Machines replaced hand tools. New sources of power, such as steam, replaced human and animal power. While most Americans continued to farm for a living, the economy began a gradual shift toward manufacturing.
Technological Innovations The Industrial Revolution started in Britain in the mid-1700s. British inventors developed new machines that transformed the textile industry.
Since the Middle Ages, workers had used spinning wheels to make thread. A spinning wheel, however, could spin only one thread at a time. In 1764, James Hargreaves developed the spinning jenny, a machine that could spin several threads at once. Other inventions speeded up the process of weaving thread into cloth. In the 1780s, Edmund Cartwright built a loom powered by water. It allowed a worker to produce a great deal more cloth in a day than was possible
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
322

before. These technological innovations would change how goods were made not only in Britain, but also in America and around the world.
The Factory System New inventions led to a new system of producing goods. Before the Industrial Revolution, most spinning and weaving took place in the home. Industrial production involved large machines, however, and these had to be housed in large mills near rivers. Water flowing downstream or over a waterfall turned a wheel that captured the power to run the machines.
To set up and operate a spinning mill required large amounts of capital, or invested money. Capitalists supplied this money. A capitalist is a person who invests in a business in order to make a profit, or the difference between the cost of a good and its selling price. Capitalists built factories and hired workers to run the machines.
The new factory system brought workers and machinery together in one place to produce goods. Factory workers earned daily or weekly wages. They had to work a set number of hours each day.
In Britain, investors saw an opportunity. Because a single worker could produce much more with a machine than by hand, the cost of goods made by machine was much lower.
As a result, more of those goods could be sold. If an investor built a factory that could produce cloth more cheaply, the investor could make a profit. Investors’ desire to make a profit brought about rapid industrialization.
During the Industrial Revolution, the demand for factory-made products grew. In economics, demand is the readiness of people to purchase goods or services. The supply, or amount of goods available to sell, depended in part on the natural resources factories could get. To make products, factories needed raw materials, power, and laborers to run machinery. Some resources, such as cotton and iron, were in short supply This scarcity, or limited supply, resulted in high prices. In response to high prices, farmers began to grow more cotton to supply spinning mills. Miners and others searched for new sources of iron and other materials used in machinery. The growing demand for products and for the supplies needed to make them led to a great change in standards of living.
B GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
How did the Industrial Revolution affect the forces of supply and demand?
» Lucy Larcom wrote about her experience as a girl working in the textile mills in Lowell, Massachusetts. Identify Cause and Effect How did the Industrial Revolution affect women?
» The spinning jenny invented by James Hargreaves allowed workers to spin multiple spools of yarn at once. Draw Conclusions How did this invention affect the supply and cost of producing textiles?
Society
