1	History. The student understands traditional historical points of reference in U.S. history through 1877. The student is expected to:
1.A identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects;
1.B apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals, events, and time periods; and
1.C explain the significance of the following dates: 1607, founding of Jamestown; 1620, arrival of the Pilgrims and signing of the Mayflower Compact; 1776, adoption of the Declaration of Independence; 1787, writing of the U.S. Constitution; 1803, Louisiana Purchase; and 1861-1865, Civil War.
2	History. The student understands the causes of exploration and colonization eras. The student is expected to:
2.A identify reasons for European exploration and colonization of North America; and
2.B compare political, economic, religious, and social reasons for the establishment of the 13 English colonies.
3	History. The student understands the foundations of representative government in the United States. The student is expected to:
3.A explain the reasons for the growth of representative government and institutions during the colonial period;
3.B analyze the importance of the Mayflower Compact, the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, and the Virginia House of Burgesses to the growth of representative government; and
3.C describe how religion and virtue contributed to the growth of representative government in the American colonies.
xxiv
4	History. The student understands significant political and economic issues of the revolutionary era. The student is expected to:
4.A analyze causes of the American Revolution, including the Proclamation of 1763, the Intolerable Acts, the Stamp Act, mercantilism, lack of representation in Parliament, and British economic policies following the French and Indian War;
4.B explain the roles played by significant individuals during the American Revolution, including Abigail Adams, John Adams, Wentworth Cheswell, Samuel Adams, Mercy Otis Warren, James Armistead, Benjamin Franklin, Bernardo de Galvez, Crispus Attucks, King George III, Haym Salomon, Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, the Marquis de Lafayette, Thomas Paine, and George Washington;
4.C explain the issues surrounding important events of the American Revolution, including declaring independence; writing the Articles of Confederation; fighting the battles of Lexington, Concord, Saratoga, and Yorktown; enduring the winter at Valley Forge; and signing the Treaty of Paris of 1783;
4.D analyze the issues of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, including the Great Compromise and the Three-Fifths Compromise; and
4.E analyze the arguments for and against ratification.
5	History. The student understands the challenges confronted by the government and its leaders in the early years of the republic and the Age of Jackson. The student is expected to:
5.A describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government;
5.B summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs, taxation, and the banking system;
5.C explain the origin and development of American political parties;
5.D explain the causes, important events, and effects of the War of 1812;
5.E identify the foreign policies of presidents Washington through Monroe and explain the impact of Washington’s Farewell Address and the Monroe Doctrine;
5.F explain the impact of the election of Andrew Jackson, including expanded suffrage; and
5.G analyze the reasons for the removal and resettlement of Cherokee Indians during the Jacksonian era, including the Indian Removal Act, Worcester v. Georgia, and the Trail of Tears.
XXV
6	History. The student understands westward expansion and its effects on the political, economic, and social development of the nation. The student is expected to:	_____________
6.A explain how the Northwest Ordinance established principles and procedures for orderly expansion of the United States;
6.B explain the political, economic, and social roots of Manifest Destiny;
6.C analyze the relationship between the concept of Manifest Destiny and the westward growth of the nation;
6.D explain the causes and effects of the U.S.-Mexican War and their impact on the United States; and
6.E identify areas that were acquired to form the United States, including the Louisiana Purchase.
7	History. The student understands how political, economic, and social factors led to the growth of sectionalism and the Civil War. The student is expected to:
7.A analyze the impact of tariff policies on sections of the United States before the Civil War;
7.B compare the effects of political, economic, and social factors on slaves and free blacks;
7.C analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States; and
7.D identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster.
History. The student understands individuals, issues, and events of the Civil War. The student is expected to:
8.A explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E. Lee, and Abraham Lincoln, and heroes such as congressional Medal of Honor recipients William Carney and Philip Bazaar;
8.B explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states’ rights, and
slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee’s surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln; and
8.C analyze Abraham Lincoln’s ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government as contained in his first and second inaugural addresses and the Gettysburg Address and contrast them with the ideas contained in Jefferson Davis’s inaugural address.
xxvi
History. The student understands the effects of Reconstruction on the political, economic, and social life of the nation. The student is expected to:
9.A evaluate legislative reform programs of the Radical Reconstruction Congress and reconstructed state governments;
9.B evaluate the impact of the election of Hiram Rhodes Revels;
9.C explain the economic, political, and social problems during Reconstruction and evaluate their impact on different groups; and
9.D identify the effects of legislative acts such as the Homestead Act, the Dawes Act, and the Morrill Act.
W
Geography. The student understands the location and characteristics of places and regions of the United States, past and present. The student is expected to: 10.A locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries;
10.B compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics; and
10.C analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the United States.
4	4 Geography. The student understands the physical characteristics of North I I America and how humans adapted to and modified the environment through
the mid-19th century. The student is expected to:
11 .A analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries;
11 .B describe the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States; and
11 .C describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
Economics. The student understands why various sections of the United States developed different patterns of economic activity. The student is expected to:
12.A identify economic differences among different regions of the United States;
12.B explain reasons for the development of the plantation system, the transatlantic slave trade, and the spread of slavery;
12.C explain the reasons for the increase in factories and urbanization; and
12.D analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the United States at selected times in U.S. history.
xxvii
I
Citizenship. The student understands the importance of effective leadership in a constitutional republic. The student is expected to:
22.A analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln; and
22.B describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
Culture. The student understands the relationships between and among people from various groups, including racial, ethnic, and religious groups, during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. The student is expected to:
23.A identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration;
23.B explain the relationship between urbanization and conflicts resulting from differences in religion, social class, and political beliefs;
23.C identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved;
23.D analyze the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity; and
23.E identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society.
Culture. The student understands the major reform movements of the 19th century. The student is expected to:
24.A describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement; and
24.B evaluate the impact of reform movements, including educational reform, temperance, the women’s rights movement, prison reform, abolition, the labor reform movement, and care of the disabled.
Culture. The student understands the impact of religion on the American way of life. The student is expected to:
25.A trace the development of religious freedom in the United States;
25.B describe religious motivation for immigration and influence on social movements, including the impact of the first and second Great Awakenings; and
25.C analyze the impact of the First Amendment guarantees of religious freedom on the American way of life.
XXX
Culture. The student understands the relationship between the arts and the times during which they were created. The student is expected to:
26.A describe developments in art, music, and literature that are unique to American culture such as the Hudson River School artists, John James Audubon, “Battle Hymn of the Republic,” transcendentalism, and other cultural activities in the history of the United States;
26.B identify examples of American art, music, and literature that reflect society in different eras; and
26.C analyze the relationship between fine arts and continuity and change in the American way of life.
Science, technology, and society. The student understands the impact of science and technology on the economic development of the United States. The student is expected to:
27.A explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat, the cotton gin, and interchangeable parts;
27.B analyze the impact of transportation and communication systems on the growth, development, and urbanization of the United States;
27.C analyze how technological innovations changed the way goods were manufactured and marketed, nationally and internationally; and
27.D explain how technological innovations brought about economic growth such as how the factory system contributed to rapid industrialization and the Transcontinental Railroad led to the opening of the west.
Science, technology, and society. The student understands the impact of scientific discoveries and technological innovations on daily life in the United States. The student is expected to:
28.A compare the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history; and
28.B identify examples of how industrialization changed life in the United States.
xxxi
Social studies skills. The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired through established research methodologies from a variety of valid sources, including electronic technology. The student is expected to:	__________________
29.A differentiate between, locate, and use valid primary and secondary sources such as computer software, databases, media and news services, biographies, interviews, and artifacts to acquire information about the United States;
29.B analyze information by sequencing, categorizing, identifying cause-and-effect relationships, comparing, contrasting, finding the main idea, summarizing, making generalizations and predictions, and drawing inferences and conclusions;
29.C organize and interpret information from outlines, reports, databases, and visuals, including graphs, charts, timelines, and maps;
29.D identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants;
29.E support a point of view on a social studies issue or event;
29.F identify bias in written, oral, and visual material;
29.G evaluate the validity of a source based on language, corroboration with other sources, and information about the author;
29.H use appropriate mathematical skills to interpret social studies information such as maps and graphs;
29.1 create thematic maps, graphs, charts, models, and databases representing various aspects of the United States; and
29.J pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, models, and databases.
Social studies skills. The student communicates in written, oral, and visual forms. The student is expected to:
30.A use social studies terminology correctly;
30.B use standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, punctuation, and proper citation of sources;
30.C transfer information from one medium to another, including written to visual and statistical to written or visual, using computer software as appropriate; and 30.D create written, oral, and visual presentations of social studies information.
xxxii
04 Social studies skills. The student uses problem-solving and decision-O I making skills, working independently and with others, in a variety of settings.
The student is expected to:
31 .A use a problem-solving process to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution; and
31.B use a decision-making process to identify a situation that requires a decision, gather information, identify options, predict consequences, and take action to implement a decision.
xxxiii
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. - That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed....”
Declaration of
Independence
Every year, you and. your classmates participate in Celebrate Freedom Week activities. These activities are designed to remind you about some of the important ideas that make our country so special. In your school, you may have school-wide displays or an assembly. Maybe speakers come to share their thoughts or students write essays or make posters or develop presentations. Whatever happens in your school, you will likely take some time to think about America’s founding documents, such as the Declaration of independence.
The Declaration of Independence states some of America's most important ideas about society and government. It has played a key role in shaping America’s constitutional republic. As you recite the words, think about why students in Texas join in Celebrate Freedom Week.
Summarize According to the Declaration of Independence, who has rights? Who can take them away?
Paraphrase In your own words, restate the idea in the Declaration about the purpose of government.
Analyze Why do you think students in Texas recite part of the Declaration of Independence when they celebrate Freedom Week?
self-evident, adj., obvious endowed, v. given; provided unalienable, adj., not to be taken away deriving, v., getting from a source consent, n., agreement
1
The Bill of Rights
One of the chief ways early American leaders tried to protect individual rights was by adding the first ten Amendments to the Constitution. This section is known as the Bill of Rights. The Bill of Rights guarantees certain legal rights, and it limits the power of the government to interfere with others.
Constructing an Argument Write an essay discussing one of the rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights.
1.	Review the Bill of Rights in the U.S. Constitution in the Reference Center. Notice that the Constitution has Commentary on the side of the actual document. This Commentary helps explain the language in the Constitution and can give you some background about each provision. Use the Commentary to help you review the first ten Amendments, or Bill of Rights.
2.	Choose one basic right as the focus of your essay. Note that several of the Amendments—including the First, Fifth, and Sixth—are divided into different parts, each dealing with a specific right. You may choose to focus on one part of one of these Amendments rather than the entire Amendment.
3.	Research a recent event or situation where the right you have chosen was protected or threatened. This might be an event or situation in your local community or a nearby community, in the state of Texas, or somewhere else in the nation. Be sure to use more than one source and to use reliable sources.
4.	Begin your essay by naming the Amendment you have chosen, and restating in your own words what the right protects or guarantees.
5.	Explain why you believe that right is important to guarantee liberty today.
» The First Amendment protects the right to petition.
6.	Describe what you think might happen if that right were not protected by the Constitution.
7.	Support your opinion with facts you have learned from your research.
8.	Don’t forget to check and revise your essay, as needed. Be sure to use proper grammar, spelling, and sentence structure.
9.	After you write your essay, your teacher may ask you and your classmates to share your views with the class. If so, remember to speak clearly and to present your views using the evidence you gathered for your essay. When listening to others, listen closely and be respectful of their views.
1
Celebrate Freedom
2.A, 10.B, 11.A, 11.B, 28.A, 29.A, 29.G


ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
How much does geography affect people’s lives? The Early Americas anc European Exploration (Prehistory-1550)
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
Enduring Understandings
The physical characteristics of regions in the early Americas influenced the culture and other human characteristics of those regions.
Physical characteristics also helped shape the population distribution and settlement patterns of early Native Americans.
Technological innovations from Asia, Africa, and Europe contributed to a growth of learning and exploration in Europe during the Renaissance.
Europeans’ desire for wealth and for the spread of Christianity brought them into contact with Native Americans.
-c
NBC LEARN


to learn about the importance of tradition and identity to two present-day teenagers from the Duwamish nation.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry * Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
Interactive Flipped Video
Like other early people around the world, the first Americans left no written records to tell us where they came from or when they
arrived. However, scientists have found evidence to suggest that the first people reached the Americas sometime during the last ice age.
I
» Objectives
Explain how people first reached the Americas.
Describe early civilizations and cultures of the Americas.
Identify the human and physical characteristics of regions.
Analyze how physical characteristics influenced population distribution and settlement patterns.
The Early Americas
» Key Terms	
glacier	Kachina
surplus	clan
causeway	Iroquois League
quipu	sachem
terrace	settlement
culture	city-state
adobe pueblo Mound Builder culture region tribe diffusion pit house potlatch	civilization
The First Americans
According to geologists, the Earth has gone through several ice ages. The last ice age occurred between 100,000 and 10,000 years ago. During that time, thick sheets of ice, called glaciers, covered almost one third of the Earth. In North America, glaciers stretched across Canada and reached as far south as present-day Kentucky.
Populations Spread Glaciers locked up water from the oceans, causing sea levels to fall and uncovering land that had been under water. In the far north, a land bridge joined Siberia in northeastern Asia to present-day Alaska in North America.
Most scientists think that bands of hunters reached North America across this land bridge. These hunters tracked herds of grazing animals. Other scientists disagree. They think that the first Americans crossed the icy arctic waters by boat, reaching North America by sea.
Once these early hunters reached the Americas, they had to keep moving in search of food. Slowly, over thousands of years, they spread across North America, Central America, and South America. The physical environments where they settled varied widely. Native Americans adapted to the physical environments of mountain plateaus, dry deserts, fertile plains, lush woodlands, and thick rain forests. In adapting to these very different environments, Native American groups developed many different customs.
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
6
k.
Adapting to and Modifying Environments
About 12,000 years ago, the last ice age ended. As temperatures rose, the glaciers melted. The land bridge between Siberia and Alaska disappeared under the Bering Strait.
About the same time, some kinds of large animals died out. This forced hunting bands to adapt to new conditions. Smaller animals, wild berries, nuts, grains, and fish became a larger part of their diets.
About 5,000 years ago, people in the Americas learned to grow crops such as corn, beans, and squash. Farming modified the environment and brought great changes to those who practiced it. Farmers no longer had to keep moving to find food. Instead, they stayed in one place and began to build permanent settlements, or small communities. As farming methods improved, people produced more food, which in turn allowed the population to grow.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did farming affect communities in Central America?
Olmecs Develop a
Civilization
Farming was a key advance for early societies in the Americas. In time, some farming communities in the Americas grew enough surplus, or extra, food to support large populations, and the first cities emerged.
Cities marked the rise of the first civilization in the Americas. A civilization is a society—or a people sharing a language, territory, and economy—that has certain basic features. Among these are cities, an organized government, different social classes, a complex religion, and some method of record keeping.
The earliest known civilization in the Americas was that of the Olmecs in present-day Mexico. The Olmecs lived in the lowlands along the Gulf of Mexico about 3,500 years ago. Scientists have found huge stone heads carved by the Olmecs. Some were ten feet tall and weighed several tons. Smaller figures showed creatures that were part human and part animal.
Olmec farmers supplied nearby cities with food. There, powerful leaders built stone temples. The Olmecs left few written records, but they did make many advances. They studied the stars and developed
The First Americans Arrive
KEY
I I
Glaciers I | Land bridge -> Land-bridge theory —► Coastal-route theory PACIFIC
OCEAN
ASIA
» This map depicts both the land-bridge and coastal-route theories of North American migration. Analyze Maps Why do some scientists disagree with the land-bridge migration theory?
0	1000 km
Lambert Conformal Conic Projection
The Early Americas and European Exploration 7 hl The Early Americas
a calendar to predict the change of seasons and mark the passage of time.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What features of Olmec society indicate that it was a civilization?
Mayan Civilization
The Olmecs influenced many later peoples, including the Mayas. The early Mayas lived in the rain forests of what are today Honduras, Belize, Guatemala, and southern Mexico. About 3,000 years ago, they began clearing the rain forest and draining swamps to create farmland.
Maya farmers were able to produce great harvests of corn, enough to feed large cities. As the Maya population grew, city-states began to spring up from Central America to southern Mexico. A city-state is a political unit that controls a city and its surrounding land. Trade flowed along a network of roads that linked inland city-states and the coast. City-states often waged war on one another for land, riches, and access to trade routes.
Mayan Social Classes Nobles also held great power in Maya society. The most powerful nobles were the kings, who also served as high priests. Other nobles
» Farming techniques developed in ancient times by the Mayas are still used by Maya farmers today.
also became priests. Priests held great power in Maya society. Only priests, the Mayas believed, could perform the ceremonies needed to bring good harvests or victory in battle. Priests conducted these ceremonies in temples built on top of huge stone pyramids.
Still other nobles served as warriors and government officials. Near the bottom of Maya society were laborers and farmers, who grew corn, squash, and many other crops. Below them were slaves, most of whom were prisoners of war or criminals.
Achievements in Mathematics and Astronomy
Maya priests had to know exactly when to honor the many gods who were thought to control the natural world. Every day, priests anxiously studied the sun, moon, and stars. They learned much about the movement of these bodies.
Based on their observations, priests made great advances in astronomy and mathematics. They learned to predict eclipses and created a relatively accurate, 365-day calendar. They also developed a system of numbers that included the new concept of zero.
Then, around A.D. 900, the Mayas abandoned their cities. Historians are not sure why. Perhaps they did so because of warfare, a drought—or both. The ram forests swallowed up the great Maya temples and palaces. Although Maya cities decayed, the Maya people survived. Today, more than 2 million people in Guatemala and southern Mexico speak Mayan languages.
RECALL
What sort of scientific advances did the Mayas achieve?
Aztec Civilization
Long after the Maya cities were abandoned, a new civilization arose to the northwest. Its builders were the Aztecs. The early Aztecs were nomads, people who moved from place to place in search of food. In the 1300s, the Aztecs settled around Lake Texcoco (tays KOH koh) in central Mexico. From there, they built a powerful empire.
Tenochtitlan On an island in the middle of the lake, the Aztecs built their capital, Tenochtitlan (tay nawch tee tlahn). They constructed a system of causeways, or raised roads made of packed earth. The causeways linked the capital to the mainland.
The Aztecs learned to farm the shallow swamps of Lake Texcoco. In some places, they dug canals, using the mud they removed to fill in parts of the lake. In other places, they attached floating reed mats to the lake
» Aztecs adapted to life on an island in the middle of a lake with limited land area by using chinampas for agriculture, even planting trees to better anchor them to the lake bed.
bottom with long stakes. Then, they piled mud onto the mats to create farmland. Aztec farmers harvested several crops a year on these chinampas, or floating gardens.
With riches from trade and conquest, Tenochtitlan prospered. Its markets offered a wide variety of goods. "There are daily more than 60,000 people bartering and selling,” wrote a Spanish visitor in the 1500s.
Religion Like the Mayas, Aztec priests studied the heavens and developed complex calendars. Such calendars gave them the ability to tell their people when to plant or harvest. Priests also performed rituals designed to please the many Aztec gods.
The Aztecs paid special attention to the god who controlled the sun. They believed that each day the sun battled its way across the heavens. They compared the sun’s battle to their own, calling themselves “warriors of the sun.” They believed that the sun required human sacrifices in order to rise each day. The Aztecs therefore killed thousands of captives each year to please this powerful god.
A
Powerful Empire By 1500, the Aztecs ruled a huge empire. It stretched from the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean and included millions of people. The Aztecs took great pride in their empire and their capital. "Who could conquer Tenochtitlan?” boasted an Aztec poet. “Who could shake the foundation of heaven?”
The Aztec world was far from peaceful, however. Heavy taxes and the sacrifice of huge numbers of prisoners of war sparked many revolts. The Aztecs waged war in part to capture more prisoners for sacrifice. Across the empire, people conquered by the Aztecs were eager for revenge. Enemies of the Aztecs would eventually help outsiders from distant lands destroy the Aztec empire.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What is a physical characteristic of Lake Texcoco, and how did the Aztecs adapt to it to live there?
Inca Civilization
Far to the south of the Aztecs, the Incas built one of the largest empires in the Americas. By 1500, their empire stretched for almost 2,500 miles along the west coast of South America.
An Impressive Capital The center of the Inca empire was the magnificent capital at Cuzco (KOOS koh), located high in the Andes in present-day Peru. Cuzco was a holy city to the Incas. All nobles in the empire tried to visit it at least once in their lifetimes. The city had massive palaces and temples made of stone and
'he Early Americas and European Exploration 8	1.1 The Early Americas
1.1 The Early Americas
decorated with gold ornaments. At the center was the palace of the emperor, who was known as the Sapa Inca. The emperor was regarded as a god who was descended from the sun god.
From Cuzco, the emperor ruled more than 10 million people. They lived in varied environments, from coastal deserts to lowland jungles to the highlands of the Andes. The Incas conquered this land by waging war against surrounding peoples.
The Inca empire was very well organized. The emperor was kept well informed about affairs in all parts of his empire. He sent high officials out to act as governors of his domain. The governors made sure that every person worked at least part of the time on projects for the state, such as road building, mining, farming, and pottery making.
Inca Achievements To unite their empire, the Incas maintained a system of roads that covered more than 10,000 miles. Builders carved roads in rock cliffs and stretched rope bridges across deep gorges. Teams of runners quickly spread royal orders across the empire using these roads.
The runners carried with them a device known as a quipu (kee poo). This was a cord or string with knots that stood for numbers or categories. The numbers
» The Inca city of Machu Picchu shows how Inca engineering shaped and was shaped by the terrain of the Andes Mountains. Notice the terraces, or stepped strips of land, that allowed farming on steep slopes.
might be bags of grain, numbers of soldiers, or other amounts of goods that the government ordered from different parts of the empire. The quipu was also used by government officials to keep records.
The Incas were skilled engineers. They built massive stone temples and forts. With only human labor, ropes, and wooden rollers, they moved stones weighing up to 200 tons. They used all their engineering skills to farm the dry, rugged mountain lands. They became experts at creating terraces—or wide, flat steps of land out of the steep mountainsides. Sturdy stone walls kept rain from washing away the soil.
Id IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS Why was a system of
roads so important to the Incas?
Early North American Societies
Scholars have found evidence of complex societies among some groups of people farther north. Traders and migrating people carried foods, goods, arts, and beliefs from Central America and Mexico to early peoples of North America. These peoples developed many distinct cultures in North America. A culture is the entire way of life of a people. It includes their homes, clothing, economy, arts, and government.
Land and People of the Southwest At least 3,000 years ago, knowledge of farming spread northward. Gradually, farming societies emerged in what is today the American Southwest. Much of this region is desert, with little rainfall and hot summers. The early societies in this region included the Hohokams (hoh HOH kahmz) and Anasazis (ah nuh SAH zeez).
The Hohokams lived in present-day southern Arizona. About 2,000 years ago, they dug networks of irrigation ditches so that they could farm the desert land. The ditches carried water from the Salt and Gila (hee luh) rivers to fields, where farmers produced corn, squash, and beans.
The Anasazis lived in the Four Corners region, where Colorado, Utah, New Mexico, and Arizona meet today. Like the Hohokams, the Anasazis irrigated the desert in order to farm. They also created a network of roads to link dozens of towns. Traders traveled these roads, carrying cotton, sandals, and blankets woven from turkey feathers.
Anasazi Houses The Anasazis built large buildings with walls of stone and adobe, or sundried brick. When the Spanish later saw similar buildings in the early 1500s, they called them pueblos (pwehb lohz),
the Spanish word for “villages.” (They also called the descendants of the Anasazis the Pueblo Indians.) About 1,000 years ago, some Anasazi villages faced attacks from warlike neighbors. To escape that threat, they built new homes along steep cliffs. Toeholds cut into the rock let people climb the cliff walls. Farmers planted their crops on land above the cliffs
Mound Builders Far to the east, other farming cultures flourished in North America. Among them were the Mound Builders, various cultures that built large earth mounds beginning about 3,000 years ago. Thousands of these mounds dot the landscape from the Appalachian Mountains to the Mississippi Valley and from Wisconsin to Florida. What is now the eastern half of the United States had a wetter climate than the Southwest, and the Mound Builders were able to farm without irrigation.
The first mounds were used for burials. Later mounds were used for religious ceremonies. They were similar in function to the pyramid temples of the Mayas.
The best-known groups of Mound Builders were the Hopewells and the Mississippians. The Mississippians took advantage of their moist climate to grow enough crops to feed large towns. BetweenA.D. 700 and 1500, the Mississippians built a city at Cahokia (kah HOH kee ah) in present-day Illinois. As many as 30,000 people may have lived there at one time.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did the Hohokams adapt to living in a desert region?
ELPS 1.A.1, 3.F.1
Take turns reading the first paragraph of Early North American Societies aloud with a partner, then ask questions about the reading. Use what you already know to help answer your partner’s questions about early North American cultures.
Culture and the Physical Characteristics of North America
Native Americans did not belong to just one group. Instead, Native Americans included many different people with many distinct cultures. In North America alone, there were hundreds of Native American languages spoken. Native American cultures, too, varied greatly, much like the cultures of the people of Europe.
Native American cultures were adapted to the many different physical environments of North America.The physical characteristics of the environment in each
ELPS
» The Anasazi made use of their environment by building dwellings along sheer cliffs as protection against intruders.
» Mounds like these in present-day Cahokia, Illinois, were used by the Mississippians for religious ceremonies.
The Early Americas and European Exploration 11
L	___________
ie Early Americas and European Exploration
10	1.1 The Early Americas
1.1 The Early Americas
region, as you will see below, influenced population distribution and settlement patterns, or where Native Americans lived, right up to modern times.
A culture region is a region in which people share a similar way of life. Most culture regions shared similar physical environments. Each culture region was home to many different tribes. A tribe is a community of people who share common customs, language, and rituals. Members of a tribe saw themselves as a distinct people who shared a common origin. Tribal leaders often made decisions for the group.
Hunting, Gathering, and Fishing Native Americans developed a variety of ways to meet their basic needs for food, clothing, and shelter. In some culture regions, tribes hunted animals and gathered nuts, fruits, and vegetables that grew in the wild. Other tribes depended on the sea for food. They made boats out of animal skins or carved canoes out of trees. From their boats and canoes, they speared or netted fish or hunted marine animals such as seals, walrus, and whales.
Farming Other tribes lived mostly by farming, planting corn, beans, and squash. Native American tribes farmed in many parts of North America, from the American Southwest to the Eastern Woodlands. Over time, farmers improved their crops. For example, more
than 5,000 years ago, wild corn was tiny, about the size of a human finger. Indian farmers developed dozens of varieties of corn including ones with larger ears.
Trade Indian tribes traded with one another for goods not found within their own region. Trade networks linked people across large distances. Goods sometimes traveled more than 1,000 miles from where they were made.
In the Northwest, traders met near the Dalles on the Columbia River. Local Indians caught and dried salmon, which they exchanged for goods and produce from other places. More than goods traveled from Indian group to group. New ideas and skills also spread.
This process of spreading ideas from one culture to another is known as diffusion. Through diffusion, skills such as farming spread from one Native American group to another.
Adapting to and Modifying Environments
Native American cultures adapted to the physical characteristics of environments in different regions. These characteristics influenced the kinds of food people raised, collected, or caught. Climate determined people’s needs for clothing and shelter. Resources provided the materials they were able to use.

Native American Culture Regions
KEY
9 Arctic/Subarctic 9 Northwest Coast [ I California/Great Basin/Plateau 3 Southwest i~l Great Plains 9 Eastern Woodlands 9 Southeast
» Groups of Native American tribes formed shared cultures in different	__,
geographic regions. Analyze Maps Which tribes listed on this map do you know	I ®
about?	* ■
Interactive Map
The Early Americas and European Exploration 12
1.1 The Early Americas
Ways Native Americans Supported Themselves
FOOD
SOURCE
FORAGING
FARMING
HUNTING
Fruits, nuts, seeds, roots, stems, and leaves from wild plants
Cultivated plants such as maize, beans, and squash
Wild game and fish
TOOLS AND TECHNOLOGY
Grinding tools for crushing seeds
Tools for clearing and cultivating: axes, hoes made with bone, shells, or stone
Tools such as spears and sharp points; trapping and netting food
INNOVATIONS
Baskets for storage
Methods for storing and preserving foods over winter months, irrigation methods
Techniques for drying meat and fish to balance the food supply over the winter
CULTURAL
CHANGES
Mobility needed to find new food sources
Cultivating land required more labor, but created settlements and communities
Mobility needed when food resources become depleted
ADVANTAGES
No need to work in fields and risk fatal encounters with wild animals
Control over the food supply when growing conditions were favorable
Hunted animals provided clothing and shelter in addition to food
DISADVANTAGES
Poor weather could lead to shortages ; Poor weather conditions could t wipe out a harvest Required a plentiful supply of wild game — - - - ' » Analyze Charts How did the foods Native Americans ate influence their way of life?
Climate and resources also affected tribal organization. Where climates were harsh and resources limited, people struggled to find enough food and shelter. In such regions, people were often nomadic. They lived in small hunting bands. Each band included a number of families. In regions with more favorable climates and plentiful resources, people tended to live in larger groups and stay in one place for longer periods.
Cultures of the Arctic and Subarctic Regions
Frozen seas and icy, treeless plains made up the world of the Inuits, who lived in the Arctic region. The Inuits used all the limited resources of their environment. In the short summer season, they collected driftwood along the ocean shore, using it for tools and shelters. For most of the year, the Inuits lived in pit houses, houses dug into the ground and covered with wood and skins. Lamps filled with seal oil kept their homes warm even in the bitter cold. Women made warm clothing out of furs and waterproof boots out of sealskins.
The Subarctic culture region consisted of a belt of forest stretching across North America south of the Arctic. This forest is made up mainly of conifers, or cone-bearing trees such as hemlock and spruce. People in the Subarctic lived where they could find food. Groups like the Chipewyan (chip uh WY un) were nomads, following large game like caribou. Physical characteristics of the environment influenced their settlement patterns. The Carrier, for example, settled
near salmon streams, although they sometimes moved to other hunting sites.
Cultures of the California, Great Basin, and Plateau Regions The California region offered more forgiving climates, with mainly hot, dry summers and mild, wet winters. The physical features included mountains, coastal lowland, and interior valleys and deserts.
Over 200 different tribes called this region home. Along the Colorado River, land was irrigated to grow corn, pumpkin, and beans. In the northwest, the Yoruk (YAWR uk) used redwood trees to build houses and canoes and caught the plentiful fish of that region. In central California, salmon and acorns were plentiful. People there hunted and gathered plant products instead of farming. With enough food nearby, people could spend time producing crafts. The Porno wove watertight baskets out of grasses and reeds.
The Great Basin culture region consisted of mountains and valleys with a dry climate, with hot summers and cold winters. Many of the bands that lived here, like the Bannock, were small and nomadic. They traveled to find seeds, nuts, roots, and bulbs. The Northern Paiute (PY yoot) lived near lakes and marshes. Hunting, fishing, and farming often provided enough food for them to stay in one place.
The Plateau region, centered on the Columbia Plateau, has a cool and dry environment, but
1.1 The Early Americas
The Early Americas and European Exploration
winter snows fed rivers flowing through the region. Surprisingly, numbers of hardy plants and animals thrive in the region. Among the people of the Plateau region were the Utes (yootz) and Shoshones (shah SHOH neez). The Native Americans of the region had few possessions beyond digging sticks, baskets, and tools and weapons needed for hunting.
Cultures of the Northwest Coastal Region
Elsewhere in North America the climate was kinder, which helped more complex cultures emerge. The people of the mountainous Northwest Coast enjoyed milder temperatures and abundant rainfall and food supplies. They gathered rich harvests of fish from the sea.
From nearby forests, they cut down tall cedar trees and split the trunks into planks for houses and canoes. With plenty of food, the people of the Pacific Northwest stayed in one place. They built permanent villages and prospered from trade with nearby groups.
Within a village, a family gained status according to how much it owned and could give away. Families sometimes competed with one another. To improve its standing, a family might hold a potlatch, or ceremonial dinner, to show off its wealth. The potlatch could last for many days. The family invited many guests and gave
» The abundant forests of the Pacific Northwest provide the cedar trees Native Americans use to carve totem poles. The images on the poles often tell stories from Native American legends.
everyone gifts. The more goods a family gave away, the i more respect it earned. However, people who received ; gifts at a potlatch were then expected to hold their own potlatches and give gifts.
Cultures of the Southwest Region The Southwest is a hot and dry region consisting of deserts, the southern Rocky Mountains, and the Colorado Plateau. People could survive only if they found water.
The Pueblo people used irrigation methods such as building dams and tanks to store water. They were able to grow corn and cotton on small farms. However, > it wasn’t all work in the desert. The Hohokams played games on ballcourts and made beautiful art with acid-etchings on shells.
Cultures of the Southeast Region Many tribes inhabited the southeastern region of North America, I which consisted of coastal plains, the southern j Appalachian Mountains, and interior rolling hills and valleys. The region had hot summers, mild winters, and plenty of rainfall. Among the people of this region were the Natchez (NACH ihz). They benefited from the region’s warm, moist climate. They hunted, fished, and farmed in the fertile Mississippi Valley.
The Natchez calendar divided the year into 13 months. Each month was named after a food or an animal that the Natchez harvested or hunted. Their months included Strawberry, Little Corn, Mulberry, Deer, Turkey, and Bear.
The ruler of the Natchez was known as the Great Sun and was worshipped as a god. The Great Sun’s feet never touched the ground. Either he was carried on a litter or he walked on mats. Below the Great Sun were members of his family, called Little Suns. Next came Nobles, then Honored People, and finally Stinkards, or commoners, who made up the majority of the people.
Marriage laws ensured that membership in each class kept changing. By law, Nobles had to marry Stinkards. Even the Great Sun chose a Stinkard as a wife. In this way, no one family could hold the position of Great Sun forever. In time, even descendants of a Great Sun became Stinkards.
Cultures of the Great Plains Region The Great Plains were dry, open grasslands in the center of North America with very few trees, hot summers, and cold winters. Tribes like the Sioux (SOO) hunted wild animals to survive. The Sioux were nomads who followed the buffalo. They ate buffalo meat and used the hide to build tents. These tents were easy to carry when they were on the move. No part of the buffalo was wasted. They made spoons and cups out of the horns and weapons from the bones.
Cultures of the Eastern Woodlands Region Like the peoples of the Southwest and Southeast, the peoples of the Eastern Woodlands were not nomads. Their culture region spanned what is today much of the Midwest and Northeast. This region includes coastal plains, the northern Appalachian Mountains, the Great Lakes region, and interior rolling hills and plains. The region receives plenty of rainfall, with warm summers and snowy winters.
The Iroquois (IHR uh kwoi) lived near lakes and streams. They cleared land for farming, which was mostly done by women. Their diet was based on the “Three Sisters : corn, squash, and beans. Algonquian (al GAHN kwee un) tribes lived near the ocean and along the Great Lakes. Many of them farmed as well. In some places it was too poor to farm. Instead, they built boats for fishing. Like the Iroquois, they also used trees from the forests to make houses and tools.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why were many people in central California able to settle in one place?
Religion
The many Native American groups had a wide variety of beliefs. Yet, they shared some basic ideas.
Close Ties to Nature Whether hunting, fishing, farming, or gathering wild plants, many Native Americans felt a close connection to the physical environment. Their prayers and ceremonies were designed to maintain a balance between people and the forces of nature. They believed that they must adapt their ways to the natural world in order to survive and prosper.
Many Native Americans believed that the world was full of powerful, unseen forces and spirits. They honored those spirits, which were thought to act and feel like humans.
In the Pacific Northwest, many tribes relied on fishing. One such group was the Kwakiutls (kwah kee 00T ulz). Each year when they caught their first fish of the season, they chanted this prayer:
We have come to meet alive,
Swimmer, do not feel wrong about what I have done to you, friend Swimmer, for that is the reason why you came, that I may spear you, that I may eat you, Supernatural One, you,
» Native Americans, such as the Kwakiutls, used nets to fish for salmon, an important food source.
» Clay soil is abundant in the Southeast, and Southeastern native peoples used it to produce earthen pottery like the example shown here.
The Early Americas and European Exploration
14	1.1 The Early Americas
The Early Americas and European Exploration 15
1.1 The Early Americas
» Pueblo Indians perform a religious harvest dance, part of the Green Corn Ceremony.
» The Iroquois lived in wooden long houses that were built clustered together. The long houses were built of posts and poles covered with tree bark.
Long-Life-Giver, you Swimmer. Now protect us, me and my wife.
—Kwakiutl Prayer of Thanks
Special Ceremonies In farming regions, tribes held special ceremonies to ensure good rainfall. At midsummer, Pueblo villages in the Southwest rang with cries of: “The kachinas are coming!” Kachinas were spirits, who were represented by masked Native American dancers. The Pueblos believed that the kachinas had the power to bring good harvests.
At Pueblo festivals, the kachinas danced. Religious leaders prayed to the spirits and gave them gifts. Only if the spirits were treated well would they return each year with rain for the Pueblos' crops. In the Southwest and the Southeast, many tribes held a Green Corn Ceremony when the corn ripened in the fall.
The ceremony lasted for several days. It marked the end of the old year and the beginning of a new one. On the last day, a sacred fire was lighted. Dancers circled the flames, and the people enjoyed a great feast. Women then used coals from the sacred fire to make new fires in their own houses.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did many Native Americans in farming regions hold ceremonies?
Interactive Gallery
The Iroquois League
The Iroquois (iHR uh kwoi) people of present-day New York State called themselves "The People of the Long House.” They took great pride in their sturdy dwellings, called long houses. A typical long house was about 150 feet long and 20 feet wide. Twelve or more families lived in a long house.
Women had a special place in Iroquois society. They owned all the household property and were in charge of planting and harvesting. When a man married, he moved in with his wife’s family.
Women also had political power. They chose clan leaders. A clan was a group of related families. If a clan leader did not do his job well, the women could remove him from his position.
The Iroquois included five nations that spoke similar languages: the Mohawk, Seneca, Onondaga (ahn un DAW guh), Oneida (oh NY duh), and Cayuga (kay YOO guh). Each nation had its own ruling council. Until the 1500s, the five nations were frequently at war with one another.
Then, in the 1500s, the five Iroquois nations formed an alliance to end the fighting. According to legend, a religious leader named Dekanawida (deh kan ah WEE
The Early Americas and European Exploration
16	1.1 The Early Americas
dah) inspired Hiawatha (hy ah wah thah) to organize the alliance. It became known as the Iroquois League.
A council of 50 specially chosen tribal leaders, called sachems, met once a year. The council made decisions for the League. Here, too, women had a political role because they chose the sachems and watched over their actions.
The Iroquois alliance did not end the fighting. The Iroquois spoke a different language from the Algonquian tribes, their neighbors to the east and west. The two groups fought many wars over land and trade.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What role did women play in Iroquois culture?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Steps in a Process Explain how scientists believe the first settlers arrived in the Americas.
2.	Support Ideas with Examples What major impact did the development of farming have on the early settlers of the Americas?
3.	Identify Patterns What effect did climate and the availability of natural resources have on the population distribution and settlement patterns of early Native American cultures?
4.	Make Predications How did the Aztecs’ religious beliefs weaken their empire?
» Stories were written in modern times about Hiawatha and his fictional wife, Minnehaha, shown in this artist’s rendering.
5. Compare and Contrast Compare and contrast how the Incas and Anasazi peoples used their engineering skills to adapt to their physical environment.
The Early Americas and. European Exploration 17 t-f The Early Americas
This instrument is an early astrolabe, which helped sailors determine their position at sea. North Africans helped to develop the astrolabe.
The period from about a.d 500 to around 1500 is known as the Middle Ages. During the early Middle Ages, invasion and war were common. People in Europe had to find new means of defending themselves.
Interactive Flipped Videol
i
» Objectives
Describe how Europe changed in the Middle Ages, including through technological innovations.
Describe patterns of trade and technological innovations in the Muslim world, Africa, and East Asia.
Identify the impact of technological innovations on Renaissance Europe.
» Key Terms
Renaissance
feudalism
manor
Crusades
innovation
astrolabe
Silk Road
caravan
savanna
extended family
kinship
Christianity
Islam
Early Europe, Africa, and Asia
Europe in the Middle Ages
Feudalism A new kind of government evolved during the Middle Ages. Kings and queens divided their lands among warrior nobles. In return, nobles promised to fight for the ruler when asked. This system of rule by lords who ruled their lands but owed loyalty and military service to a monarch is called feudalism (fyood ul iz um).
At the top of feudal society stood the king and the most powerful lords. Next came the lesser nobles. Most people in feudal society were peasants who farmed the lord’s lands and could not leave the land without the lord’s permission.
Daily Life in Feudal Society Feudal life revolved around the manor, which included the lord’s castle and the lands around it. Manor lands might include several villages. Each manor was self-sufficient. That is, people made almost everything they needed. Life for peasants was hard. Peasants were farmers who worked mostly by hand on small plots. They struggled to produce enough food just to survive.
By about A.D 900, life began to change. Peasants used new methods of farming to produce more food. Warfare declined and trade
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
I
Access your Digital Lesson. 18
k
began to grow. Slowly, people began to look beyond their isolated villages.
Religion The most powerful force in medieval western Europe was the Roman Catholic Church. The Roman Catholic Church was the main branch of Christianity in western Europe. Like other branches of Christianity, it was based on the teachings of Jesus, who lived centuries earlier. During ancient and early medieval times, the religion spread across Europe.
The Church ruled more than religious life. The Church owned large amounts of land and offered the only source of education. The clergy were often the only people who could read and write. Because of their efforts, much of the learning from the ancient world was preserved.
While Christianity was the main religion in western Europe, the region also had a strong Jewish community. Their religion was Judaism, a religion centuries older than Christianity. It, too, had spread across Europe in ancient and early medieval times. While Jewish people played an important role in medieval Europe, they often faced discrimination and persecution, or attacks because of their beliefs.
The Crusades The pace of change in Europe increased between 1100 and 1300 in part because of the Crusades. The Crusades were a series of wars
fought by Christians to control the region then known as the Holy Land or Palestine, much of which is now Israel. This region included Jerusalem and the other places where Jesus had lived and taught. Muslims had controlled this region for centuries.
During the Crusades, tens of thousands of Christians journeyed to the Middle East. Fighting between Christians and Muslims continued for almost 200 years. Christians won some victories, and they ruled kingdoms in the region for more than 100 years. But in the end, they failed to keep control of the Holy Land.
Growing Trade The Crusades had important effects on Europe, however. Crusaders traveled beyond their villages and came into contact with other civilizations. In the Middle East, they tasted new foods, such as rice, oranges, dates, and new spices. They saw beautiful silks and woven rugs.
Europe had traded with the Middle East for many years before the Crusades. However, returning Crusaders demanded more Asian foods, spices, silks, and rugs. Italian merchants realized that people would pay high prices for such goods. They outfitted ships and increased trade with the Muslim world.
Technological Innovations in Navigation Trade brought new knowledge and with it, new technological
» A typical medieval manor included a castle, a church, fields for agriculture and livestock, and dwellings for serfs.
The Early Americas and European Exploration 19	1.2 Early Europe, Africa, and Asia
innovations, or new methods and practical ideas. From the Muslim world, Europeans acquired sailing skills and the magnetic compass. Muslims had earlier adopted the magnetic compass from the Chinese. The magnetic needle of the compass always pointed north, which helped ships stay on course.
Another useful instrument was the astrolabe (as troh layb), which helped sailors determine their latitude while at sea. These new instruments let Europeans sail far out to sea, beyond sight of land. By 1500, Portugal had taken the lead in this new overseas travel.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
How did the Crusades affect trade in the Middle Ages? The Middle East
Middle Eastern merchants played a large role in this growing trade. Linking Europe, Africa, and Asia, the Middle East was a major crossroads of the world.
Muslim Conquests and Inventions The growth of trade was also linked to the spread of a new religion. In the early 600s, a new religion, Islam, emerged in Arabia. A people called the Arabs lived in Arabia, in the southern Middle East.
Islam won many followers among the Arabs. Beginning in the 600s, Islam spread rapidly. Devout
Trade Routes of Asia and Africa
a crrowt.h
followers conquered North Africa and much of Spain. They conquered lands to the east, too, from Persia to India and beyond. Eventually, the Muslim world spread from South Asia to what is now Portugal and Spain. In many countries ruled by Muslims, however, there were also communities of Christians and Jewish people.
Islam expanded through trade and conquest by sword. While some remained faithful to Christianity, Judaism, and other religions, many people in conquered lands chose to convert to the new religion. Others were converted by force, or under the threat of crippling taxes. Elsewhere, Muslim merchants carried the new faith to people living along the trade routes of Asia and Africa.
Islam united Muslims from many lands and fostered the growth of trade. Muslims had a basic duty to make a pilgrimage, or journey, to the holy city of Mecca at least once in their lives. Every year, people from across the Muslim world traveled to Mecca. Muslims from North Africa, Persia, Afghanistan, India, Spain, and West Africa crowded Mecca’s dusty streets. They prayed in Arabic, the language of Islam. This regular travel encouraged trade among the Muslim lands.
People in the mainly Muslim Middle East developed many of the technologies we use today. Experiments with how light enters the eye led 10th century Muslim mathematician Ibn al-Haitham to invent the first pin-hole camera. A Muslim engineer invented the
Takla Makan Desert KUNLUN . ASIA ^^AYAS1 t
,'i^ Chittagong
Hay of
Calicut Henyal>	, , .
EQUATOR
Malacca!* INDIAN	’
OCEAN
1,000 mi
0	1,000 km
Miller Cylindrical Projection
Yellow
’Xianyang s‘,(
1 I a>t ( hind Sea
South (ihitta r
Scu ''' "C-
Interactive Map

The Silk Road
» The trade routes between Europe and Asia became collectively known as the Silk Road. Analyze Maps What regions in Europe and Asia did the Silk Road connect?
Sil Interactive Illustration
crankshaft, a key device in modern machinery, and the windmill was invented in Persia in the 600s to grind corn.
Navigating the Seas Middle Eastern merchants traded across a vast area. They sailed to ports around the Indian Ocean. Their ships used large, triangular sails that allowed captains to sail close to the direction the wind was blowing from.
Middle Eastern sailors had knowledge of wind and weather conditions in the Indian Ocean. As a result, merchants in ports around the region knew when the trading ships had to sail and when they would return. Middle Easterners made important technological innovations in the astrolabe, which, as you have learned, helped sailors find their way far from shore.
Middle Eastern merchants sold porcelains, perfumes, and fabrics from China. Jade and tea were popular, too. The Spice Islands of Indonesia offered nutmeg, clove, and mace. Cloth, indigo, and sugar came from East Africa, as well as spices, salt, and slaves. Goods like textiles and spices traveled well. They quickly spread across the globe.
Silk Road Some Middle Eastern traders traveled the overland routes that crossed the grasslands, mountains, and deserts of Central Asia and linked China and the
Middle East. These routes had become known as the Silk Road because prized Chinese silks had been carried westward along them for more than 1,000 years.
Travel on the Silk Road was dangerous. Desert storms, hunger, and bandits were a constant threat. Traders formed caravans, or groups of people who traveled together for safety. Despite the dangers, trade along the Silk Road prospered.
By the 1400s, trade goods were flowing across a huge area. More than just silk was traded on the Silk Road. Everything from horses to spices and gems traveled along the route.
fcl DEFINE How would you define the Silk Road?
African Cultures and
Technologies
Trade routes played a large role in Africa, too. Longdistance trade routes crossed the vast Sahara, the desert linking West Africa and North Africa.
A peaceful afternoon in a West African village might be pierced by sounds of a horn. Children would shout, “Batafo! Batafo!” Traders! Soon, a long line of porters and camels arrived. Villagers watched as the tired travelers unloaded sacks of salt or dried fish.
The Early Americas and European Exploration 20	1.2 Early Europe, Africa, and Asia
The Early Americas and European Exploration 21
1.2 Early Europe, Africa, and Asia
Gold, fabrics, jewelry, and slaves were also part of the caravan.
Sea traders also spread navigation technologies throughout Africa and eventually to Europe. The lateen sail, believed to have been invented first in Egypt, was a triangular sail that allowed ships to travel toward the wind. Although historians cannot be certain, it is likely that North Africans adapted the astrolabe for sea travel, too. It was used by African, Arab, and Indian sailors and then adopted by Europeans.
City-States of East Africa Trade had long flowed up and down the coast of East Africa. Small villages that had good natural harbors grew into busy trading centers.
Gold from Zimbabwe (zim BAH bweh), a powerful inland state, was carried to coastal cities such as Kilwa and Sofala. From there, ships carried the gold, and prized goods such as hardwoods and ivory, across the Indian Ocean to Arabia, India, and China.
Wealth from trade helped local East African rulers build strong city-states. East African city-states gained wealth and power by trading people as well as goods. They traded enslaved people from the interior of East Africa to Arabs and other groups across the Indian Ocean.
Many rulers of these city-states became Muslims. In time, Muslim culture influenced East African traditions. The blend of cultures led to the rise of a new
Trade in Africa and Eurasia
AFRICA
Domesticated camels enabled North African merchants to cross the Sahara. Caravans could include merchants, missionaries, pilgrims, and scholars.
RESOURCES AND GOODS
•	Gold, copper, and salt
•	Ivory for artistic carving
•	Kola nuts for medicine; coffee beans prized as a stimulant
TECHNOLOGY AND EDUCATION
•	Advanced metal forging techniques for toolmaking
•	Weaving techniques for patterned textiles
•	Universities taught mathematics, medicine, law,geography, history, and art
•	Training in carpentry, fishing, and tailoring
» Analyze Charts How did the exchange of goods and information between Africa and Eurasia benefit both regions?
language, Swahili, which blended Arabic words and local African languages.	;
Trading Kingdoms of West Africa A region of grasslands, called the savanna, covers much of West ' Africa. Several rich trading kingdoms emerged there. Among the best known were Mali and Songhai (sawng hy). The city of Timbuktu was the major trading center > for both kingdoms. These West African empires gained ‘ power through warfare. They conquered neighboring • peoples and took control of surrounding lands.
The kingdom of Mali rose in about A.D. 1200 and flourished for about 200 years. Like the rulers of East | Africa’s city-states, many rulers in West African , kingdoms adopted the religion of Islam.	!
Mali’s most famous ruler, Mansa Musa, was a | Muslim. In 1324, the emperor made a pilgrimage to = Mecca. On the way, he and his caravan stopped in Cairo, Egypt. His wealth in gold amazed the Egyptians. I In time, stories of Mansa Musa’s immense wealth reached Europe. A Spanish map from that time shows Mansa Musa on his throne, holding a golden object.
So abundant is the gold in his country that this lord is the richest and most noble king in all the land.
—Catalan Atlas, 1375
EURASIA
Improvements in land and sea travel enabled goods and ideas to travel between East Asia, South Asia, the Middle East, and Europe.
RESOURCES AND GOODS
•	Spices for flavorings, perfumes, and medicines as well as European wines
•	Textiles including silk and wool
•	Copper, iron, and silver
TECHNOLOGY AND EDUCATION
•	Techniques for making pottery, ceramics, glazes, glass, and lacquerware
•	Study in mathematics, medicine, and engineering, advances in agricultural and irrigation techniques
•	Architectural domes and arches used in building mosques, temples, and churches
•	Surgical instruments and techniques
In the 1400s, Songhai emerged as the most powerful empire in West Africa. Muslim emperors extended Songhai’s power and made Timbuktu into a thriving city.
Ways of Life in Africa Ways of life varied greatly across the huge continent of Africa. While powerful trading states flourished in some regions, most people lived outside these kingdoms. Many lived in small villages. They made a living by herding, fishing, or farming.
Family relationships were important in African cultures. Although family patterns varied across Africa, many people lived within an extended family.
In an extended family, several generations live in one household. An extended family usually included grandparents, parents, children, and sometimes aunts, uncles, and cousins. The grandparents, or elders, received special respect for their wisdom and knowledge.
Ties of kinship, or sharing a common ancestor, linked families. People related by kinship owed loyalty to one another. Kinship ties encouraged a strong sense of community and cooperation.
Religious beliefs varied widely across Africa. Yet, African beliefs reflected some common threads. Links among family members lasted even after a person died. In their rituals and ceremonies, many Africans honored the spirits of their ancestors as well as the forces of nature. Powerful spirits, they believed, could harm or could help the living.
fcfl CHECK UNDERSTANDING How would you explain
what an extended family is to a friend?
ELPS 1.A.2
Read Ways of Life in Africa. Draw on your past experience to understand the content described in this reading.
'V ELPS
Chinese Trade and
Technology
Africa had many different cultures and kingdoms. By contrast, in China, power was centered on one emperor. Chinese rulers were often suspicious of outsiders. China was the most isolated civilization of the ancient world. Long distances and physical barriers separated it from Egypt, the Middle East, and India. This isolation contributed to the Chinese belief that China was the center of the Earth and the sole source of civilization. The ancient Chinese looked down on outsiders who did not speak Chinese or follow Chinese ways.
» Analyze Maps What information does the image of Mansa Musa on his throne, holding a golden object, add to this medieval map?
China Uses Technology to Increase Trade
Chinese inventions changed shipbuilding around the globe. The Chinese invented the rudder, which made it easier to steer large ships. They created watertight compartments that went in the ship's hull to reduce the risk of sinking. They also probably invented the magnetic compass, which decreased the likelihood of getting lost on the open seas.
A young emperor who came to power in 1402 was eager to use these new technologies to increase trade. He ordered a huge fleet to be built and named Zheng He (JUNG HUH) to command it. Zheng He’s fleet numbered more than 300 ships. It carried tons of trade goods. The largest ships were more than 400 feet long.
Between 1405 and 1433, Zheng He made seven long voyages. His fleet traded at ports in Southeast Asia, India, Arabia, and East Africa. At every port, Chinese traders carried on a brisk business. They expanded Chinese trade and influence across a wide region.
The Voyages End Zheng He’s great fleet returned home with exotic goods and animals, such as giraffes, that the Chinese had never seen. However, China’s overseas voyages soon ended. A new emperor decided that China had nothing to learn from the outside world. He outlawed most foreign trade. However, traders
The Early Americas and European Exploration 22	1.2 Early Europe, Africa, and Asia
The Early Americas and European Exploration : 23	'	1.2 Early Europe, Africa, and Asia

like Zheng He had spread Chinese technological innovations around the world.
The Chinese first invented paper in A.D. 105. They also developed a printing press with movable type. The Chinese made advancements in timekeeping, developing several different kinds of clocks. They also invented gunpowder. Europeans later used gunpowder in handguns and cannons, which were based on Chinese designs.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did new technologies improve Chinese ships?
Europe’s Renaissance
Increased trade and travel made Europeans eager to learn more about the wider world. Scholars looked in monastery libraries for manuscripts of ancient Greek and Roman works. Some traveled to the Middle East, where many ancient works had been preserved.
As scholars studied ancient learning, they began to make their own discoveries. They produced new books on art, medicine, astronomy, and chemistry. This great burst of learning and technological innovation was called the Renaissance (ren uh sahns), a French word
i
» During the Renaissance, printing presses with movable type, as shown here, allowed printers to mass-produce books, helping to spread new learning.
meaning rebirth. It lasted from the late 1300s until the 1600s.
The Chinese had invented the printing press and movable type, or metal letters that could be used to print paper. However, the Chinese language required thousands of different letters, and movable type had little impact.
During the 1430s, a German printer named Johannes Gutenberg (GOOT un burg) is believed to have invented movable type without knowing that it had existed in China. Movable type was much more k useful for printing in European languages, which ’ used only 26 letters. Together, movable type and the printing press helped to spread Renaissance learning. Before movable type and the printing press, books were scarce and costly because each was copied by hand. With these technological innovations, large numbers of books could be produced quickly and at a low cost. Soon more people began to read, and learning spread ' more quickly.
Europeans Search for New Trade Routes During the Renaissance, trade brought new prosperity. European rulers began to increase their power. In England and France, kings and queens worked to bring powerful feudal lords under their control. In Spam and Portugal, Christian monarchs drove out Muslim rulers, who had governed there for centuries.
Rulers in England, France, Spain, and Portugal were eager to increase their wealth. They saw the great profits that could be made through trade. However, Middle Eastern and Italian merchants controlled the trade routes across the Mediterranean Sea. So, Western Europe’s leaders began hunting for other routes to Asia. European rulers also looked to Africa as a source of riches. Tales of Mansa Musa’s wealth had created a stir in Europe, but no one knew the source of African gold.
Portuguese Voyages Portugal was an early leader in the search for a new trade route to Asia and for the source of African gold. In the early 1400s, Prince Henry, known as Henry the Navigator, encouraged sea captains to sail south along the coast of West Africa. Realizing that Portugal needed better navigators to accomplish the task, he set up an informal school to teach sailors techniques of navigation and the art of shipbuilding.
Under Henry’s guidance, the Portuguese designed a new type of ship, the caravel (kar uh vel). With triangular sails and a steering rudder, caravels could be sailed closer to the direction the wind was blowing from. Portuguese caravels stopped at many places along the coast of West Africa. They traded cloth, silver, textiles, and grain for gold and ivory. They also
The Early Americas and European Exploration
24	1.2 Early Europe, Africa, and Asia
Portuguese Routes of Exploration
SO^W
KEY
• Bartolomeu Dias, 1487-1488 Vasco da Gama, 1497-1499
» This map shows the sea routes taken by Bartolomeu Dias and Vasco da Gama.	r
Analyze Maps Which Portuguese explorer stayed closer to land?	I
Interactive 3-D Model
bought Africans who had been forced into slavery and sold them in Europe and elsewhere.
Further Exploration Slowly, Portuguese explorers ventured farther south, hoping to find a sea route around Africa to the rich spice trade of Asia. In 1488, Bartolomeu Dias reached the southern tip of Africa.
Nine years later, in 1497, Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope at the southern tip of Africa. He then sailed up the coast of East Africa and across the Indian Ocean to India. The Portuguese pushed on to the East Indies, the islands of Southeast Asia and the source of valuable spices.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What effect did movable type and the printing press have on learning?
ELPS 3.F.2
Read Portuguese Voyages and Further Exploration. Share information about the reading with a partner.
’V ELPS
ASSESSMENT
1.	Identify Cause and Effect What advantages did Middle Eastern merchants possess that allowed them to take such a central role in the expansion of overseas trade?
2.	Identify Central Issues What were the benefits of the feudal system in Europe in the Middle Ages?
3.	Identify Cause and Effect What were some of the main causes that led to the great burst of learning known as the Renaissance?
4.	Draw Conclusions How did trade between China and other civilizations have long term effects worldwide?
5.	Support Ideas with Examples Explain how the Crusades set the stage for the Age of Exploration that followed.
The Early Americas and European Exploration 25
1.2 Early Europe, Africa, and Asia
Interactive Flipped Video
Many stories exist about early people from Europe or Asia sailing to the Americas. Yet, real evidence has been hard to find. Most experts agree that such voyages were rare, if they occurred at all.
» Objectives
Identify reasons for European exploration of the Americas.
Describe the results of European exploration in the Americas.
Evaluate how exchanges between Europeans and Native Americans modified the physical environment.
» Key Terms
colony
turning point
circumnavigate
Columbian
Exchange
modification
European
Exploration in the Americas
Early Contact With the Americas
Unlike other possible early voyagers to the Americas, the Vikings left behind a detailed record of their voyages. In 1001,Viking sailors led by Leif Ericson reached the eastern tip of North America. Archaeologists have found evidence of the Viking settlement of Vinland in present-day Newfoundland, Canada. The Vikings did not stay in Vinland long and no one is sure why they left. However, Viking stories describe fierce battles with Skraelings, the Viking name for the Inuits.
Evidence suggests that Asians continued to cross the Bering Sea into North America after the last ice age ended. Some scholars believe that ancient seafarers from Polynesia may have traveled to the Americas using their knowledge of the stars and winds. Modern Polynesians have sailed canoes thousands of miles in this way. Still others think that fishing boats from China and Japan blew off course and landed on the western coast of North or South America.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
26
Perhaps such voyages occurred. If so, they were long forgotten. Before 1492, the peoples of Asia and Europe had no knowledge of the Americas and their remarkable civilizations.
Ki RECALL Why aren’t we certain whether early
people from Europe or Asia other than the Vikings sailed to America?
The Voyages of Columbus
Portuguese sailors had pioneered new routes around Africa toward Asia in the late 1400s. Spain, too, wanted a share of the riches. King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella hoped to keep their rival, Portugal, from controlling trade with India, China, and Japan. They therefore agreed to finance a voyage of exploration by Christopher Columbus. Columbus, an Italian sea captain, planned to reach the East Indies by sailing west across the Atlantic. Finding a sea route straight to Asia would give the Spanish direct access to the silks, spices, and precious metals of Asia. The spice trade was a major cause for European exploration and a reason the Spanish rulers supported Columbus’s voyage. However, it was not the only reason. They hoped for wealth from any source. “Get gold,” King Ferdinand said to Columbus. “Humanely if possible, but at all hazards—get gold.”
Sailing Across the Atlantic In August 1492, Columbus set out with three ships and a crew of about 90 sailors. As captain, he commanded the largest vessel, the Santa Maria. The other ships were the Nina and the Pinta.
After a brief stop at the Canary Islands, the little fleet continued west into unknown seas. Fair winds sped them along, but a month passed without the sight of land. Some sailors began to grumble. They had never been away from land for so long and feared being lost at sea. Still, Columbus sailed on.
On October 7, sailors saw flocks of birds flying southwest. Columbus changed course to follow the birds. A few days later, crew members spotted tree branches and flowers floating in the water. At 2 A.M. on October 12, the lookout on the Pinta spotted white cliffs shining in the moonlight. “Tierra! Tierra!” he shouted. "Land! Land!”
At dawn, Columbus rowed ashore and planted the banner of Spain on the beach. He was convinced that he had reached the East Indies in Asia. He called the people he found there “Indians.” In fact, he had reached islands off the coasts of North America and South America in the Caribbean Sea. These islands later became known as the West Indies.
For three months, Columbus explored the West Indies. To his delight, he found signs of gold on the islands. Eager to report his success, he returned to Spain.
Spain Seeks Colonies In Spain, Columbus presented Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand with gifts of pink pearls and brilliantly colored parrots. The royal couple listened intently as Columbus brought with him several of many things that Europeans had never seen before: tobacco, pineapples, and hammocks used for sleeping. Columbus also described the “Indians” he had met, the Tainos (ty nohz). The Tainos, he promised, could easily be converted to Christianity and could also be used as slaves.
The Spanish monarchs were impressed. They gave Columbus the title Admiral of the Ocean Sea. They also agreed to finance future voyages. The promise of great wealth, and the chance to spread Christianity, gave them a reason to explore further.
Columbus made three more voyages across the Atlantic. In 1493, he founded the first Spanish colony in the Americas, Santo Domingo, on an island he called Hispaniola (present-day Haiti and the Dominican Republic). A colony is an area settled and ruled by the government of a distant land. Columbus also explored
» This illustration shows Columbus meeting the Taino people of the West Indies. His voyages benefited Spain but brought much misery to the world of the Taino.
The Early Americas and European Exploration 27	13 European Exploration in the Americas
present-day Cuba and Jamaica and sailed along the coasts of Central America and northern South America. He claimed all of these lands for Spain.
Columbus proved to be a better explorer than governor. During his third expedition, settlers on Hispaniola complained of his harsh rule. Queen Isabella appointed an investigator, who sent Columbus back to Spain in chains. In the end, the queen pardoned Columbus, but he never regained the honors he had won earlier. He died in 1506, still convinced that he had reached Asia.
The Impact of Columbus’s Voyages Columbus has long been honored as the bold sea captain who “discovered America.” Today, we recognize that Native Americans had discovered and settled these lands long before 1492. Still, in at least one sense, Columbus deserves the honors history has given him. Europeans knew nothing of the Americas until Columbus told them about this “new world.” His daring voyages marked the beginning of lasting contact among the peoples of Europe, Africa, and the Americas.
For a great many Native Americans, contact had tragic results. Columbus and those who followed were convinced that European culture was superior to that of the Indians. The Spanish claimed Taino lands and forced Tainos to work in gold mines, on ranches, or in Spanish households. Many Tainos died from harsh conditions or European diseases. Within 100 years of Columbus’s arrival, the Taino population was virtually wiped out.
The Life of Christopher Columbus
» Analyze Timelines How many voyages did Columbus make to the Americas?
For better or worse, the voyages of Columbus signaled a turning point for the Americas. A turning point is a moment in history that marks a decisive change. Curious Europeans saw the new lands as a place where they could settle, trade, and grow rich. i
H IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What reasons did Spain have for sending Columbus on his voyages?
Other Spanish Exploration ,
After the voyages of Columbus, the Spanish explored and settled other Caribbean islands. They wanted to take advantage of the land Columbus had found, seeking gold, crops, slaves, and converts to Christianity for the Spanish crown. By 1511, they had conquered Puerto Rico, Jamaica, and Cuba. They also explored the eastern coasts of North America and South America in i search of a western route to Asia.
In 1513, Vasco Nunez de Balboa (bal BOH uh) plunged into the jungles of the Isthmus of Panama. Native Americans had told him that a large body of water lay to the west. With a party of Spanish soldiers and Indians, Balboa reached the Pacific Ocean after about 25 days. He stood in the crashing surf and claimed the ocean for Spain.
The Spanish had no idea how wide the Pacific was until a sea captain named Ferdinand Magellan (muh JEL un) sailed across it. The expedition—made up of five ships and about 250 crew members—left Spain in 1519. Fifteen months later, it rounded Cape Horn, the stormy southern tip of South America and entered the
Pacific Ocean. Crossing the vast Pacific, the sailors ran out of food.
We remained 3 months and 20 days without taking in provisions or other refreshments and ate only old biscuit reduced to powder, full of grubs and stinking from the dirt which rats had made on it. We drank water that was yellow and stinking.
—Antonio Pigafetta, The Diary of Antonio Pigafetta
Magellan himself was killed in a battle with the local people of the Philippine Islands off the coast of Asia.
In 1522, only one ship and 18 sailors returned to Spain. They were the first people to circumnavigate, or sail completely around, the world. In doing so, they had found an all-water western route to Asia. Their voyage made Europeans aware of the true size of the Earth.
El IDENTIFY Identify the significance of Magellan’^
voyage.
» In 1513, Vasco Nunez de Balboa was the first Spaniard to reach the Pacific Ocean, which he claimed for Spain.
The Columbian Exchange
The encounter between the peoples of the Eastern and Western hemispheres sparked a global exchange of goods and ideas. Because it started with the voyages of Columbus, this transfer is known as the Columbian Exchange. The Columbian Exchange refers to a biological and cultural exchange of animals, plants, human populations, diseases, food, government, technology, the arts, and languages.
The exchange went in both directions. Europeans learned much from Native Americans.
At the same time, Europeans contributed in many ways to the culture of the Americas. This exchange also brought about many modifications, or changes, to the physical environment of the Americas, with both positive and negative results.
Modifying Environments Europeans introduced domestic animals such as chickens from Europe and Africa. European pigs, cattle, and horses often escaped into the wild and multiplied rapidly. Forests and grasslands were converted to pastures. As horses spread through what would become the United States, Indians learned to ride them and used them to carry heavy loads.
Interactive Chart

» Horses and other domesticated animals were introduced to the Americas by Europeans. Horses soon became part of Native Americans’ way of life.
he Early Americas and European Exploration 28
1.3 European Exploration in the Americas
The Early Americas and European Exploration 29
1.3 European Exploration in the Americas
Plants from Europe and Africa changed the way Native Americans lived. The first bananas came from the Canary Islands. By 1520, one Spaniard reported that banana trees had spread “so greatly that it is marvelous to see the great abundance of them.” Oranges, lemons, and figs were also new to the Americas. In North America, explorers also brought such plants as bluegrass, the daisy, and the dandelion. These plants spread quickly in American soil and modified American grasslands.
Tragically, Europeans also brought new diseases, such as smallpox and influenza. Native Americans had no resistance to these diseases. Historians estimate that within 75 years, diseases from Europe had killed almost 90 percent of the people in the Caribbean islands and in Mexico.
Native American influences on Europe, Africa, and Asia For their part, Native Americans introduced Europeans, Africans, and Asians to new foods, customs, and ideas. After 1492, elements of Native American ways of life gradually spread around the world. Sadly, disease also spread from the Americas to Europe and other parts of the world.
Native Americans introduced Europeans to valuable food crops such as corn, potatoes, sweet potatoes, beans, tomatoes, manioc, squash, peanuts, pineapples, and blueberries. Today, almost half the world’s food
crops come from plants that were first grown in the Americas.
Europeans carried the new foods with them as they sailed around the world. Everywhere, people’s diets changed and populations increased. In South Asia, people used American hot peppers and chilis to spice stews. Chinese peasants began growing corn and sweet potatoes. Italians made sauces from tomatoes. People in West Africa grew manioc and corn.
European settlers often adopted Native American skills. In the North, Indians showed Europeans how to use snowshoes and trap beavers and other fur-bearing animals. European explorers learned how to paddle Indian canoes. Some leaders studied Native American political structures. In the 1700s, Benjamin Franklin admired the Iroquois League and urged American colonists to unite in a similar way.
Positive and Negative Consequences Through the Columbian Exchange, Europeans and Native Americans modified their environments and gamed new resources and skills. At the same time, warfare and disease killed many on both sides. Europeans viewed expansion positively. They gained great wealth, explored trade routes, and spread Christianity. Yet their farming, mining, and diseases took a toll on the physical environment and left many Native Americans dead. Despite these negatives, the Columbian
Exchange shaped the modern world, including what would become the United States.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How would you define the Columbian Exchange?
1. Support a Point of View with Evidence How did
European expansion in the Americas affect Native Americans?
ASSESSMENT
2.	Compare the expeditions of Vasco Nunez de Balboa and Ferdinand Magellan.
3.	Summarize the career of Christopher Columbus.
4.	Identify Cause and Effect Explain the causes and effects of the Columbian Exchange.
5.	Generate Explanations Why were Native Americans so susceptible to European diseases such as influenza?
EXCHANGE
Famines and starvation were common events in Europe during the Middle Ages.
Famine affected native peoples of the Americas as well. As a result of the Columbian Exchange, newly arrived species made the food supply more abundant and diverse on both sides of the ocean.
n-w Tin 'Mu-inc
Previously unknown, corn	LHPOPf	, M'tfW hi	O Oh	Europeans brought both sugar
became a dietary staple in	maize	beans	peppers	cane and enslaved Africans to
Mediterranean, African, and	potatoes	peanuts	pineapples	grow it to the Americas.
Asian countries.	sweet	squash	tomatoes	
	potatoes	pumpkins	cocoa	X’
				
¥				
Brought by Spaniards, wheat and rice grew well in the Americas. Rice was sometimes used as a substitute for corn.

wheat	grapes	pigs
sugar	olive oil	cows
bananas	dandelions	goats
rice	horses	chickens
Cows and pigs were unknown in the Americas before Europeans brought them. Over time, Native Americans added beef and pork to their diets.
» Analyze Graphs What were some positive consequences of the Columbian	•—
Exchange?	r®
[Interactive Map
The Early Americas and European Exploration 30	1.3 European Exploration in the
Americas
l
The Early Americas and European Exploration 31	1-3 European Exploration in the Americas
Compare Human Characteristics Compare places and culture regions in what is now the United States in terms of human characteristics. Analyze the images above, which show settlements in two different Native American culture regions in North America. Then write a paragraph comparing the ways the two societies modified their environments. Identify the people and culture region shown in each image, explain how each society modified its environment, and discuss specific reasons why the two groups chose different ways to do so. (See photographs above.) 10.B
Analyze Environmental Influences on Population Distribution Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced Native American population distribution during the seventeenth century. Write a paragraph analyzing how the physical characteristics of the culture regions influenced whether the population was concentrated in specific areas or spread out across the region. Consider both the influence of climate and the availability of resources. 11 .A
3.	Analyze Environmental Influences on Settlement Patterns Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced settlement patterns during the seventeenth century. Write a paragraph analyzing how the physical characteristics of the environment influenced settlement patterns among the Chipewyan and Carrier. Identify in which region the Chipewyan and Carrier lived, describe the physical characteristics of the environment in that region, and describe how these physical characteristics affected settlement patterns. 11. A
4.	Compare Human Characteristics Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of human characteristics. Write a paragraph comparing the cultural characteristics of the Plateau region with those of the Northwest Coastal region. Describe how the Utes and the Shoshones of the Plateau region lived and contrast the Plateau cultures with the more complex cultures found in the Northwest Coastal region. 10.B
5.	Evaluate Sources Describe the negative consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States by locating a primary or secondary source on the subject and evaluating it on the basis of language, corroboration with another sources, and information about the author. Select an example of how human modification of the physical environment, such as the Columbian Exchange, can have negative consequences. Then locate a primary or secondary source that discusses similar negative consequences. Write a paragraph summarizing and evaluating the source. Answer these questions: What negative consequences does the author describe? Do other sources support the information in the source you chose? What information can you gather about the author and his or her knowledge of the subject? 11.B,
29.G
The Early Americas and European Exploration 32
6.	Compare Effects of Technological Innovations on Daily Life Compare the effects of technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history. Use the chart above other sources to write about the effects of innovations in technology on early Europe, Africa, Asia, and eventually on the region that became the United States. Write a paragraph comparing how these innovations might have influenced daily life. Consider what information in the chart is relevant to the topic of your paragraph and how the innovations listed in the chart likely affected daily life. (See table above.) 28.A
7.	Locate and Use Valid Primary and Secondary Sources Locate and use valid primary and secondary sources such as computer software, databases, media and news services, biographies, interviews, and artifacts to compare places and regions in the United States
in terms of human characteristics. Select two Native American culture regions that interest you. Then acquire information about both of these regions by locating one valid primary or secondary source from each of these categories: computer software, database, media or news service, biography, interview, and artifact. Be sure to select valid sources. Then use the information you have acquired to write a short essay comparing the two culture regions in terms of human characteristics. 10.B, 29.A
8.	Analyze Environment’s Influence on Settlement Patterns Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced settlement patterns during the seventeenth century. Write a paragraph analyzing how the physical characteristics of the Eastern Woodlands region influenced the location and structure of Iroquois settlements. Describe and analyze the region’s climate and physical landscape, where the Iroquois settled, and the nature of Iroquois settlements. 11 .A
9.	Compare Effects of Technological Innovations on Daily Life Compare the effects of technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history. Write a paragraph comparing the effects of different technologies developed in the Middle East on daily life in the United States today. Consider the contributions of Middle Eastern engineers and Persians. 28.A
10.	Compare Effects of Technological Innovations in Navigation Compare the effects of technological innovations in navigation that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history. Write a paragraph discussing how advances in technology affected travel by sea for people in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, China, and later in the region that is now the United States. Consider what technological innovations in navigation came from each area of the world and what effects these innovations had on navigation. 28.A
11.	Identify Reasons for European Exploration Identify reasons for European exploration of North America. Write a paragraph identifying why the Spanish were interested in exploring North America. Include the political reasons for exploration, the religious reasons for exploration, and the economic reasons for exploration. 2.A
12.	Describe Positive Consequences of Columbian Exchange Describe the positive consequences of the human modification of the physical environment resulting from the Columbian Exchange. Write a paragraph describing how people benefited from the Columbian Exchange. Define the term Columbian Exchange and describe how the Columbian Exchange changed the physical environment of North America, how Native Americans benefited from the results of these changes, and how the Columbian Exchange benefited other parts of the world. 11 .B
13.	Describe Negative Consequences of Columbian Exchange Describe the negative consequences
of human modification of the physical environment resulting from the Columbian Exchange. Write a paragraph describing the negative results of the Columbian Exchange. Define the term Columbian Exchange. Describe how Native Americans were harmed by the Columbian Exchange and what harm the Columbian Exchange brought to other parts of the world. 11.B
14.	Describe Positive and Negative Consequences of Environmental Modifications Describe the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States. Write
a paragraph describing the positive and negative consequences of the introduction of European pigs, cattle, and horses to North America. Describe the effect on the environment and the effect on Native Americans. 11.B
The Early Americas and European Exploration
33
TEKS ASSESSMENT
Trade in Africa and Eurasia
AFRICA
EURASIA
Domesticated camels enabled North African merchants to cross the Sahara. Caravans could include merchants, missionaries, pilgrims, and scholars.
tu»yynV«9
•	Gold, copper, and salt
•	Ivory for artistic carving
•	Kola nuts for medicine; coffee beans prized as a stimulant
a#3UlSnvWl*t* , AND EDUCATION
•	Advanced metal forging techniques for toolmaking
•	Weaving techniques for patterned textiles
•	Universities taught mathematics, medicine, law.geography, history, and art
•	Training in carpentry, fishing, and tailoring
AMD
VWHNV
• Spices for flavorings,
' perfumes, and medicines
• Techniques for making pottery, ceramics, glazes,
as well as European wines glass, and lacquerwaie
• Textiles including silk and wool
liillil
1111!
llilllt
Slfli
•	Study in mathematics, medicine, and engineering, advances in agricultural and irrigation techniques
•	Architectural domes and ardies used hbuftSng mosques, temples, and churches
•	Surgical instruments and techniques
15.	Describe Environmental Modifications Describe the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States. Write a paragraph describing how the introduction of plants from Europe and Africa changed the environment in the Americas. Identify some of the new plants and describe how these plants modified the environment in the Americas. 11 .B
16.	Differentiate Between Valid Primary and Secondary Sources Differentiate between valid primary and secondary sources such as computer software, databases, media and news services, biographies, interviews, and artifacts by analyzing and categorizing
a list of sources related to reasons for European exploration of North America. The list of sources should include the European exploration article from Encyclopedia Britannica CD-ROM, the National Museum of American History online database, the Flipped Video on the Columbian Exchange, the news article about new archaeological evidence of Viking exploration, the interview with a boatbuilder who constructs replicas of caravels, and Christopher Columbus’s autobiography. Use your Write a paragraph categorizing the sources into two groups based on whether they are primary or secondary sources. Consider the following questions: What are the characteristics of a primary source?
What are the characteristics of a secondary source? Which characteristics does the specific source reflect? 2.A, 29.A
17.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: How much does geography affect people’s lives? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
The Early Americas and European Exploration 34
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE
The Early Americas and European Exploration 35
1 Pre-Columbian Civilizations
CIVILIZATION BEGINNING HEIGHT OF POWER | END
Olmecs	Around 3,500 years ago	1200-400 BC	Around 400 BC cities destroyed; reasons unknown
Mayas	Around 3,000 years ago	AD 250-950	After 950: cities were slowly abandoned; the Mayas still live in the region
Aztecs	Around AD 1300	1428-1521	1521: Spanish conquistadors under Cortes defeat the Aztecs
Incas	Around AD 1000	1438-1533	1533: Spanish conquistadors under Pizzaro defeat the Incas
Based on the chart, which statement below best describes the sequence of Pre-Columbian South American and Mesoamerican civilizations?
A
Of the four civilizations described in the chart, only the Mayas still exist as evidence of their great empire. B
The history of civilization in South America and Mesoamerica is an unbroken chain of empires rising, ruling, and being conquered by new, stronger empires. C
Since their empires were at the height of their powers at about the same time, it is clear that the Aztecs and the Incas agreed to rule their lands together. D
From the Olmecs and the Mayas to the Aztecs and Incas, civilizations flourished in South American and Mesoamerica before Europeans began exploring the Western Hemisphere. 2	Which of the following represents a reason why the California culture region and the Great Basin culture region differed in the size of their Native American populations?
F
The Great Basin had a larger population than California because it had mild summers and winters and more rivers than California. G
The Great Basin had a smaller population than California because the main source of water was the runoff from melting winter snows. H
California had a larger population than the Great Basin because it had a more forgiving climate and more resources than the Great Basin. J
California had a smaller population than the Great Basin because it had a cold, dry climate where only the hardiest plants and animals could survive. The Early Americas and European Exploration 36
Access additional practice questions
Which of the following best replaces the A Developed a calendar B Built ceremonial mounds
question mark in the diagram above?
C
Played games on ball courts D Cut down trees to make houses What does this painting highlight about the relationship between the characteristics of a region’s physical geography and settlement patterns?
F
Because horses are adapted to dry climates, settlement patterns in those regions were based on horse travel. G
People in dry regions had to cluster into family units to make the best use of resources. H A
dry climate forced people to spend time searching for a place with water to settle. J
People in dry regions with limited resources often had to move from one place to another. If you have trouble with...				
Question	1	2	3	4
See Lesson	1.1	1.2	1.3	1.4
TEKS 1.B 11. A 10.B 11.A

j
I
I
I
The Early Americas and European Exploration
5	Which of the following technological innovations that we still use in our daily lives was first developed by Muslims in the Middle Ages?
A
Astrolabe B
Crankshaft C Lateen sails D Navigator’s back-staff 6
European Voyages of Exploration 1492-1609
KEY
-	Columbus, 1492-1493 Cabot, 1497
-	Vespucci, 1499 Balboa, 1510-1513 Magellan, 1519-1522 Cortes, 1519-1521 Pizarro, 1524-1533 Hudson, 1609
Based on the map key, during what span of years was European exploration of the Western Hemisphere most intense?
F 1492-1499 G 1492-1609 H 1510-1522 J 1519-1522
The Early Americas and European Exploration 38
iii
7 Which of the following best represents a reason for European exploration? A To spread feudalism B To spread Christianity C To take back the Holy Lands D To find new technological innovations
H
hr
8	Which of the following could be seen as a negative modification of the environment resulting from the introduction of cattle to the Americas?
F
Forests and grasslands were converted to pasture. G
Buffalo populations were quickly replaced by wild cattle. H
Cattle diseases spread from the Americas back to Europe. J
Dandelions were mixed with native wildflowers to feed the cattle. If you have trouble with... Question	5
See Lesson	1-2
TEKS 28.A
..6........5........ 7........:........8
1.3	I	1.3	i	1.4
1.B........1........2 A.......f .......11.B
The Early Americas
and European Exploration 39

SIIIOSMB
. .	' -u ’*.?■

ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
Why do people move? » The Mayflower, the ship that carried the English Pilgrims to America
*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
I. A, 1.C, 2.A, 2.B, 3.A, 3.B, 3.C, 10.A, 10.B, 10.C, 11.A,
II. B, 11.C, 12.A, 12.B, 12.D, 14.A, 14.B, 15.A, 20.A, 23.A, 23.C, 23.D, 23.E, 25.A, 25.B, 26.A, 26.B, 28.A, 29.I, 29.J, 30.D
Enduring Understandings
•	The Spanish were the first to colonize North America; they brought enslaved Africans as workers for their colonies.
•	The French and Dutch also colonized North America, seeking to profit from the fur trade.
•	English colonists settled along the east coast of North America.
•	People seeking religious freedom founded New England’s colonies, as well as Pennsylvania and Maryland.
•	The slave trade brought enslaved Africans to the English colonies, especially in the South, which relied on slavery for plantation agriculture.
•	The English colonies developed representative governments and inherited a tradition of legal rights from England.
PEARSON
NBC LEARN

2 European Colonization of North America (15001 1750)
to learn about the adventures of explorer and colonist John Smith.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
43
Interactive Flipped Video
“What a troublesome thing it is to discover new lands. The risks we took, it is hardly possible to exaggerate.” Thus spoke Bernal Diaz del Castillo, one of the many Spanish conquistadors (kahn KEES tuh dorz), or conquerors, who marched into the Americas in the 1500s. When asked why they traveled to the Americas, Diaz responded, “We came here to serve God and the king and also to get rich.”
» Objectives
Describe how conquistadors defeated two Native American empires.
Explain why Spain settled its colonies.
Explain the causes and effects of the transatlantic slave trade.
» Key Terms
conquistador
pueblo
presidio
mission
peninsulare
creole
mestizo
encomienda
plantation
Spanish Colonization and New Spain
Conquistadors Arrive in the Americas
In their search for glory and gold, the conquistadors made Spam one of the richest nations in Europe. Spanish colonists followed the conquistadors and created a vast new empire in the Americas.
The rulers of Spain gave conquistadors permission to establish settlements in the Americas. In return, conquistadors agreed to give Spain one fifth of any gold or treasure they captured.
Like other conquistadors, Hernando Cortes was eager to win riches and glory. He had heard rumors of a fabulously wealthy Native American empire in Mexico. With only about 600 soldiers and 16 horses, Cortes set sail for Mexico in 1519 in search of gold.
The Spanish Destroy an Empire Moctezuma (mokt uh zoo muh), the Aztec emperor who ruled over much of Mexico, heard disturbing reports of a large house floating on the sea. It was filled with white men with long, thick beards. Aztec sacred writings predicted that a powerful white-skinned god would come from the east to rule the Aztecs. The strangers were approaching Tenochtitlan (tay nawch teet
PEARSON I
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
44
LAHN), the Aztec capital, which is now Mexico City. Moctezuma decided to welcome them as his guests.
Cortes took advantage of Moctezuma’s invitation. Shrewdly, Cortes had already begun to win the support of other Indians who resented Aztec rule.
One of his trusted advisers was an Indian woman the Spanish called Dona Marina. She gave Cortes valuable information about the Aztecs and acted as a translator and negotiator. On November 8,1519, Cortes marched into Tenochtitlan. The city was much larger than any Spanish city at that time. Thousands upon thousands of Aztecs turned out to see the astonishing newcomers riding horses. Diaz recalled:
Who could count the multitude of
men, women and children which had
come out on the roofs, in their boats on
the canals, or in the streets, to see us?
—Bernal Diaz del Castillo, True History of the Conquest of New Spain
At first, Cortes was friendly to Moctezuma. Soon, however, he made the emperor a prisoner in his own city. Tensions mounted in Tenochtitlan over the next half year.
Finally, the Aztecs drove out the Spanish. Their victory, however, was brief. Aided by people whom the Aztecs had conquered, Cortes recaptured the city. In the end, the Spanish destroyed Tenochtitlan, and Moctezuma was killed. The Aztec empire had fallen.
The Inca Empire Falls Another conquistador, Francisco Pizarro (pee SAHR oh), set his sights on the Incan empire. Pizarro sailed down the Pacific coast of South America with fewer than 200 Spanish soldiers. In 1532, he captured the Incan emperor Atahualpa (ah tuh WAHL puh) and later executed him. Without the leadership of Atahualpa, Incan resistance collapsed. By 1535, Pizarro controlled much of the Incan empire.
Why the Spanish Won How were the Spanish able to conquer two great empires with only a handful of soldiers? First, the Spanish had superior military equipment. They were protected by steel armor and had guns. The Aztecs and Incas relied on clubs, bows and arrows, and spears. Also, the Native Americans had never seen horses. They were frightened by mounted Spanish soldiers.
In addition, the Native Americans did not fight as hard as they might have. The Aztecs hesitated to attack at first because they thought the Spanish might be gods.
» Hernando Cortes kneels before the Aztec emperor Moctezuma. Infer What is the artist suggesting about this interaction between Moctezuma and Cortes?
» In this artist’s rendering, Francisco Pizarro and his soldiers surround the Inca emperor Atahualpa.
European Colonization of North America
45
