8.1 Conflicts and Compromises
In the 1848 presidential campaign, Free-Soilers named former President Martin Van Buren as their candidate. Democrats chose Lewis Cass of Michigan. The Whigs selected Zachary Taylor, a hero of the Mexican War.
For the first time, slavery was an important election issue. Van Buren called for a ban on slavery in the Mexican Cession. Cass supported popular sovereignty. Taylor did not speak on the issue. However, because he was a slave owner from Louisiana, many southern voters assumed that he supported slavery.
Zachary Taylor won the election. Still, Van Buren took 10 percent of the popular vote, and 13 other Free-Soil candidates won seats in Congress. The success of the new Free-Soil party showed that slavery had become a national issue.
H IDENTIFY CENTRAL ISSUES
What was significant about the Free-Soil Party and the fact that slavery was a political issue for the first time?
California Reignites the Slavery Debate
For a time after the Missouri Compromise, both slave and free states entered the Union peacefully. However, when California requested admission to the Union as a
free state in 1850, the balance of power in the Senate was once again threatened.
Conflict and Compromise Over California In 1849 there were 15 slave states and 15 free states in the Union. If California entered the Union as a free state, the balance of power would be broken. Furthermore, it seemed quite possible that Oregon, Utah, and New Mexico might also join the Union as free states.
Many southerners feared that the South would be hopelessly outvoted in the Senate. Some even suggested that southern states might want to secede, or remove themselves, from the United States. Northern congressmen, meanwhile, argued that California should enter the Union as a free state because most of the territory lay north of the Missouri Compromise line.
It was clear that the nation faced a crisis. Many in Congress looked to Senator Henry Clay for a solution.
Conflicts Between Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun Clay had won the nickname "the Great Compromiser ” for working out the Missouri Compromise and the compromise Tariff of 1833, which resolved the Nullification Crisis. Now, decades later, the 73-year-old Clay was frail and ill. Still, he pleaded for the North and South to reach an agreement. If they failed to do so, Clay warned, the nation could break apart.
Senator John C. Calhoun of South Carolina had worked with Clay to pass the compromise Tariff of 1833,
Balance of Free and Slave States
HH
Original 13 states » Analyze Data What effect did the admission of California to the Union as a free state in 1850 have on the balance of power in the Senate?
Sectionalism and Civil War 378	8.1 Conflicts and Compromises
but now he opposed compromise over the extension of slavery to the West. He drafted a speech expressing his opposition.
Calhoun was dying of tuberculosis and could not speak loudly enough to address the Senate. He stared defiantly at his northern foes while Senator James Mason of Virginia read his speech.
Calhoun refused to compromise. He insisted that slavery be allowed in the western territories. In addition, Calhoun demanded that fugitives, or African Americans who had fled slavery, be returned to their owners. He wanted northerners to admit that southern slaveholders had the right to reclaim their "property.”
If the North rejected the South’s demands, Calhoun told the Senate, “let the states ... agree to part in peace. If you are unwilling that we should part in peace, tell us so, and we shall know what to do.” Everyone knew what Calhoun meant. If an agreement could not be reached, the South would use force to leave the Union.
Daniel Webster Offers Compromise Daniel Webster of Massachusetts spoke next. He had opposed Clay's compromise Tariff of 1833. Now, he supported Clay's plea to save the Union. Webster stated his position clearly:
“I speak today not as a
Massachusetts man, nor as a northern man, but as an American. ... I speak today for the preservation of the Union.
. . . There can be no such thing as a peaceable secession.”
—Daniel Webster, Speech in the U.S. Senate, July 17, 1850
Webster feared that the states could not separate without starting a bloody civil war. A civil war is a war between people of the same country.
Like many northerners, Webster viewed slavery as evil. The breakup of the United States, however, he believed was worse. To save the Union, Webster was willing to compromise. He would support southern demands that northerners be forced to return fugitives from slavery.
El CHECK UNDERSTANDING Why did Daniel
Webster, an avowed opponent of slavery, agree to support returning to their owners African Americans who had escaped slavery?
ELPS LISTENING
2.1.4 With a partner, discuss John C. Calhoun and Daniel Webster. One of you will talk » The admission of California to the Union threatened to upset the delicate balance of slave and free states. The issue led to a showdown in Congress between Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun.
» Daniel Webster (standing) addressed the Senate during the great debate on Clay’s compromise plan in 1850. Webster feared the possibility of a civil war more than the spread of slavery.
Sectionalism and Civil War 379
8.1 Conflicts and Compromises
about Calhoun and his position on slavery while the other listens. Then do the same for Webster.
Congress Reaches a
Compromise
In 1850, as the debate raged, Calhoun died. His last words reportedly were “The South! The poor South! God knows what will become of her now!” President Taylor also died in 1850. The new President was Millard Fillmore. Unlike Taylor, he supported Clay’s compromise plan.
The Compromise of 1850 Addresses Regional Concerns Henry Clay gave more than 70 speeches in favor of a compromise. At last, however, he became too sick to continue. Stephen Douglas, of Illinois, took up the fight for him and guided Clay’s plan, the Compromise of 1850, through Congress.
The Compromise of 1850 had five main provisions. First, it allowed California to enter the Union as a free state. Second, it divided the rest of the Mexican Cession into the territories of New Mexico and Utah.
Voters in each would decide the slavery question according to popular sovereignty. Third, it ended the slave trade in Washington, D.C., the nation’s capital. Congress, however, declared that it had no power to
ban the slave trade between slave states. Fourth, it included a strict fugitive slave law. Fifth, it settled a border dispute between Texas and New Mexico.
The Fugitive Slave Act Helps the South The Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 required all citizens to help catch African Americans trying to escape slavery. People who let fugitives escape could be fined $1,000 and jailed. The new law also set up special courts to handle the cases of runaways. Suspects were not allowed a jury trial. Judges received $10 for sending an accused runaway to the South but only $5 for setting someone free. Lured by the extra money, some judges sent African Americans to the South whether or not they were runaways.
The Fugitive Slave Act Enrages the North The
Fugitive Slave Act enraged antislavery northerners. By forcing them to catch runaways, the law made northerners feel as if they were part of the slave system. In several northern cities, crowds tried to rescue fugitives from their captors.
Despite the compromise, tensions remained high because neither side got everything that it wanted. The new Fugitive Slave Act was especially hard for northerners to accept. Each time the act was enforced, it convinced more northerners that slavery was immoral and evil.
EFFECTS OF THE COMPROMISE OF
1850 
CALIFORNIA JOINS THE UNION
AS A FREE STATE
[ED: Can the pie graph title be shortened? It's much longer than the typical pie graph title, and it sounds a little redundant with the main title.]
67%
IYE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES VOTES ON
lALIFORNIA BECOMING A FREE STATE
SLAVERY
DECLINES
IN WASHINGTON, D.C.
Source: National Archives
1800
4 SLAVES to 1 .FREE BLACK
I860
1 SLAVE ™ 3 FREE BLACKS
25%
NAY
Source: GovTrack.us
NOT VOTING
FUGITIVE
SLAVE ACT
1850
11 RELEASED
RETURNED TO OWNERS
20,000
Estimated number of blacks who fled to Canada
$500 fine & 6 months imprisonment for any person aiding a fugitive slave
Source: The Slave Catchers: The Enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Law
» Analyze Information Based on the information on the circle graph, what can you infer about the reason Congressional representatives from slave states agreed to the Compromise of 1850?
Sil Interactive Cartoon
Sectionalism and Civil War 380	8.1 Conflicts and Compromises
To counter the Fugitive Slave Act, many northern states passed personal liberty laws. These laws made it harder to recapture those accused of running away The laws brought suspects before judges, provided jury trials, and prohibited kidnapping.
Some laws also gave legal assistance. One state, Vermont, declared free any enslaved person who entered the state. Southerners were outraged by these laws and called any interference with the Fugitive Slave Act unconstitutional.
Effects of Conflict and Compromise The
Compromise of 1850 had the effect of holding the union together for a while longer and creating a peaceful solution to the threat of secession by the South and civil war. However, the conflict between the North and the South over the issues of slavery and its expansion remained. Many in the North and in the South were not satisfied with the compromise.
Three great Congressional leaders' actions had an effect on the conflict over slavery and the Compromise of 1850, just as they had had on an earlier compromise, the compromise Tariff of 1833 that ended the Nullification Crisis. In 1833, the actions of Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun had brought the passage of the compromise tariff, while Daniel Webster stood in opposition. In 1850, Clay, the Great Compromiser, once again arranged the passage of a compromise, but this time with the support of Webster, as Calhoun tried to block the compromise. As they had in 1833, the compromisers of 1850 helped preserve the Union. In 1850, though, the opponents of compromise threatened to tear it apart.
H GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
How did the Fugitive Slave Act cause tensions between northerners and southerners?
A
Book Sways the North Against Slavery An event in 1852 added to the growing antislavery mood of the North. Harriet Beecher Stowe, a New England woman, published a novel called Uncle Toni's Cabin. Stowe wrote the novel to show the evils of slavery and the injustice of the Fugitive Slave Act.
A
Powerful Story Appeals to Northerners Stowe told the story of Uncle Tom, an enslaved African American noted for his kindness and piety. Tom’s world is shattered when he is bought by the brutal Simon Legree. When Tom refuses to reveal the whereabouts of $150 REWARD
RAN AW AY
from the subscriber, on the night of the 2d instant, a negro man, who calls himself Henry about 22 years old, & feet 6 or 8 Inches high, or-Kdinary color, rather chunky built, bushy head, and has it divided mostly on one side, and keeps it very nicely combed; has been raised in the house,and isa tirst rate dining-room servant, and was In a
____tavern in Louisville for 18 months. I
^^expect he is now in Louisville trying to make his escape to a free state, (in all probability to Cincinnati, Ohio.) Perhaps he may try to get employment on a steamboat He is a good cook, and is nandy in any capacity as a house servant. Had on when be left, a dark cassinett coatee, and dark striped cassinett pantaloons, new—he bad other clothing. X will give pffO reward if taken in touisvill; 100 dollars if* taken one hundred miles from Louisville in this State, and ISO dollars if taken ou1 of this State, and delivered to me, or secured in any jnil so that 1 can tret Mir a^ain.	WILLIAM 1H MR
Bardfitoirn, ffy., Abpftmfer 1838.
» Slave owners often posted rewards for captured fugitives, as in this poster from 1838. Hypothesize How might the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 have affected the practice of offering rewards for turning in African Americans who fled slavery?
©
Interactive Gallery
two runaways, Legree whips him to death. Uncle Toni’s Cabin had wide appeal among northern readers.
The first printing, consisting of 5,000 copies, sold out in just two days. It quickly became a best seller, selling 300,000 copies the first year. Eventually, the book sold millions of copies and was translated into dozens of languages.
Nationwide Reaction Is Mixed Although Uncle Toni’s Cabin was popular in the North, southerners objected to the book. They claimed that it did not give a true picture of slave life. Indeed, Stowe had seen little of slavery firsthand.
Despite such objections, Uncle Toni’s Cabin helped to change the way northerners felt about slavery. No longer could they ignore slavery as a political problem for Congress to settle. More and more northerners now saw slavery as a moral problem facing every American. For this reason, Uncle Toni’s Cabin was one of the most important books in American history.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What legitimate complaint did southerners have about Uncle Tom’s Cabin? Sectionalism and Civil War 381	8.1 Conflicts and Compromises
ASSESSMENT
1.	Generate Explanations What was the effect of the Missouri Compromise?
2.	Draw Conclusions What could explain why the Wilmot Proviso passed in the House but did not pass in the Senate?
3.	Summarize the South’s reaction to California’s request for admission to the Union.
4.	Compare Vermont declared free any enslaved person who entered the state, an action in direct conflict with the Fugitive Slave Act. How was Vermont’s declaration similar to that of South Carolina, which in 1832 declared a tariff passed by Congress, the so-called Tariff of Abominations illegal?
5.	Draw Conclusions Why was the Fugitive Slave Act advantageous to the southern states?
Sectionalism and Civil War 382
8.1 Conflicts and Compromises
The Compromise of 1850 dealt mainly with lands that were part of the Mexican Cession. It did not change slavery policies of the Missouri Compromise for lands that had been part of the Louisiana Purchase. However, the Compromise of 1850 caused some people to question whether the Missouri Compromise needed changing.
Growing Tensions
Interactive Flipped Video
The Question of Slavery in Kansas and Nebraska
In January 1854, Senator Stephen Douglas introduced a bill to set up a government for the lands covering the northwestern part of the Louisiana Purchase. This territory stretched from present-day Oklahoma north to present-day Canada, and from Missouri west to the Rockies.
Douglas knew that white southerners did not want to add another free state to the Union. He proposed that this large region be divided into two territories, Kansas and Nebraska. The settlers living in each territory would then be able to decide the issue of slavery by popular sovereignty. Douglas’s bill was known as the Kansas-Nebraska Act.
The Kansas-Nebraska Act Ignites Sectionalist Disputes The
Kansas-Nebraska Act seemed fair to many people. After all, the Compromise of 1850 had applied popular sovereignty in New Mexico and Utah. Southern leaders especially supported the Kansas-Nebraska Act. They were sure that slave owners from neighboring Missouri would move with their enslaved African Americans across the border into Kansas. In time, they hoped, Kansas would become a slave state.
President Franklin Pierce, a Democrat elected in 1852, also supported the bill. With the President’s help, Douglas pushed the
» Objectives
Identify the goals and outcomes of the Kansas-Nebraska Act.
Summarize the impact of the Dred Scott case on the nation.
Explain why the Republican Party was founded.
Explain the rapid emergence of Abraham Lincoln as a Republican Party leader.
Describe the reaction to John Brown’s raid on Harpers Ferry.
» Key Terms
Kansas-Nebraska
Act
Border Ruffians
guerrilla warfare
lawsuit
arsenal
treason
martyr
Dred Scott v.
Sandford Republican Party
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
383
Kansas-Nebraska Act through Congress. He did not realize it at the time, but he had lit a fire under a powder keg. Sectionalist arguments over slavery once again erupted, this time bringing the nation closer to civil war.
Many northerners were unhappy with the new law. The Missouri Compromise had already banned slavery in Kansas and Nebraska, they insisted. In effect, the Kansas-Nebraska Act would repeal the Missouri Compromise.
The northern reaction to the Kansas-Nebraska Act was swift and angry. Opponents of slavery called the act a “criminal betrayal of precious rights.” Slavery could now spread to areas that had been free for more than 30 years. Some northerners protested by openly challenging the Fugitive Slave Act.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did northerners consider the Kansas-Nebraska Act a betrayal?
» Angry citizens in Boston protested an 1854 court order to return Anthony Burns to slavery in Virginia. His return was in accordance with the Fugitive Slave Act. An army escort marched Burns to the Boston waterfront.
Violent Clashes Over Slavery in Kansas
Kansas now became a testing ground for popular sovereignty. Stephen Douglas hoped that settlers would decide the slavery issue peacefully on election day. Instead, proslavery and antislavery forces sent settlers to Kansas to fight for control of the territory.
Most of the new arrivals were farmers from neighboring states. Their main interest in moving to Kansas was to acquire cheap land. Few of these settlers owned enslaved African Americans. At the same time, abolitionists brought in more than 1,000 settlers from New England.
Proslavery settlers moved into Kansas as well. They wanted to make sure that antislavery forces did not overrun the territory. Proslavery bands from Missouri often rode across the border. These Border Ruffians, as they were called, battled the antislavery forces in Kansas.
Rival Governments in Kansas In 1855, Kansas held elections to choose lawmakers. Hundreds of Border Ruffians crossed into Kansas and voted illegally. They helped to elect a proslavery legislature.
The new legislature quickly passed laws to support slavery. One law said that people could be put to death for helping enslaved African Americans escape. Another made speaking out against slavery a crime punishable by two years of hard labor. Antislavery settlers refused to accept these laws. They elected their own governor and legislature. With two rival governments, Kansas was in chaos. Armed gangs roamed the territory looking for trouble.
Pro- and Antislavery Forces Fight in Kansas A
band of proslavery men raided the town of Lawrence, an antislavery stronghold, in 1856. The attackers destroyed homes and smashed the press of a Free-Soil newspaper.
John Brown, an abolitionist, decided to strike back. Brown had moved to Kansas to help make it a free state. He claimed that God had sent him to punish supporters of slavery.
Brown rode with his four sons and two other men to the town of Pottawatomie (paht uh WAHT uh mee) Creek. In the middle of the night, they dragged five proslavery settlers from their beds and murdered them.
The killings at Pottawatomie Creek led to even more violence. Both sides fought fiercely and engaged m guerrilla warfare, or warfare in which small military groups use surprise attacks and other methods. By late 1856, more than 200 people had been killed.
Sectionalism and Civil War
384	8.2 Growing Tensions
Newspapers started calling the territory “Bleeding Kansas.”
GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
How did events in Kansas foreshadow the looming Civil War?
Violence Over Slavery Breaks Out in the Senate
Even before John Brown’s attack, the battle over Kansas had spilled into the Senate. Charles Sumner of Massachusetts was the leading abolitionist senator. In one speech, the sharp-tongued Sumner denounced the proslavery legislature of Kansas. He then viciously criticized his southern foes, singling out Andrew Butler, an elderly senator from South Carolina.
Butler was not in the Senate on the day Sumner spoke. A few days later, however, Butler’s nephew, Congressman Preston Brooks, marched into the Senate chamber. Using a heavy cane, Brooks beat Sumner until he fell down, bloody and unconscious, to the floor. Sumner did not fully recover from the beating for three years.
Many southerners felt that Sumner got what he deserved for his verbal abuse of another senator. Hundreds of people sent canes to Brooks to show their support.
To northerners, however, the brutal act was more evidence that slavery led to violence. The violence in the Senate was another warning that the nation was veering toward a civil war over slavery.
DRAW CONCLUSIONS
What does the altercation in the Senate tell you about the mood of the country in the late-1850s?
The Impact of the Dred Scott Case
With Congress in an uproar, many Americans looked to the Supreme Court to settle the slavery issue and restore peace. In 1857, the Court ruled on a case that involved an enslaved man named Dred Scott. Instead of bringing harmony, however, the Court’s decision further divided the North and the South.
Dred Scott had been enslaved for many years in Missouri. Later, he moved with his owner, who was on army surgeon, to Illinois and then to the Wisconsin Territory, where slavery was not allowed. After they returned to Missouri, Scott's owner died. The owner's wife took ownership of Scott, and eventually those rights transferred to her brother, John Sanford.
» Proslavery Representative Preston Brooks beat abolitionist Senator Charles Sumner on the Senate floor. Analyze Political Cartoons How does the cartoon portray northerners and southerners differently?
Interactive Gallery
» Dred Scott, who had once lived in a free territory, appealed for his freedom after his owner died. Predict Consequences How did the Supreme Court ruling against Dred Scott challenge the Missouri Compromise?
Interactive Gallery
©
Sectionalism and Civil War 385	8.2 Growing Tensions
Antislavery lawyers helped Scott to file a lawsuit, a legal case brought to settle a dispute between people or groups. Scott’s lawyers argued that, because Scott had lived in a free territory, he had become a free man.
The Decision and Significance of Dred Scott v. Sandford In time, the case reached the Supreme Court as Dred Scott v. Sandford. The Court’s decision shocked and dismayed Americans who opposed slavery. First, the Court ruled that Scott could not file a lawsuit because, as an enslaved person, he was not a citizen. Also, the Court’s written decision clearly stated that slaves were considered to be property.
The Court’s ruling did not stop there. Instead, the Justices went on to make a sweeping decision about the larger issue of slavery in the territories. According to the Court, Congress did not have the power to outlaw slavery in any territory. The Court’s ruling meant that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional.
The Dred Scott v. Sandford decision had a far-reaching impact on life in the United States. It meant that enslaved African Americans could not find freedom anywhere in the United States, and together with the Fugitive Slave Act, that no part of the United States could be completely free of slavery. The decision
» According to the Dred Scott decision, enslaved African Americans were considered property, not citizens. The court decision had hard implications for fugitives such as this one.
also further increased tensions between the North and South.
The Democratic Party began to divide over the issue of slavery. The decision also increased support for abolition in the North.
Reactions to Dred Scott v. Sandford White southerners rejoiced at Dred Scott v. Sandford. It meant that slavery was legal in all the territories. This was just what white southerners had been demanding for years.
African Americans responded angrily to the Dred Scott decision. In the North, many held public meetings to condemn the ruling. At one meeting in Philadelphia, a speaker hoped that the ruling would lead more whites to “join with us in our efforts to recover the long lost boon of freedom.”
White northerners were also shocked by the ruling. Many had hoped that slavery would eventually die out if it were restricted to the South. Now, however, slavery could spread throughout the West. Even northerners who disliked abolitionists felt that the ruling in Dred Scotty. Sandford was wrong. A newspaper in Cincinnati declared, “We are now one great . . . slaveholding community.”
Abolitionist Frederick Douglass also spoke out against Dred Scott v. Sandford: “This infamous decision,” he declared, “maintains that slaves ... are property in the same sense that horses, sheep, and swine are property . . . that [people] of African descent are not and cannot be citizens of the United States.” He told his listeners:
“All I ask of the American people is that they live up to the Constitution, adopt its principles, [take in] its spirit, and enforce its provisions. When this is done . . . liberty . . . will become the inheritance of all the inhabitants of this highly favored country.”
-—-Frederick Douglass, Collected Speeches, 1857
Ed COMPARE the decision in Dred Scott v. Sandfoid
with the Preamble to the Declaration of Independence which states . all men are created equal; [and] are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights.” How do the two differ?
Sectionalism and Civil War 386	8.2 Growing Tensions
The Republican Party Challenges Other Parties
By the mid-1850s, people who opposed slavery in the territories sought a new political voice. Neither Whigs nor Democrats, they argued, would take a strong stand against slavery. We have submitted to slavery long enough,” an Ohio Democrat declared.
A group of Free-Soilers, northern Democrats, and antislavery Whigs gathered in Michigan in 1854. There they formed the Republican party. Its main goal was to keep slavery out of the western territories. Some Republicans were abolitionists. They hoped to end slavery in the South as well. Most Republicans, however, wanted only to stop the spread of slavery.
Growth of the Republican Party The new party grew quickly By 1856, it was ready to challenge the older parties for power. Republicans selected John C. Fremont to run for President.
Fremont was a frontiersman who had fought for California’s independence. He had little political experience, but he opposed the spread of slavery.
Fremont’s main opponent was Democrat James Buchanan of Pennsylvania. Many Democrats saw Buchanan as a “northern man with southern principles.” They hoped that he would attract voters in both the North and the South. Former President Millard Fillmore also ran as the candidate of the American, or “Know-Nothing,” party A strong supporter of the Union, Fillmore feared that a Republican victory would split the nation apart.
Buchanan won the election with support from a large majority of southerners and many northerners. Still, the Republicans made a strong showing in the election. Without the support of a single southern state, Fremont won one third of the popular vote. Southerners worried that their influence in the national government was fading.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why was the Republican Party established in 1854?
Abraham Lincoln Leads the Republican Party
The next test for the Republican party came in 1858 in Illinois. Abraham Lincoln, a Republican, challenged Democrat Stephen Douglas for his seat in the Senate. Decause most Americans expected Douglas to run for Resident in 1860, the race captured the attention of the whole nation.

s s’ r'f 'A..
f /s ’’Uss', t/f
» American Party candidate Millard Fillmore separates Republican John Fremont (left) and Democrat James Buchanan (right) before they can harm one another. Analyze Political Cartoons What can you infer about Fillmore’s view on sectional tensions?
Lincoln Attacks Proslavery Positions Abraham Lincoln was born on the Kentucky frontier. Like many frontier people, his parents moved often to find better land. The family lived in Indiana and later in Illinois. As a child, Lincoln spent only a year in school. Still, he taught himself to read, poring over his books by firelight.
After Lincoln left home, he opened a store in Illinois. There, he studied law on his own and launched a career in politics. He served eight years in the state legislature and one term in Congress. Bitterly opposed to the Kansas-Nebraska Act, he decided to run for the Senate in 1858.
When the race began, Lincoln was not a national figure. Still, people in Illinois knew him well and liked him. To them, he was "just folks”—someone who enjoyed picnics, wrestling contests, and all their favorite pastimes. His honesty, wit, and plain-spoken manner made him a good speaker. Lincoln strongly opposed the Dred Scott decision and used his political platform to speak against it. He voiced his opposition when he debated Stephen Douglas. He later spoke against it during his presidential campaign, rallying Republicans to oppose the Court’s decision.

Sectionalism and Civil War 387
8.2 Growing Tensions
Lincoln and Douglas Debate Slavery During the Senate campaign, Lincoln challenged Douglas to a series of debates. Douglas was not eager to accept, but he did. During the campaign, the two debated seven times. Slavery was the important issue.
Douglas wanted to settle the slavery question by popular sovereignty, or a popular vote in each territory. He personally disliked slavery, but stated that he did not care whether people in the territories voted “down or up” for it.
Lincoln, like nearly all whites of his day, did not believe in “perfect equality” between blacks and whites. He did, however, believe that slavery was wrong.
“There is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights [listed] in the Declaration of Independence, the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. .
. . In the right to eat the bread, without the leave of anybody else, which his own hand earns, he is my equal and
the equal of Judge Douglas, and the
equal of every living man.”
—Abraham Lincoln, Speech at Ottawa, Illinois, August 21, 1858
Since slavery was a “moral, social, and political wrong,” said Lincoln, Douglas and other Americans should not treat it as an unimportant question to be voted “down or up.” Lincoln was totally opposed to slavery in the territories. Still, he was not an abolitionist. He had no wish to interfere with slavery in the states where it already existed.
Lincoln Emerges as a Leader Week after week, both men spoke nearly every day to large crowds. Newspapers reprinted their campaign speeches. The more northerners read Lincoln’s words, the more they thought about the injustice of slavery.
In the end, Douglas won the election by a slim margin. Still, Lincoln was a winner, too. He was now known throughout the country. Two years later, the two rivals would again meet face to face—both seeking the office of President.
& DESCRIBE the contradiction in Lincoln’s position
on slavery.
THE CHANGING PERCEPTION
of SLAVERY SUPPORT FOR THE
KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT
KANSAS ELECTION FOR
TERRITORIAL LEGISLATURE
ILLINOIS SENATE ELECTION
2,905
LEGALLY-
REGISTERED
VOTERS
6,218
ACTUAL VOTES CAST
» Analyze Data How did the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which allowed states to decide if they would allow slavery, affect the outcome of the Kansas election for territorial legislature in 1855?
Sectionalism and Civil War 388	8.2 Growing Tensions
Q3S3 ELPS LISTENING
2.1.5 Describe Lincoln’s early life to a partner, and have him or her take notes on what you say. Then listen to your partner speak about Lincoln’s personality and beliefs, and take notes on what you hear. John Brown’s Antislavery Campaign
In the meantime, more bloodshed inflamed divisions between the North and the South. In 1859, the radical abolitionist John Brown carried his antislavery campaign from Kansas to the East. He led a group of followers, including five African Americans, to the town of Harpers Ferry, Virginia.
There, Brown planned to raid a federal arsenal, or gun warehouse. He thought that enslaved African Americans would flock to him at the arsenal. He would then give them weapons and lead them in a revolt.
The Impact of John Brown’s Raid Brown quickly gained control of the arsenal. No slave uprising took place, however. Instead, troops under the command of Robert E. Lee killed ten raiders and captured Brown.
Most people, in both the North and the South, thought that Brown's plan to lead a slave revolt was insane. After all, there were few enslaved African Americans in Harpers Ferry. Furthermore, after seizing the arsenal, Brown did nothing further to encourage a slave revolt. At his trial, however, Brown seemed perfectly sane. He sat quietly as the court found him guilty of murder and treason, or actions against one's country. Before hearing his sentence, he gave a moving defense of his actions. He showed no emotion as he was sentenced to death.
A
Symbol of the Nation’s Divisions Because he conducted himself with such dignity during his trial, John Brown became a hero to many northerners. Some considered him a martyr because he was willing to give up his life for his beliefs. On the morning he was hanged, church bells rang solemnly throughout the North. In years to come, New Englanders would sing a popular song with the chorus: “John Brown's body lies amold’ring in the grave, but his soul is marching on.” When poet Julia Ward Howe heard the song, she was inspired to write the poem “The Battle Hymn of the Republic,” which became a popular Civil War song set to the same tune, a piece of music that was unique to American culture. To white southerners, the northern response to John Brown’s death was outrageous. People were singing the praises of a man who had tried to lead a slave revolt! Many southerners became convinced that
» In 1858, Abraham Lincoln and Stephen Douglas debated over the spread of slavery. Both men disliked slavery, but Lincoln opposed its spread, while Douglas favored settling the issue by a popular vote in each territory.
» In this abolitionist painting, John Brown pauses on his way to his execution to kiss an enslaved woman’s baby.
Sectionalism and Civil War 389
8.2 Growing Tensions
the North wanted to destroy slavery—and the South along with it. The nation was poised for a violent clash.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why were southerners outraged at the northern response to John Brown’s execution?
ASSESSMENT
1. Draw Conclusions Some northerners were outraged by the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act. What did that outrage have to do with the location of the Kansas Territory?
2.	Summarize the issue that was brought to the Supreme Court in Dred Scott v. Sandford.
3.	Check Understanding What worried southerners about the Republican Party victories in the election of 1856?
4.	Identify Central Issues Neither Stephen Douglas nor Abraham Lincoln approved of slavery, so what disagreement did they have?
5.	Hypothesize Why did John Brown’s raid on a federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry fail?
Sectionalism and Civil War
8.2 Growing Tensions
The Republican National Convention for the presidential election of 1860 took place in Chicago, Illinois. Abraham Lincoln faced William Seward for the nomination. Lincoln, whose fame had increased during the Lincoln-Douglas debates in 1858, won the nomination.
Interactive Flipped Video
Division and the
Outbreak of War
Abraham Lincoln and the Election of 1860
The Democrats held their convention in Charleston, South Carolina. Lack of unity proved costly for the Democratic party. Southerners wanted the party to call for slavery in all new territories. However, northern Democrats refused to do so. In the end, the party split in two. Northern Democrats chose Stephen Douglas to run for President. Southern Democrats picked John Breckinridge of Kentucky.
Some Americans tried to heal the split between the North and the South by forming a new party. The Constitutional Union party chose John Bell of Tennessee to run for President.
Bell was a moderate who wanted to keep the Union together. He jot support only in a few southern states that were still seeking a compromise.
Douglas was sure that Lincoln would win. However, he believed that Democrats “must try to save the Union.” He urged southerners to stay with the Union, no matter who was elected.
When the votes were counted, Lincoln had carried the North and won the election. He was able to take advantage of divisions in the Democratic party. Also, southern votes did not affect the outcome
1.A, 1.C, 8.A, 8.B, 8.C, 12.D, 17.B
» Objectives
Identify how the 1860 election reflected sectional differences.
Explain why southern states seceded from the Union following the election of 1860. Identify how the Civil War began in 1861.
Describe the strengths and weaknesses of the North and South as the war began. Identify the leaders of each side in the war.
» Key Terms
unamendable border state martial law Robert E. Lee Jefferson Davis
c
PEARSON 1	_
tall realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
391
at all. Lincoln’s name was not even on the ballot in 10 southern states. Northerners outnumbered southerners and outvoted them. The stage for civil war had been set.
B GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
How did the split in the Democratic Party in the 1860 election reflect the split in the country? The Nation Moves Toward Civil War
Lincoln’s election brought a strong reaction in the South. A South Carolina woman described how the news was received:
“The excitement was very great. Everybody was talking at the same time. One . . . more moved than the others, stood up saying . . . ‘No more vain regrets—sad forebodings are useless. The stake is life or death.’”
—Mary Boykin Chesnut, A Diary From Dixie, 1860
» A crowd in South Carolina gathered to learn that Lincoln had been elected President. Infer How was this crowd likely to have reacted to Lincoln's victory with only northern votes?
To many southerners, Lincoln’s election meant that the South no longer had a voice in national government. They believed that the President and Congress were now set against their interests especially slavery. Even before the election, South Carolina’s governor had written to other southern governors. If Lincoln won, he wrote, it would be their duty to leave the Union. This sentiment revealed the strong currents of sectionalism running through the country. Many in the South felt stronger ties to their region than to the nation.
The Nation Splits Along Sectional Lines Senator John Crittenden of Kentucky made a last effort to save the Union. In December 1860, he introduced a bill to extend the Missouri Compromise line to the Pacific. Crittenden also proposed an amendment to the Constitution that was unamendable, one that could not be changed. Such an amendment would guarantee forever the right to hold enslaved African Americans in states south of the compromise line.
The compromise bill received little support. Slavery in the West was no longer the issue. Many southerners believed that the North had put an abolitionist in the White House. They felt that secession was their only choice. Most Republicans also were unwilling to surrender what they had won in the national election.
On December 20, 1860, South Carolina became the first state to secede. By late February 1861, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas had also seceded.
At a convention in Montgomery, Alabama, the seven states formed a new nation, the Confederate States of America. Jefferson Davis of Mississippi became the first president of the Confederacy.
Causes Leading to War Now a new issue emerged: whether southern states were allowed to secede under the Constitution. Most southerners believed that they had every right to secede. After all, the Declaration of Independence said that “it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish” a government that denies the rights of its citizens. Lincoln, they believed, would deny white southerners the right to own African Americans as slaves.
For many southerners, secession was an issue of states’ rights and sovereignty, or independent control of an area. Many in the southern states believed that states had the sovereign right to secede. According to this view, states had the authority to make decisions without interference from the federal government, and the Constitution created a Union made up of states that could decide to leave the Union at any point. Those states also had the sovereign right to join together to form a new government, such as the Confederacy.
Sectionalism and Civil War 392	8.3 Division and the Outbreak of War
Lincoln disagreed. He maintained that the Constitution allowed for shared powers between national and state governments, but did not give states sovereignty that would allow them to secede. The causes of the looming Civil War thus included sectionalism, disagreement over the extension of slavery, claims of states rights, and disagreement over the constitutionality of those claims.
COMPARE AND CONTRAST
the views of southerners and President Lincoln on the issues of state sovereignty and the right to secede from the Union.
War Breaks Out
When Lincoln took the oath of office on March 4, 1861, he faced a dangerous situation. Seven southern states had seceded from the United States and had joined together to form the Confederacy.
Lincoln’s First Inaugural Address When he took office, Lincoln delivered an inaugural address. In his inaugural address, Lincoln warned that “no state . . . can lawfully get out of the Union." Still, he pledged that there would be no war unless the South started it:
“In YOUR hands, my dissatisfied fellow-countrymen, and not in MINE, is the momentous issue of civil war. . .
. We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection.”
Abiaham Lincoln, Lust. Inaugural .Adcliess
Lincoln’s First Inaugural Address expressed ideas about union, liberty, equality, and government. Regarding union, Lincoln emphasized that the Constitution set limits on the actions of states, and that there was no provision in the Constitution for secession. That is, the Constitution required that the Union be preserved. On liberty, again, Lincoln emphasized that the states’ liberty was constrained by their acceptance of the Constitution and did not include a right to secede.
Lincoln also addressed another aspect of liberty. He stated his willingness to enforce the Fugitive Slave Act, but only if the liberty of free African Americans from kidnapping and enslavement could be ensured. Regarding equality, Lincoln assured Americans that he Would provide government services and enforce federal
» Just one month after Jefferson Davis became president of the Confederacy, Abraham Lincoln was sworn in as President of the United States at the Capitol. In his speech, Lincoln said that secession was unconstitutional.
law equally in all states, whether they were slave or free states.
Finally, on government, Lincoln stated that government required acquiescence, or the willingness to accept laws whether or not a person agreed with those laws. The unwillingness of the South to accept his legal election under the Constitution, he implied, was a threat to government.
The Inaugural Address of Jefferson Davis By
the time Lincoln gave his address, the Confederate States of America had already sworn in Jefferson Davis as President. Davis had a role similar to that of the American President, being chief executive of the Confederate government. In his inaugural address, he said the Confederacy would adopt the same Constitution as the United States for its government
However, Davis’s inaugural speech was very different from Lincoln’s. Whereas Lincoln pledged to keep the Union together, Davis explained why the South had decided to secede from the Union. Davis said secession was based on “the desire to preserve our own rights and promote our own welfare.”
He also said, "It is joyous, in the midst of perilous times, to look around upon a people united in heart,
Sectionalism and Civil War 393	8.3 Division and the Outbreak of War
where one purpose of high resolve animates and actuates the whole—where the sacrifices to be made are not weighed in the balance against honor and right and liberty and equality.” Lincoln, in contrast, described secession as “the essence of anarchy.” He believed secession countered the principles of liberty and equality on which the nation was founded and its government was based. For Davis, liberty and equality existed only between white men. In a later speech, Lincoln would extend the idea of equality to all Americans.
Davis emphasized that government exists only with the consent of the governed. Since southerners could no longer consent to a government they considered opposed to their interests, they had to break away and form a government to which they could consent. This was in contrast to Lincoln’s argument that government sometimes requires citizens to acquiesce to, or obey, laws with which they disagree. Davis also argued that, under the U.S. Constitution, states had the right to reclaim powers that they had given to the federal government by seceding. Lincoln took the opposite view, that states had no such right.
1861—Lincoln Faces War Lincoln said in his inaugural address that he did not want war, but Jefferson Davis had already ordered Confederate forces
» When Confederate troops fired across the Charleston Harbor at Fort Sumter, one of only four remaining federal forts in the South, they started the American Civil War.
to begin seizing federal forts in the South. Lincoln faced a difficult decision. Should he let the Confederates take over federal property? If he did, he would seem to be admitting that states had the right to leave the Union. On the other hand, if he sent troops to hold the forts, he might start a civil war. He might also lose the support of the eight slave states that had not seceded from the Union.
In April, the Confederacy forced Lincoln to make up his mind. By then, Confederate troops controlled nearly all forts, post offices, and other federal buildings in the South. The Union held only three forts off the Florida coast and Fort Sumter in South Carolina. Fort Sumter was important to the Confederacy because it guarded Charleston Harbor.
The Attack on Fort Sumter President Lincoln learned that food supplies at Fort Sumter were running low. He notified the governor of South Carolina that he was going to ship food to the fort. Lincoln promised not to send troops or weapons.
The Confederates, however, felt that they could not leave the fort in Union hands. On April 11, 1861, they demanded that Fort Sumter surrender. Major Robert Anderson, the Union commander, refused to give in until he had run out of food or was ordered to surrender by the United States government. Confederate guns then opened fire. The Union troops quickly ran out of ammunition. On April 13, Anderson surrendered the fort.
When Confederate troops shelled Fort Sumter, people in Charleston gathered on their rooftops to watch. To many, it was like a fireworks show. No one knew that the fireworks marked the start of the Civil War, which would last four terrible years, from 1861 to 1865. This deadly part of the Civil War era would have devastating effects to lives, property, and national unity.
SUMMARIZE
Lincoln’s dilemma over southern states taking control of federal property. Taking Sides
When the war began, each side was convinced that its cause was just. Southerners believed in states’ rights, so they believed that states had the right to leave the Union. In fact, they called the conflict the War for Southern Independence. White southerners wanted independence so that they could keep their traditional way of life—including the institution of slavery. They also believed the North had caused the war. Many
Sectionalism and Civil War 394	8.3 Division and the Outbreak of War
Choosing Sides
Florida
Gulf of Mexico
» Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, approximately what percentage of Union states were slave states during the Civil War?
0	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
KEY
[~l Free Union states
] Border states (Slave states that stayed in the Union)
I
Confederate states by April 1861 | States that joined the Confederacy after April 1861 I I Territories
*Became a state in 1863


southerners, therefore, also called it the War of Northern Aggression.
Northerners, meanwhile, believed that they had to fight to save the Union. At the outset of the war, abolishing slavery was not an official goal of the North. In fact, many northerners, guided by feelings of racism, approved of slavery. Racism is the belief that one race is by nature superior to another.
In April 1861, eight slave states were still in the Union. As the war began, they had to make the difficult decision of which side to join.
Their decision would greatly affect the outcome of the war. These states had more than half of the South’s population and food crops. In addition, many of the South’s factories were in these states.
Four of these states—Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas—quickly joined the Confederacy. However, after some wavering between the North and South, the four border states—Kentucky, Missouri, Maryland, and Delaware—decided to remain in the Union. Maryland was especially critical to the Union cause since it bordered the nation’s capital at Washington, D.C.
Still, there were some citizens of the border states who supported the South. In April 1861, pro-Confederate *nobs attacked Union troops in Baltimore, Maryland. In response, President Lincoln declared martial law, or rule by the army instead of the elected government.
Many people who sided with the South were arrested. Sectionalism had led Americans to feel connected to their region, rather than to the country overall. Now they not only identified as northerners or southerners, they had also officially split into two governments with military forces.
El CHECK UNDERSTANDING Why were both the
North and South trying to attract slave states outside the Confederacy to join their cause?
Strengths and Weaknesses of the North and South
Both sides during the Civil War had strengths and weaknesses as the war began. The South had the strong advantage of fighting a defensive war. “We seek no conquest," said Confederate President Jefferson Davis. “All we ask is to be let alone.” If the North did not move its forces into the South, the Confederacy would remain a separate country.
The South’s Strengths at Home and Economic Limitations White southerners believed that they were fighting a war for independence, similar to the American Revolution. Defending their homeland and their way of life gave them a strong reason to fight. “Our
Sectionalism and Civil War 395	8.3 Division and the Outbreak of War
men must prevail in combat,” one Confederate said, “or they will lose their property, country, freedom—in short, everything.”
Confederate soldiers also enjoyed an advantage because they knew the southern countryside better. Friendly civilians often guided soldiers along obscure roads that did not appear on maps. Much of the South was wooded, too. Confederate forces used the woods for cover as they defended themselves against invading Union troops.
The South, however, had serious economic weaknesses. These weaknesses were the effects of economic differences between the North and the South. The South had few factories to produce weapons and other vital supplies. It also had few railroads to move troops and supplies. The railroads that it did have often did not connect to one another. Tracks simply ran between two points and then stopped.
The South also had political problems. The Confederate constitution favored states’ rights and limited the authority of the central government. As a result, the Confederate government often found it difficult to get things done. On one occasion, for example, the governor of Georgia insisted that only Georgian officers should command Georgian troops.
Finally, the South had a small population. Only about 9 million people lived in the Confederacy, compared with 22 million in the Union.
More than one third of the southern population were enslaved African Americans. As a result, the South did not have enough people to serve as soldiers and to support the war effort.
The North’s Military Disadvantages and Financial Strengths The North had almost four times as many free citizens as the South. Thus, it had a large source of volunteers. It also had many people to grow food and to work in factories making supplies.
The North’s biggest advantages reflected the effects of economic differences with the South. Industry was the North's greatest resource. Before the war, northern factories produced more than 90 percent of the nation’s manufactured goods. Once the war began, these factories quickly began making guns, bullets, cannons, boots, uniforms, and other supplies for the Union army. In addition, the North had more than 70 percent of the nation’s rail lines, which it used to transport both troops and supplies.
The North benefited from a strong navy and a large fleet of trading ships. With few warships and only a small merchant fleet, the South was unable to compete with the North at sea.
Despite these advantages, the North faced a difficult military challenge. To bring the South back into the Union, northern soldiers had to conquer a huge area. Instead of defending their homes, they were invading
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
POPULATION 1860
U.S. CITIES LARGEST POPULATIONS
TOTAL VALUE OF MANUFACTURED PRODUCTS
TOPS STATES
' • Xi.X' lljlllB
RESOURCES
RAILROADS FARM ACREAGE
MANUFACTURING WORKERS FACTORIES (THOUSANDS)
» Analyze Data Based on the information in the graphs, what advantages did the North have over the South at the start of the Civil War?
[HlBSBSHffl
Sectionalism and Civil War 396	8.3 Division and the Outbreak of War
unfamiliar land. As Union armies marched into the South, their lines of supply would be much longer than those of the Confederates and thus more open to attack.
0 SUMMARIZE how a weak economy and weak industry can be problematic during wartime.
The Leadership Roles of Lincoln and Davis
Leadership was a crucial factor in the Civil War. President Jefferson Davis of the Confederacy, President Abraham Lincoln of the Union, and military leaders on both sides played key roles in determining the war’s outcome.
Jefferson Davis Leads the South Before the war, many people thought that Davis was a stronger leader than Lincoln. Davis’s experience prepared him for the position. However, he did not want it. As one observer stated:
“Mr. Davis’s military instincts still predominate, and his eager wish was to have joined the airny instead of being elected piesident.”
Davis had attended the United States Military Academy at West Point. He had served as an officer in the Mexican War. Later, he served as Secretary of War under President Franklin Pierce.
Furthermore, Davis was widely respected in the South as President of the Confederacy for his honesty and courage. Davis, however, did not like to turn over to others the details of military planning. As a result, he spent much time worrying about small matters and arguing with his advisers.
The Leadership Qualities of Abraham Lincoln
At first, some northerners had doubts about Abraham Lincoln’s ability to lead as President of the United States. He did not have much experience in national politics or military matters. However, Lincoln proved to he a patient but strong leader and a fine war planner.
Day by day, Lincoln gained the respect of those around him. Many liked his sense of humor. They noted that Lincoln even accepted criticism with a smile. When Secretary of War Edwin Stanton called Lincoln a fool, Lincoln commented, “Did Stanton say I was a fool? Then I must be one, for Stanton is generally right and he always says what he means.”
» A graduate of West Point and an accomplished military officer with experience in the Mexican War, Jefferson Davis wished to serve in the Confederate Army rather than become the Confederacy’s president.
» At the start of his first term, President Lincoln gained the respect of those around him. He was admired for his leadership as well as his good nature and sense of humor.
Sectionalism and Civil War 397
8.3 Division and the Outbreak of War
» General Robert E. Lee of Virginia rejected Lincoln’s offer to command the Union army. The decision would prove costly for the Union, because Lee was a brilliant military commander.
The Role of Robert E. Lee, Military Leader As the
war began, army officers in the South had to decide whether to stay in the Union army and fight against their home states, or join the Confederate forces.
Robert E. Lee of Virginia faced this dilemma when Lincoln asked him to command the Union army. He explained in a letter to a friend:
“If Virginia stands by the old Union, so will I. But if she secedes . . . , then I will still follow my native State with my sword and, if need be, with my life.”
E.
Lee, quoted in Carl Sandburg’s Abraham Lincoln
Virginia did secede and Lee refused Lincoln’s offer. Later, Lee became commander of the Confederate army. Many of the prewar United States Army’s best officers served the Confederacy. As a result, President Lincoln had trouble finding generals to match those of the South.
ET CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What advantages in leadership did the South have over the North?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Draw Conclusions Why did Senator Crittenden’s proposed compromise receive little support?
2.	Check Understanding Why did Lincoln make a point of telling the governor of South Carolina that he was sending food, but not troops or arms, to Fort Sumter?
3.	Identify Central Issues What motivated the South to fight in the Civil War?
4.	Summarize the principal disadvantages the North faced in fighting the Civil War.
5.	Express Problems Clearly How did Jefferson Davis’s reluctance to serve as President of the Confederacy affect his leadership?
Sectionalism and Civil War 398
8.3 Division and the Outbreak of War
The North and South had different strategies for victory.
The Union planned an aggressive campaign against the South. The South, meanwhile, planned to hold tight until the North lost the will to fight.
General George B. McClellan’s Union forces defeated the Confederates at the Battle of Antietam. This illustration shows Union soldiers advancing toward Dunker Church during the battle.
Interactive Flipped Video
The Course of War
The Different Strategies of the North and South
Union Strategy First, the Union planned to use its navy to blockade southern ports. This would cut off the South’s supply of manufactured goods from Europe and its ability to earn money from cotton exports.
In the East, Union generals aimed to seize Richmond, Virginia, the Confederate capital. They thought that they might end the war quickly by capturing the Confederate government.
In the West, the Union planned to seize control of the Mississippi Hiver. This would prevent the South from using the river to supply its troops. It would also separate Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana from the rest of the Confederacy.
» Objectives
Describe the strategies the North and South adopted to win the war.
Explain how early battles dispelled hopes for a quick end to the war.
Identify the victories of the Confederates and the Union in the early years of the war.
Confederate Strategy The South’s strategy was simpler: the Confederate army would fight a defensive war until northerners tired of fighting. If the war became unpopular in the North, President Lincoln would have to stop the war and recognize the South’s independence.
The Confederacy counted on European money and supplies to help fight the war. Southern cotton was important to the textile mills of England and other countries. Southerners were confident that Europeans would recognize the Confederacy as an independent
» Key Terms
Battle of Bull Run
Virginia
Monitor
Battle of Antietam Battle of
Fredericksburg Battle of
Chancellorsville Battle of Shiloh
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
399
nation and that the South could continue to sell Europe cotton for its factories.
H DESCRIBE
how the Union plan for victory was more aggressive than the southern plan.
The Beginnings of a Long War
“Forward to Richmond! Forward to Richmond!” Every day for more than a month, the influential New York Tribune blazed this war cry across its front page. At last, responding to popular pressure, President Lincoln ordered an attack.
Stonewall Jackson Makes a Stand at Bull Run On
July 21, 1861, Union troops set out from Washington, D.C., to attack the Confederate army, which was camped 30 miles southwest of the capital. Hundreds of Washingtonians, in a festive mood, rode out along with them to watch the battle. Many northerners thought the Union army would crush the Confederates.
The Union troops had not gone far when they met up with Confederate soldiers. A battle quickly followed. It took place near a small Virginia stream known as Bull Run, which was also near the town of Manassas.
At first, Union forces succeeded in breaking up Confederate battle lines. “The war is over!” yelled some soldiers from Massachusetts. But General Thomas Jackson rallied the Virginia troops on a nearby hill. “Look!” cried a Confederate officer to his men, "There is Jackson standing like a stone wall! Rally behind the Virginians!” From that day on, the general was known as “Stonewall” Jackson. Historians consider him one of the most gifted tactical commanders in the Civil War, and he led many successful military campaigns for the Confederate army.
In the end, it was the Union troops who panicked and ran. “Off they went,” reported one observer, “across fields, toward the woods, anywhere, everywhere, to escape.” For most of the soldiers, the retreat did not stop until they reached Washington, D.C.
The Battle of Bull Run (also referred to as the Battle of Manassas by the Confederates) showed both the Union and the Confederacy that their soldiers needed training. It also showed that the Confederate army could stand up to the Union, meaning the war would be long and bloody.
George McClellan Takes Command of the Union Army After the shocking disaster at Bull Run, President Lincoln appointed General George McClellan as commander of the Union army of the East, known
The Civil War in the East
KEY
—► Union troops —► Confederate troops
*	Union victories
*	Confederate victories Indecisive battle
New Jersey
» Analyze Maps Using the map key, measure the distance between the U.S. capital and the Confederate capital. How might the locations of the two capitals have influenced the battles and troop movements shown on the map?
Monitor vs. Merrimack
F -yfr'JWW
V' ''
,i i /•
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
50 mi
50 km Lambert Azimuthal
Equal-Area Projection
Interactive Map
©
N
Sectionalism and Civil War 400	8.4 The Course of War
as the Army of the Potomac. McClellan, a superb organizer, transformed inexperienced recruits into an army of trained soldiers prepared for battle.
McClellan, however, was very cautious. He delayed leading his troops into battle. Newspapers reported "all quiet along the Potomac” so often that the phrase became a national joke. Finally, President Lincoln lost patience. “If General McClellan does not want to use the army,” the President snapped, “I would like to borrow it.”
At last, in March 1862, McClellan and most of his troops left Washington and sailed down the Potomac River and the Chesapeake Bay. After landing south of Richmond on the Virginia Peninsula, McClellan began inching slowly toward the Confederate capital.
Learning of the Union approach, General Robert E. Lee launched a series of counterattacks. At the same time, Lee sent General Stonewall Jackson north to threaten Washington. As a result, Lincoln was prevented from sending the rest of the Union army to help McClellan. Cautious as usual, McClellan abandoned the attack and retreated. The Peninsula Campaign, as it became known, had failed.
The Blockade and the Ironclads Early in the war, Union ships blockaded southern ports. At first, some small, fast ships slipped through the blockade. These "blockade runners” brought everything from matches to guns to the Confederacy.
In time, however, the blockade became more effective. Trade through southern ports dropped by more than 90 percent. The South desperately needed a way to break the Union blockade. One method it tried was the ironclad ship. Clad means clothed, or covered. Ironclad ships were covered with iron for protection.
Confederates took over an abandoned Union warship, the USS Merrimack. They covered it with iron plates and renamed it the Virginia. On its first day out in March 1862, the Virginia destroyed two Union ships and drove three more aground. Union cannonballs bounced harmlessly off the Virginia's metal skin.
The Union countered with its own ironclad, the Monitor The two ships clashed in a body of water called Hampton Roads near the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay.
Despite an exhausting battle, neither vessel seriously damaged the other, and both withdrew. Two months later, Confederates had to sink the Virginia when the Union captured Norfolk. The Union eventually built more than 50 ironclads.
Ironclad ships changed naval warfare. However, the South was never again able to mount a serious attack gainst the Union navy. The Union blockade held throughout the war.
» The Confederate ship Virginia battled the Union ship Monitor near Hampton Roads, Virginia, in 1862. This was the first engagement of ironclad warships in the Civil War.
The Battle of Antietam In September 1862, General Lee took the offensive and marched his troops north into Maryland. He believed that a southern victory on northern soil would be a great blow to northern morale.
Luck was against Lee, however. At an abandoned Confederate campsite, a Union officer found a copy of Lee’s battle plan. It was wrapped around three cigars, left behind by a careless general. General McClellan was overjoyed to have the information. “If I cannot whip ‘Bobbie Lee,’ I will be willing to go home,” he boasted.
However, McClellan was slow to act. Finally, after a few days, he attacked Lee’s main force near a creek called Antietam (an TEE tuhm) in the town of Sharpsburg, Maryland, on September 17. In the battle that followed, more than 23,000 Union and Confederate soldiers were killed or wounded—in one day. September 17, 1862, remains the bloodiest day in American military history.
On the night of September 18, Lee ordered his troops to slip back into Virginia. The Confederates breathed a sigh of relief when they saw that McClellan was not pursuing them.
Neither side was a clear winner at the Battle of Antietam (also called the Battle of Sharpsburg by the Confederates). The battle was significant, however, because the North was able to claim victory, since
Sectionalism and Civil War
Lee had ordered his forces to withdraw. As a result, northern morale improved. Still, President Lincoln was keenly disappointed. General McClellan had failed to follow up his victory by pursuing the Confederates. In November, Lincoln appointed General Ambrose Burnside to replace McClellan as commander of the Army of the Potomac.
B DRAW CONCLUSIONS
What conclusions can you draw from the first battles of the Civil War?
Confederate Forces Win in the East
Two stunning victories for the Confederacy came in late 1862 and 1863. In December 1862, Union forces set out once again toward Richmond. General Robert E. Lee played a key role in both victories, part of a record of success as the Confederacy’s leading general.
Meeting General Ambrose Burnside’s Union army outside Fredericksburg, Virginia, Lee’s forces dug into the crest of a hill. There, in a strong defensive position, Confederate guns mowed down wave after wave of charging Union troops. The Battle of Fredericksburg was one of the Union’s worst defeats.
» Union troops charged the Confederates at
Fredericksburg. Confederate troops soundly defeated them and won the battle. Predict Consequences How might this defeat have affected Union strategy?
Half a year later, in May 1863, Lee, aided by Stonewall Jackson, again outmaneuvered Union forces. The Battle of Chancellorsville took place on thickly wooded ground near Chancellorsville, Virginia. Lee and Jackson defeated the Union troops in three days.
Victory came at a high price for the South, however. During the battle, nervous Confederate sentries fired at what they thought was an approaching Union soldier. The “Union soldier” was General Stonewall Jackson. Several days later, Jackson died as a result of his injuries. The Confederacy had lost one of its best generals.
ET IDENTIFY
How might the Confederates have felt after the Battles of Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville?
Union Forces Find Success in the West
In the West, Union forces met better results. As you have read, part of the Union strategy was to seize control of the Mississippi River. General Ulysses S. Grant began moving toward that goal. In February 1862, Grant attacked and captured Fort Henry and Fort Donelson in Tennessee. These Confederate forts guarded two important tributaries of the Mississippi.
Grant now pushed south to Shiloh, a village on the Tennessee River. There, on April 6, he was surprised by Confederate forces. By the end of the day the Confederates had driven the Union troops back to the banks of the river.
Grant now showed the toughness and determination that would enable him to win many battles in the future and made him the Union’s most successful leading general. He rushed reinforcements to the battle. That night, one of Grant’s generals approached him. The officer thought Union forces should retreat.
But, seeing Grant’s stubborn face, the officer only said, “Well, Grant, we've had the devil’s own day, haven’t we?”
“Yes,” Grant replied. “Lick ’em tomorrow, though."
And they did. With the aid of the reinforcements, Grant beat back the Confederates and won the Battle of Shiloh. It was, however, one of the bloodiest encounters of the Civil War.
While Grant was fighting at Shiloh, the Union navy moved to gain control of the Mississippi River. In April 1862, Union gunboats captured New Orleans, Louisiana. Other ships seized Memphis, Tennessee. By capturing these two cities, the Union controlled both
©
Interactive Timeline
Sectionalism and Civil War 402	8.4 The Course of War
ends of the southern Mississippi. The South could no longer use the river as a supply line.
UNDERSTANDING
Why was the capture of Fort Henry and Fort Donelson critical to the Union’s overall war strategy?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the problems that a successful blockade of southern ports would cause for the South.
2.	Identify Central Issues What did the Battle of Bull Run reveal?
3.	Draw Conclusions What can you conclude from the fact that hundreds of civilians went along with the Union troops on their march to Bull Run to watch the battle and the fact that they were in a festive mood?
4.	Analyze Information How can you tell that General Robert E. Lee was an unusually good officer?
5.	Make Predications What do the battles and events that you have read about so far lead you to predict about the war?
» General Grant’s army was in Tennessee to capture the Mississippi River. However, the Confederates attacked at Shiloh and nearly destroyed his army before he could recover and claim victory.

Sectionalism
and Civil War 403	8.4 The Course of War
Interactive Flipped Video
8.5
The Civil War began as a war to restore the Union, not to end slavery. President Lincoln made this point clear in a letter that was widely distributed.
j
8.A, 8.B, 23.B
» Objectives
Describe the purpose of the Emancipation Proclamation and its effects.
Explain African Americans’ contributions to the war effort in the Union army and behind Confederate lines.
Describe conditions for Civil War soldiers.
Explain problems on the home front, including economic issues.
Identify the role women played in the war.
» Key Terms
emancipate
Emancipation
Proclamation 54th Massachusetts
Regiment Fort Wagner Copperhead draft
habeas corpus income tax inflation profiteer William Carney
Emancipation and Life in Wartime
I
The Emancipation Proclamation
“If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it; and if I could do it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would	'
also do that.”
—Abraham Lincoln, August 22, 1862. quoted in Call Sandhaui's
Abmn ic Lincoln
Lincoln had a reason for handling the slavery issue cautiously. As you have read, four slave states remained in the Union. The President did not want to do anything that might cause these states to shift their	,
loyalty to the Confederacy. The resources of the border states might	j
allow the South to turn the tide of the war.
By mid-1862, however, Lincoln came to believe that he could save the Union only by broadening the goals of the war. He decided to emancipate, or free, enslaved African Americans then living in Confederate territory. In the four loyal slave states, however, enslaved African Americans would not be freed. Nor would African Americans I
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
404
be freed in Confederate lands that had already been captured by the Union, such as the city of New Orleans, Tennessee, or parts of Virginia.
A
Cautious Introduction Lincoln had practical reasons for his emancipation plan. At the start of the Civil War, more than 3 million enslaved African Americans labored for the Confederacy. They helped grow the food that fed Confederate soldiers. They also worked in iron and lead mines that were vital to the South's war effort. Some served as nurses and cooks for the army. Lincoln knew that emancipation would weaken the Confederacy’s ability to carry on the war. However, Lincoln did not want to anger slave owners in the Union. Also, he knew that many northerners opposed freedom for enslaved African Americans. Lincoln hoped to introduce the idea of emancipation slowly, by limiting it to territory controlled by the Confederacy.
The President had another motive. Lincoln believed that slavery was wrong. When he felt that he could act to free enslaved African Americans without threatening the Union, he did so.
Lincoln was concerned about the timing of his announcement. The war was not going well for the Union. He did not want Americans to think he was freeing enslaved African Americans as a desperate
effort to save a losing cause. He waited for a victory to announce his plan.
On September 22, 1862, following the Union victory at Antietam, Lincoln announced a preliminary proclamation. He issued the formal Emancipation Proclamation on January 1,1863.
A
Significant Proclamation Because the rebelling states were not under Union control, no African Americans actually gained their freedom on January 1, 1863. Still, the Emancipation Proclamation changed the purpose of the war. Now, Union troops were fighting to end slavery as well as to save the Union. The opponents of slavery greeted the proclamation with joy. In Boston, African American abolitionist Frederick Douglass witnessed one of the many emotional celebrations that took place:
“The effect of this announcement was startling . . , and the scene was wild and grand. , . . My old friend Rue, a Negro preacher, . . . expressed the heartfelt emotion of the hour, when he led all voices in the anthem, ‘Sound the loud timbrel o’er Egypt’s dark sea,
Areas Under Union and Confederate Control, 1862
British Territory
A. .
Vermont ,Maine\
New
Hampshire
Massachusetts
Rhode Island Connecticut New Jersey Delaware Maryland
0
0	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area
Projection
» Analyze Maps Why might some southern regions have been exempted from [ the Emancipation Proclamation?
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
400 mi
KEY
[	| Union states
[	[ Confederate states
Slave states that stayed in the Union
[	| Other areas under Union
control
Sectionalism and Civil War
405	8.5 Emancipation and Life in Wartime
Jehovah hath triumphed, his people are free!”'
—Frederick Douglass, Life and limes of Frederick Douglass
In the South, Lincoln's proclamation was seen as a “fiend’s act” that destroyed valuable property. The proclamation won the sympathy of Europeans, especially workers. As a result, it became less likely that Britain or any other European country would come to the aid of the South.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did the Emancipation Proclamation change the purpose of the Civil War?
African Americans Fight Heroically for the Union
When the war began, thousands of free blacks volunteered to fight for the Union. At first, federal law forbade African Americans to serve as soldiers. When Congress repealed that law in 1862, however, both free African Americans and African Americans who had escaped from slavery enlisted in the Union army.
» Nearly half of the 54th Massachusetts Regiment died in the failed attack on Fort Wagner, South Carolina. Yet the regiment’s bravery and heroism helped earn respect for African American soldiers in the Union army.
Military Service The army assigned African American volunteers to all-black units, commanded by white officers. At first, the black troops served only as laborers. They performed noncombat duties such as building roads and guarding supplies. Black troops received only half the pay of white soldiers.
African American soldiers protested against this policy of discrimination, which denied them the same treatment as other soldiers. Gradually, conditions changed. By 1863, African American troops were fighting in major battles against the Confederates. In 1864, the United States War Department announced that all soldiers would receive equal pay. By the end of the war, about 200,000 African Americans had fought for the Union. Nearly 40,000 lost their lives.
The Story of the 54th Regiment One of the most famous African American units in the Union army
was the 54th Massachusetts Regiment. The
54th accepted African Americans from all across the North. Frederick Douglass helped recruit troops for the regiment, and two of his sons served in it.
On July 18,1863, the 54th Massachusetts Regiment led an attack on Fort Wagner near Charleston, South Carolina. Under heavy fire, troops fought their way into the fort before being forced to withdraw. In the desperate fighting, almost half the regiment was killed.
The courage and heroism of the 54th Massachusetts and other regiments helped to win respect for African American soldiers. Sergeant William Carney of the 54th Massachusetts was the first of 16 African American soldiers to win the Congressional Medal of Honor in the Civil War. Such Union heroes had “proved themselves among the bravest of the brave,” Secretary of War Edwin Stanton told Lincoln.
An Opportunity for Freedom Despite the Emancipation Proclamation, African Americans still worked in the South as slaves on plantations. However, many enslaved African Americans slowed down their work or refused to work at all. In this way, they hoped to weaken the South’s war effort. They knew that when victorious Union troops arrived in their area, they would be free.
Thousands of enslaved African Americans took direct action to free themselves. Whenever a Union army moved into a region, enslaved African Americans from all over the area would flee their former masters. They crossed the Union lines to freedom. By the end
Sectionalism and Civil War 406	8.5 Emancipation and Life in Wartime
» Analyze Data Based on the information in the graphic organizer, approximately what percentage of enslaved African Americans from the South escaped to the North during the Civil War?
of the war, about one fourth of the South’s enslaved population had escaped to freedom.
IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why were many African Americans on plantations able to escape during the war?
E33323 ELPS SPEAKING 3.B.2
In a group of three, retell the story of the 54th Regiment. Use the picture of 54th Regiment soldiers to support your retelling. Include vocabulary such as bravery, respect, and heroism in your retelling. Soldiers Face the Horrors of War
On both sides, most soldiers were under the age of 21. War, however, quickly turned gentle boys into tough men. Soldiers drilled and marched for long hours. They slept on the ground even in rain and snow. Often their Nothing was inadequate and uncomfortable. Many soldiers had no shoes, especially in the Confederacy. In combat, boys of 18 learned to stand firm as cannon Masts shook the earth and bullets whizzed past their ears.
As the death toll rose, the age restrictions for soldiers were relaxed. The South drafted boys as young as 17 and men as old as 50.
New technology added to the horror of war. Cone-shaped bullets made rifles twice as accurate. Improved cannons hurled exploding shells several miles. The new weapons had deadly results. In most battles, one fourth or more of the soldiers were killed or wounded.
Sick and wounded soldiers faced other horrors. Medical care on the battlefield was crude. Surgeons routinely amputated injured arms and legs. At the time, doctors did not know how germs cause infection and disease. As a result, minor wounds often became infected. In addition, poor sanitary conditions in the army camps allowed disease to spread rapidly. Diseases such as pneumonia and malaria killed more men than guns or cannons did. Improper diet also caused sickness.
On both sides, prisoners of war faced horrifying conditions. At Andersonville, a prison camp in Georgia, many Union prisoners died of disease or starvation. The difficult life of soldiers led many to desert. One out of every seven Union soldiers and one out of every nine Confederate soldiers deserted.
B RECALL
How did disease affect Civil War troops? Jr"'
Sectionalism and Civil War 407
8.5
Emancipation
and Life in Wartime
Political Challenges in the North and South
Many northerners opposed using force to keep the South in the Union. Supporters of the war called these people Copperheads, after the poisonous snake. Other northerners supported the war but opposed the way Lincoln was conducting it.
The Draft As the war dragged on, public support dwindled. When the war began, the North offered men money to enlist. However, some men abused the system. They would sign up, collect the money, and then desert. Soon, however, there was a shortage of volunteers to serve in the Union army.
Congress passed a draft law in 1863. It required all able-bodied males between the ages of 20 and 45 to serve in the military if they were called.
Under the law, a man could avoid the draft by paying the government $300 (about as much as an unskilled worker could earn in a year) or by hiring someone to serve in his place. This angered many people, who began to see the Civil War as “a rich man’s war and a poor man’s fight.”
» The draft law of 1863 meant that if men wanted to avoid fighting in the war, they either paid the government $300 or hired others to fight in their place. Here, “bounty brokers” offer their services as potential substitutes.
The Draft Riots Opposition to the draft law led to riots in several northern cities. The law had gone into effect soon after Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation. Some white northerners, especially recent immigrants in the cities, believed that they were being forced to fight to end slavery. Unlike abolitionists, many people in northern cities had little reason for wanting slavery abolished. Freed African Americans, they thought, would compete with them for jobs and drive down their wages. Essentially, they feared, the draft would force them to fight for something that was against their self-interest. The draft riots showed that urbanization could lead to conflicts resulting from differences in political beliefs. With so many people gathered in northern cities, it was possible for large-scale unrest to develop over political issues such as the draft.
The worst riot took place in New York City during July 1863. For four days, white workers attacked free blacks. Rioters also attacked rich New Yorkers who had paid to avoid serving in the army. At least 74 people were killed during the riot.
President Lincoln moved to stop the riots and other “disloyal practices.” Several times, he suspended habeas corpus (hay bee uhs KOR puhs), the right to be charged or have a hearing before being jailed. Lincoln argued that the Constitution allowed him to deny people their rights “when in the cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.” The President also said that those arrested could be tried under the stricter rules of a military court. Eventually nearly 14,000 people were arrested. However, most were never charged with a specific crime or brought to trial.
A
Draft Comes to the South President Jefferson Davis struggled to create a strong federal government for the Confederacy. Many southerners firmly believed in states’ rights. They resisted paying taxes to a central government. At one point, Georgia even threatened to secede from the Confederacy! Like the North, the South was forced to pass a draft law to fill its army. However, men who owned or supervised more than 20 slaves did not have to serve. Southern farmers who had few or no slaves resented this law.
Near the end of the war, the South no longer had enough white men to fill the ranks. Robert E. Lee urged that enslaved African Americans be allowed to serve as soldiers. Desperate, the Confederate Congress finally
§1 Interactive Gallery
Sectionalism and Civil War 408	8.5 Emancipation and Life in Wartime
.	-  '	"Wl"‘"	—Ullin   WMIH—1
CIVIL WAR
Causes of the Civil War		Effects of the Civil War
•	The issue of slavery in the territories divides the North and South. •	Abolitionists oppose slavery. •	South fears northern domination. •	Southern states secede after Lincoln's election. •	Confederates bombard Fort Sumter.		•	Lincoln issues the Emancipation Proclamation. •	The northern economy booms. •	The South loses its cotton trade with Britain. •	Total war destroys the South's economy. •	Hundreds of thousands of Americans die.
» Analyze Charts Did the war’s effects justify the South in its reasons for going to war?
agreed. The war ended, however, before more than a few thousand enslaved men fought for the Confederacy.
IDENTIFY
How were draft problems in the South different from those in the North? War Challenges and Fuels the Northern Economy
The Civil War cost far more than any previous war. The Union had to use several strategies to raise money. In some ways, however, war helped the North’s economy.
Taxation and Inflation To pay for the war, Congress established the nation’s first income tax, or tax on people’s earnings, in 1861. A new agency, the Internal Revenue Bureau, oversaw the collection process. The Union also issued bonds worth millions of dollars. Still, taxes and bonds did not raise enough money. To get the funds it needed, the North printed more than $400
i million in paper money.
As the money supply increased, each dollar was Wth less. In response, businesses charged more for their goods. The North was experiencing inflation, a rise in prices and a decrease in the value of money. Uuring the war, prices for goods nearly doubled in the North.
Wartime Economic Advantages The war also helped the North’s economy in several ways. Since many farmers went off to fight, there was a greater need for machines to plant and harvest crops. The purchase of reapers rose to nearly 165,000 during the war. As a result, farm production actually went up during the war.
The wartime demand for clothing, shoes, guns, and other goods helped many northern industries. Some manufacturers made fortunes by profiteering. Profiteers charged excessive prices for goods that the government desperately needed for the war.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did the Civil War strengthen the North’s economy?
War Devastates the
Southern Economy
For the South, war brought economic ruin. The South had to struggle with the cost of the war, the loss of the cotton trade, and severe shortages brought on by the Union blockade.
A
Weak Wartime Economy To raise money, the Confederacy imposed an income tax and a tax-in-kind. The tax-in-kind required farmers to turn over one tenth of their crops to the government. The government took Sectionalism and Civil War 409	8.5 Emancipation and Life in Wartime
crops because it knew that southern farmers had little money.
Like the North, the South printed paper money. It printed so much that wild inflation set in. By 1865, one Confederate dollar was worth only two cents in gold. Prices were especially high in Richmond, where a barrel of flour was $275 in early 1864, potatoes were $25 a bushel, and butter was $15 a pound.
The war did serious damage to the cotton trade, the South’s main source of income. Early in the war, President Davis halted cotton shipments to Britain. He hoped to force Britain to side with the South in return for renewed shipments of cotton. The tactic backfired. Britain simply bought more cotton from Egypt and India. Davis succeeded only in cutting the South’s income.
The Union Blockade Creates Shortages The
Union blockade created severe shortages in the South. Confederate armies sometimes had to wait weeks for supplies of food and clothing. With few factories of its own, the South bought many of its weapons in Europe. However, the blockade cut off most deliveries from across the Atlantic. To acquire goods, the government began building and running factories. Private manufacturers were offered contracts and draft exemptions for their workers if they started making war goods.
For civilians, the blockade brought food shortages. The production of food became critical to the economy. Many plantations switched from growing cotton to raising grain and livestock, or animals raised for food. In some states, cotton production was limited.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What happened when Jefferson Davis tried to use economic pressure to force the British to side with the South?
Contributions of Women to the War Effort
Women of both the North and the South played vital roles during the war. As men left for the battlefields, women took jobs in industry and on farms. While men fought in the war, many women took over responsibilities of family farms and businesses. They also had to raise their families on their own.
In rare instances, some women even disguised themselves as men and enlisted in the army to fight in the war. Others served as spies and provided valuable information to military commanders. Many served in army camps, some of them choosing to accompany their husbands to war.
Women’s aid societies helped supply the troops with food, bedding, clothing, and medicine. Throughout the
BLOCKADE OF SOUTHERN PORTS
EXPENSES fob a"
TRAVELING FROM
$ PRICES $
IN THE SOUTH
CONFEDERATE DOLLARS)
Bacon	$8 a pound
Flour	$300 a barrel
Turkeys	$60 each
Milk	$4 a quart
Tea	$18-$20 a pound
Sugar	$20 a pound
	1865	
March 11	Meal on the road	$20
March 20	Eyeglasses	$135
March 23	Coat, vest, pants	$2,700
March 30	Cavalry boots (1 pr)	$450
April 24	Matches	$25
April 24	Penknife	$125
COTTON PRODUCTION DURING THE WAR
$
» Analyze Graphs Based on the information in the graph, what were the effects of the North blockading southern ports?
Sectionalism and Civil War 410	8.5 Emancipation and Life in Wartime
North, women held fairs and other fundraising events to pay for supplies.
Aid to the Wounded Women on both sides worked as nurses. At first, doctors were unwilling to permit even trained nurses to work in military hospitals. When wounded men began to swamp army hospitals, however, thrs attitude soon changed. In fact, women performed so well that nursing became an accepted occupation for women after the war.
Dorothea Drx, famous for her work reforming prisons and mental hospitals, and Clara Barton, who later founded the American Red Cross, both became nurses for the Union army. Sojourner Truth, the African American antislavery leader, worked in Union hospitals and in camps for African Americans freed from slavery. In the South, Sally Tompkins set up a hospital in Richmond, Virginia.
B DESCRIBE
some ways in which women contributed to the war effort.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Draw Conclusions What was the effect of the Emancipation Proclamation on the numbers of men choosing to join the Union army?
2.	Summarize how the treatment of African American soldiers in the Union army changed as the war progressed.
3.	Check Understanding Why did inflation become a problem in the North?
» During the Civil War, women helped by caring for the sick and wounded. They were so successful that nursing became an accepted profession for women following the war.

Interactive Gallery
4.	Identify Central Issues Why were urban areas the most frequent sites of draft riots?
5.	Draw Conclusions Why do you suppose men who owned or supervised more than 20 enslaved African Americans did not have to serve in the Confederate army?
Sectionalism and Civil War
411	8.5 Emancipation and Life m Wartime
Confederate armies won major battles at Fredericksburg in December 1862 and at Chancellorsville in May 1863. These were gloomy days for the North. Then, in July 1863, the tide of war turned against the South as Union forces won major victories in both the East and the West.
» Objectives
Explain why the Union victories at Vicksburg and Gettysburg helped turn the war in the Union’s favor.
The War's End
Describe Grant’s plan for ending the war and the war’s outcome.
Identify Lincoln’s hopes for the Union after his reelection.
Summarize why the Civil War marked a turning point in American history.
» Key Terms
siege
Battle of Gettysburg Pickett’s Charge Gettysburg Address total war
Appomattox Court House
Philip Bazaar
The Siege of Vicksburg
General Grant Captures Vicksburg In the West, Union triumph came along the Mississippi River. The Union, which had captured New Orleans and Memphis, already controlled both ends of the southern Mississippi River. Still, the Confederates held Vicksburg, Mississippi. It controlled a crucial Mississippi River crossing linking the eastern and western Confederate states. Vicksburg sat on a cliff high above the river. Its physical geography made it difficult to attack from the river.
Early in 1863, Grant’s forces tried again and again to seize Vicksburg. The Confederates held out bravely. At last, Grant devised a brilliant plan. Landing at an unguarded spot on the river and arching his troops inland, he launched a surprise attack on Jackson, Mississippi. Then, he turned west and attacked Vicksburg from the rear. On the side facing away from the river, no physical barriers protected Vicksburg.
For more than six weeks, Grant's forces laid siege to Vicksburg. A siege is a military encirclement of an enemy position and blockading or bombarding it in order to force it to surrender. Finally, on July 4, 1863, the Confederates surrendered Vicksburg.
On July 9, Union forces also captured Port Hudson, Louisiana. The entire Mississippi River was now under Union control. The Union
"91 reah ze
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
412
took advantage of physical geography by using the Mississippi River to supply its troops.
The Confederacy was now split into two parts. Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana were cut off from the rest of the Confederate states. This meant that the eastern Confederate states were no longer able to get supplies from the western states. This was a devastating loss for the Confederacy.
UNDERSTANDING
Why was Union control of the Mississippi River a blow to the Confederacy?
L
The Battle of Gettysburg
Meanwhile, in the East, after his victory at Chancellorsville, General Lee moved his army north into Pennsylvania. He hoped to take the Yankees by surprise. If he succeeded in Pennsylvania, Lee planned to swing south and capture Washington, D.C. The Union army followed the Confederates, making sure to remain between the Confederates and Washington.
On June 30,	1863, the Union Army of the
Potomac, now under command of General George C. Meade, met part of Lee’s army at the small town of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. Both sides quickly sent in reinforcements. The three-day Battle of Gettysburg that followed was one of the most significant events of the Civil Wai.
On the first day of battle, July 1, the Confederates drove the Union forces out of Gettysburg. The Yankees, however, took up strong positions on Cemetery Ridge, overlooking the town. Union troops fortified these positions throughout that night.
The next day, Lee ordered an attack on both ends of the Union line, much of which was positioned on high ground, making the attacks difficult. Southern troops fought hard, but the Union army was well prepared for Lee’s offensive. At the end of a day of savage fighting, Lee’s forces had suffered heavy casualties but failed to dislodge the Union army from its strong position.
General Lee’s Disastrous Decision Despite his losses, Lee decided to attack again. He wanted to "create a panic and virtually destroy the [Union] army. On July 3, he ordered General George Pickett to lead 15,000 men in a daring charge against the center of the Union line. To reach their target, Pickett’s men would have to march about 1,000 yards across sloping, open ground—all within clear view of the enemy.
This last attack led by Pickett is known as Pickett’s Charge. Prior to the charge, Confederate cannons pounded the Union position on Cemetery Ridge, but the Union lines remained intact.
» For more than six weeks, General Grant’s forces circled Vicksburg, cutting off its supplies, and used siege cannons, like the one shown here, to bomb the city until its eventual surrender.
Interactive Map
» The Battle of Gettysburg involved three days of fighting with heavy casualties. The Confederates, like the prisoners shown here, hoped for a decisive victory that never came.

Interactive 3-D Model
Sectionalism and Civil War 413	8.6 The War’s End
Pickett then gave the order to charge. As the Confederates marched forward, Union guns opened fire. Row after row of soldiers fell to the ground, dead or wounded. The battle noise, one soldier recalled, was “strange and terrible, a sound that came from thousands of human throats . . . like a vast mournful roar.”
Pickett’s Charge failed. The steady barrage of bullets and shells kept all but a handful of Confederate soldiers from penetrating the Union lines. The next day, a Union officer trying to ride over the battlefield could not because "the dead and wounded lay too thick to guide a horse through them.”
As the survivors limped back, Lee rode among them. “It’s all my fault,” he admitted humbly. Lee had no choice but to retreat with his weakened army. After they were defeated at Gettysburg, the Confederates would never invade the North again.
General Meade was proud of the victory. He had protected Pennsylvania and Washington, D.C. Lincoln, however, was disappointed. He felt that the Union army had once again allowed the Confederate troops to get away.
The Union victories at Vicksburg and Gettysburg marked the turning point of the Civil War. It seemed just a matter of time before the Confederacy would fall.
» Describing the sacrifices made at the Battle of Gettysburg, President Lincoln proclaimed that, if the war preserved the Union and its principles of liberty and equality, “these dead shall not have died in vain.”

However, the South was still determined to fight. The war would last another two years.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
Why was the Union victory at Gettysburg significant?
The Gettysburg Address
The Battle of Gettysburg left more than 50,000 dead or wounded. On November 19, 1863, there was a ceremony to dedicate a cemetery to the memory of those soldiers who died at Gettysburg. President Lincoln attended the ceremony. He delivered a speech now known as the Gettysburg Address. The speech expressed the purpose of the Civil War and exemplified Lincoln's leadership at a time of tremendous crisis. Lincoln said that the Civil War was a test of whether or not a democratic government could survive. This claim implied that the nation's survival depended on the integrity of the Union. He also addressed the theme of equality. He reminded Americans that their nation was founded on the belief that “all men are created equal.” Lincoln told the audience:
“We here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain—that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom—and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth. ”
—Abraham Lincoln, Gettysburg Address, November
19, 1863
Lincoln’s words, “all men are created equal,” taken from the Declaration of Independence, and his mention of "a new birth of freedom” both express his ideas about liberty and equality. Coming so soon after the Emancipation Proclamation, made earlier that same year, Lincoln’s words implied that “a new birth of freedom” for millions of African Americans had become not just one of the goals of the Civil War, but one of the nation’s ideals. Lincoln’s entire speech was only ten sentences long and took about three minutes to deliver, but it is honored as a profound statement of American ideals.
fcl RECALL Lincoln said that the Civil War was a test.
What was that test?
Sectionalism and Civil War 414	8.6 The Wear’s End
The Civil War: Final Battles
A
» Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, what can you infer about the Union army’s strategy toward the end of the Civil War?
^Washington,7D.C.
lW
.1
New Jersey
KEY
—► Union troops * Union victories —► Confederate troops Confederate victories
bporsyivama	;
Cold Harbor
--	\ H
, ............?
Siege ofXV ~ L Petersburg
(June 1864-April 1865)
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
50 mi
50 km Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area Projection
Interactive Map
©

N
Union Forces Move
Southward
Since the beginning of the war, Lincoln had searched for a general who could lead the Union to victory. More and more, he thought of Ulysses S. Grant. After capturing Vicksburg, Grant continued to win battles in the West. In 1864, Lincoln appointed him commander of the Union forces. In this role, Grant would lead the final Union advance against the Confederacy.
Some questioned the choice, but President Lincoln felt that "Unconditional Surrender” Grant, as some called him, was the general who would end the war in the Union’s favor. Even back when Grant had been criticized for near disaster at the Battle of Shiloh, Lincoln had defended Grant: "I can’t spare this man,” Lincoln said. “He fights.”
Grant had a plan for ending the war. He wanted to destroy the South’s ability to fight. To achieve this, Grant ordered his generals to wage total war against the South.
He wanted the Union army to destroy food, equipment, and anything else they found that might he useful to the enemy. In the past, most wars had been restricted to soldiers. Total war, however, did not make any distinctions. Civilians in the South, like the Confederate army, would suffer hardship.
Grant Sends Sheridan to the Shenandoah To set
his plan in motion, Grant sent General Philip Sheridan and his cavalry into the rich farmland of Virginia's Shenandoah Valley. He instructed Sheridan:
“Leave nothing to invite the enemy to return. Destroy whatever cannot be consumed. Let the valley be left so that crows flying over it will have to carry their rations along with them.”
S.
Grant, quoted in Bruce Catton’s Grant, Takes Command
Sheridan obeyed. In the summer and fall of 1864, he marched through the valley, destroying farms and livestock.
During the campaign, Sheridan’s troops burned 2,000 barns filled with grain. There was nothing left for Lee’s troops or for southern civilians.
Sherman’s March to the Sea Grant also ordered General William Tecumseh Sherman to capture Atlanta, Georgia, and then march to the Atlantic coast. Like Sheridan, Sherman had orders to destroy everything useful to the South.
Sherman's troops captured Atlanta in September 1864. They began their campaign by turning the people
Sectionalism and Civil War 415	8.6 The War’s End
of Atlanta out of their homes and burning a large part of the city. Then, Sherman began his “march to the sea.”
As they marched through Georgia, Sherman’s troops ripped up railroad tracks, built bonfires from the ties, then heated and twisted the rails. (The now useless rails, often twisted around trees, were nicknamed “Sherman’s neckties.”) The soldiers killed livestock and tore up fields. They burned barns, homes, bridges, and factories.
Ki DESCRIBE Grant's concept of total war.
Contrasting Ideas of
Liberty and Union
Lincoln ran for reelection in 1864. At first, his defeat seemed, in his own words, “exceedingly probable.” Before the capture of Atlanta, Union chances for a final victory looked bleak. Lincoln knew that many northerners were unhappy with his handling of the war. He thought that this might cost him the election.
The Democrats nominated General George McClellan to oppose Lincoln. They adopted a resolution demanding the immediate “cessation of hostilities” against the South. Although he had commanded the
» General William T. Sherman (using the telescope) led a campaign that cut a destructive path through the South. Hypothesize Why would Sherman order his troops to destroy all items of value?
Union army, McClellan was willing to compromise with the Confederacy. If peace could be achieved, he was ready to restore slavery.
Then, in September, Sherman took Atlanta, and the North rallied around Lincoln. Sheridan’s smashing victories in the Shenandoah Valley in October further increased Lincoln’s popular support. In the election in November, the vote was close, but Lincoln remained President.
In his Second Inaugural Address, Lincoln looked forward to the coming of peace:
“With malice toward none, with charity for all . . . let us strive ... to bind up the nation’s wounds ... to do all which may achieve a just and a lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.”
—Abraham Lincoln, Second Inaugural Address
Two Inaugural Addresses Lincoln’s Second Inaugural Address, along with his First Inaugural and Gettysburg Addresses, are landmark speeches in American history. Taken together, they present Lincoln’s ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government.
In his First Inaugural, Lincoln emphasized the importance of the union of the states, which he viewed as “perpetual,” or never-ending. Again, in the Gettysburg Address, he emphasized the importance of maintaining the union of the country, especially since the country was based on freedom and equality. Lincoln’s Second Inaugural highlighted slavery as a violation of equality and liberty, yet emphasized, again, the preservation of unity by urging people to “bind up the nation’s wounds.”
In contrast, Confederate President Jefferson Davis had conveyed different views in his inaugural address, given shortly after Lincoln’s inauguration. In his speech, Davis explained southerner’s reasons for withdrawing from the Union and seceding. It was “a necessity not a choice,” he said. Quoting the Declaration of Independence, Davis stated this about government:
“Our present condition . . . illustrates the American idea that governments rest upon the consent of the governed, and that it is the right of the people to alter or abolish governments whenever
Sectionalism and Civil War 416	8.6 The War’s End
they become destructive of the ends
for which they were established.”
—President Jefferson Davis. First Inaugural Address, February 18, 1861
Lincoln had insisted in his First Inaugural Address that the Constitution required union. In the Emancipation Proclamation and the Gettysburg Address, Lincoln had extended the idea of liberty to all Americans. While Lincoln’s speeches called for equality and liberty for enslaved African Americans, Davis called for the equality and liberty only of southern whites.
In his commitment to principles of liberty, equality, and the preservation of the Union and the government, and in his decisions as President during the most difficult crisis the United States had ever faced, Lincoln demonstrated remarkable leadership qualities.
El IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS How did Jefferson
Davis use the Declaration of Independence to justify secession?
ELPS
ELPS SPEAKING 3.B.3
With a partner, discuss the contrasting ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government of Lincoln and Davis. Use these words and phrases in your discussion: but, however, in contrast, on the other hand. The Confederacy
Surrenders at Appomattox
Grant had begun a drive to capture Richmond in May 1864. Throughout the spring and summer, he and Lee fought a series of costly battles.
Northerners read with horror that 60,000 men were killed or wounded in a single month at the Battles of the Wilderness, Spotsylvania, and Cold Harbor, all in Virginia. Still, Grant pressed on. He knew that the Union could replace men and supplies. The South could not.
Lee dug in at Petersburg, near Richmond. Here, Grant kept Lee under siege for nine months. At last, with a fresh supply of troops, Grant took Petersburg on April 2,1865. The same day, Richmond fell.
The War Ends Lee and his army withdrew to a small Virginia town called Appomattox Court House. There, a week later, they were trapped by Union troops. Lee knew that his men would be slaughtered if he kept fighting. On April 9, 1865, Lee surrendered.
At Appomattox Court House, Grant offered generous terms of surrender to the defeated Confederate army.
» Richmond, Virginia, shown here, was the capital of the Confederacy. It was in Richmond that Confederate President Jefferson Davis gave his inaugural address in 1861.
Soldiers were required to turn over their rifles, but officers were allowed to keep their pistols. Soldiers who had horses could keep them. Grant knew that southerners would need the animals for spring plowing. Finally, ordered Grant, “each officer and man will be allowed to return to his home, not to be disturbed by the United States authorities.”
As the Confederates surrendered, Union soldiers began to cheer. Grant ordered them to be silent. “The war is over,” he said. “The rebels are our countrymen again.”
Honoring Those Who Served The war was over, but for hundreds and thousands of men, women, and children, it would be remembered as the most important event of their lives. The men who fought on both sides were honored for their services with ceremonies up to 75 years after the war. During the war, President Lincoln had signed into law what would become the Medal of Honor, the highest honor in the American military. Over 1,500 soldiers were awarded the Medal of Honor for their heroic actions during the Civil War.
One Medal of Honor recipient was Philip Bazaar, an immigrant from Chile. He enlisted in the Navy at New Bedford, Massachusetts. Although his rank was low—"ordinary seaman”—his actions proved him a
Sectionalism and Civil War 417	8.6 The War s End
hero. He earned the Medal of Honor carrying vital messages between commanders while serving on the U.S.S. Santiago de Cuba during the assault on Fort Fisher, North Carolina, on January 15,1865:
“As one of a boat crew detailed to one of the generals on shore, O.S. Bazaar bravely entered the fort in the assault and accompanied his party in carrying dispatches at the height of the battle. He was 1 of 6 men who entered the fort in the assault from the fleet."
—Medal of Honor Citation for Philip Bazaar, June 22,
1865
Id RECALL What was significant about how General
Grant treated Confederate soldiers after they surrendered?
The Nation Begins a New Chapter
The effect of the Civil War was immense. The Civil War years, 1861-1865, were significant on many levels. More than 360,000 Union soldiers and 250,000 Confederate soldiers lost their lives. No war has ever resulted in more American deaths. In dollars, the war’s cost was about 20 billion. That was more than 11 times the entire amount spent by the federal government between 1789 and 1861.
The Civil War was a major turning point in American history. The balance of power was changed. The Democratic party lost its influence and the Republicans were in a commanding position. No longer would Americans speak of the nation as a confederation of states. Before the war, Americans referred to “these United States.” After, they began speaking of “the United States.” The idea that each state might secede, if it chose, was dead. As a result, the power of the federal government grew.
The war also put an end to slavery in the United States. For years, Americans had debated whether slavery could exist in a nation dedicated to the ideals of liberty and equality. By the war’s end, millions of African Americans had gained their freedom. Millions more Americans, both northern and southern, began to think about what it meant to be free and equal.
_________________COSTS of the civil war
MONETARY COSTS \ . HUMAN COSTS
8484.8 KOliJifR
NORTH
$3.4 BILLION
Total cost to the North
POLITICAL COSTS
1864 to 1884
won	presidential elections:
1864 LINCOLN
1868 GRANT
1872 GRANT
1876 HAYES
1880 GARFIELD 1884 CLEVELAND
SOUTH
$3.3 BILLION
Total cost to the South
U.S. GROWTH
vs. SOUTHERN
AGRICULTURAL
GROWTH
1874-1904
1879-1889 1884-1894 1889-1899 1894-1904
1874-1884
» Analyze Data Based on the information about the human costs of the war, which side had more casualties during the war?
Sectionalism and Civil War 418	8.6 The War’s End
To be sure, a long and difficult struggle for equality lay ahead. Yet, Lincoln’s words at Gettysburg were prophetic: "We here highly resolve . . . that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom.” From out of a cruel, bitter, often heart-rending war, the United States did indeed emerge a stronger, freer nation.
B RECALL
Why was the Civil War significant? ASSESSMENT
1. Draw Conclusions How might General Lee’s goal of capturing Washington D.C. have led
him to order Pickett’s Charge at the Battle of Gettysburg?
2.	Interpret What elements of total war do you see in General Sherman’s “March to the Sea”?
3.	Address Central Issues What was the major reason that Abraham Lincoln was reelected?
4.	Summarize the terms of surrender that General Grant offered General Lee.
5.	Hypothesize What was life like in the United States after the enormous loss of life and expenses of the war.
Sectionalism and Civil War
419	8.6 The War’s End
1.	Identify Congressional Conflicts Identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John C. Calhoun and Henry Clay. Write a paragraph identifying and comparing the roles of John C. Calhoun and Henry Clay in the conflict over the extension of slavery that divided Congress in 1850. Explain how the slavery issue divided Congress in 1850, Calhoun’s position on the issue, Clay’s position in the conflict, and how the conflict was settled. 7.D, 29.B
2.	Summarize the Compromise of 1850 Summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in
a peaceful resolution by identifying the provisions of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of Henry Clay. Write a paragraph describing the Compromise of 1850. Identify the roles of Henry Clay and Stephen Douglas in obtaining the compromise and summarize the compromise’s five provisions. 7.D, 21 .C
3.	Analyze the Fugitive Slave Act’s Impact Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States. Write a paragraph explaining why the Fugitive Slave Act increased tensions between the North and the South over slavery. Explain how northerners felt about Fugitive Slave Act, how some northerners and northern states responded to the Fugitive Slave Act, and how southerners reacted to the northern response. 7.C
4.	Evaluate the Impact of Landmark Supreme Court Decisions Evaluate the impact of selected landmark Supreme Court decisions, including Dred Scott v. Sandford, on life in the United States. Write a paragraph evaluating the impact that the Supreme Court ruling in Dred Scott v. Sandford had on life in the United States. Describe the events that led to Dred Scott’s filing a lawsuit that eventually reached the Supreme Court, explain the Court’s ruling in Dred Scott v. Sandford, and evaluate the impact of the Court’s decision. 18.C
5.	Identify Different Points of View of Political Parties on Important Historical Issues Identify the different points of view of Republican Abraham Lincoln and Democrat Stephen Douglas regarding the issue of slavery. Write a paragraph describing the views regarding slavery presented by Lincoln and Douglas
in their debates. Identify both Stephen Douglas’s and Abraham Lincoln’s views regarding the spread of slavery. 21 .A
6.	Analyze Economic Differences Between the North and South Analyze the effects of economic differences among different regions of the United States at selected times in U.S. history, including during the Civil War, and use the analysis to make generalizations. Use the bar graph and other sources to write a paragraph describing and making generalizations about the economic differences between the North and the South. Describe the important components of the northern economy and the southern economy, assess the strengths and weaknesses of both sides, and use the information you gather to make a generalization about the two economies. (See graph below.) 12.D, 29.B
railroads SBfeBiBllIsi	RESOURCES
FARM ACREAGE C23BI1I1I1I
M&MUFACTURIHG WORKERS
liillBIllillliB FACTORIES :TKOlfSASDSi E33!l!llllSli	
7.	Locate Places of Importance in the United States Locate places of importance in the United States, such as Harper’s Ferry, Virginia, and describe how the place is related to the effects of sectionalism. Write a paragraph describing John Brown’s antislavery campaign and its location in Harper’s Ferry, Virginia. Explain why Brown chose Harper’s Ferry, Virginia, to further his antislavery campaign, explain how Brown’s raid was a result of sectionalism, and describe the results of John Brown’s raid. 1.A 10.A
8.	Describe Developments in Music Unique to American Culture Analyze information by sequencing to describe developments in music that are unique
to American culture, such as the “Battle Hymn of the Republic.” Write a paragraph describing the sequence of events that led to the “Battle Hymn of the Republic” becoming a piece of music unique to American culture. Explain why the chorus of a popular song in New England celebrated John Brown’s actions and describe the sequence of events that led the song to be adapted into the popular Civil War song, “Battle Hymn of the Republic.” 26.A, 29.B
Sectionalism and Civil War 420
9.	Explain Constitutional Issues Regarding States’ Rights in the Civil War Explain constitutional issues arising over the issue of states’ rights, including the Civil War. Write a paragraph explaining how southerners
and President Lincoln differed in their views on whether southern states were allowed to secede under the Constitution. Consider how southerners used the Declaration of Independence, states’ rights, and the Constitution to defend their right to secede, and how President Lincoln used the Constitution to argue against the right of states to secede. 17.B
10.	Explain How Sectionalism and States’ Rights Caused the Civil War Describe and explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism and states’ rights. Write a paragraph explaining how Lincoln’s election as President split the nation along sectional lines and led some states to secede. Consider why Lincoln’s election victory alarmed southerners,
why Senator Crittenden’s attempt at a compromise on slavery failed to gain support, and which states were the first to exercise what they saw as their states’ right to secede. 1.A, 8.B
11.	Explain the Effect of Physical Geography on the Battle of Vicksburg Explain the effects of physical geography on the Battle of Vicksburg and the role played by Ulysses S. Grant. Use the map below and other sources to write a paragraph explaining the Battle of Vicksburg. Explain why it was important for the Union to secure the city of Vicksburg. Look at the terrain
and relief as shown on the map and analyze how the physical geography of Vicksburg affected the battle, and explain how General Grant took control of Vicksburg. (See map below.) 8.A, 8.B, 1O.C
12.	Describe Contributions of General George McClellan Describe the contributions of significant military leaders of the United States, including General George McClellan, and analyze information by drawing a conclusion. Write a paragraph describing the contributions of General George McClellan to the Army of the Potomac and the Peninsula Campaign. Identify General George McClellan, describe McClellan’s approach in leading the troops in the Peninsula Campaign, explain the results of the Peninsula Campaign, and draw a conclusion about General McClellan’s leadership. 29.B, 22.B
O'** aV#
10 mi
0	10 km
Vornnn Lambert Azimuthal .vernon	Equa|.Area Projection
V

N
W >E
$
Cypress
Swamp
Bridgeport. ^Vicksburg
ChampioH _c|jnton
Jackson*

Raymonds
•Cayuga
•Bruinsburg
Grand Guff
*Port Gibson
Sectionalism
and Civil War 421
13.	Explain Role of Abraham Lincoln in the Civil
War Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Abraham Lincoln. Using Abraham Lincoln’s quotation below and other sources, write a paragraph explaining President Lincoln’s goal in fighting the Civil War and his decision to issue the Emancipation Proclamation. Explain President Lincoln’s goal in fighting the Civil War, explain the purpose of the Emancipation Proclamation, and analyze why Lincoln did not free all enslaved African Americans. 8.A,
22.A
If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it; and if I could do it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would also do that.
—Abraham Lincoln, August 22, 1862, quoted in Carl Sandburg, Abraham Lincoln
14.	Explain the Relationship Between Urbanization and Conflicts Explain the relationship between urbanization and conflicts resulting from differences
in political beliefs, and identify ways conflicts between people from various racial groups were resolved. Write a paragraph describing what led to the northern draft riots and what actions President Lincoln took to stop the riots. Answer the following questions: Why did many northerners see the Civil War as “a rich man’s war and a poor man’s fight”? How did the Emancipation Proclamation help trigger the draft riots? What steps did President Lincoln take to stop the riots? 23.B, 23.C
15.	Identify the Social Contributions of Women to American Society Identify the social contributions of women to American society, as in the Civil War effort. Write a paragraph describing the ways that women contributed to the Civil War effort. Describe the ways women contributed to the war effort on the home front and on the battlefield. 23.E
16.	Explain the Battle of Gettysburg and Robert E. Lee’s Role in It Explain significant events of the Civil War, including the Battle of Gettysburg, and explain the role played by Robert E. Lee. Write a paragraph analyzing how General Robert E.
Lee’s decisions affected the outcome of the Battle of Gettysburg. Explain General Lee’s strategy for attacking in Pennsylvania and beyond, analyze how and why General Lee’s decisions during the battle led to a Confederate defeat, and explain why the Battle of Gettysburg is considered a turning point in the Civil War. 8.A, 8.B
17.	Organize and Interpret Information from a Timeline
Explain the role played by Abraham Lincoln during the Civil War by organizing and interpreting information from visuals, including timelines. Use the timeline below and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing the events that led to Abraham Lincoln’s victory in the presidential election of 1864. Organize information from the timeline and other sources to explain Lincoln’s role in events, interpret how Lincoln’s actions affected the course of the war, and explain how Lincoln’s actions most likely led to his reelection. (See timeline below.) 8.A, 29.C
Background to the Election of 1864
SOURCE:
Sncydopaedb Britannica; Ubrary of Congress Sectionalism and Civil War 422
18.	Analyze Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address and Jefferson Davis’s Inaugural Address Analyze information by finding the main idea; analyze Abraham Lincoln’s ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government as contained in the Gettysburg Address and contrast them with the ideas contained in Jefferson Davis’s inaugural address. Identify the main idea in each quotation below. Then, use these quotations and other sources to write a paragraph explaining and contrasting Abraham Lincoln’s ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government with those expressed in Jefferson Davis’s inaugural address. State the main idea of the excerpt from Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address; state the main idea of the excerpt from Davis’s inaugural address; and analyze and contrast Lincoln’s and Davis’s ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government. 8.C,
29.B
We here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain—that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom—and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.
- Ahrahnm Lincoln, ( J •! t yshmg Address,
Novell ihf >i Id. hddJ
Our present condition . . . illustrates the American idea that governments rest upon the consent of the governed, and that it is the right of the people to alter or abolish governments whenever they become destructive of the ends for which they were established.
- President Jet Arson Davis, inarigurai Address,
Pehi nniy IP. 1 aid 1
20.	Explain the Significance of the Civil War Explain the significance of 1861-1865, the Civil War. Write a paragraph explaining the significant changes the Civil War brought to the United States. Explain how the war shifted the balance of power among political parties
in the United States, how the war changed the way Americans perceived the nation, and how the end of slavery affected the nation’s thoughts about liberty and equality. 1.C
21.	Describe Contribution of General Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson Describe the contributions of significant military leaders of the United States, including General Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson. Write a paragraph describing the contributions of General Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson at the Battle of Bull Run. Describe who General Jackson was, what he did during the Battle of Bull Run, and how he got the nickname of “Stonewall.” 22.B
22.	Apply Relative Chronology Apply relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals
and time periods. Write a paragraph describing the sequence of generals-in-chief of the Union army during the early Civil War and the late Civil War. Answer the following questions: Who was the most important general-in-chief of the Union army in the early Civil War and what battles and campaigns was he known for? Why did President Lincoln replace this general? In the late Civil War, whom did President Lincoln appoint as the general-in-chief of the Union Army and why? How did this general bring the Civil War to a close?
1.B
19.	Describe the Human and Monetary Costs of the Civil War Identify the major eras in U.S. history through 1877, including the Civil War, and describe the effects of the war in human and monetary costs. Write a paragraph describing how the Civil War cost the U.S. dearly in loss of life and wealth. Describe the human losses and financial costs on both sides and explain how these losses make the Civil War a major era in U.S. history. 1.A
Sectionalism and Civil War
The Civil War: Final Battles
KEY
—► Union troops
<	Union victories
—► Confederate troops
<	Confederate victories
	
< 		
	
>W	
	Delaware
1	
■■	L—-J
.y
~ J
iwnta .X\?	.. J j
Wl < ■* 1 :	f
«2?'	Feteraburolx ?)
1865 Hve rones Z(|ww tS6^prll 1865)
lillli
L ANTIC OCEAN
50 mi
0	50 km
Lambert Azimuthal
Equal-Area Projection

23.	Transfer Information from One Medium to Another Locate places of importance in the United States during the nineteenth century, and transfer information from one medium to another, including statistical to written or visual, using computer software as appropriate. Research casualty statistics for both Union and Confederate troops for the battles shown on the map above. Use computer software to present these statistics on a bar graph and write an account explaining how these battles led to the Confederate surrender and the end of the Civil War. Use the map to locate the Battles of the Wilderness, Spotsylvania, Cold Harbor, and the siege of Petersburg; find statistics for these battles, including both Union and Confederate dead and whether the battle was a Union or Confederate victory (or undecided); create a bar graph from these statistics; and write a report using the statistics and other information that explains how these battles led to the end of the Civil War. 10.A, 30.C
24.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: When is war justified? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
Sectionalism and Civil War 424
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE

Sectionalism and Civil War
1 Which of the following comparisons best describes how Henry Clay’s Missouri Compromise changed the congressional debate over slavery?
A
Before, conflicts arose often over tariffs; after, conflicts eased because Congress agreed to lower taxes on the South. B
Before, conflicts rarely arose over slavery; after, Congress shifted the balance of power to the South, angering northerners. C
Before, conflicts arose because slave states were gaining too much power; after, Congress limited the number of slave states that could join the union. D
Before, conflicts arose over slavery every time a new state applied to enter the union; after, Congress would try to maintain balance between slave and free states based on geography. In YOUR hands, my dissatisfied fellow-countrymen, and not in MINE, is the momentous issue of civil war.... We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection. —Abraham Lincoln, First Inaugural Address
By the time Lincoln made this speech, several states had declared their intention to secede from the Union. Based on the quotation above, how did Abraham Lincoln view his role as president in the growing civil conflict?
F
As duly elected president, he intended to use his power to declare war on the seceding states, if necessary. G
He still considered himself the president of all Americans and wanted to avoid war with the seceding states. H
As President of the United States, he had little authority over the seceding states, but he hoped they could become allies. J
As leader of the nation, he would use his power to issue a friendly pardon to the seceding states, although they would still be considered enemies. Sectionalism and Civil War 426
ize
www.redrsiuniexas.com
Access additional practice questions
3	Which of the following best summarizes the constitutional conflict over states’ rights durinq the Civil War?
A
Southern leaders knew they could not constitutionally secede from the Union, so they declared war. B
President Lincoln wanted to avoid war by adding a constitutional amendment allowing for peaceful secession. C
Southern leaders believed they had a constitutional right to secede, but northern leaders did not agree and were willing to fight to save the Union. D
Lincoln agreed that the southern states had a constitutional right to secede, but he believed preserving the Union was in the country’s best interest. How did General U.S. Grant’s victory at Shiloh affect the Civil War?
F
It helped the Union win control over New Orleans. G
It helped the Confederacy preserve the security of Louisiana. H
It helped the Union seize control of the southern Mississippi River. J
It helped the Confederacy move closer to an attack against Washington, D.C. Jf you have trouble with... Question	J
j See Lesson	8.1
3
8.3
17.B
4_
8.4
8.A
Sectionalism and Civil War
The image above celebrates the Emancipation Proclamation, which— A freed slaves in the Confederacy B freed slaves throughout the United States C announced the re-election of Abraham Lincoln D declared the secession of South Carolina from the Union
6	The Battle of Gettysburg was a turning point in the Civil War because—
F it was the first time that Union forces retreated from a battle G it was the last time that Confederate forces won a major battle H it was the first time that Union forces defeated Confederate forces J it was the last time that Confederate forces invaded the Union states
Sectionalism and Civil War 428
r,
iivivv.r caiouil ICAdO.UUlil
Access additional practice questions
SOUTHERN AFRICAN AMERICANS BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR RIGHTS UNDER THELAW POPULATION TREATMENT BYWIUTE SLAVE OWNERS
Free African Americans		About 200,000	Generally disliked and distrusted
Enslaved African Americans	Denied any	About 400,000	Legally treated
k	 		legal rights		as property
Which option best replaces the X in the table above?
A
Denied any legal rights B Legally treated as equals C Denied full citizenship rights under state laws D Allowed full citizenship rights under the U.S. Constitution 8	In the 1800s, John J. Audubon’s art was unique to American culture because he—
F only used pigments that were made from resources found in the United States G painted a collection of images: one for each bird known to exist in the United States
H was the only American artist devoted to painting scenes within the United States and its territories
J refused to study art in Europe and founded an art academy in the United States to train American artists
If you have trouble with... Question J	5
See Lesson	8.5
TEKS 8.B
7
7.2
7.B
Sectionalism and Civil War
In this Topic, you will learn about the Reconstruction era. You will also find lots of ways to investigate the ideas of this Topic and to master the TEKS.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
The Reconstruction Era
LESSON OUTLINE
9.1: Early Reconstruction 1.A, 8.B, 16.B 9.2: Radical Reconstruction 9.A, 16.B 9.3: Reconstruction and Southern Society 9.A, 9.B, 9.C
9.4: The Aftermath of Reconstruction 1.A, 9.A, 9.C, 23.C
9.5: Western Agriculture 9.D 9.6: Hardships for Native Americans 9.D 9.7: Mining, Railroads, and the Economy 27.D
TEKS
1.A, 8.B, 9.A, 9.B, 9.C, 9.D, 10.A, 10.C, 11.A, 11.B, 12.D, 16.B, 21 .A, 22.A, 23.C, 27.B, 27.D, 28.A, 29.J
•	Connect
: My Story Video and Topic Essential Question—see ; how they connect to your past experience or to : what you have already learned. The Essential ; Question for this Topic is: How should we handle : conflict?
i Begin your study by trying the i following:
NBC LEARN
Watch My Story Video: : Born into Slavery
Launch your Civic Discussion:
•	Ending Reconstruction
430
•	Investigate
; A group of lessons will help ; you investigate the Topic : further. Each lesson has = interesting text readings and i fascinating interactivities.
; Together, they will bring the i Topic to life and help you ; master the TEKS for this Topic
: And keep working on your : Civic Discussion. You’re : almost ready to show what : you have accomplished by i expressing your position for i the Civic Discussion using the
•	evidence you have gathered.
» Digital interactivity from the online course
•	Synthesize
: You’ll see that this Topic is about more than i fascinating texts and fun interactivities. It’s : really about how those things help you think : about big ideas, like the Essential Question for
•	this Topic.
•	Demonstrate
i Completing this Topic is like practicing all
: your soccer skills or rehearsing the scenes
•	in a play. Now you get a chance to pull it
•	all together for the final game or the live
•	performance. You can do this on the Topic
•	Review and Assessment pages. Or you can
•	complete work on your Civic Discussion,
•	Ending Reconstruction........................
TEKS in Topic 9	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
Enduring Understandings
•	Reconstruction was the era of rebuilding and political, economic, and social change in the South following the Civil War.
•	Amendments passed during Reconstruction gave political rights to African Americans, but African Americans often were denied these rights in the South.
•	Shifts in political power ended Reconstruction, followed by gradual economic recovery in the South.
•	The cattle boom and the Homestead Act rapidly increased westward migration.
•	As settlers moved West, Native Americans were forced to give up their land and way of life.
•	Railroads aided westward expansion and improved the American economy.
to learn about experiences of people
who were enslaved.
9 The Reconstruction Et (1865-1877)
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry * Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
pOli
if
Like other major southern cities, Atlanta lay in ruins after the Civil War. Much of the South needed to be rebuilt.
\2z At the end of the Civil War, the future looked bleak to many southerners. Across the South, cities and farms lay in ruins. All southerners, black or white, faced an unfamiliar new world. At the same time, a shattered nation had to find a way to become whole again.
821 Interactive Flipped Video
1.A, 8.B, 16.B
» Objectives
Describe the nation’s economic, political, and social problems after the Civil War.
Identify the early steps that were taken during Reconstruction.
Explain how the assassination of Lincoln and the inauguration of a new President led to conflict.
» Key Terms
freedmen Reconstruction Ten Percent Plan amnesty Wade-Davis Bill Freedmen’s Bureau Thirteenth Amendment
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Early Reconstruction
Effects of the Civil War
After four years of war, both northerners and southerners had to adjust to a changed world. The adjustment was far more difficult in the South.
Political, Economic, and Social Problems in the North Despite
their victory, northerners faced a number of economic problems. Some 800,000 returning Union soldiers needed jobs. The government was canceling its war orders, and factories were laying off workers. Still, the North’s economic disruption was only temporary. Boom times quickly returned.
The North lost more soldiers in the war than the South did. However, only a few battles had taken place on northern soil.
Northern farms and cities were hardly touched. One returning Union soldier remarked, “It seemed ... as if I had been away only a day or two, and had just taken up . . . where I had left off." However, thousands of soldiers suffered wounds from the war, many of which included missing limbs and other painful injuries.
The North faced political problems, too. There was disagreement about how to bring the South back into the Union and what to do with newly freed African Americans. Many wanted to punish southerners for what they had done, while others wanted a more moderate approach
434
Political, Economic, and Social Problems in the South Economic conditions in the South were far worse than in the North. Confederate soldiers had little chance of taking up where they had left off. In some areas, every house, barn, and bridge had been destroyed.
Two thirds of the South’s railroad tracks had been turned into twisted heaps of scrap. The cities of Columbia, Richmond, and Atlanta had been leveled.
The war wrecked the South’s financial system. After the war, Confederate money was worthless. People who had loaned money to the Confederacy were never repaid. Many southern banks closed, and depositors lost their savings.
The war changed southern society forever. Almost overnight, there was a new class of nearly four million people known as freedmen—men and women who had been enslaved. Under slavery, they had been forbidden to own property and to learn to read or write. What would become of them? How could the South cope with this sudden, drastic change?
These economic and social problems combined with political problems. It was unclear how the southern states would run their governments. There were not yet legal systems in place to protect African Americans, and many white southerners feared African Americans gaining political power. Also, many white politicians who had held office in the Confederacy were forbidden from politics.
Overall, the economic differences between the agrarian South and industrial North increased after the war. The northern economy picked up, while the South struggled to rebuild. Many southerners resented northerners coming in to "fix” southern problems, and the ruined economy made recovery especially hard.
1^ DESCRIBE the political, economic, and social
difficulties faced by the South after the war.
The Causes and Effects of Reconstruction
When the Civil War ended, President Lincoln hoped to deal with the tremendous damage and turmoil the Civil War had caused. The era following the Civil War became known as Reconstruction, or the rebuilding of the South. Lincoln wanted to make it fairly easy for southerners to rejoin the Union. The sooner the nation was reunited, Lincoln believed, the faster the South would be able to rebuild.
Lincoln’s Ten Percent Plan As early as 1863, Lincoln outlined his Ten Percent Plan for Reconstruction.
» After the war, soldiers such as this Union officer returned to their homes. Despite the high loss of life, the North did not require as much rebuilding as did the South.
» Registered enemies of the Union swear their allegiance to the United States at the office of General Bowen in New Orleans.
§1 Interactive Chart
The Reconstruction Era (1865-1877)	435	9-1 Early Reconstruction
Under this plan, a southern state could form a new government after 10 percent of its voters swore an oath of loyalty to the United States. The new government had to abolish slavery. Voters could then elect members of Congress and take part in the national government once again.
Lincoln’s plan also offered amnesty, or a government pardon, to Confederates who swore loyalty to the Union. Amnesty would not apply to the former leaders of the Confederacy, however.
Lincoln Rejects a Rival Proposal Many Republicans in Congress felt that the Ten Percent Plan was too generous toward the South. In 1864, they passed the Wade-Davis Bill, a rival plan for Reconstruction. It required a majority of white men in each southern state to swear loyalty to the Union. It also denied the right to vote or hold office to anyone who had volunteered to fight for the Confederacy. Lincoln refused to sign the Wade-Davis Bill because he felt it was too harsh.
The Freedmen’s Bureau Addresses Economic and Social Needs There were many effects of the Reconstruction era. One such effect was Congress and the President agreed on a proposal to create a new agency. One month before Lee surrendered, Congress
» Southern freedmen attended schools set up by the Freedmen’s Bureau to gain skills necessary for employment. In this engraving, African American children attend a school in South Carolina.
passed a bill creating the Freedmen’s Bureau, a government agency to help former slaves. Lincoln signed the bill.
The Freedmen’s Bureau gave food and clothing to former slaves. It also tried to find jobs for freedmen. The bureau helped poor whites as well. It provided medical care for more than one million people.
One of the bureau’s most important tasks was to set up schools for freedmen. Most of the teachers were volunteers, often women from the North. Grandparents and grandchildren sat side by side in the classroom. Charlotte Forten, an African American volunteer from Philadelphia, wrote:
“It is wonderful how a people who have been so long crushed to the earth . . . can have so great a desire for knowledge, and such a capacity for attaining it.”
—Charlotte Forten, article in the Atlantic Monthly
The Freedmen’s Bureau laid the foundation for the South’s public school system. It also created colleges for African Americans, including Howard, Morehouse, and Fisk. Many of the graduates of these schools became teachers themselves. By the 1870s, African Americans were teaching in grade schools throughout the South.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did President Lincoln want to make it easy for the South to rejoin the Union?
The Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
President Lincoln hoped to persuade Congress to accept his Reconstruction plan. However, he never got the chance.
On April 14,1865, just five days after Lee’s surrender, President Lincoln attended a play at Ford’s Theatre in Washington, D.C. A popular actor who supported the Confederate cause, John Wilkes Booth, crept into the President’s box and shot Lincoln in the head. Lincoln died the next morning. Booth was later caught and killed in a barn outside the city.
The nation was plunged into grief. The assassination was significant because Lincoln was the first American President to be assassinated. Also, millions who had been celebrating the war’s end now mourned Lincoln’s death. His body was transported by train for burial in his hometown, Springfield, Illinois. Millions of Americans came to pay their respects along the route.
B EXPLAIN
the meaning behind Secretary of War Edwin Stanton’s statement about Lincoln. » This present-day photo shows the box at Ford’s Theatre where John Wilkes Booth assassinated Abraham Lincoln on April 14, 1865.
"Now he belongs to the ages,” commented Secretary of War Edwin Stanton.
Booth was part of a group of ten conspirators who had long been plotting to kill Lincoln, Vice President Andrew Johnson, and Secretary of State William Seward. None of the other assassinations took place, although Seward was attacked by one of the conspirators. Four of Booth’s co-conspirators were hanged for their crimes, including Mary Surratt, the first woman executed by the United States.
President Johnson’s Reconstruction Plan
Vice President Andrew Johnson was now President. Johnson had represented Tennessee in Congress. When his state seceded, Johnson had remained loyal to the Union.
The Impact of the Thirteenth Amendment on Life in the United States Republicans in Congress believed Johnson would support a strict Reconstruction plan. But his plan was much milder than expected. It called for a majority of voters in each southern state to pledge loyalty to the United States. Each state also had to ratify the Thirteenth Amendment, which Congress had approved in January 1865. It banned slavery throughout the nation. (As you read, the Emancipation Proclamation did not free slaves in areas already under Union control.)
The Thirteenth Amendment had a significant impact on life in the United States. Without slavery, the South developed new social and economic systems. Many newly freed African Americans were hired on plantations. Others moved to towns or to the North to tad work.
Politically, the amendment overturned previous state laws and Supreme Court decisions upholding slavery. Many people had argued that slavery was a state decision. The Thirteenth Amendment gave Congress the power to intervene, and later to pass additional legislation protecting civil rights.
Political Problems in Congress The southern states Quickly met Johnson's conditions. As a result, the President approved their new state governments in late ^65. Voters in the South then elected representatives to Congress. Many of those elected had held office in Ihe Confederacy. For example, Alexander Stephens, the
