2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
The Incas were weak from fighting among themselves over control of their government.
Finally, many Indians died from European diseases, such as smallpox, measles, and influenza. Some historians believe that disease alone would have ensured Spanish victory over the Indians.
From the Spanish perspective, their interaction with the Aztecs and the Incas resulted in great victories that brought wealth and power. The Spanish also saw the conquests as further proof of their natural superiority. The Aztecs and Incas, of course, had a much different view of the same events. From their perspectives, the Spanish conquests were disasters that devastated their civilizations.
B identify SUPPORTING DETAILS What reasons
can you identify that help explain why the Spanish conquered the Aztecs and the Incas so easily?
Exploring Lands to the North
The Spanish search for treasure reached beyond the lands of the Aztecs and Incas. Moving north, conquistadors explored the Spanish borderlands. The
borderlands spanned the present-day southern United States from Florida to California.
Juan Ponce de Leon (pawn say day lay OHN) traveled through parts of Florida in 1513, looking for a legendary fountain of youth. Indians claimed that anyone who bathed in its magical water would remain young forever. Ponce de Leon found no such fountain.
An Expedition Proves Difficult Another explorer, Panfilo Narvaez (nahr VAH es), led an expedition that ended in disaster. In 1528, a storm struck his fleet in the Gulf of Mexico. Narvaez and many others were lost at sea. The rest landed on an island in present-day Texas. Indians captured the few survivors and held them prisoner. Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca (kah VAY suh day VAH kuh) assumed leadership of the small group.
Cabeza de Vaca, an enslaved African named Estevanico, and two others finally escaped their captors in 1533. The four walked across the plains of Texas, searching for a Spanish settlement. Finally, in 1536, they reached a town in Mexico. They had traveled by foot more than 1,000 miles through the Southwest.
The Search for Gold Continues From 1539 to 1542, Hernando De Soto explored Florida and other parts of the Southeast. In his search for gold, he reached the
1565-1776
Spanish Explorers and Settlements in North America
KEY
—	Ponce de Leon, 1513
—	Narvaez/Cabeza de Vaca/ Estevanico, 1528-1536
--- De Soto, 1539-1542
--- Coronado, 1540-1547
1 Spanish territory, 1530 4 Spanish missions, 1565-1776 • Other Spanish settlements,
» Spanish explorers took several different routes through North America Analyze Maps What impact might exploration of the Spanish borderlands have had on the present-day United States?
I
Interactive Map European Colonization of North America 46
2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
Spanish Territories in the Americas
» Spanish territory covered Central America, part of North America, and much of the Caribbean Islands and South America. Analyze Maps How did the Spanish divide their territory into colonies?
Mississippi River. De Soto died along the riverbank, without finding the riches he sought.
The conquistador Francisco Coronado (koh roh NAH doh) heard legends about "seven cities of gold.” In 1540, he led an expedition into the southwestern borderlands. He traveled to present-day Arizona and New Mexico. Some of his party went as far as the Grand Canyon. Still, the Zuni (ZOO nee) villages he visited had no golden streets.
The Spanish expeditions into the borderlands met with little success. Faced with strong Indian resistance in the north, Spain focused instead on bringing order to its empire in the south.
IDENTIFY
What reasons did explorers have for traveling north?
The Colonization of New Spain
The conquistadors set up colonies in many parts of the Americas. Spain had many causes for colonization, or setting up colonies. One was the search for wealth: settlements provided bases from which expeditions could set out in search of gold. Settlements could
also created wealth through farming and trade. A second important cause of settlement was to spread Christianity by converting native peoples. A third cause was to satisfy a thirst for adventure and exploration. Sometimes, historians summarize the Spanish exploration and settlement of the Americas as motivated by “Gold, God, and Glory.” Thousands of Spanish immigrants moved to Spanish settlements looking for opportunities the colonies offered, especially farming.
At first, Spain let the conquistadors govern the lands they conquered. When the conquistadors proved to be poor rulers, the Spanish king took away their authority He then set up a strong system of government to rule his growing empire. In 1535, he divided his American lands into New Spain and Peru. The northern borderlands were part of New Spain. The king put a viceroy in charge of each region to rule in his name.
A set of laws called the Laws of the Indies stated how the colonies should be organized and ruled. The laws provided for three kinds of settlements in New Spain: pueblos, presidios (prih SID ee ohz), and missions. Some large communities included all three.
Spanish Settlements Spain established many settlements in the Americas. Many of these Spanish settlements were built in a similar pattern. The
European Colonization of North America 47	2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
The Incas were weak from fighting among themselves over control of their government.
Finally, many Indians died from European diseases, such as smallpox, measles, and influenza. Some historians believe that disease alone would have ensured Spanish victory over the Indians.
From the Spanish perspective, their interaction with the Aztecs and the Incas resulted in great victories that brought wealth and power. The Spanish also saw the conquests as further proof of their natural superiority. The Aztecs and Incas, of course, had a much different view of the same events. From their perspectives, the Spanish conquests were disasters that devastated their civilizations.
E2 IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What reasons can you identify that help explain why the Spanish conquered the Aztecs and the Incas so easily?
Exploring Lands to the North
The Spanish search for treasure reached beyond the lands of the Aztecs and Incas. Moving north, conquistadors explored the Spanish borderlands. The
borderlands spanned the present-day southern United States from Florida to California.
Juan Ponce de Leon (pawn say day lay ohn) traveled through parts of Florida in 1513, looking for a legendary fountain of youth. Indians claimed that anyone who f bathed in its magical water would remain young forever. Ponce de Leon found no such fountain.
An Expedition Proves Difficult Another explorer, Panfilo Narvaez (nahr VAH es), led an expedition that ended in disaster. In 1528, a storm struck his fleet in the Gulf of Mexico. Narvaez and many others were lost at sea. The rest landed on an island in present-day Texas. Indians captured the few survivors and held them prisoner. Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca (kah VAY suh day VAH kuh) assumed leadership of the small group.
Cabeza de Vaca, an enslaved African named Estevanico, and two others finally escaped their captors in 1533. The four walked across the plains of Texas, searching for a Spanish settlement. Finally, in 1536, they reached a town in Mexico. They had traveled by foot more than 1,000 miles through the Southwest.
The Search for Gold Continues From 1539 to 1542, Hernando De Soto explored Florida and other parts of the Southeast. In his search for gold, he reached the 1
Spanish Territories in the Americas
» Spanish territory covered Central America, part of North America, and much of the Caribbean Islands and South America. Analyze Maps How did the Spanish divide their territory into colonies?
1565-1776
Spanish Explorers and Settlements in North America
KEY
—	Ponce de Leon, 1513
—	Narvaez/Cabeza de Vaca/ Estevanico, 1528-1536
--- De Soto, 1539-1542
--- Coronado,1540-1547
M
Spanish territory, 1530 i Spanish missions, 1565-1776 • Other Spanish settlements, 0	500 km
Lambert Azimuthal
Equal-Area Projection
Interactive Map
VSan Francisco
Sar) Luis
Obispo San	/
■ Gabriel
t ( Santa
San Diego P	™
San Xayiendel Bac
» Spanish explorers took several different routes through North America Analyze Maps What impact might exploration of the Spanish borderlands have had on the present-day United States?


European Colonization of North America
Mississippi River. De Soto died along the riverbank, without finding the riches he sought.
The conquistador Francisco Coronado (koh roh NAH doh) heard legends about "seven cities of gold.” In 1540, he led an expedition into the southwestern borderlands. He traveled to present-day Arizona and New Mexico. Some of his party went as far as the Grand Canyon. Still, the Zuni (ZOO nee) villages he visited had no golden streets.
The Spanish expeditions into the borderlands met with little success. Faced with strong Indian resistance in the north, Spain focused instead on bringing order to its empire in the south.
H IDENTIFY
What reasons did explorers have for traveling north? The Colonization of New Spain
The conquistadors set up colonies in many parts of the Americas. Spain had many causes for colonization, or setting up colonies. One was the search for wealth: settlements provided bases from which expeditions could set out in search of gold. Settlements could
also created wealth through farming and trade. A second important cause of settlement was to spread Christianity by converting native peoples. A third cause was to satisfy a thirst for adventure and exploration. Sometimes, historians summarize the Spanish exploration and settlement of the Americas as motivated by “Gold, God, and Glory.” Thousands of Spanish immigrants moved to Spanish settlements looking for opportunities the colonies offered, especially farming.
At first, Spain let the conquistadors govern the lands they conquered. When the conquistadors proved to be poor rulers, the Spanish king took away their authority. He then set up a strong system of government to rule his growing empire. In 1535, he divided his American lands into New Spain and Peru. The northern borderlands were part of New Spain. The king put a viceroy in charge of each region to rule in his name.
A set of laws called the Laws of the Indies stated how the colonies should be organized and ruled. The laws provided for three kinds of settlements in New Spain: pueblos, presidios (prih SID ee ohz), and missions. Some large communities included all three.
Spanish Settlements Spain established many settlements in the Americas. Many of these Spanish settlements were built in a similar pattern. The
2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
European Colonization of North America 47	2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
» Settlers in St. Augustine, Florida, in New Spain came to town to do business, worship, and socialize.
» Mission San Francisco de la Espada in San Antonio, Texas, was one of Spain’s many religious settlements in the Americas dedicated to the conversion of the Indians to Christianity.
pueblos, or towns, were centers of farming and trade. In the middle of the town was a plaza, or public square.
Here, townspeople and farmers came to do business or worship at the church. Shops and homes lined the four sides of the plaza.
The Spanish took control of Indian pueblos and built new towns as well. In 1598, Juan de Onate (oh NYAH tay) founded the colony of New Mexico among the adobe villages of the Pueblo Indians. He used brutal force to conquer the Native Americans of the region. Don Pedro de Peralta later founded Santa Fe as the Spanish capital of New Mexico.
Presidios were forts where soldiers lived. Inside the high, thick walls were shops, stables, and storehouses for food. Soldiers protected the farmers who settled nearby. The first presidio in the borderlands was built in 1565 at St. Augustine, Florida. St. Augustine was the first permanent European settlement in what would become the United States. Its founding marked the beginning of the era of colonization in the future territory of the United States, which would continue until the United States declared independence in 1776.
The Legacy of Missions Like other Europeans in the Americas, the Spanish believed they had a duty to convert Indians to Christianity. They set up missions, settlements run by Catholic priests and friars whose goal was to convert Indians to Christianity. They often forced Indians to live and work on the missions. In New Mexico, the Spanish tried to destroy any trace of traditional Pueblo Indians’ religious practices and subjected them to severe punishments. This resulted in the Pueblo Revolt of 1680. The Pueblo Indians rose up against Spanish rule. They killed about 400 Spaniards and drove the others out of the region. The Spanish recaptured the region in the mid-1690s.
Missions gradually spread across the Spanish borderlands. The first mission in Texas was founded in 1659 at El Paso.
In 1691, Father Eusebio Francisco Kino (kee noh) crossed into present-day Arizona. He eventually set up 24 missions in the area. The missions were a direct result of early Spanish colonization efforts. Over time, they had a significant impact in the Americas. By the late 1700s, a string of missions dotted the California coast from San Diego to San Francisco, and Spanish language and culture gradually spread with them.
Ed RECALL What reasons did Spanish colonists have
for coming to New Spain?
The Social Order in New Spain
The Laws of the Indies also set up a strict social system. People in Spanish colonies were divided into four social classes: peninsulares (puh NIN suh LAH rayz), creoles (KREE ohlz), mestizos (mes TEE sohz), and Indians.
Different Social Classes At the top of the social scale were the peninsulares. Born in Spain, peninsulares held the highest jobs in government and the Church. They also owned large tracts of land as well as rich gold and silver mines.
Below the peninsulares were the creoles, people born in the Americas to parents of Spanish origin. Many creoles were wealthy and well educated. They owned farms and ranches, taught at universities, and practiced law. However, they could not hold the jobs that were reserved for peninsulares.
Below the creoles were people of mixed Spanish and Indian background, known as mestizos. Mestizos worked on farms and ranches owned by peninsulares and creoles. In the cities, they worked as carpenters, shoemakers, tailors, and bakers. Over the course of Spanish colonization, mestizos came to be the largest class of people.
The lowest class in the colonies was the Indians. In the early years of Spanish colonization, Indians were the largest class. The Spanish treated them as a conquered people. Under New Spain’s strict social system, Indians were kept in poverty for hundreds of years.
A
Blend of Spanish and Indian Cultures The effects of colonization can be seen in the new way of life in New Spain that blended Spanish and Indian ways. Spanish settlers brought their own culture to the colonies. They introduced their language, laws, religion, and learning. In 1551, the Spanish founded the University of Mexico. Native Americans also influenced the culture of New Spain. Colonists adopted Indian foods, such as corn, tomatoes, potatoes, and squash. Indian workers used materials they knew well, such as adobe bricks, to build fine libraries, theaters, and churches. Sometimes, Indian artists decorated church walls with paintings of local traditions.
Harsh Treatment of Native Americans Spanish colonists needed workers for their ranches, farms, and mines. To help them, the Spanish government gave settlers encomiendas (en koh mee EN dahz), land grants that included the right to demand labor or taxes from Native Americans.
Mines in Mexico, Peru, and other parts of the Americas made Spain rich. Treasure ships laden with
» New Spain’s society was divided into social classes based on birthplace and racial characteristics.
Interactive Chart
thousands of tons of gold and silver sailed regularly across the Atlantic.
The Spanish forced Native Americans to work in the gold and silver mines. In flickering light, Indians hacked out rich ores in narrow, dark tunnels. Many died when tunnels caved in.
These harsh conditions led one priest, Bartolome de Las Casas (day lahs KAH sahs), to seek reform. Traveling through New Spain, Las Casas witnessed firsthand the deaths of Indians due to hunger, disease, and mistreatment. What he saw horrified him:
The Indians were totally deprived of their freedom. , . . Even beasts enjoy more freedom when they are allowed to graze in the field.
—Bartolome de Las Casas, Tears of the Indians
Many Spanish in New Spain did not share Las Casas’ view or his values. So, he journeyed to Europe and asked the king of Spain to protect the Indians’ civil rights. In the 1540s, the royal government passed laws prohibiting the enslavement of Native Americans. The laws also allowed Indians to own cattle and grow crops. However, few officials in New Spain enforced the
European Colonization of North America
2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
European Colonization of North America 49	2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
new laws or took the time to think about Indians’ basic human needs.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What were some ways in which peninsulares were powerful? The Transatlantic Slave Trade
The death toll among Native Americans continued to rise. Faced with a severe shortage of workers, Spanish colonists looked across the Atlantic Ocean for a new source of labor.
Reasons for the Slave Trade Still seeking to protect Native Americans, Bartolome de Las Casas made a suggestion that had a lasting, tragic impact. His idea was that Africans be brought as slaves to replace forced Indian laborers. Las Casas argued that Africans were less likely to die from European diseases. He also claimed that Africans would suffer less because they were used to doing hard farm work in their homelands.
Las Casas’s arguments encouraged the Atlantic slave trade, or the trade of enslaved Africans across the Atlantic to the Americas. In many parts of Africa, slavery had existed for centuries. Often, war prisoners
were enslaved. Eventually, these enslaved people or their children might gain freedom. After the Americas were colonized, though, some Africans began to capture and enslave people and sell them to European traders. The traders then shipped the enslaved men, women, and children to the Americas. Most Africans who settled in the Americas did so against their will.
By the time he died, Las Casas had come to regret his suggestion. He saw that enslaved Africans suffered as much as the Indians. By that time, however, it was too late to undo the damage. Slavery had become a key part of the colonial economy.
Slave Trade Expansion The European demand for African labor grew rapidly, mainly in Spain’s colonies in the West Indies, including what are now Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Puerto Rico, and in other parts of the Americas. Enslaved Africans were especially valued on sugar plantations in the West Indies and in the Portuguese colony of Brazil. A plantation is a large estate farmed by many workers. Sugar could not be grown on small estates because it reguired too much land and labor. Enslaved Africans often worked all through the night cutting sugar, which was then sold in Europe for a large profit.
Some scholars estimate that Europeans transported more than 10 million enslaved Africans across the
» Many Africans were captured and shipped to Europe and the Americas to work as slaves. Analyze Maps Most Africans enslaved in the Americas came from which coast of Africa?
European Colonization of North America 50
2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
SLAVERY IN THE AMERICAS
DESTINATIONS OF ENSLAVED AFRICANS
TOBACCO AND SLAVERY
Tobacco production rose in Virginia and Maryland as planters in those colonies imported more enslaved Africans to grow the crops.
MARYLAND AND VIRGINIA
ABOUT 20 MILLION POUNDS IN 1680 27 MILLION POUNDS IN 1700
MILLION POUNDS IN
MARYLAND AND VIRGINIA
| 4,000 IN 1680 17,000 IN 1700
35,000 BY 1720
» Enslaved Africans were shipped to destinations in Europe, Asia, and the Americas. Analyze Charts Which region received the fewest enslaved Africans? Which received the most?
Atlantic Ocean to the Americas between the 1500s and the 1800s. The vast majority came from West Africa.
IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
Why were plantations developed in the Americas?
ASSESSMENT
1. Generate Explanations Who helped Cortes destroy the Aztec empire and why?
2.	Identify Central Issues What two reasons did the Spanish have for deciding not to focus on their northern borderlands?
3.	Analyze Information What makes St. Augustine a particularly notable Spanish settlement?
4.	Identify Cause and Effect What did the Spanish government's land grants include that caused hardship for Native Americans, and what hardship did it cause?
5.	Summarize how Spanish and Native American cultures blended in New Spain.
European Colonization of North America 51
2.1 Spanish Colonization and New Spain
European nations began to compete for riches around the world. Religious differences heightened their rivalry. Until the 1500s, the Roman Catholic Church was the only church in Western Europe. That unity ended when a major religious reform movement sharply divided Christians.
TEKS
"**5 I.Vr,	I I.Vz,
» Objectives
Explain why Europeans explored North America’s coast.
Identify the reasons for French and Dutch colonization in North America.
Identify the reasons for English colonization.
Explain how Virginia began a tradition of representative government.
Describe how different groups in Jamestown interacted with the environment.
» Key Terms
northwest passage Protestant
Reformation coureur de bois charter burgess
House of Burgesses representative
government Magna Carta Bacon’s Rebellion alliance frontier
indentured servant
Religious Difference Leads to Rivalries As
Europeans settled in the Americas, they brought their religious conflicts with them. Queen Elizabeth encouraged English adventurers to raid Spanish colonies and capture Spanish treasure fleets. Protestant England also competed with Catholic France for lands in North America.
Not all rivalries were religious. Both the Netherlands and England were Protestant. Still, they competed for control of land in North America and for economic markets all over the world, including Asia.
Reasons for the Exploration of North America
Like Columbus, Europeans continued during the 1500s to look for new ways to reach the riches of Asia. Magellan’s route around South America seemed long and difficult. Europeans wanted to discover a shorter northwest passage, or waterway through or around North America.
Giovanni Caboto, an Italian sea captain who the English called John Cabot, set out to find a northwest passage for the English. He was confident he had found such a passage, but he was mistaken. The "newfound land” that he thought he had found off the Asian coast in fact lay off the coast of North America. Today, Newfoundland is part of the easternmost province of Canada.
French Exploration The French sent another Italian captain, Giovanni da Verrazano (vehr rah TSAH noh), in search of a northwest passage. Verrazano journeyed along the North American coast from the present-day Carolinas to Canada. During the 1530s, Jacques Cartier (kar tee yay), also sailing for the French, traveled more than halfway up the St. Lawrence River.
Explorations of Henry Hudson In 1609, the English explorer Henry Hudson sailed for the Dutch. His ship, the Half Moon, entered present-day New York harbor. Hudson continued to sail some 150 miles up the river that now bears his name.
The following year, Hudson made a voyage into the far north—this time for the English. After spending a harsh winter in what is now called Hudson Bay, his crew rebelled. They set Hudson, his son, and seven loyal sailors adrift in a small boat. The boat and its crew were never seen again.
Mapping New Regions None of these explorers found a northwest passage to Asia. However, they did map and explore many parts of North America. The rulers
The First French,
Dutch, and English Colonies
European Rivalries
Religious Reform In 1517, a German monk named Martin Luther publicly challenged many practices of the Catholic Church. Soon after, he split with the Church entirely. Luther believed that the Church had become too worldly. He opposed the power of popes. He also objected to the Catholic teaching that believers could gain eternal lrfe by performing good works. Luther argued that people could be saved only by faith in God.
Because of their protests against the Church, Luther’s supporters became known as Protestants. The Protestant Reformation, as the new movement was known, divided Europe. Soon, the Protestants themselves split, forming many different churches.
By the late 1500s, religion divided the states of Western Europe. Roman Catholic monarchs ruled Spain and France. A Protestant queen, Elizabeth I, ruled England. In the Netherlands, the Dutch people were mostly Protestant.
Exploring North America
<		KEY	
— Cabot, 1497		Hudson, 1610-1611	
-— Verrazano, 1524		Marquette and Joliet,	1673
— Cartier, 1534-1536		La Salle, 1678-1682	
Hudson, 1609		
GREENLAND
N
ICELAND
LOUISIANA
1,000 km
1*000 mi Miller Cylindrical Projection
AFRICA
» Explorers from England, France, and the Netherlands took different routes from Europe to North America. Analyze Maps Why might you expect conflict to develop between the English and French in North America?
www.PearsonTexas.com
| Access your Digital Lesson.
52
European Colonization of North America 53	2.2 The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies
of Western Europe began thinking about how to profit from the region’s rich resources through colonization.
Q CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What factors contributed to rivalries between English and Spanish explorers?
New France Is Colonized
Samuel de Champlain (sham PLAYN) founded Port Royal, the first permanent French settlement in North America, in 1605. Three years later, he led another group of settlers along the route Cartier had pioneered. On a rocky cliff high above the St. Lawrence River, Champlain built a trading post known as Quebec (kwih BEK). The opportunity to create wealth through trade was one of the main reasons for French colonization in America. The French also wanted to surpass their rivals, the English. Many French settlers were looking for adventure and hoped to find their fortune in the New World.
Economic Activity in New France Unlike Spain’s American empire, New France had little gold or silver.
» Native Americans board a European trading ship to display their selection of furs. They will exchange the furs for the goods displayed at the feet of the seated European trader.
Instead, the French profited from fishing, trapping, and trading.
French colonists who lived and worked in Native f American lands beyond the French settlements [ became known as coureurs de bois (koo RUHR duh bwah), or “runners of the woods.” The French brought knives, kettles, cloth, and other items for trade with Native Americans. In return, the Indians gave them , beaver skins and other furs that sold for high prices in j Europe.	;
Coureurs de bois established friendly relations | with Native American groups. Unlike the Spanish, the ■ French did not attempt to conquer the Indians. Also, because coureurs de bois did not establish farms, they i did not interfere with Indian lands. Indians taught the i French trapping and survival skills, such as how to ; make snowshoes and canoes. Many coureurs married Indian women.	(
Missionary Work Continues Catholic missionaries often traveled with fur traders. A missionary is a person who goes to another land to win converts for a religion. French missionaries tried to convert Native Americans to Christianity. They also drew maps and wrote about the lands they explored.
Life was difficult, especially in winter. One French priest recalled traveling on foot through deep snow:
If a thaw came, dear Lord, what pain! ... I was marching on an icy path that broke with every step I took; as the snow softened . . . we often sunk [sank] in it up to our . . . waist.
—Paul Le Jeune, quoted in < - ;:/• < //: ,'d	:
(Parkman)
Colonization Along the Mississippi River French trappers followed the St. Lawrence deep into the heart of North America. Led by Indian guides, they reached the Great Lakes. Here, Indians spoke of a mighty river, which they called Mississippi, or “Father of the Waters.”
A
French missionary, Father Jacques Marquette (mar ket), and a fur trader, Louis Joliet (joh lee et), set out to reach the Mississippi in 1673. Led by Indian guides, they followed the river for more than 700 miles before turning back. Nine years later, Robert de La Salle completed the journey to the Gulf of Mexico. La Salle named the region Louisiana in honor of the French king, Louis XIV. To keep Spain and England out of Louisiana, the French built forts in the north along the Great Lakes. Among them was Fort Detroit, built by Antoine Cadillac
near Lake Erie. The French also built New Orleans, a fort near the mouth of the river. New Orleans grew into a busy trading center. French control of the network of waterways at the heart of North America gave the French a strategic advantage over the Spanish and the English.
French colonists imported thousands of Africans to work as slaves on plantations around New Orleans. Some enslaved Africans, however, joined with the Natchez Indians in a revolt against the French. The French put down the Natchez Revolt in 1729. Some enslaved Africans who fought on the side of the French received their freedom. In Louisiana, free and enslaved Africans together made up the majority of settlers.
Government in New France New France was governed much like New Spain. The French king controlled the government directly, and people had little freedom. A council appointed by the king made all decisions.
Louis XIV worried that too few French were moving to New France. In the 1660s, therefore, he sent about a thousand people to the colony, including many young women. Despite the king’s efforts to increase the population, New France grew slowly. Winters were harsh, and the short growing season made farming difficult. Only about 10,000 settlers lived in the colony by 1680. Of those, one third lived on farms along the St. Lawrence. Others chose to become coureurs de bois, living largely free of government control.
fell IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS Why was the Mississippi
River important to the French?
The Dutch Establish New Netherland
Like the French, the Dutch hoped to profit from their discoveries in the Americas by colonizing. In 1626, Peter Minuit (min yoo wit) led a group of Dutch settlers to the mouth of the Hudson River. Other Dutch colonists had already settled on Manhattan Island and farther up the Hudson River. Minuit bought Manhattan Island from local Indians. Minuit called his settlement New Amsterdam. The entire colony was known as New Netherland (now known as New York).
New Netherland was privately funded by the Dutch West India Company. Many colonists immigrated to New Netherland hoping to profit from the region’s active fur trade.
From a tiny group of 30 houses, New Amsterdam grew into a busy port. The Dutch welcomed people of many nations, ethnic groups, and religions to their
» The coureurs de bois, fishermen, and trappers who settled New France were mostly male. They gladly welcomed female settlers sent to the New World by the French king.
Interactive Map
» A canal to transport goods runs down the center of Broad Street in New Amsterdam, an early Dutch settlement. New Amsterdam later became New York City.


European Colonization of North America
54
2.2 The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies

European Colonization of North America 55
2.2 The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies
colony. A Roman Catholic priest who visited New Netherland in 1643 reported:
On the island of Manhattan, and in its environs, there may well be four or five hundred men of different sects and nations: the Director General told me that there were men of eighteen different languages; they are scattered here and there on the river, above and below, as the beauty and convenience of the spot has invited each to settle.
—Father Isaac Jogues, quoted in Narratives of New
Netherland, 1609-1664 (Jameson)
The Dutch also built trading posts along the Hudson River. The most important one was Fort Orange, today known as Albany. Dutch merchants became known for their good business sense.
The Dutch enlarged New Netherland in 1655 by taking over the colony of New Sweden. The Swedes had established New Sweden along the Delaware River some 15 years earlier.
Trade Rivalries in the Region Dutch traders sent furs to the Netherlands. The packing list for the first
» Native Americans trade goods with Dutch settlers on Manhattan Island.
shipment included “the skins of 7,246 beaver, 853 otter,
81 mink, 36 cat lynx, and 34 small rats.”
The Dutch and French became rivals in the fur trade. Both sought alliances with Native Americans. An alliance is an agreement between nations to aid and protect one another. The Dutch made friends with the Iroquois. The Hurons (HYOO rahnz) helped the French. Fighting raged for years among the Europeans and their Native American allies.
Dutch Culture Comes to North America The
Dutch brought many of their customs from Europe to New Netherland. They liked to ice-skate, and in winter, the frozen rivers and ponds filled with skaters. Every year on Saint Nicholas’s birthday, Dutch children put out their shoes to be filled with all sorts of presents. Known in Dutch as “Sinterklaas,” Saint Nicholas came to be called Santa Claus.
Some Dutch words entered the English language.
A
Dutch master was a boss. The people of New Amsterdam sailed in yachts. Dutch children munched on cookies and rode through the snow on sleighs. Interaction With Native Americans and the Environment Dutch and French settlement on the . east coast of North America brought major changes to Native Americans and the environment. As in New Spain, European diseases killed thousands of Indians, and rivalry over the fur trade increased between different European countries’ Native American allies. The scramble for furs also led to overtrapping. By 1640, trappers had almost wiped out the beavers on Iroquois lands in upstate New York.
The arrival of Europeans affected Native Americans in other ways. Missionaries tried to convert Indians to Christianity. Indians eagerly adopted European trade goods, such as copper kettles and knives. They also bought muskets and gunpowder for hunting and warfare. Alcohol sold by European traders had a harsh effect on Native American life.
Europeans all waged warfare to seize Indian lands. As Indians were forced off their lands, they moved westward onto lands of other Indians, which sometimes led to violence between Native American groups. The conflict between Native Americans and Europeans would continue for many years.
b IDENTIFY What was one reason why the New
Netherland colony was founded?
Roanoke and Jamestown
England watched with envy as other European countries gained riches from their colonies in the Americas. Several ambitious English gentlemen proposed that England settle the Americas as well. With Queen Elizabeth’s permission, Sir Walter Raleigh raised money to outfit a colony in North America. In 1585, about 100 men set sail across the Atlantic. The colonists landed on Roanoke (ROH uh nohk), an island off the coast of present-day North Carolina. Within a year, however, the colonists had run short of food and were quarreling with neighboring Indians. When an English ship stopped in the harbor, the weary settlers sailed home.
The Lost Colony of Roanoke In 1587, Raleigh sent John White, one of the original colonists, back to Roanoke with a new group of settlers that included women and children. When supplies ran low, White returned to England, leaving behind 117 colonists. He planned to return in a few months. When he got back to England, however, he found the country was then preparing for war with Spain. It was three years before he was able to sail back to Roanoke.
When White arrived, he found the settlement strangely quiet. Houses stood empty. Vines twined through the windows and pumpkins sprouted from the earthen floors. On a tree, someone had carved the word CROATOAN, the name of a nearby island. No other trace of the colonists remained. White was eager to investigate, but a storm was blowing up and his crew refused to make the trip. To this day, the fate of the “Lost Colony” remains a mystery.
The Founding of Jamestown After the failure of Roanoke, nearly 20 years passed before England again tried to establish a colony in North America. In 1606, the Virginia Company of London, a private company, received a charter from King James I. A charter is a legal document giving certain rights to a person or company.
The royal charter gave the Virginia Company the right to settle lands along the east coast of North America. The charter also guaranteed that colonists of this land, called Virginia, would have the same rights as English citizens.
In the spring of 1607, a group of 105 colonists, funded by the Virginia Company, arrived in Virginia. They sailed into Chesapeake Bay and began building houses along the James River. They named their tiny outpost Jamestown after their king. Jamestown was the first permanent English settlement in what is now the United States.
» In the spring of 1607, English colonists began building a settlement at Jamestown, Virginia.
» Colonists in Jamestown hold religious services under a makeshift tent. The swampy land would prove challenging for the colonists.
European Colonization of North America 56	2.2 The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies
European Colonization of North America
57
2.2 The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies
Reasons for Colonization The settlers of Jamestown hoped to make a profit by finding gold or other riches. They also hoped to discover a water route to Asia. Furthermore, they wanted to claim the region for England.
The colonists soon discovered that Jamestown was located in a swampy area. The water was unhealthy, and mosquitoes spread malaria. Many settlers suffered or died from disease. Historians have long debated the reason why the settlers chose the location they did. One of the main reasons was security: they located their settlement in a place where Spanish ships would be unlikely to find them. If the Spanish did discover Jamestown, its location would make it more easily defensible against Spanish ships.
Governing the colony also proved difficult. The Virginia Company had chosen a council of 13 men to rule the settlement.
Members of the council quarreled with one another and did little to plan for the colony's future. By the summer of 1608, the colony was near failure.
The Colonists Face Further Difficulties Another major problem the Jamestown colonists faced was starvation. Their physical environment offered plenty of resources: fish to catch, plants to gather, and animals
» Jamestown colonists constructed buildings such as thisjn the first permanent English settlement in what is ^United States.
an Colonization of North America 58
to hunt. However, many colonists were not used to living in the wilderness and did not know how to take advantage of these resources. Furthermore, the colonists did not spend enough time producing food. Captain John Smith, a young soldier and explorer, f observed that the colonists were not planting enough : crops. He complained that people wanted only to | “dig gold, wash gold, refine gold, load gold. As they searched in vain for gold, the colony ran out of food.
Smith helped to save the colony. He set up stern rules that forced colonists to work if they wished to eat. ,
He also visited nearby Indian villages. Powhatan (pow uh tan), the most powerful chief in the area, agreed to supply corn to the English.
Peaceful relations with Native Americans did not last, however. Whenever the Indians refused to supply food, the colonists used force to seize what they needed. Once, Smith aimed a gun at Powhatan's brother until the Indians provided corn to buy his freedom. Such incidents led to frequent and bloody warfare. Peace was restored briefly when the colonist John Rolfe married Pocahontas, daughter of Powhatan.
However, problems arose soon after John Smith returned to England in 1609. Desperate settlers cooked “dogs, cats, snakes, [and] toadstools” to survive. To , keep warm, they broke up houses to burn as firewood. The colonists gradually learned to use the sources available in their environment to survive.
Tobacco Crops Help Jamestown’s economy finally improved after 1612, when colonists began growing tobacco. Europeans had learned about tobacco from Native Americans.
King James called pipe smoking “a vile custom.” Still, the new fad caught on quickly. By 1620, England was importing more than 30,000 pounds of tobacco a year. At last, Virginians had found a way to make their colony succeed.
English immigrants to Virginia interacted with their environment by cutting down forests and planting the land with tobacco. Their interaction with the environment was different from that of other groups of immigrants to North America, such as the Dutch and the French, whose trading activity led to the near elimination of beaver populations in some areas.
Id IDENTIFY What early difficulties did the Jamestown
colonists face?
’V ELPS
ELPS 1.C.1
Read the entire text under this heading. Create a Venn diagram to help you compare and contrast key words in the text. 2.2	The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies
An Improved Form of Government
For a time, the governors sent by the Virginia Company ran the colony like a military outpost. Each morning, a drumbeat summoned settlers to work at assigned tasks. Harsh laws imposed the death penalty even for small offenses, like stealing an ear of corn. Such conditions were unlikely to attract new colonists. As John Smith commented after his return to England, “No Man will go ... to have less freedom there than here.”
The House of Burgesses To attract more settlers, the Virginia Company took steps to establish a more stable government. In 1619, it sent a new governor with orders to consult settlers on all important matters. Male settlers were allowed to elect burgesses, or representatives to the government.
The burgesses met in an assembly called the House of Burgesses. Together with the governor and his council, they made laws for the colony. The first session met in the Jamestown church in July and August 1619. In steamy weather, the burgesses sat in the church pews, while the governor and council took their places in the choir stalls.
The House of Burgesses marked the beginning of representative government in the English colonies. In a representative government, voters elect representatives to make laws for them.
Political Rights and Responsibilties The idea that people had political rights was deeply rooted in English history. In 1215, English nobles had forced King John to sign the Magna Carta, or Great Charter. This document said that the king could not raise taxes without first consulting a Great Council of nobles and church leaders. Over time, the rights won by nobles were extended to other people.
The Great Council grew into a representative assembly, called Parliament. Parliament was divided into the House of Lords, made up of nobles, and an elected House of Commons. Only rich men had the right to vote. Still, the English had established the principle that even monarchs had to obey the law.
Some Virginia Settlers Can Vote At first, free Virginians had even greater rights than citizens in England. They did not have to own property in order to vote. In 1670, however, the colony restricted the vote to free, white, male property owners.
Despite these limits, representative government remained important. The idea took root that settlers should have a say in the affairs of the colony. Colonists

European Colonization of North America 59	2.2 The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies
» The House of Burgesses in Jamestown, Virginia, was the first elected legislative assembly in the English colonies. Infer How was government in the English colonies different from that in the Spanish or French colonies?
came to refer to the Virginia Company’s 1619 frame of government as their own “Great Charter.”
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why was the House of Burgesses created in Virginia?
The Jamestown Colony Grows
During the early years of the Jamestown Colony, only a few women chose to make the journey from England. Nor did enough workers come to raise tobacco and other crops.
Women in Jamestown The colony’s first women arrived in 1608—a “Mistress Forrest” and her maid, Anne Burras. Few others followed until 1619, when the Virginia Company sent about 100 women to help “make the men more settled.” This shipload of women quickly found husbands. The Virginia Company profited from the marriages because it charged each man who found a wife 150 pounds of tobacco.
Life for women was a daily struggle. Women had to make everything from scratch—food, clothing,
even medicines. Many died young from hard work or childbirth. By 1624, there were still fewer than 300 women in the Jamestown colony, compared to more than 1,000 men.
Africans Arrive in Virginia Enslaved Africans were brought to Virginia early on. Recently discovered records show that at least 15 black men and 17 black women were already living there by 1619. That same year, a Dutch ship arrived with about 20 Africans. The Dutch sold the Africans to Virginians who needed laborers to grow tobacco. The colonists valued the agricultural skills that the Africans brought with them. From their perspective, the arrival of Africans meant the arrival of a labor force. From the enslaved Africans’ perspective, this was a journey into a brutal life of forced labor.
About 300 Africans lived in Virginia by 1644. Some were slaves for life.
Others worked as indentured servants, or people who were pledged to work for a master for a period until they paid off the cost of their voyage, and expected one day to own their own farms. Some Africans did become free planters. Anthony Johnson owned 250 acres of land and employed five servants to help him work it. For a time, free Africans in Virginia also had the right to vote. These newcomers from Africa helped
COLONIAL SETTLERS' ORIGINS
ESTIMATED ETHNICITY
OF
AMERICAN COLONIES
1 IN 2 ENGLISH
1 IN 5 AFRICAN
IN IO SCOTCH-IRISH
1 IN 10 GERMAN
1 IN 25 DUTCH
to transform the environment of Virginia by cutting down forests and planting tobacco fields.
Bacon’s Rebellion Meanwhile, English settlers [ continued to arrive in Virginia, attracted by the f promise of profits from tobacco. Wealthy planters, however, controlled the best lands near the coast. Many newcomers were indentured servants. When they finished their period of service, they looked for ; farmland. Because the best lands along the coast were ; taken, these and other newcomers had to push farther j inland, onto Indian lands.	J
As in New England, conflicts over land led to fighting between some white settlers and Indians. After several bloody clashes, settlers called on the governor to take action against Native Americans. The governor refused. He was unwilling to act, in part because he profited from his own fur trade with Indians. Frontier , settlers were furious.
Finally, in 1676, Nathaniel Bacon, an ambitious young planter, organized angry men and women on the frontier, including both black and white indentured servants. He raided Native American villages, regardless of whether the Indians there had been friendly to the colonists or not. Then, he led his followers to Jamestown and burned the capital.
ESTIMATED POPULATION IN
1700 89% WHITE 11% BLACK e
SOUTHfcRN White: 81%
non ii«/6
e
WilHr 93%
7%
: 98%
i i > 2%
ESTIMATED POPULATION IN
1770 78% WHITE 21% BLACK <
The uprising, known as Bacon’s Rebellion, lasted only a short time. When Bacon died suddenly, the revolt fell apart. The governor hanged 23 of Bacon’s followers. Still, he could not stop English settlers from moving onto Indian lands along the frontier, or the edge of the settlement.
Wealthy Virginians generally supported Governor Berkeley. They were alarmed that black and white indentured servants had joined together in a rebellion. In response, Virginia set up a system of laws replacing indentured servitude for Africans with a condition of lifelong slavery that would be passed on to enslaved Africans’ children. As slavery expanded, free African Americans also lost rights. By the early 1700s, free African American property owners could no longer vote.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why did many Africans come to Virginia?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize What did John Cabot, Giovanni da Verrazano, Jacques Cartier, and Henry Hudson all have in common?
2.	Support Ideas with Evidence What evidence in this lesson supports the idea that Native Americans were not opposed to early interactions with French settlers?
3.	Support Ideas with Examples What examples can you give to show that contacts between European colonists and Native Americans had negative consequences?
» Governor William Berkeley of Virginia confronts a mob of angry colonists in Jamestown during Bacon’s Rebellion. Interpret What attitude is the artist trying to convey through Berkeley’s posture and facial expression?
4.	Generate Explanations Why did the Jamestown colony have so little food in its early years?
5.	Predict Consequences What do you think happened after Virginia law established lifelong enslavement for people of African origin?
SOUTHERN
VVliitc: 59%
Black: 41%
WinO 94% RUT: 6%
.	97%
kk«c 3%
» The population of the English colonies in America included a variety of European ethnic groups. Analyze Charts What might account for the dramatic increase in the black population of the Southern Colonies between 1700 and 1775?
European Colonization of North America 60
2.2 The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies
European Colonization of North America 61
2.2 The First French, Dutch, and English Colonies
Male passengers on the Mayflower sign the Mayflower Compact, which established a government for the colony at Plymouth.
After two hard months at sea, the colonists on board the small sailing ship were relieved to see the shores of New England. Still, there were no European colonies for hundreds of miles.
Interactive Flipped Video
I. A, 1.C, 2.A, 3.B, 3.C.10.A,
II. A, 20.A, 23.A, 23.C, 23.D,
» Objectives
Explain how the desire for religious freedom led to the settlement of the New England colonies.
Identify the significance of the Mayflower Compact.
Describe how conflicts over religion and politics were resolved in colonial New England.
Identify reasons for conflict between settlers and Native Americans.
Describe the daily life and the economy in the New England colonies.
» Key Terms	
Pilgrim	Sabbath
established church persecution Mayflower Compact precedent Thanksgiving Puritans General Court Fundamental Orders of Connecticut religious tolerance	town meeting
PEARSON 1
realize
The New England Colonies
Seeking Religious Freedom
One of the voyagers. William Bradford, vividly remembered the situation:
Being thus passed the vast ocean . . . they had now no friends to welcome them nor inns to entertain or refresh their weatherbeaten bodies; no houses or much less towns to repair to . . . And for the season it was winter, and they that know the winters of that country know them to be sharp and violent.
—William. Bradford, Of Plymouth PldwMou
Unlike the Jamestown colonists or the Spanish, these newcomers sought neither gold nor silver nor great riches. What they wanted most was to practice their religion freely. Years later, the founders of Plymouth became known to history as the Pilgrims.
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
62
Religion in Europe It was not easy for people to practice religion freely in Europe during the 1500s. As you have read, after the Protestant Reformation, Christians in western Europe were divided into Protestants and Roman Catholics. This division led to fierce religious wars. In France, for example, Protestants and Catholics fought each other for nearly 40 years. Thousands upon thousands of people were killed because of their religious beliefs.
Most European rulers believed that they could not maintain order unless everyone followed the ruler’s religion. The religion chosen by the ruler was known as the established church. In England, for example, the established church was the Anglican church, or Church of England. In the 1530s, Parliament passed laws making the English monarch the head of the Church of England.
In England and other nations, people who did not follow the established religion were often persecuted. Persecution is the mistreatment or punishment of certain people because of their beliefs. Sometimes, members of persecuted groups had to worship secretly. If they were discovered, they might be imprisoned or even executed by being burned at the stake.
The Pilgrims One religious group in England that faced persecution were the people we now call the Pilgrims. At the time, they were known as Separatists. They were called that because, although they were Protestant, they wanted to separate from the Church of England.
The English government bitterly opposed the Separatists. William Bradford remembered what some Separatists had suffered.
They . . . were hunted and persecuted on every side. , . . For some were taken and clapped up in prison, others had their houses beset and watched night and day . . . and the most were [glad] to flee and leave their houses.
—William Bradford, Of Plymouin Plantanon
In the early 1600s, a group of Separatists left England for Leyden, a city in the Netherlands. The Dutch allowed the newcomers to worship freely. Still, the Pilgrims missed their English way of life. They were also worried that their children were growing up more Dutch than English.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why did the Pilgrims want to establish their own colony?
» The pilgrims crossed the Atlantic in search of religious freedom in ships such as this.
A
Quaker in England stands trial for violating the religious practices of the Anglican Church. Quakers were also persecuted in New England for their religious beliefs. European Colonization of North America 63	2.3 The New England Colonies
Plymouth Colony
A group of Separatists decided to return to England. Along with some other English people who were not Separatists, they won a charter to set up a colony in the northern part of Virginia. Like the colonists who followed them, the Pilgrims’ enterprise was started and funded privately in the hopes that it would earn a profit. In September 1620, more than 100 men, women, and children set sail aboard a small ship called the Mayflower. The journey was long and difficult.
At last, in November 1620, the Mayflower landed on the cold, bleak shore of Cape Cod, in present-day Massachusetts. The passengers had planned to settle farther south along the Hudson River, but the difficult sea voyage exhausted them. The colonists decided to travel no farther. They called their new settlement Plimoth, or Plymouth, because the Mayflower had sailed from the port of Plymouth, England.
A
New Pledge to Govern the Colony Before going ashore, the Pilgrims realized that they would not be settling within the boundaries of Virginia. As a result, the terms of their charter would not apply to their new colony. In that case, who would govern them? The question was important because not all colonists on the Mayflower were Pilgrims. Some of these "strangers,” as » In November 1620, English Separatists on the Mayflower, shown here, arrived at present-day Massachusetts to start new lives free of religious oersecution.
>pean Colonization of North America
the Pilgrims called them, said they were not bound to obey the Pilgrims, “for none had power to command them.”
In response, the Pilgrims joined together to write _ a framework for governing their colony On November * 11, 1620, the 41 adult male passengers—both Pilgrims j and non-Pilgrims—signed the Mayflower Compact. They pledged themselves to unite into a “civil body politic,” or government. They agreed to make and abide by laws that insured “the general Good of the Colony.”
The Mayflower Compact established an important , tradition. When the Pilgrims found themselves without a government, they banded together themselves to make laws. In time, they set up a government in which adult male colonists elected a governor and council. Thus, like Virginia’s Great Charter, the Mayflower Compact strengthened the English tradition of governing through elected representatives. These representatives were in turn expected to show the religious virtues that the Pilgrims valued and to make decisions for the common good. The colony at Plymouth thought that this type of representative government, rather than the monarchy • that they knew in England, would best protect their > religious freedom.
Religious Motivation and Religious Freedom The i
Pilgrims were the first of many immigrants who came to North America in order to worship as they pleased. That did not mean that religious freedom spread quickly through England’s colonies. Many settlers who wished to worship as they pleased still believed that only their own religious beliefs should be observed. Most of the English colonies set up their own established churches. 1
Still, the Pilgrims’ desire to worship freely set an important precedent, or example for others to follow in the future. In time, the idea of religious freedom for all would become a cornerstone of American democracy. 0 DESCRIBE What was the Mayflower Compact?
I
ELPS 1.D.1
Read the section titled A New Pledge to Govern the Colony. Discuss why the Mayflower Compact is important. When you cannot think of a word for an idea, describe what you mean using other words or point to the part of the text that supports your idea.
ELPS
Overcoming Hardships in Plymouth
The Pilgrims built their settlement on the site of a Native American village that had been abandoned because of disease. The colonists even found baskets filled with corn that they were able to eat.
64	2.3 The New England Colonies
I
A
Cold Winter in Plymouth However, the corn was not enough to get the Pilgrims through their first winter. The Pilgrims had failed to bring enough food with them, and it was too late in the season to plant new crops. The harsh season was also difficult to survive because the Pilgrims had not had enough time to build proper shelters. During the winter, the men worked to build houses onshore, while most spent nights aboard the Mayflower. Nearly half the settlers had perished of disease or starvation by spring.
Among those who died that winter was the colony’s first governor. William Bradford was chosen to take his place. Bradford’s able leadership helped the colony survive. Reelected many times, he would lead Plymouth for most of the next 36 years.
Despite the great suffering of that winter, the Pilgrims’ religious faith remained strong. They believed that it was God’s will for them to remain in Plymouth. “What could now sustain them,” wrote Bradford, “but the Spirit of God and His grace?”
Native Americans Offer Assistance In the spring, the Pilgrims began to clear land and plant crops. They also received help from neighboring Native Americans. A Pemaquid Indian, Samoset, had learned English from earlier explorers sailing along the coast. He introduced the Pilgrims to Massasoit (mas uh soit), chief of the local Wampanoag (wahm puh NOH ahg) Indians.
The Wampanoag who helped the Pilgrims most was named Squanto. As a young man, Squanto had been captured by an English expedition led by John Smith. Squanto lived for a time in England, where he learned to speak the language. As a result, he could communicate easily with the Pilgrims.
Squanto brought the Pilgrims seeds of native plants—corn, beans, and pumpkins—and showed them how to plant them. He also taught the settlers how to catch eels from nearby rivers. By treading water, he stirred up eels from the mud at the river bottom and then snatched them up with his hands. The grateful Pilgrims called Squanto “a special instrument sent of God.”
In the fall, the Pilgrims had a very good harvest. Because they believed that God had given them this harvest, they set aside a day for giving thanks.
In later years, the Pilgrims celebrated after each harvest season with a day of thanksgiving. Americans today celebrate Thanksgiving as a national holiday.
IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did Native Americans help the Pilgrims?
European Colonization of North America
.if...
65
» Squanto teaches a group of Pilgrims how to plant corn, using dead fish as fertilizer.
Forming Massachusetts Bay Colony
The migration to Massachusetts Bay during the 1630s was led by a religious group known as the Puritans. Unlike the Pilgrims, the Puritans did not want to separate entirely from the Church of England. Instead, they hoped to reform the church by introducing simpler forms of worship. They wanted to do away with many practices inherited from the Roman Catholic Church, such as organ music, finely decorated houses of worship, and special clothing for priests.
Reasons for Immigration to Massachusetts The
Puritans were a powerful group in England. Although some were small farmers, many were well-educated and successful merchants or landowners.
Charles I, who became king in 1625, disapproved of the Puritans and their ideas. He canceled Puritan business charters and even had a few Puritans jailed.
By 1629, some Puritan leaders were convinced that England had fallen on “evil and declining times.” They persuaded royal officials to grant them a charter to form the Massachusetts Bay Company. The company’s bold plan was to build a new society based on biblical laws and teachings. John Winthrop, a lawyer and a devout
2.3	The New England Colonies
Puritan, believed that the new colony would set an example to the world.
Some settlers joined the Massachusetts colonists for economic rather than religious reasons. In wealthy English families, the oldest son usually inherited his father's estate. With little hope of owning land, younger sons sought opportunity elsewhere. They were attracted to Massachusetts Bay because it offered cheap land or a chance to start a business.
A
Greater Say in Government In 1629, the Puritans sent a small advance party to North America. John Winthrop and a party of more than 1,000 arrived the following year. Winthrop was chosen as the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Once ashore, Winthrop set an example for others. Although he was governor, he worked hard to build a home, clear land, and plant crops. There was discontent among some colonists, though. Under the charter, only stockholders who had invested money in the Massachusetts Bay Company had the right to vote. Most settlers, however, were not stockholders. They resented taxes and laws passed by a government in which they had no say.
Winthrop and other stockholders saw that the colony would run more smoothly if a greater number of settlers could take part. At the same time, Puritan leaders
THE NEW ENGLAND COLONIES
* iJWi
» This chart offers a snapshot of the people and economy of the New England Colonies. Analyze Graphs What does the graph of imports and exports tell you about the economy of the New England Colonies during the 1700s?
EXPORTS & IMPORTS
1630
AGRICULTURE
1623
1636
1636
wished to keep non-Puritans out of the government. As a result, they granted the right to vote for governor to all men who were church members. Later, male church members also elected representatives to an assembly called the General Court.
Under the leadership of Winthrop and other Puritans, the Massachusetts Bay Colony prospered. Between 1629 and 1640, some 15,000 men, women, and children journeyed from England to Massachusetts. This movement of people is known as the Great Migration. Many of the newcomers settled in Boston, which grew into the colony’s largest town.	j
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why was the right to vote expanded in the Massachusetts Bay Colony?
New Colonies Form Over
I
Religious Differences
The Puritan leaders did not like anyone to question their religious beliefs or the way the colony was governed. Usually, discontented colonists were forced to leave. Some colonists who left Massachusetts founded other colonies in New England.
A
New Colony with Limited Government In May 1636, a Puritan minister named Thomas Hooker led about 100 settlers out of Massachusetts Bay. Pushing west, they drove their cattle, goats, and pigs along Indian trails that cut through the forests. When they reached the Connecticut River, they built a town, which they called Hartford.
Hooker left Massachusetts Bay because he believed that the governor and other officials had too much power. He wanted to set up a colony in Connecticut with strict limits on government.
The settlers wrote a plan of government called the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut in 1639 It created a government much like that of Massachusetts, which relied on the virtue of the people to obey the law and seek the common good. There were, however, two important differences. First, the Fundamental Orders gave the vote to all men who were property owners, including those who were not church members. Second, the Fundamental Orders limited the governor’s power. In this way, the Fundamental Orders expanded the idea of representative government in the English colonies.
Connecticut became a separate colony in 1662, with a new charter granted by the king of England. By then, 15 towns were thriving along the Connecticut River.
A
New Relationship Between Religion and Government Another Puritan who challenged the leaders of Massachusetts Bay was Roger Williams. A young minister in the village of Salem, Williams was gentle and good-natured. William Bradford described him as “zealous but very unsettled in judgment.” Some Puritan leaders probably agreed with this. Most people, including Governor Winthrop, liked him. Williams’s ideas, however, alarmed Puritan leaders. Williams believed that the Puritan church in Massachusetts had too much power. In Williams’s view, the business of church and state should be completely separate since concern with political affairs would corrupt the church. The role of the state, said Williams, was to maintain order and peace. It should not support a particular church. Finally, Williams did not believe that the Puritan leaders had the right to force people to attend religious services. Because of these political reasons, Williams sought to establish a new colony.
Williams also believed in religious tolerance. Religious tolerance means a willingness to let others practice their own beliefs. In Puritan Massachusetts, non-Puritans were not allowed to worship freely.
Puritan leaders viewed Williams as a dangerous troublemaker. In 1635, the General Court ordered him to leave Massachusetts. Fearing that the court
» Thomas Hooker and his followers congregate at the spot in the forest they have chosen for the new settlement of Hartford in 1636.
Interactive Chart
would send him back to England, Williams fled to Narragansett Bay, where he spent the winter with Indians. In the spring of 1636, the Indians sold him land for a settlement. After a few years, the settlement became the English colony of Rhode Island.
In Rhode Island, Williams put into practice his ideas about tolerance. He allowed complete freedom of religion for all Protestants, Jews, and Catholics. He did not set up a state church or require settlers to attend church services. He also gave all white men the right to vote. Before long, settlers who disliked the strict Puritan rule of Massachusetts flocked to Providence and other towns in Rhode Island. The creation of a colony with freedom of religion thus offered a way to resolve conflicts between people from different religious groups.
A
Woman’s Voice Calls for Religious Freedom Among those who fled to Rhode Island was Anne Hutchinson. A devout Puritan, Hutchinson regularly attended church services in Boston, where she first lived. After church, she and her friends gathered at her home to discuss the minister’s sermon. Often, she seemed to question some of the minister’s teachings. Hutchinson was very persuasive and neighbors flocked to hear her.
opean Colonization of North America 66	2.3 The New England Colonies
European Colonization of North America
2.3 The New England Colonies
Puritan leaders grew angry. They believed that Hutchinson’s opinions were full of religious errors. Even worse, they said, a woman did not have the right to explain God’s law. In November 1637, Hutchinson was ordered to appear before the Massachusetts General Court.
At her trial, Hutchinson answered the questions put to her by Governor Winthrop and other members of the court. Each time, her answers revealed weaknesses in their arguments. They could not prove that she had broken any Puritan laws or that she had disobeyed any religious teachings.
Then, after two long days of hostile questioning, Hutchinson made a serious mistake. She told the court that God spoke directly to her, “By the voice of His own spirit to my soul.” Members of the court were shocked. Puritans believed that God spoke only through the Bible, not directly to individuals. The court ordered her out of the colony.
In 1638, Hutchinson, along with her family and some friends, went to Rhode Island. The Puritan leaders had won their case. For later Americans,
» Anne Hutchinson was tried in Puritan Massachusetts for disagreeing with church teachings and forced to leave the colony. Analyze Information Why might the treatment of Hutchinson be seen as a violation of human rights today?
however, Hutchinson became an important symbol of the struggle for religious freedom.
Q CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What relationship did i Roger Williams want to see between government and [ religion? I War Erupts Between
Puritans and Native	,
Americans
From Massachusetts Bay, settlers fanned out across New England. Some built trading and fishing villages along the coast north of Boston. Port towns with good harbors were ideal for the fishing industry and also lured trading ships, building the area’s economy. In 1680, the king would make some of these coastal settlements into a separate colony called New Hampshire.
Mistrust and More Settlers Leads to Conflict The i
first meetings between English settlers and Native j Americans did not foreshadow the conflict that would j eventually occur between them. Some colonial leaders such as Roger Williams tried to treat Native Americans ; fairly.	!
As more colonists settled in New England, they began to take over more Native American lands. By 1670, nearly 45,000 English settlers were living in the towns in New England. Land was a resource, but as more people lived in the region, it became increasingly scarce. Fighting soon broke out between white settlers and Indian nations of the region.
King Phillip’s War The largest conflict came in 1675. Metacom, also known by his English name, King Phillip, was chief of the Wampanoag Indians. He watched for years as English towns were built on Wampanoag lands. “I am resolved not to see the day when I have no i country,” he told an English friend. Metacom’s people attacked villages throughout New England.
Other Indian groups, from Rhode Island to Maine, soon allied themselves with the Wampanoags. They were determined to drive the English settlers off their land. Metacom and his allies destroyed 12 towns and killed more than 600 European settlers.
After more than a year of fighting, however, Metacom was captured and killed. The English sold his family and about 1,000 other Indians into slavery in the West Indies. Other Indians were forced from their homelands.
The pattern of English expansion followed by war was repeated between colonists and Indians
The New England Colonies
KEY
Ml New England Colonies 23 Area claimed by New York and New Hampshire
Newport
Rhode Island
» Most of New England’s major towns were located on harbors along the coast. Analyze Maps What does this location suggest about their economies?
100 mi
0	100 km
Lambert Conformal Conic Projection
Interactive Map
Lake Ontario
throughout the colonies. It would continue for many years to come.
fel IDENTIFY What was a significant cause of King
Phillip’s War?
The Towns of New
England
Puritans believed that people should worship and tend to local matters as a community. As a result, New England became a land of tightly knit towns.
At the center of many towns was the common, an open field where cattle grazed. Nearby stood the meetinghouse, where Puritans worshiped and held town meetings.
Religious Practice The Puritans took their Sabbath, or holy day of religious observance and rest, very seriously. On Sundays, no one was allowed to play games or visit taverns to joke, talk, and drink. The law required all citizens to attend Sunday church services, which would last all day.
During the 1600s, women sat on one side of the church and men on the other. Blacks and Indians stood in a balcony at the back. Children had separate pews, where an adult watched over them.

The Importance of Local Government At town meetings, which were normally held in meeting houses where the settlers worshipped, settlers discussed and voted on many issues. What roads should be built? How much should the schoolmaster be paid? Town meetings gave New Englanders a chance to speak their minds.
Puritan congregations also discussed and voted on church issues. They chose their own ministers and members and answered to no other authority.
These early experiences encouraged the growth of democratic ideas in New England. Values such as self-government, individual choice, and the common good took root and thrived.
Still, Puritan laws were strict. About 15 crimes carried the death penalty. One crime punishable by death was witchcraft. In 1692, Puritans in Salem Village executed 20 innocent men and women as witches.
The Environment Influences Economic Activity
New England was a difficult land for colonists. The rocky soil was poor for farming and required much labor. After a time, however, Native Americans taught English settlers how to grow many crops, such as Indian corn, pumpkins, squash, and beans. Still, some communities relocated to take advantage of better lands. In the mid-1630s, cattle and dairy farmers who had settled in Dorchester, Massachusetts, moved to the Connecticut River Valley. The rich river valley at
European Colonization of North America
68	2.3 The New England Colonies
European Colonization of North America 69	2.3 The New England Colonies
» This image shows whalers capturing a whale. Whaling grew into a big business in New England in the 1700s.
oil for lamps and other products. In the 1700s and 1800s, whaling grew into a big business.
Puritan communities and their governments often supported the development of important industries such as shipbuilding and ironworking. They found ways to work together for long-term goals that might benefit the general population. For example, sometimes they limited the sale of wood to make more available to shipbuilders.
The Puritans Leave a Lasting Legacy During the 1700s, the Puritan tradition declined. Fewer families left England for religious reasons. Ministers had less influence on the way colonies were governed. Nevertheless, the Puritans had stamped New England with their distinctive customs and their ideal of a religious society. The ideas of Pilgrims and Puritans, their virtues of hard work and thrift, their high regard for education, and their contributions to democratic thought still influence American values and American identity today.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What values did Puritans associate with town meetings?
By 1700, England had four colonies in the region just south of New England. These colonies became known as the Middle Colonies because they were located between New England and the Southern Colonies. The Middle Colonies had a greater mix of people than either New England or the Southern Colonies.
Interactive Flipped Video
ASSESSMENT
Windsor, Connecticut, provided lush meadows and pastures better suited to their cattle than the sandy soils and rocky hills of Dorchester.
Although much of the soil was poor, the forests were full of riches. Settlers hunted wild turkey and deer. Settlers also cut down trees, floating them down rivers to sawmills near seaports such as Boston, Massachusetts, or Portsmouth, New Hampshire. With miles of coastline and nearby raw materials, these and other New England towns grew into major shipbuilding centers. Because abundant timber meant that ships could be built more cheaply in New England than in England, New England sold many ships to English buyers. New England’s wooden ships and boats were used by a thriving fishing industry and for overseas trade.
New Englanders fished for cod and halibut. In the 1600s, people began to hunt whales. Whales supplied
1.	Identify Central Issues Why did settling in Plymouth in late 1620 pose significant problems for the Pilgrims?
2.	Compare and Contrast the Pilgrims and the Puritans.
3.	Support Ideas with Examples What examples from the text show that colonists adapted their local economy to the environment in which they lived?
4.	Identify Cause and Effect What effect did population growth have on the conflict between colonists and Native Americans?
5.	Cite Evidence to support the claim that the New England Colonies promoted the ideals of democracy and self-government.
The Middle Colonies
2.B, 14.B, 20.A, 23.A, 23.D
A
Dutch Colony Becomes English Each of the colonies along the Atlantic coast had been established by different people for different purposes. Sometimes colonies were formed to escape political oppression or social tensions back home in Europe. The New England Colonies served as a refuge for people who faced religious persecution. Many were also created to profit a European company across the ocean, as many colonies to the south were. In the case of New Netherland, however, the conditions back home for the Dutch were stable and fairly prosperous. New Netherland was founded simply to take advantage of economic opportunities in North America.
New Amsterdam The Dutch set up the colony of New Netherland along the Hudson River. They developed the fur trade and built settlements where fur-bearing animals were abundant. In the colony’s early years, settlers traded with Indians and built the settlement of New Amsterdam into a thriving port. Located near good farmland and with a safe harbor for ships, New Amsterdam quickly became a center for commerce and trading valuable beaver skins.
Although less interested in farming, Dutch officials did promote agriculture by granting some large parcels of land to a few rich families. A single land grant could stretch for miles. Indeed, one grant was as big as Rhode Island! Owners of these huge estates were
» Objectives
Explain the reasons for the establishment of the colonies of New York and New Jersey.
Explain the reasons for the establishment of the colonies of Pennsylvania and Delaware.
Describe the economy of the Middle Colonies, including the relationship between the economy and the physical environment.
» Key Terms
patroon
proprietary colony royal colony Quakers
Pennsylvania Dutch cash crop William Penn
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
European Colonization of North America 70
2.3 The New England Colonies
71
©
called patroons. In return for the grant, each patroon promised to settle at least 50 European farm families on the land. Few farmers wanted to work for the patroons, however. Patroons had great power and could charge whatever rents they pleased.
England Gains Control Many settlers lived in the trading center of New Amsterdam, which by 1664 had a population of about 1,500 people. They came from all over Europe. Most of them came for the economic opportunities, working as merchants or farmers, or in trades and crafts. Many were also attracted by the chance to practice their religion freely. African slaves were in demand as well. In the early years they made up more than a quarter of the population of the town.
Dutch colonists were mainly Protestants who belonged to the Dutch Reformed Church. Still, they permitted members of other religions and ethnic groups—including Roman Catholics, French Protestants, and Jews—to buy land. "People do not seem concerned what religion their neighbor is” wrote a shocked visitor from Virginia. “Indeed, they do not seem to care if he has any religion at all.”
In fact, Peter Stuyvesant (STY vuh sunt), the governor of New Netherland, had been ordered not to interfere with other religions as long as they did not disturb the peace or restrict commerce.
» Ample farmland and fertile soil form the backdrop to the first Quaker meetinghouse built in Burlington, New Jersey, in 1683.
The relationship between the English and the Dutch was complicated by their common interest in creating new colonies and expanding trade. In North America, the Dutch wanted to continue benefiting from New Amsterdam’s economic growth. However, the English r wanted New Amsterdam for themselves.
By 1664, the rivalry between England and the Netherlands for trade and colonies was at its height.
In August of that year, English warships entered New Amsterdam’s harbor. Governor Stuyvesant swore to defend the city. However, he had few weapons and . little gunpowder. Also, Stuyvesant had made himself J so unpopular with his harsh rule and heavy taxes that the colonists refused to help him. In the end, he surrendered without firing a shot.
King Charles II of England then gave New Netherland to his brother, the Duke of York. He renamed the colony New York in the duke’s honor.
U DESCRIBE
Why did many people come to New Amsterdam? New Jersey Forms Out of New York
At the time of the English takeover, New York stretched as far south as the Delaware River. The Duke of York decided that the colony was too big to govern easily. He gave some of the land to friends, Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret. They set up a proprietary (proh PRY uh tehr ee) colony, which they called New Jersey, in 1664.
A
Proprietary Colony and Free Enterprise In setting up a proprietary colony, the king gave land to one or more people in return for a yearly payment. These proprietors were free to divide the land and rent it to others. They made laws for the colony but had to respect the rights of colonists under English law. This new system of colonization was different from most that had come before. Proprietary colonies placed vast lands and power in the hands of a few men loyal to the monarch. Earlier colonies had been financed by stock companies made up of a number of investors. Like New York, New Jersey had fertile farmland and a wealth of other resources that attracted people from many lands. Thousands of European settlers immigrated to New Jersey as a haven from war and poverty. Settlers came from Finland, Ireland, Scotland, Germany, and Sweden. There were also English and Dutch settlers who moved there from the colony of New York. In addition, some New England colonists, hoping to find better farmland, chose to relocate to New Jersey.
The proprietors of the New Jersey encouraged the free enterprise system, which meant that government played a limited role in the economy. The free enterprise system benefited colonists. They could farm or run businesses without much control by the local government. Facing financial losses themselves, however, the proprietors eventually returned the colony of New Jersey to the English crown.
A
Royal Colony In 1702, New Jersey became a royal colony, which is a colony under the direct control of the English king or queen. The colony’s royal charter protected religious freedom and the rights of an assembly that voted on local matters. This charter could be viewed as a legal agreement between the monarch and settlers, binding to both. It was a step toward a more democratic form of government. Despite these improvements, direct English rule tended to be harsh toward colonists. New Jersey’s independent-minded settlers struggled to gain more influence over decisions that affected them. H DEFINE
What was a proprietary colony? Pennsylvania Becomes a Colony
West of New Jersey, William Penn founded the colony of Pennsylvania in 1681. Penn came from a wealthy English family and was a personal friend of King Charles II. At age 22, however, Penn shocked family and friends by joining the Quakers, one of the most despised religious groups in England.
The Quakers Seek Religious Freedom Like Pilgrims and Puritans, Quakers were Protestant reformers. Their reforms went further than those of other groups, however.
Quakers believed that all people—men and women, nobles and commoners—were equal in God’s sight. They allowed women to preach in public and refused to bow or remove their hats in the presence of nobles. Quakers spoke out against all war and refused to serve in the army.
To most English people, Quaker beliefs seemed wicked. In both England and New England, Quakers were arrested, fined, or even hanged for their ideas. Penn became convinced that the Quakers must leave England. He took steps to found a new colony. Together with others, Penn purchased parts of New Jersey from their proprietors. Then he turned to the king for help.
Charles II issued a royal charter naming Penn proprietor of a large tract of land in North America. The
European Colonization of North America 73
king named the new colony Pennsylvania, or Penn’s woodlands. During his time as proprietor, Penn took steps that aided the development of self-government in Pennsylvania. He proposed a constitution and a General Assembly. Later, he agreed to changes in the constitution and greater powers for the colonial assembly.
Showing Fairness to All Penn thought of his colony as a “holy experiment.” He wanted it to be a model of religious freedom, peace, and Christian living. Protestants, Catholics, and Jews went to Pennsylvania to escape persecution. Later, English officials forced Penn to turn away Catholic and Jewish settlers.
Penn’s Quaker beliefs led him to speak out for fair treatment of Native Americans. Penn believed that the land in North America belonged to the Indians. He insisted that settlers should pay for the land. Native Americans respected him for this policy. As a result, Pennsylvania colonists enjoyed many years of peace with their Indian neighbors. One settler remarked, “as Penn treated the Indians with extraordinary humanity, they became civil and loving to us.”
Pennsylvania Expands Penn sent pamphlets describing his colony all over Europe. Soon, settlers from England, Scotland, Wales, the Netherlands,
2.4	The Middle Colonies
Lropean Colonization of North America 72	2.4 The Middle Colonies
France, and Germany began to cross the Atlantic Ocean to Pennsylvania.
Among the new arrivals were large numbers of German-speaking Protestants. They became known as Pennsylvania Dutch because people could not pronounce the word Deutsch (doich), which means German. Many Pennsylvania Dutch had faced religious persecution in Europe, including the Amish and Mennonites. Because of their experiences in Europe, these German-speaking people were naturally attracted to the ideals of Penn’s colony, in which people of different ethnicities and religions could live peaceably together. The ethnic diversity of Pennsylvania contributed to a developing American identity based on ethnic diversity.
Pennsylvania, like most other colonies, was created for a mix of political, economic, religious, and social reasons. Pennsylvania was like the New England colonies in the religious reasons for its creation.
Like New York, its political roots lay in a proprietor’s ties to the king. Pennsylvania’s social goals of harmony among different groups were similar to those of Rhode Island. Like most proprietors, Penn hoped to profit from his colony.
Enslaved Africans were also brought to the growing Pennsylvania colony. They made up about one third
» Settlers in the Middle Colonies altered the land to suit their physical and economic needs, chopping- trees to build homes and plowing fields to farm.
of North America
of all new arrivals between 1730 and 1750. Enslaved Africans were present in New York, New Jersey, and the New England Colonies as well, but in smaller numbers than in the Southern Colonies. Because of Philadelphia's location along the Delaware River, many worked as laborers in manufacturing and shipbuilding.
Delaware Is Born For a time, Pennsylvania included some lands along the lower Delaware River. The region was known as Pennsylvania’s Lower Counties. Later, in 1704, the Lower Counties would break away to form the colony of Delaware.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
Why did Quakers want to establish their own colony?
Daily Life in the Middle Colonies
The majority of colonists made their living by farming. Farmers found more favorable conditions in the Middle Colonies than in New England. The broad Hudson and Delaware river valleys were rich and fertile. Winters were milder than in New England, and the growing season lasted longer.
A
Thriving Economy On such promising land, farmers in the eastern counties of the Middle Colonies cleared their fields. They mostly chose to raise wheat, barley, and rye as a way to earn money. Wheat, barley, and rye were cash crops, or crops that were sold for money on the market and not consumed by the farmer’s family In fact, the Middle Colonies exported so much grain that they became known as the Breadbasket Colonies. The Pennsylvania Dutch tended to settle the fertile interior lands. They altered the environment by clearing land and starting farms, turning these regions into rich fields that are still productive today.
Farmers of the Middle Colonies also raised herds of cattle and pigs. Every year, they sent tons of beef, pork, and butter to the ports of New York and Philadelphia. From there, the goods went by ship to New England and the South or to the West Indies, England, and other parts of Europe.
Farms in the Middle Colonies were generally larger than those in New England. Landowners hired workers to help with the planting, harvesting, and other tasks. Enslaved African Americans worked on a few large farms. However, most workers were farmhands who worked alongside the families that owned the land.
Aside from farmers, there were also skilled artisans in the Middle Colonies. Encouraged by William Penn, skilled German crafts workers set up shop in
74	2.4 The Middle Colonies
Comparing the New England and Middle Colonies
NEW ENGLAND
MIDDLE COLONIES
MAIN REASON
FOR SETTLEMENT
BUSINESS AND TRADE
AGRICULTURE
ETHNIC DIVERSITY
SETTLEMENT STRUCTURE
CULTURE AND SOCIETY
Avoid religious persecution
Shipbuilding, shipping, fishing, forestry
Mostly limited to the needs of the colonies
Mainly English
Close-knit towns
Religious uniformity; small family farms and businesses with few servants or slaves
Economic gain
Agriculture, skilled trades, shipping
Fertile farmland produced export crops
English, Dutch, German, and Scotch-Irish
More scattered settlements
Ethnic and religious diversity; larger farms and businesses need indentured servants
» Religious, economic, geographic, and ethnic differences distinguished the Middle Colonies from New England. Analyze Charts Which colonial region would you rather live in? Why?
Pennsylvania. In time, the colony became a center of manufacturing and crafts. One visitor reported that workshops turned out “hardware, clocks, watches, locks, guns, flints, glass, stoneware, nails, [and] paper.”
Settlers in the Delaware River valley profited from the region’s rich deposits of iron ore. Heating the ore in furnaces, they purified it and then hammered it into nails, tools, and parts for guns.
Home Life Because houses tended to be far apart in the Middle Colonies, towns were less important than in New England. Counties, rather than villages, became centers of local government.
The different groups who settled the Middle Colonies had their own favorite ways of building. Swedish settlers introduced log cabins to the Americas. The Dutch used red bricks to build narrow, high-walled houses. German settlers developed a wood-burning stove that heated a home better than a fireplace, which sent heat up the chimney and pulled cold air in through cracks in the walls.
Everyone in a household had a job to do. Households were largely self sufficient, which meant that most things needed for survival—food, clothing, soap, candles, and many other goods—were made at home. As one farmer said, “Nothing to wear, eat, or drink was purchased, as my farm provided all.”
Expanding Beyond Philadelphia In the 1700s, thousands of German and Scotch-Irish settlers arrived in Philadelphia. From there, many traveled west into the backcountry the area of land along the eastern slopes of the Appalachian Mountains. Settlers followed an old Indian trail that became known as the Great Wagon Road.
Although settlers planned to follow farming methods they had used in Europe, they found the challenge of farming the backcountry more difficult than they had thought it would be. To farm the backcountry, settlers had to clear thick forests. From Indians, settlers learned how to use knots from pine trees as candles to light their homes. They made wooden dishes from logs, gathered honey from hollows in trees, and hunted wild animals for food. German gunsmiths developed a lightweight rifle for use in forests. Sharpshooters boasted that the “Pennsylvania rifle” could hit a rattlesnake between the eyes at 100 yards.
Many of the settlers who arrived in the backcountry moved onto Indian lands. “The Indians . . . are alarmed at the swarm of strangers,” one Pennsylvania official reported. “We are afraid of a [fight] between them for the [colonists] are very rough to them.” However, officials did not step in to protect Indian rights. On more than
European Colonization of North America 75	2.4 The Middle Colonies
one occasion, disputes between settlers and Indians resulted in violence.
Id IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS Why was so much of the Middle Colonies’ economy based on farming?
ASSESSMENT
1. Analyze Information How did Dutch policies in New Netherland undermine support for Dutch rule?
2.	Compare and Contrast New Jersey as a proprietary colony and as a royal colony.
3.	Apply Concepts What did the term “free enterprise system” mean in New Jersey while it was a proprietary colony?
4.	Cite Evidence that William Penn’s Quaker beliefs were heartfelt and solid.
5.	Apply Concepts How did the free enterprise system encourage the cultivation of cash crops in the Middle Colonies?
In 1632, Sir George Calvert persuaded King Charles I to grant him land for a colony in the Americas Calvert had ruined his career in Protestant England by becoming a Roman Catholic. Now, he planned to build a colony where Catholics could practice their religion freely.
The settlement of Charleston was established where two rivers met the Atlantic Ocean.
Interactive Flipped Video
The Southern
Colonies
Lord Baltimore’s Colony
He named the colony Maryland in honor of Queen Henrietta Maria, the king’s wife. Calvert died before his colony could get underway. His son Cecil, Lord Baltimore, pushed on with the project.
Settlers Come to Maryland In the spring of 1634, about 200 colonists landed along the upper Chesapeake Bay, across the Potomac River from England’s first southern colony, Virginia. Maryland was truly a land of plenty. Chesapeake Bay was full of fish, oysters, and crabs. Across the bay, Virginians were already growing tobacco for profit.
Maryland’s new settlers hoped to do the same. Remembering the early problems at Jamestown, the newcomers avoided the swampy lowlands. They built their first town, St. Mary’s, in a drier location.
As proprietor of the colony, Lord Baltimore owned Maryland. It was his responsibility, not that of a company, to start the colony. He used private funds to do it. He appointed a governor and a council of advisers. He gave colonists a role in government by creating an elected assembly. At first, settlers had to pay rent to Lord Baltimore. Few settlers came to Maryland, because most wanted to own their
2.B, 11.A, 11.C, 12.B, 12.D, 23.A
» Objectives
Explain the reasons for the establishment of Maryland.
Explain the reasons for the establishment of the Carolinas and Georgia.
Describe the relationship between different environments, different settlement patterns, and different economic systems in the Southern Colonies.
Explain the development of the slave trade and the spread of slavery in the Southern Colonies.
» Key Terms
Act of Toleration indigo debtor slave codes racism
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
European Colonization of North America 76
2.4 The Middle Colonies
77
©
land. Eager to attract settlers, Lord Baltimore decided to make generous land grants to anyone who brought over servants, women, and children. Later he offered smaller farms, as well as great estates, to attract more settlers.
A few women took advantage of Lord Baltimore s offer of land. Two sisters, Margaret and Mary Brent, arrived in Maryland in 1638 with nine male servants. In time, they set up two plantations of about 1,000 acres each. Later, Margaret Brent helped prevent a rebellion among the governor’s soldiers. The Maryland assembly praised her efforts, saying that “the colony’s safety at any time [was better] in her hands than in any man’s.”
Acceptance of Other Religions To make sure Maryland continued to grow, Lord Baltimore welcomed Protestants as well as Catholics to the colony. Later, Lord Baltimore came to fear that Protestants might try to deprive Catholics of their right to worship freely. In 1649, he asked the assembly to pass an Act of Toleration. The law provided religious freedom for all Christians. As in many colonies, this freedom did not extend to Jews.
B IDENTIFY
How did Lord Baltimore found the Maryland colony?
» St. Mary’s City was the first town built in Maryland.
Settlement in the
Carolinas and Georgia
South of Virginia and Maryland, English colonists settled in a region that they called the Carolinas. In 1663, a group of eight English nobles received a grant of land from King Charles II. Settlement took place in two separate areas, one in the north and the other in the south.
The Carolinas Develop Differently In the northern i part of the Carolinas, settlers were mostly poor tobacco farmers who had spread south from Virginia. They tended to have small farms. Eventually, in 1712, the colony became known as North Carolina. Farther south, the group of eight English nobles set up a larger colony.
The largest settlement, Charles Town, sprang up where the Ashley and Cooper rivers met the Atlantic Ocean. Later, Charles Town’s name was shortened ' to Charleston. This colony became known as South Carolina in 1719.
Most early settlers in Charleston were English people who had been living in Barbados, a British colony in the Caribbean. Later, other immigrants arrived, including Germans, Swiss, French Protestants, and Spanish Jews.
Around 1685, a few planters discovered that rice grew well in the swampy lowlands along the coast. However, they were unable to grow rich crops until Africans from rice-growing areas of Africa arrived in the colony. Before long, Carolina rice was a profitable crop traded around the world. Settlers farther inland in South Carolina later learned to raise indigo, a plant used to make a valuable blue dye.
Georgia Offers a Second Chance The last of England’s Southern Colonies was carved out of the southern part of South Carolina. James Oglethorpe, a respected English soldier and energetic social reformer, helped to found Georgia in 1732. He and the other trustees started and funded the colony privately. They hoped it would solve an English social problem as well as defend the English colonies to the north from Spanish Florida to the south. Oglethorpe wanted the new colony to be a place where debtors, or people who owed money they could not pay back, could make a fresh start. Penn had established Pennsylvania as a refuge for people of different religions. Similarly, Oglethorpe established Georgia mainly for social reasons, as a refuge for debtors.
Under English law, the government could imprison debtors until they paid what they owed. If they ever got out of jail, debtors often had no money and no place to live. Oglethorpe offered to pay for debtors and other
poor people to travel to Georgia. “In America,” he said, “there are enough fertile lands to feed all the poor of England.”
In 1733, Oglethorpe and 120 colonists built the colony’s first settlement at Savannah, along the Savannah River. Oglethorpe set strict rules for the colony. Farms could be no bigger than 500 acres, and slavery was forbidden.
At first, Georgia grew slowly. Later, however, Oglethorpe changed the rules to allow large plantations and slave labor. After that, the colony grew more quickly.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did South Carolina’s economy come to depend on rice crops?
Two Regions Develop Differently
The plantation system developed in the Southern Colonies because of the headright. The headright was a grant of land for each settler who came to a colony, or for the person who paid to bring a settler. Wealthy settlers saw a chance to gain even more wealth by paying for farm workers and thus gaining ownership of large amounts of fertile, coastal farmland.
Although the plantation system developed first in Virginia, South Carolina planters turned to it as well. They wanted large numbers of workers for rice plantations. Few white settlers were willing to work in rice paddies. As in Virginia, planters turned to Africa for slave labor.
By 1700, most people coming to Charleston were African men and women brought against their will. Each time a planter bought an enslaved African, the planter gained more land. This system led to the expansion of slavery across the South.
Tidewater Plantations on the Coast The Southern Colonies enjoyed warmer weather and a longer growing season than the colonies to the north. Parts of Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina near the coast all became major tobacco-growing areas. Settlers in lowland South Carolina and Georgia raised rice, indigo, and cotton. In these regions, physical characteristics of the environment, such as flat landscapes and fertile soils, resulted in a relatively dense population during the 1600s and 1700s.
Colonists soon found that it was most profitable to raise tobacco and rice on large plantations. As you recall, a plantation is a large estate farmed by many workers. The earliest planters settled along rivers and creeks of the coastal plain. Because these rivers and
» Enslaved Africans, such as these unloading rice barges, made up the largest racial group in South Carolina.
Interactive Illustration
creeks rose and fell with ocean tides, the region was known as the Tidewater. The Tidewater’s gentle slopes and rivers offered rich farmland for plantations.
Farther inland, planters settled along rivers. Rivers provided an easy way to move goods to market. Planters loaded crops onto ships bound for the West Indies and Europe. On the return trip, the ships carried English manufactured goods and other luxuries for planters and their families.
Most Tidewater plantations had their own docks along the river, and merchant ships picked up crops and delivered goods directly to them. For this reason, few large seaport cities developed in the Southern Colonies.
Large Tidewater plantations often consisted of brick or framed mansions with nearby storehouses and quarters for enslaved workers. The mansions overlooked fields or paddies, and often, the nearest river. On these southern plantations, anywhere from 20 to 100 enslaved Africans and African Americans did most of the work. Most of these enslaved workers worked in the fields. Others were skilled workers, such as carpenters, barrel makers, or blacksmiths. Still other enslaved Africans and African Americans worked in the main house as cooks, servants, or housekeepers.
Only a small percentage of white southerners owned large plantations. Yet, planters set the style of southern
European Colonization of North America 78	2.5 The Southern Colonies
Is,
European Colonization of North America
2.5 The Southern Colonies
living. Life centered around the planter’s house, or the Great House. There, the planter’s family lived in elegant quarters, including a parlor for visitors, a dining room, and guest bedrooms.
During the growing season, planters decided which fields to plant, what crops to grow, and when to harvest the crops. Planters’ wives kept the household running smoothly. They directed enslaved cooks, maids, and butlers in the house and made sure daily tasks were done, such as milking cows.
In contrast to the lives of the planters, enslaved workers faced daily hardship. They were impoverished and denied basic rights. Their diets were often inadequate for the work they did. Their dwellings were rough and open to the weather. They faced diseases and other dangers.
Yet enslaved Africans played a crucial role on plantations. They used farming skills they had brought from West Africa. With their help, English settlers learned how to grow rice. Africans also knew how to use wild plants unfamiliar to the English. They made water buckets out of gourds, and they used palmetto leaves to make fans, brooms, and baskets.
The Backcountry Farther Inland West of the Tidewater, life, and the local economy, was very
» This print shows a Southern plantation during the 1700s, with enslaved workers assisting the lady of the house.
different. Here, at the base of the Appalachians, rolling hills and thick forests covered the land. These physical characteristics of the environment would in turn influence population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activity in the region during the 1600s and 1700s. As in the Middle Colonies, this inland area was called the backcountry. Attracted by rich soil, settlers followed the Great Wagon Road into the backcountry of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas.
Among the settlers who moved into the backcountry were Scotch-Irish and Germans, including German Moravians. The Scotch-Irish tended to be Presbyterian farmers and craftspeople. Many were escaping famine and harsh treatment under English rule in Northern Ireland, or were the children of such immigrants.
They built churches and started schools in their backcountry settlements. These immigrant groups transformed the environment by clearing the forests and creating fields where they grew crops such as wheat and fields and pens where they raised cattle and pigs.
The German immigrants to the backcountry, mostly Lutherans, sought good land at low cost. They often settled together in the same areas, speaking German and retaining German culture. The German Moravians were members of a Protestant group that sought to convert Indians to Christianity. They allowed women to preach and were pacifists. The Moravians kept careful records of backcountry life—including everything from the weather to fashions—that historians still use today.
The backcountry was more democratic than the Tidewater. Settlers there were more likely to treat one another as equals. Men tended smaller fields of tobacco or garden crops such as beans, corn, or peas. They also hunted game.
The distance of the backcountry from the coastline made trade difficult and prevented the development of a plantation economy. Instead, backcountry farmers had to be mostly self-sufficient. Surplus goods were sold at local markets. Women cooked meals and fashioned simple, rugged clothing out of wool or deerskins. Another major difference between the backcountry and the Tidewater was slavery. Farms were smaller in the backcountry in part because of the hills and thick forests. Fewer enslaved Africans worked on these smaller farms, and most people were of European descent.
The hardships of backcountry life brought settlers closer together. Families gathered to husk corn or help one another build barns. Clustered in fertile valleys along the edge of the Appalachians, these hardy settlers felled trees and grew crops. By changing the
European Colonization of North America
2.5 The Southern Colonies
environment for the better, they in turn encouraged further economic development in the region.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why was there less slavery in the backcountry than the Tidewater region?
DEBS ELPS 3.H.3
Read the section titled Tidewater Plantations on the Coast. Describe the plantations to a partner using as much detail as possible. The Slave Trade Expands
In the early years, Africans in the English colonies included free people and indentured servants as well as enslaved persons. During the 1600s, even Africans who were enslaved enjoyed some privileges. The first enslaved Africans arrived in Virginia in 1619. For the next fifty years, since the African population was small, the status of Africans in the colony was not clearly established. Some enslaved Africans purchased their freedom. Several Africans during the 1600s, such as Anthony Johnson, became successful property owners. In South Carolina some enslaved Africans worked without supervision as cowboys, herding cattle to market.
By 1700, plantations in the Southern Colonies had come to rely heavily on slave labor. Eventually, enslaved Africans made up the majority of the population in South Carolina and Georgia. They cleared the land, worked the crops, and tended the livestock. In order to maintain the supply of enslaved Africans, southern planters relied on a system of slave trading that stretched halfway across the globe.
Africans Are Enslaved In Africa, as you have learned, as elsewhere around the world, slavery had been part of the social and economic system since ancient times. Usually, slaves were people who had been captured in war. Muslim merchants sometimes brought enslaved Africans into Europe and the Middle East.
Over a period of about 300 years, as the transatlantic slave trade grew, millions of Africans were enslaved. Slave traders from European nations set up posts along the West African coast. They offered guns and other goods in exchange for enslaved Africans.
As the demand for cheap labor increased, Africans who lived along the coast made raids into the interior, seeking captives to sell to the Europeans. They marched their captives to the coast. There, the Africans were loaded aboard European ships headed for forced immigration to the Americas.
» Planters in the Southern Colonies relied on the slave trade to maintain a supply of plantation labor. Summarize How does this poster present enslaved Africans?
Sailing Across the Middle Passage In the 1700s, English sailors began referring to the passage of slave-trading ships west across the Atlantic Ocean as the Middle Passage. Below the decks of these ships, enslaved Africans were often crammed tightly together on shelves. One observer noted that they were “chained to each other hand and foot, and stowed so close, that they were not allowed above a foot and a half for each in breadth.” The captives were allowed above deck to eat and exercise in the fresh air only once or twice a day.
Many enslaved Africans resisted, but only a few escaped. Some fought for their freedom during the trip. They would stage a mutiny or revolt. The slave traders lived in fear of this and were heavily armed. Other slaves resisted by refusing to eat or by committing suicide by jumping overboard to avoid a life of enslavement.
Records of slave-trading ships show that about 10 percent of Africans loaded aboard a ship for passage to the Americas died during the voyage. Many died of illnesses that spread rapidly in the filthy, crowded conditions inside a ship's hold. Others died of mistreatment. This slave trade lasted about 300 years. During that time, it may have caused the deaths of as many as 2 to 3 million Africans.
European Colonization of North America 81	2.5 The Southern Colonies
ECONOMICS OF
the COLONIAL REGIONS 13% WOOD
PRODUCTS
EXPORTS
1
7% INDIGO

NEW
ENGLAND
MIDDLE
SOUTHERN
I E38
PHYSICAL
WEALTH
£51
£137
For the most part, colonists enjoyed more social equality than people in England, where a person’s opportunities in life were largely determined by birth. Still, class differences existed. Like Europeans, colonial Americans thought it was only natural that some people rank more highly than others. A person’s birth and wealth still determined his or her social status.
» The economies of the three colonial regions depended on different resources. Analyze Charts What two resources did the Southern Colonies possess in great abundance that increased their wealth over that of the New England and Middle Colonies?



Human Rights Are Often Ignored As the importance of slavery increased during the 1600s, and particularly after Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia, greater limits were placed on the rights of enslaved Africans and African Americans. Colonists passed laws that set out rules for slaves’ behavior and denied enslaved people basic human rights. These slave codes treated enslaved Africans and African Americans not as human beings but as property.
Most English colonists did not question the justice of owning enslaved Africans. They believed that black Africans, as a racial group, were inferior to white Europeans. The belief that one race is superior to another is called racism. Some colonists believed that they were helping enslaved Africans by teaching them Christianity.
A handful of colonists spoke out against the evils of slavery. In 1688, Quakers in Germantown, Pennsylvania, became the first group of colonists to call for an end to slavery.
U CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did many colonists believe there was nothing wrong with slavery?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Contrast the ownership of the colony of Maryland with the ownership of colonies that were founded earlier.
2.	Cite Evidence What evidence supports the claim that the planters in the southern Carolinas could not make rice a profitable crop on their own?
3.	Analyze Information How did Oglethorpe’s idea to found Georgia help solve a social problem in England?
4.	Generate Explanations Why was South Carolina the only English colony in 1700 where the majority of the population was made up of enslaved Africans?
5.	Summarize what the Middle Passage was like for most enslaved Africans.
Colonial Society
Society in Colonial Times
The Upper and Middle Social Classes At the top of society stood the gentry. The gentry included wealthy planters, merchants, ministers, successful lawyers, and royal officials. They could afford to dress in the latest fashions from London.
Below the gentry were the middle class. The middle class included farmers who worked their own land, skilled craft workers, and some tradespeople. Nearly three quarters of all white colonists belonged to the middle class. They prospered because land in the colonies was plentiful and easy to buy and because skilled work was in high demand and paid relatively well.
The Lower Social Classes The lowest social class included hired farmhands, indentured servants, and enslaved Africans and African Americans. Indentured servants signed contracts to work without wages for a period of four to seven years for anyone who would pay their ocean passage to the Americas. When their term of service was completed, indentured servants received “freedom dues : a set of clothes, tools, and 50 acres of land. Because there were so few European women in the colonies, female indentured servants often shortened their terms of service by marrying.
1.A, 25.B, 26.B, 28.A
» Objectives
Outline the structure of colonial society.
Describe colonial art, music, and literature, and the impact of ideas on colonial society.
Describe the causes of the Great Awakening and its effects on colonial society.
Explain the growth of educational institutions.
» Key Terms
gentry
middle class Gullah
Great Awakening apprentice dame school Enlightenment libel
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
European Colonization of North America 82
2.5 The Southern Colonies
83
©
» Most colonists lived and worked on small family farms.
» In colonial cities and towns, men and women often worked together, as in this silk workshop in Jamestown, Virginia. Draw Conclusions What does this illustration suggest about the colonists’ desire to succeed?
Interactive Gallery

Thousands of men, women, and children came to North America as indentured servants. After completing their terms, some became successful and rose into the middle class.	I
Working Life in the Countryside From New Hampshire to Georgia, most colonists survived by farming. Men worked long hours planting crops, tending the fields, and raising livestock pigs, cows, and other farm animals. Anything beyond what the family needed to live was taken to markets to sell. Families also traded crops and livestock with their neighbors for additional goods.
While men typically did much of the agricultural work, women often worked within the home. They worked hard taking care of the household and the family. By the kitchen fire, they cooked the family s meals. They milked cows, tended chickens and a vegetable garden, watched the children, cleaned, did laundry by hand, and made candles, cheese, and i clothes.	;
Life was different in the backcountry, out beyond more settled lands. Life was difficult, and wives and husbands often worked side by side in the fields at harvest time. With so much to be done, no one worried whether harvesting was proper “woman’s work.” One , surprised visitor described a backcountry woman's activities: “She will carry a gunn in the woods and kill deer, turkeys &c., shoot down wild cattle, catch and tye hoggs, knock down [cattle] with an ax, and perform the most manfull Exercises as well as most men.”
Working Life in Cities In cities, women sometimes worked outside the home. A young single woman from a poorer family might work for one of the gentry as a maid, a cook, or a nurse. Other women were midwives, who delivered babies. Still others sewed fine hats or dresses to be sold to women who could afford them. Learning such skills often required years of training.
Some women learned trades from their fathers, brothers, or husbands. They worked as butchers, shoemakers, or silversmiths. Quite a few women became printers. A woman might take over her husband’s business when he died.
Men often worked in trades, for example as coopers (who made and repaired wooden barrels), blacksmiths, and silversmiths. Most large towns in the colonies were seaports, where merchants and traders brought goods to and from Europe. As this trade grew, more men also took on jobs as bankers, lawyers, and businessmen.
Some educated men in the colonies became politicians. Others were pamphleteers, who wrote and distributed small booklets informing people on a subject. There were many doctors in the colonies,
where illness was common. However, medical training varied. A surgeon might be a barber with little real medical training.
African Influences in the Colonies By the mid-
1700s, the culture of Africans and African Americans in the colonies varied greatly. On rice plantations in South Carolina, enslaved Africans used methods from West Africa for growing and harvesting rice. For example, flat baskets holding the grains were shaken in the wind to separate the grains from leaves and other particles. Then a wooden mortar and pestle were used to clean the grains.
Language is another area where African influences were strong. In some coastal areas, enslaved Africans spoke a distinctive combination of English and West African languages known as Gullah (gull uh). Parents often chose African names for their children, such as Quosh or Juba or Cuff.
In Charleston and other South Carolina port towns, some Africans worked along the dock, making rope or barrels or helping to build ships. Skilled crafts workers made fine wooden cabinets or silver plates and utensils. Many of their designs reflected African artistic styles. Although most Africans in these towns were enslaved, many opened their own shops or stalls in the market. Some used their earnings to buy their own and their family’s freedom.
In the Middle Colonies and New England, the African and African American population increased during the 1700s. Africans and African Americans in the northern colonies included both free and enslaved people. Their numbers were much lower than in the Southern Colonies. However, they were still an important part of the population.
In some of the Middle Colonies, such as New York, there were even plantations that relied on slave labor. Often, these plantations produced grains and meat for sale to feed enslaved workers in the Southern Colonies or the West Indies.
DEFINE
What was an indentured servant? Colonial Art, Literature, and Music
Colonists brought with them the artistic traditions of their homelands. New artistic styles also developed that reflected colonial society. Wealthy gentry decorated their homes with paintings of landscapes and religious art. Furniture, houses, and clothing were often decorated with intricate carvings or designs.
» Enslaved African-Amercians introduced new methods of harvesting and preparing different grains.
Art Reflects Colonial Society Paintings that celebrated important people of the time were especially popular works of art. Those who could afford it hired artists to paint portraits of their family members. These portraits showed off the family’s importance and provided a valuable keepsake to be passed on for generations to come. Portraits also honored famous individuals and key events. One of the oldest surviving colonial portraits is of New Netherland Governor Peter Stuyvesant, painted in the 1660s.
Prints were also popular in colonial families. These were small engravings scratched into metal or carved into wood. Printmakers used the metal or wood with ink, paper, and a press to make a picture that could be easily reproduced. Many people had prints of famous figures, such as politicians or clergymen.
Many artists were self-taught. Few became wealthy from their work. They often traveled from town to town in search of people who wanted portraits done. The paintings they left behind are like time capsules. Much like photographs do today, they show how people dressed, what their tastes were like, and how their families lived.
American Literature Emerges Literature also developed in the colonies. The first colonial printing press was built in Massachusetts in 1640. It printed
Colonization of North America
84	2.6 Colonial Society
European Colonization of North America 85	2.6 Colonial Society
religious books and books for Harvard College. With the spread of printing, more colonists began to read.
Colonists read reprints of European books and books by American writers. One of the most popular— and particularly American—types of stories was the captivity tale. In these stories, a white settler was captured by Native Americans and had to overcome hardships in order to escape.
Colonial Music Music was another popular art form in the colonies. Colonists brought popular folk music from Europe. They sang and danced at weddings and other celebrations. Enslaved Africans brought musical traditions with them from Africa. These traditions combined with European traditions in musical forms such as work songs and spirituals, or religious songs.
Music was closely tied to religious life for many colonists. New organs appeared in churches. The hymns people sang grew especially popular during the Great Awakening.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What clues can we find about colonial lives in artwork such as paintings?
» With his fiery sermons, Jonathan Edwards, a New England preacher, helped spark the religious movement known as the Great Awakening.
A
New Religious Movement
In the 1730s and 1740s, a religious revival, or movement, known as the Great Awakening swept through the colonies. It is sometimes also known as the First Great Awakening to distinguish it from later religious revivals. Its drama and emotion touched women and men of all races, ethnic backgrounds, and classes.
Enthusiastic Preachers A New England preacher, Jonathan Edwards, helped set off the Great Awakening. In powerful sermons, Edwards called on colonists, especially young people, to examine their lives.
He preached of the sweetness and beauty of God. At the same time, he warned listeners to heed the Bible’s teachings. Otherwise, they would be “sinners in the hands of an angry God,” headed for the fiery torments of hell. The powerful sermons of preachers such as Edwards were one of the main causes of the Great Awakening.
In 1739, when an English minister named George Whitefield arrived in the colonies, the movement spread like wildfire. Whitefield drew huge crowds to outdoor meetings. An enthusiastic and energetic preacher, his voice would ring with feeling as he called on sinners to repent. After hearing Whitefield speak, Jonathan Edwards’s wife reported, “I have seen upwards of a thousand people hang on his words with breathless silence, broken only by an occasional half-suppressed sob.”
The Great Awakening’s Impact The colonies were made up of many different religious groups. There were Quakers, Puritans, Catholics, Presbyterians, and more. Each group had its own ideas about the proper relationship with God.
Some groups, like the Anglicans, disagreed strongly with Whitefield. Others, like the Baptists and Methodists, found new opportunities to expand during the Great Awakening as people revisited their faith.
The Great Awakening aroused bitter debate. People who supported the movement often split away from their old churches to form new ones. Opponents warned that the movement was too emotional. Still, the growth of so many new churches forced colonists to become more tolerant of people with different beliefs. Also, because the Great Awakening appealed to people in all of the colonies, from different classes and ethnic backgrounds, it brought colonists together for the first time. Ties formed during the Great Awakening helped form the groundwork for future bonds among the colonies.
In the colonies, members of most churches controlled their parishes. The role parishes played in local communities made people think about the importance of self-rule a key factor in the development of American democracy.
The Great Awakening contributed in another way to the spread of democratic feelings in the colonies. Many of the new preachers were not as well educated as most ministers. They argued that formal training was less important than a heart filled with the holy spirit. Such teachings encouraged a spirit of independence. Many believers felt more free to challenge authority when their liberties were at stake. People began to think differently about their political rights and their governments. They felt if they could figure out how to worship on their own and how to run their own churches, then they could govern themselves with those same virtues. Eventually, many of these colonists would challenge the authority of colonial governors and the English king.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
How did the Great Awakening change how people thought about themselves and their political rights?
Colonial Schools and
Colleges
Among the colonists, New Englanders were the most concerned about education. Puritans taught that all people had a duty to study the Bible. If colonists did not learn to read, how would they fulfill this duty?
Public Schools in New England In 1642, the Massachusetts assembly passed a law ordering all parents to teach their children “to read and understand the principles of religion.” They also required all towns with 50 or more families to hire a schoolteacher. Towns with 100 or more families also had to set up a grammar school to prepare boys for college.
In this way, Massachusetts set up the first public schools, or schools supported by taxes. Public schools allowed both rich and poor children to receive an education.
The first New England schools had only one room for students of all ages. Parents paid the schoolteacher with corn, peas, or other foods. Each child was expected to bring a share of wood to burn in the stove. Students who forgot would find themselves seated in the coldest corner of the room!
Private Education in Other Colonies In the Middle Colonies, churches and individual families set up
» Crowds of people gathered to hear sermons by English minister George Whitefield, as shown in a later print. Infer What does the artist suggest about the attitude of Whitefield’s audience?
» In colonial New England, instructors taught students of all ages in a single classroom.
Interactive Chart
°f North America 86
2.6 Colonial Society
European Colonization of North America 87
2.6 Colonial Society
» Mothers and special girls' schools taught girls and young women the skills needed to run a household.
» In the Southern Colonies, family members and private tutors often provided children with their education.
private schools. Because pupils paid to attend, only wealthy families could afford to educate their children.
In the Southern Colonies, people often lived too far from one another to bring children together in one school building. Some planters hired tutors, or ? private teachers. The wealthiest planters sent their sons to school in England. As a rule, enslaved African Americans were denied education of any kind.
Apprenticeships and Dame Schools Boys whose parents wished them to learn a trade or craft served as apprentices (uh pren tis ez). An apprentice worked for a master to learn a trade or a craft.
For example, when a boy reached the age of 12 or 13, his parents might apprentice him to a master glassmaker. The young apprentice lived in the glassmaker’s home for six or seven years while learning the craft. The glassmaker gave the boy food and clothing. He was also supposed to teach his apprentice how to read and write and provide him with religions training.
In return, the apprentice worked without pay in the glassmaker’s shop and learned the skills he needed to set up his own shop. Boys were apprenticed in many trades, including papermaking, printing, and tanning (making leather).
In New England, most schools accepted only boys. However, some girls attended dame schools, or private schools run by women in their own homes. Other girls, though, usually learned skills from their mothers, who taught them to cook, make soap and candles, spin wool, weave, sew, and embroider. A few learned to read and write.
The Growth of Colleges In 1633, Puritan John Eliot spoke of the need for Massachusetts to establish an official college. Institutions of higher learning were held up as a way to promote European culture in the Americas. As Eliot cautioned, "if we no[u]rish not L[e] arning both church & common wealth will sinke.”
Harvard College opened in 1638 with 10 students. The goal of the college was to educate future ministers.
It was modeled after English schools, where students studied six days a week in Latin and Greek. It was open only to men.
By the late 1600s, however, Harvard graduates were moving away from the ministry. Some became physicians, public servants, or teachers. The College of William and Mary opened in Virginia to prepare men for the Anglican ministry. Yale College in Connecticut aimed to educate clergymen. Gradually, however, nine colleges opened over the following century and
expanded their areas of study. Students could learn other subjects, such as medicine and law.
B RECALL
Why were there private schools in many colonies?
A
New World of Ideas During the 1600s, European scientists began to use reason and logic instead of superstition to understand the world. They developed theories, and then performed experiments to test them. In doing so, they discovered many of the laws of nature. The English scientist Isaac Newton, for example, explained the law of gravity.
The Ideas of the Enlightenment European thinkers of the late 1600s and 1700s believed that reason and scientific methods could be applied to the study of society. They tried to discover the natural laws that governed human behavior. Because these thinkers believed in the light of human reason, the movement that they started is known as the Enlightenment. John Locke, an English philosopher, wrote works that were widely read in the colonies. He said people could gain knowledge of the world by observing and by experimenting.
In the English colonies, the Enlightenment spread among better educated colonists. They included wealthy merchants, lawyers, ministers, and others who had the leisure to read the latest books from Europe. Urban craftsmen also heard and discussed these ideas.
Benjamin Franklin Influences Daily Life The best example of the Enlightenment spirit in the English colonies was Benjamin Franklin. Franklin was born in 1706, the son of a poor Boston soap and candle maker. Although he had only two years of formal schooling, he used his spare time to study literature, mathematics, and foreign languages.
At age 17, Franklin made his way to Philadelphia. There, he built up a successful printing business. His most popular publication was Poor Richard's Almanack. Published yearly, it contained useful information and clever quotes, such as "Early to bed, early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.”
Like other Enlightenment thinkers, Franklin wanted to use reason to improve the world around him. He invented practical devices that helped improve daily life. For example, Franklin suffered from poor eyesight, so he invented bifocal glasses to help himself—and countless others—see better. Franklin also invented a new kind of iron stove. It was set in the middle of a room instead of in a wall, and it kept houses warmer without filling them with smoke. Another one of Franklins
» Isaac Newton analyzes the colors in a ray of light shining through his door. Newton was an important figure in the Enlightenment, a movement that emphasized reason, logic, and individualism.
» Founded in 1693, the College of William and Mary educated young men to join the Anglican clergy.
European Colonization of North America
88	2.6 Colonial Society
European Colonization of North America 89
Colonial Society
1

» This illustration shows the acquittal of John Peter Zenger on a charge of libel, which helped establish the American principle of freedom of the press.
dwellers found entertainment at singing societies, traveling circuses, carnivals, and horse races.
In 1704, John Campbell founded the Boston News-Letter, the first regular weekly newspaper in the English colonies. Within 50 years, each of the colonies, except New Jersey and Delaware, had at least one weekly paper.
John Peter Zenger’s Libel Trial The growth of colonial newspapers led to a dispute over freedom of the press. John Peter Zenger published the Weekly Journal in New York City. In 1734, he was arrested for publishing stories that criticized the governor. Zenger was put on trial for libel—the act of publishing a statement that may unjustly damage a person’s reputation. Zenger’s lawyer argued that, since the stories were true, his client had not committed libel. The jury agreed and freed Zenger. At the time, the case did not attract a great deal of attention. However, freedom of the press would become recognized as a basic American right.
U IDENTIFY
How did some of Benjamin Franklin’s inventions influence the daily lives of colonists?
Like other European nations at the time, England believed that its colonies should benefit the home country. This belief was part of an economic theory known as mercantilism (mur kun til iz um).
Interactive Flipped Video
ASSESSMENT
inventions, the lightning rod, protected buildings from catching fire in a storm because of lightning strikes. As a community leader, Franklin persuaded Philadelphia officials to pave streets, organize a fire company, and set up the first lending library in the Americas. Franklin’s inventions and his public service earned him worldwide fame.
The Influence of Colonial Cities and Towns While most colonists lived on farms, towns and cities strongly influenced colonial life. Through the great ports of Philadelphia, New York, Boston, and Charleston, merchants shipped products overseas. Towns and cities also served as centers of a busy trade between the coast and the growing backcountry.
Culture flourished in the towns. By the mid-1700s, many colonial towns had their own theaters. Town
1.	Infer Women did not have access to certain jobs in the colonies. How was women’s access to employment was restricted?
2.	Analyze Information How did the Great Awakening lead to greater religious tolerance?
3.	Support Ideas with Evidence What evidence can you find in the reading to support the idea that educational opportunities were not equal between many of the colonies?
4.	Generate Explanations Why do you think enslaved African Americans were generally denied an education?
5.	Make Generalizations What generalization can you make about education in the 1700s based on the fact that newspapers were becoming increasingly popular throughout the colonies?
Colonial Trade and Government
Mercantilism and the English Colonies
According to this theory, a nation could become strong by keeping strict control over its trade. As one English gentleman put it, “Whosoever commands the trade of the world commands the riches of the world.”
Imports and Exports Mercantilists thought that a country should export more than it imported. Exports are goods sent to markets outside a country.
Imports are goods brought into a country. If England sold more goods than it bought abroad, gold would flow into the home country as payment for those exports.
The Navigation Acts Affect the Colonies Beginning in the 1650s, the English Parliament passed a series of Navigation Acts that regulated trade between England and its colonies. The purpose of these laws was to ensure that only England benefited from trade with its colonies.
Under the new laws, only colonial or English ships could carry goods to and from the colonies. Colonists were banned from trading directly
3.A, 15.A, 20.A
» Objectives
Explain the development of mercantilism and colonists’ response to it.
Outline the relationship of the slave trade to other kinds of trade.
Describe the development of governments and legal systems in the colonies.
» Key Terms
mercantilism
export
Navigation Acts Yankees triangular trade legislature Glorious Revolution bill of rights English Bill of Rights imports
William Blackstone legislature
PEARSON 1
El realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
European Colonization of North America 9Q
2.6 Colonial Society
91
with other European nations or their colonies. All trade had to go through England. The Navigation Acts also listed certain products, such as tobacco and cotton, that colonial merchants could ship only to England. In this way, Parliament created jobs for English workers who cut and rolled tobacco or spun cotton into cloth.
The Navigation Acts helped the colonies as well as England. For example, the law encouraged colonists to build ships for their own use and for sale to England. As a result, New England became a prosperous shipbuilding center. Also, because of the acts, colonial merchants did not have to compete with foreign merchants because they were sure of having a market for their goods in England.
Still, many colonists resented the Navigation Acts. In their view, the laws favored English merchants. Colonial merchants often ignored the Navigation Acts or found ways to get around them.
H IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
Why did England pass the Navigation Acts?
Trading Across the
Atlantic
The colonies produced a wide variety of goods, and merchant ships sailed up and down the Atlantic coast. Merchants from New England dominated colonial trade.
They were known as Yankees, a nickname that implied they were clever and hardworking. Yankee traders earned a reputation for profiting from any deal.
The Triangular Trade Colonial merchants developed many trade routes. One route was known as the triangular trade because the three legs of the route formed a triangle. On the first leg, ships from New England carried rum, guns, gunpowder, cloth, and tools from New England to West Africa. In Africa, Yankee merchants traded these goods for slaves.
On the second leg of the journey, ships carried enslaved Africans to the West Indies. It was because enslaved Africans traveled on the second leg of a three-leg voyage that this leg was known as the Middle Passage. With the profits from selling the enslaved Africans, Yankee traders bought molasses—a dark-brown syrup made from sugar cane—and sugar. On the final leg, ships then sailed back to New England, where colonists used the molasses and sugar to make rum for sale in Africa or Europe.
The Triangular Trade
shows the routes of the Triangular Trade. Analyze Maps Which ■he first destination for many enslaved Africans?
Sil Interactive Map
in Colonization of North America 92	2.7 Colonial Trad.
and Government
Merchants Disregard the Navigation Acts Many New England merchants grew wealthy from the triangular trade. In doing so, they often disobeyed the Navigation Acts. Traders were supposed to buy sugar and molasses only from English colonies in the West Indies. However, the demand for molasses was so high that New Englanders smuggled in cargoes from the Dutch, French, and Spanish West Indies, too. Bribes made customs officials look the other way.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did many traders ignore the Navigation Acts and buy sugar and molasses from non-English colonies in the West Indies?
The Foundations
of Representative
Government
Although each colony developed its own government, the governments had much in common. A governor directed the colony’s affairs and enforced the laws. Most governors were appointed, either by the king or by the colony’s proprietor. In Rhode Island and Connecticut, however, colonists elected their own governors. Representative government and institutions spread in the colonies for several reasons.
Elected Assemblies As you learned, the Virginia Company decided to establish an elected assembly to attract more settlers. For this reason, and inspired by the English tradition of representative government outlined in the Magna Carta, all of the colonies gained a legislature soon after they were founded.
A legislature is a group of people, usually elected, who have the power to make laws. In most colonies, the legislature had an upper house and a lower house. The upper house was made up of advisers appointed by the governor.
The lower house was an elected assembly. It approved laws and protected the rights of citizens. Just as important, it had the right to approve or reject any taxes or budget items the governor asked for. This “power of the purse,” or right to raise or spend money, was an important check on the governor’s power. Any governor who ignored the assembly risked losing his salary.
As colonial settlers spread inland and founded new cities and towns, representative government and institutions grew. Most colonial cities and towns had their own city and town councils.
» John Archdale, a governor of the early Carolina colony, addresses the Carolina Assembly in 1696. Each colony gained its own legislature, or group of lawmakers.
Interactive Chart
The Right to Vote Each colony had its own rules about who could vote. By the 1720s, however, all of the colonies had laws that restricted the right to vote to white Christian men over the age of 21.
In some colonies, only Protestants or members of a particular church could vote. All colonies restricted the vote to men who owned a certain amount of property. Colonial leaders believed that only property owners knew what was best for a colony.
William Blackstone and Common Law The
colonies followed English common law. Under common law, laws develop from the past rulings of judges. In applying laws, courts followed the principle that "like cases should be tried alike.”
Colonists brought the tradition of common law with them from England. In the 1760s, William Blackstone published a four-volume book, Commentaries on the Laws of England. In it, Blackstone reviewed the entire history of English law. As a member of Parliament and a judge in England, he believed common law was the highest and best form of law.
Blackstone supported Parliament and opposed colonists' moves toward self-rule. However, his ideas about common law took hold in the colonies. Common
European Colonization of North America 93	2.7 Colonial Trade and Government
» This illustration shows a colonial woman in court. While unmarried women and widows had some legal rights, married women were legally dependent on their husbands.
law was a body of laws that was valid independent of Parliament’s acts. As such, it provided a basis for self-rule and an independent legal system once the colonies began to move toward independence.
The English Bill of Rights Supports Freedoms
Colonists took great pride in their elected assemblies. They also valued the rights that the Magna Carta gave them as English subjects.
Colonists won still more rights as a result of the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Parliament removed King James II from the throne and asked William and Mary of the Netherlands to rule. In return for Parliament’s support, William and Mary signed the English Bill of Rights in 1689. A bill of rights is a written list of freedoms the government promises to protect.
The English Bill of Rights protected the rights of individuals and gave anyone accused of a crime the right to a trial by jury. Just as important, the English Bill of Rights said that a ruler could not raise taxes or an army without the approval of Parliament. The Bill of
Rights also strengthened the position of representative government and institutions in the colonies.
Liberties are Restricted English colonists in the Americas often enjoyed more freedoms than did the f English themselves. However, the rights of English citizens did not extend to all colonists. Women had more rights in the colonies than in England but far fewer rights than did free, white males. A woman's father or husband was supposed to protect her. A married woman could not start her own business or sign a contract unless her husband approved it.	}
In most colonies, unmarried women and widows had more rights than married women. They could make contracts and sue in court. In Maryland and the Carolinas, women settlers who headed families could buy land on the same terms as men.
African Americans and Native Americans in the colonies had almost no rights. While so many colonists * enjoyed English liberties, most African Americans were bound in slavery. The conflict between liberty and slavery would not be resolved until the 1860s.
m DESCRIBE How did the English Bill of Rights
promote freedom?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Compare Points of View Compare how the English and the colonists viewed the Navigation Acts.
2.	Cite Evidence What evidence is there in the reading to suggest that molasses was critical to the success of the triangular trade?
3.	Summarize the rights of women in colonial America.
4.	Predict Consequences Colonial traders profited ; greatly from the triangular trade, partly because they disregarded the Navigation Acts and traded with colonies of European nations other than England. How do you think they might have responded if England started to strictly enforce
the Navigation Acts?
5.	Summarize How did English laws contribute to the development of freedom and self-government in the American colonies?
TEKS ASSESSMENT
1.	Describe Causes of Spanish Colonization Describe the causes of Spanish colonization in New Spain. Write a paragraph about the reasons the Spanish had for colonizing New Spain. Explain the quotation below in relation to colonization. In your paragraph, consider what historians mean by gold, God, and glory. 1.A
Sometimes, historians summarize the Spanish exploration and settlement of the Americas as motivated by “Gold, God, and Glory. ”
2.	Explain The Founding of Jamestown Explain the significance of 1607, the founding of Jamestown. Write a paragraph explaining the significance of the founding of Jamestown in 1607. Answer these questions: What is a charter? What rights did the royal charter give the Virginia Company and guarantee colonists? What were the goals of the colonists who arrived in 1607? What is the significance of the founding of Jamestown? 1.C
3.	Analyze Importance of Virginia House of Burgesses Explain the reasons for the growth of representative government during the colonial period and analyze the importance of the Virginia House of Burgesses to the growth of representative government. Write a paragraph analyzing the importance of
the Virginia House of Burgesses to the growth of representative government in the colonial period.
Answer the following questions: What is a representative government? Why did the Virginia Company establish the House of Burgesses? Which settlers could be elected as burgesses? What was the purpose of the House of Burgesses? Why was the establishment of the House of Burgesses important? 3.A, 3.B
4.	Describe Religious Motivation for Immigration
Describe religious motivation for immigration of the Puritans and the establishment of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Write a paragraph describing the role that religion played in the Puritans’ decision to immigrate to New England and establish the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Consider how the Puritans felt about Church of England, why the Puritans persuaded royal officials to grant them a charter to form the Massachusetts Bay Company, and how religion influenced what the Puritans hope to do in Massachusetts. 2.B, 25.B
5.	Describe Contribution of Religion and Virtue to Representative Government Describe how religion and virtue contributed to the growth of representative government in the American colonies. Write a paragraph describing how religion and virtue contributed to the growth of representative government. Consider the role of religious virtue and the common good in representative government and how belief in religious freedom led to greater representation over time. 3.C
Create a Model Describe the positive consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States by creating a model representing Plymouth Plantation. Use the photographs above and other sources to create a model of Plymouth Plantation. Show how the colonists modified their environment in positive ways to help in their survival, and use captions or labels to describe the positive modifications. Include houses, roads, crops, and a mill. (See photographs above.) 11.B, 29.I
7. Analyze Mercantilism Identify reasons for European colonization of North America, including mercantilism. Using the quotation below and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing how the theory of mercantilism influenced England’s relationship with its colonies. Answer the following questions: How does the quotation below reflect the economic theory of mercantilism? What role did imports and exports play in mercantilism? How did the Navigation Acts support the theory of mercantilism? Why did many colonists resent the Navigation Acts? 2.A
Whosoever commands the trade of the world commands the riches of the world.
—English gentleman
European Colonization of North America
2.7 Colonial Trade and Government
European Colonization of North America
95
The New England Colonies
The Location of Jamestown
o_______________ 20 mi
0	20 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equidistant
Projection
Analyze Effects of Physical Geographic Factors Locate places of importance in the United States during the seventeenth century, and analyze the effects of physical geographic factors on major historical events in the United States, such as the founding of Jamestown. Examine the physical geography of the place that the colonists chose for Jamestown. Then locate Jamestown on the map above and use what you learned about the physical geography of the area to write a paragraph that answers the following questions: Where was Jamestown located? What about the physical geography made the location difficult for colonists? What advantages did the location provide for security? 10. A, 10.C
Identify Ways Religious Conflicts Are
Resolved Identify ways conflicts between people from various religious groups were resolved. Write a paragraph identifying the conflict between Anne Hutchinson and the Puritans in Massachusetts Bay Colony and how it was resolved. Describe why Anne Hutchinson was ordered to appear before the Massachusetts General Court, recount her testimony, and describe what the court ruled. 23.C
Explain William Penn’s Role on Development of Self-Government Explain the role of significant individuals, such as William Penn, in the development of self-government in colonial America. Write a paragraph explaining the role William Penn played in the development of self-government in colonial America. Explain how Penn aided self-government in Pennsylvania and advanced self-government in the Lower Counties. 20.A
11.	Compare Political and Economic Reasons for Colonization Compare political and economic reasons for the establishment of the 13 English colonies. Write
a paragraph comparing the economic reasons for the establishment of what became the colony of New York with the political reasons for the founding of New Jersey. Compare the reasons for founding each colony and describe how a proprietary colony differed from earlier methods of establishing colonies. 2.B
12.	Explain Development of Free-Enterprise System Explain why a free-enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation, including minimal government intrusion. Write a paragraph describing why a free-enterprise system developed in New Jersey when it was a proprietary colony. Explain why a free-enterprise system was able to develop in New Jersey and why the system that developed can be consider free enterprise. 14.A
13.	Describe Characteristics of Free-Enterprise System Describe the characteristics of the U.S. free-enterprise system during the eighteenth century. Write a paragraph describing how the cultivation of cash crops in the Middle Colonies illustrates the characteristics of a free-enterprise system. Describe what cash crops are and why their cultivation can be considered free enterprise. 14.B

KEY
EU
Middle Colonies Area Claimed by New York and New Hampshire Virginia' -	. !^lOeteMre
150 km Lambert Conformal Conic Projection
14.	Pose and Answer Questions About Geographic Distributions and Patterns Locate regions of importance in the United States during the seventeenth century by posing and answering questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps. Locate important regions in colonial American on the maps above and pose and answer questions about geographic patterns and distributions. Consider questions such as the following: Which region has the greatest number of coastal cities? What geographic factor might account for this pattern? What pattern
is evident on both maps about the location of inland cities? What might explain this pattern? (See maps above.) 10.A, 29.J
15.	Analyze Economic Effect of Physical Characteristics Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced economic activities during the eighteenth century. Write a paragraph analyzing
the impact of the physical environment on economic activities in the Middle Colonies. Consider the climate, the soil, the effect of these physical factors on farming, and the effect of farming on the economy. 11 .A
16.	Compare Human Characteristics Compare places of the United States in terms of human characteristics. Write a paragraph comparing Massachusetts and Pennsylvania in terms of human characteristics.
Consider settlement patterns and religious and ethnic diversity. 10.B
17.	Trace Development of Religious Freedom Trace the development of religious freedom in the United States. Write a paragraph describing how the Act of Toleration contributed to the development of religious freedom in colonial North America. Consider why Lord Baltimore welcomed Protestants to Maryland, why
he asked the Maryland assembly to pass the Act of Toleration, what the act protected, and whom the act did not protect. 25.A
18.	Identify Ethnic Groups Identify selected ethnic groups that settled in the United States, including those who settled in the backcountry during the colonial era. Write a paragraph identifying the ethnic groups that settled in the backcountry of the Southern Colonies. Identify the groups and explain why they came. 23.A
19.	Identify Economic Contributions of Women Identify the economic contributions of women to American society. Write a paragraph identifying the economic roles women played in colonial society. Identify the contributions of planters’ wives, farmers’ wives, backcountry wives, women in cities, and women in trades. 23.E
European Colonization of North America 96
European Colonization of North America
97
£38
PHYSICAL
WEALTH
20.	Analyze Economic Differences Create charts representing various aspects of the United States to analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the United States at selected times in U.S. history. Use the graph above and other sources to create a chart analyzing the causes and effects of economic differences among the three colonial regions. Create a cause-and-effect chart with
a row for each colonial region. In the Effects column, summarize what the graph shows about the sources of physical wealth for each colonial region. In the Cause column, use your text to summarize the causes of the effects. Analyze the information in the chart and write a sentence explaining why the amount and sources of wealth are so different for the Southern Colonies. (See graph above.) 12.D, 29.1
21.	Describe Interaction With Environment Describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the eighteenth century. Write a paragraph describing how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment of the Southern Colonies in the 1700s. Consider English settlers in the Tidewater, enslaved Africans, and backcountry immigrants. 11.C
22.	Explain Transatlantic Slave Trade Explain reasons for the transatlantic slave trade. Write a paragraph explaining the reasons for the transatlantic slave trade. Consider reasons related to the Southern Colonies and reasons related to colonial trade. 12.B
£137
23.	Identify Economic Differences Identify economic differences among different regions of the United States by creating a thematic map representing colonial exports. Use maps, graphs, and information from various sources to create a thematic map showing the major exports for each colonial region. Use symbols
to represent the exports, include a key to identify the symbols, and write a caption for the map identifying what economic differences the map shows. 12.A, 29.I
24.	Analyze Contributions of Racial Groups Analyze the contributions of people of various racial groups to our national identity. Write a paragraph analyzing the contributions of Africans and African Americans to colonial society. Consider influences related to the introduction of African farming techniques and African language and culture. 23.D
25.	Compare Effects of Scientific Discoveries Compare the effects of scientific discoveries that have influenced daily life in the colonial era, including those of Benjamin Franklin. Write a paragraph comparing different ways that Benjamin Franklin’s inventions improved daily life. Describe Benjamin Franklin’s inventions and compare their effects on daily life. 28.A
26.	Describe Developments in American Art Describe developments in art that are unique to American culture, and identify examples of American art that reflect society in the colonial era. Write a paragraph describing art in colonial America and identifying how the art reflects colonial society. Consider the artistic traditions colonists brought with them, the popularity of portraits and prints, and how the art forms reflect life and society in colonial times. 26.A, 26.B
27.	Explain Significance of Mayflower Compact Explain the significance of 1620, arrival of the Pilgrims and signing of the Mayflower Compact, and analyze the importance of the Mayflower Compact to the growth
of representative government. Using the quotation below and other sources, write a paragraph explaining why the Pilgrims signed the Mayflower Compact when they arrived in Plymouth in 1620 and analyzing why the document is important to the growth of representative government. Recount where the Pilgrims were headed and where they actually landed in 1620, explain why the Pilgrims believed they needed to write and sign the Mayflower Compact, use the quotation to summarize what the signers agreed to do, and analyze why the Mayflower Compact was an important step toward the U.S. system of representative government. 1.C, 3.B,
15.	A
IN THE NAME OF GOD, AMEN.
We, whose names are underwritten, . . . Do by these Presents, solemnly and mutually, in the Presence of God and one another, covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil Body Politick, for our better Ordering and Preservation, . . . And by Virtue hereof do enact, constitute, and frame, such just and equal Laws, Ordinances, Acts, Constitutions, and Officers, from time to time, as shall be thought most meet and convenient for the general Good of the Colony; unto which we promise all due Submission and Obedience. ... 1C l Vt; I r'i’	"	' '
28.	Describe Developments in American Music Describe developments in music that are unique to American culture, and identify examples of American music that reflect society in the colonial era. Write a paragraph describing music in colonial America and identifying how the music reflects colonial society. Consider European and African musical traditions, the blending of these traditions, and the importance of religious music in colonial society. 26.A, 26.B
29.	Analyze Contributions of Religious Groups Analyze the contributions of people of various religious groups to our national identity by creating a visual presentation. Create a concept web showing how different religious leaders contributed to our national identity as a country of religious tolerance. Consider the actions and ideas of such religious leaders as Thomas Hooker, Roger Williams, William Penn, Lord Baltimore, and
the ministers of the Great Awakening. Decorate your concept web with images that illustrate religious tolerance in the nation today. 23.D, 30.D
30.	Explain Growth of Representative Government Explain the reasons for the growth of representative government during the colonial period. Write a paragraph explaining how the colonial governments laid the foundations for representative government. Consider the role of governors, the role of assemblies, and the right to vote. 3.A
31.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: Why do people move? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
European Colonization of North America
98
European Colonization of North America
99
T
L^ju^iu^a Access additional practice questions J
What factor in Spain’s ability to conquer the empires of the Aztecs and Incas is best illustrated in the image above?
A
The Aztecs and Incas had been weakened by diseases. B
The Spanish had superior military equipment and horses. C
The subjects of the Aztec and Inca rulers betrayed them to the Spanish. D
The Aztecs and Incas revered the Spanish as gods and were afraid to fight them. 3	The colonists who established the Plymouth Colony mainly wanted to— A create a North American stronghold for England B find wealth and gain huge profits in North America C establish an English shipping port in North America D avoid religious prosecution and practice their religion freely
4
Comparing the New England and Middle Colonies
NEW ENGLAND I MIDDLE COLONIES
MAIN BEASON
FOB SETTLEMENT
BDSINEBSAirainuM./ll
AGRICULTURE
ETHNIC DI
VER&ity SETTLEMENT STRUCTURE
CULTURE AND SOCIETY I!-
Avoid religious persecution
Shipbuilding, shipping, fishing, forestry
Mostly limited to the needs of the colonies
Mainly English
Close-knit towns
Religious uniformity; small family farms and businesses with few servants or slaves
Economic gain
Agriculture, skilled trades, shipping
Fertile farmland produced export crops
English, Dutch, German, and Scotch-Irish
More scattered settlements
Ethnic and religious diversity; larger farms and businesses need indentured servants
2	One of the main reasons that the French began explorations in North America was to— F create wealth through fishing, trapping, and trading G capture Native Americans and take them to France as slaves H establish large, permanent cities along the North American seacoast J engage in war with Spain to take over the Spanish holdings in North America
Based on this table, how did the reason for settlement relate to the economic situation of these colonies?
F
Colonies started for economic gain are poor and colonies started for religious reasons are wealthy. G
Colonies started for economic gain export more crops and have larger farms than do colonies started for religious reasons. H
Whether started for religious reasons or for economic gain, all of the colonies on the table were just barely able to meet their own needs. J
Colonies started for religious reasons have no businesses outside of agriculture while colonies started for economic gain are split between business and farming. If you have trouble with......	................____________________________
Question i	1 ................?________t________?_______k..-...
See Lesson ;	2.1	_.........2-2......_________2.3 ____£......2.4
TEKS ................1 .A ......'......2.A	....J________2.B   ..£.... 12.D
European Colonization of North America 100
European Colonization of North America
101
5 Life in the Colonial Tidewater and Backcountry
Early English settlers and enslaved Africans
Large-scale plantation farming of cash crops for export
Flat plain
Coastal plains
BACKCOUNTRY
Appalachian mountains and their foothills
Hilly, mountainous
Scotch-Irish, poorer English migrants, Germans
Small-scale subsistence farming, fur trade
Take note of the land descriptions in the table. Why was the Tidewater attractive to wealthy settlers who wanted to start plantations?
A
The flat land offered much better views. B
The foothills provided richer croplands. C
The plains were better for successful farming. D
The mountains offered more exciting leisure activities. 6	Although he opposed the colonies ruling themselves, England’s William Blackstone wrote a book that helped form the basis for the colonies’ —
F legislative body
G independent legal system H structure of town government J system of checks and balances
European Colonization of North America 102
Access additional practice questions
•	Dug irrigation ditches
•	Created a network of roads
•	Used adobe to build large buildings
Which Native American group modified their environment in the ways listed above? A Inuit B Anasazi C Natchez D Hopewell
8 Which of the following best explains why the introduction of the horse was one of the positive changes to the environment that resulted from the Columbian Exchange?
F
The Spanish converted pastures to grasslands to feed the horses. G
Native Americans learned to ride horses and use them to carry loads. H
Native Americans relied on horses as a source of food and to plow fields. J
The Spanish used horses to conquer Native Americans in North and South America. If you have trouble with...				
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	2.5	2.7	1.1	1.3
TEKS 11.A 20.A 10.B 11.B
European Colonization
of North America 103
H

The Revolutionary Era
In this Topic, you will learn about the Revolution era in the United States.
You will also find lots of ways to investigate the ideas of this Topic and to master the TEKS.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
LESSON OUTLINE
3.1: The French and Indian War 29.C.G, 29.H.A
3.2: Tensions With Britain 4.A, 4.B
3.3: Taking Up Arms 1.A, 4.A, 4.B, 4.C, 10.A,
20.C
3.4: Declaring Independence 1.A, 1.C, 4.B, 4.C, 15.C, 19.A
3.5: Winning Independence 4.B, 4.C, 10.A, 22.B, 23.D
1.A, 1.C, 4.A, 4.B, 4.C, 10.A, 10.C, 14.A, 15.C, 19.A, 20.B, 20.C, 22.B, 23.D, 23.E, 29.B, 29.C, 29.C.G, 29.H, 29.H.A, 30.A, 30.B, 30.D, 31.B
• Connect
: My Story Video and Topic Essential Question—
: see how they connect to your past experience or : to what you have already learned. The Essential ; Question for this Topic is: When is war justified?
j Begin your study by trying the i following:
i NBC LEARN Watch My Story Video:
; Benjamin Franklin and the Fight for Independence
Launch your Project:
• Write a Blog on the American Revolution
9 Investigate
; A group of lessons will help : you investigate the Topic : further. Each lesson has ; interesting text readings and : fascinating interactivities.
: Together, they will bring the : Topic to life and help you ; master the TEKS for this ; Topic.
; And keep working on your : Project. You’re almost ready ; to show what you have ; accomplished by presenting t your blog.
Q
Go back Notable People of the American Revolution
Q.
Mary Ludwig Hays, the Revolutionary Heroine "Molly Pitcher” ► Mary Hays earned the nickname ‘Molly Pitcher” by bringing water to soldiers in the field. When her husband fell during the Battle of Monmouth, she took his place in the gun crew for the remainder of the battle. Later, Mary received a pension for her services during the war.
» Digital interactivity from the online course
*	Synthesize
i You’ll see that this Topic is about i even more than fascinating texts and i fun interactivities. It's really about : how those things help you think : about big ideas, like the Essential
•	Question for this Topic.


1 of 3	;	>
Demonstrate	TEKS in Topic 3 i	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 3	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
Completing this Topic is like practicing all your soccer skills or rehearsing the scenes in a play. Now you get a chance to pull it all together for the final game or the live performance. You can do this on the Topic Review and Assessment pages. Or you can complete work on your Project, Write a Blog on the American Revolution	•	1.A	5,10,11,13,18	20.C	6,8
	1.C	11	22.B	9
	4.A	4	23.D	17
	4.B	7,11	23.E	16
	4.C	14	29.B	2
	10. A	1	29.C	1,6
	10.C	2,3	29.H	17
	14. A	15	30.A	12
	15.C	13, 15	30. B	5
	19. A	12	30.D	5
	20. B	12	31.B	10
I
p!

105
A-
104
3 The Revolutionary Era (1750-1783)
*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1.A, 1.C, 4.A, 4.B, 4.C, 10.A, 10.C, 14.A, 15.C, 19.A, 20.B, 20.C, 22.B, 23.D, 23.E, 29.B, 29.C, 29.H, 30.A, 30.B, 30.D, 31.B
Enduring Understandings
•	Great Britain’s victory over France in the French and Indian War increased British power and territory in North America.
•	Following the French and Indian War, Britain imposed taxes on the colonists without consent or representation, causing conflict.
•	Conflict between the colonists and Britain eventually led to fighting in Massachusetts, uniting the colonies, and starting the American Revolution.
•	The Continental Congress issued the Declaration of Independence to cut ties with Britain and form the United States of America.
•	Americans gained their independence from Britain after winning an eight-year war with assistance from France.
PEARSON 1 e
realize nbc learn
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
				

107
Interactive Flipped Video
By the mid-1700s, the major powers of Europe were locked in a worldwide struggle for empire. Britain, France, Spain, and the Netherlands competed for trade and colonies in far-flung corners of the globe. The British colonies in North America soon became caught up in the contest.
a .
» Objectives
Explain how the rivalry between Britain and France and conflict over the Ohio Valley led to the French and Indian War in North America.
Identify how mistakes and lack of unity led to British defeats early in the war.
Summarize how the tide of the war turned in Britain’s favor.
Explain how the British won the war. Describe the power shift that occurred after the war.
» Key Terms
French and Indian War
Albany Plan of Union Plains of Abraham Treaty of Paris George Washington
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
The French and Indian War
Europeans Fight Over North American Land
The most serious threat came from France. It claimed a vast area that circled the English colonies from the St. Lawrence River west to the Great Lakes and south to the Gulf of Mexico. To protect their land claims, the French built an extensive system of forts. These forts blocked the British colonies from expanding to the west.
The Importance of the Ohio River Valley At first, most settlers in the British colonies were content to remain along the Atlantic coast. By the 1740s, however, traders were crossing the Appalachian Mountains in search of furs. Pushing into the forests of the Ohio Valley, which supported an abundance of wildlife, settlers tried to take over the profitable French trade with the Indians.
France was determined to stop the British from expanding westward. The Ohio River was especially important to the French because it provided a vital link between their claims along the Great Lakes and their settlements along the Mississippi River.

Ohio Valley Native Americans Choose Allies
Native Americans had hunted animals and grown crops in the Ohio Valley for centuries. They did not want to give up the land to European settlers, French or British. One Native American protested to a British trader, “You and the French are like the two edges of a pair of shears. And we are the cloth which is to be cut to pieces between them.”
Still, the growing conflict between Britain and France was too dangerous to ignore. Some Native Americans decided that the only way to protect their way of life was to take sides in the struggle.
The French expected the Indians to side with them. Most French in North America were trappers and traders. Generally, they did not destroy Indian hunting grounds by clearing forests for farms. Also, many French trappers married Native American women and adopted their ways. As a result, France had built strong alliances with such Native American groups as the Algonquins and the Hurons.
Many British settlers were farmers. These settlers usually ignored Indian rights by felling trees and clearing land for crops. However, an English trader and official, William Johnson, helped gain Iroquois support for Britain. The Iroquois respected Johnson. He was one of the few British settlers who had an Indian wife, Molly Brant. She was the sister of the Mohawk chief
v.	Z
o,
T
PACIFIC
OCEAN
16CAV x	140 W
<----------------------\
KEY 1 I I Claimed by Britain B Claimed by Spain [ I Claimed by France
n French fort _____________________J
Thayendanegea, known to the British as Joseph Brant. Both Joseph and Molly Brant became valuable allies for the British. The British also won Native American allies in the Ohio Valley by charging lower prices than the French for trade goods.
In the end, Britain managed to convince the powerful Iroquois nations to join with them. The British alliance was attractive to the Iroquois because they were old enemies of the Algonquin and the Huron peoples. The war reignited old conflicts in the Ohio Valley between the Iroquois and the Algonquins and Hurons. Some tribes, like the Shawnees, Delawares, and Mingos, formed alliances to push Europeans off their lands. More often, however, the alliances Native Americans formed with the British and the French pitted tribes against each other in the fighting to come.
IDENTIFY
Which Native American groups sided with the British and which sided with the French as the war began?
North America in 1753
» By 1753, the French had claimed a vast area of North America. Analyze Maps Why were the French determined to prevent British colonies from expanding westward?
108
