and Culture Before the Civil War 323	7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
Factories Come to America
Britain wanted to keep its technological innovations, or new technologies, secret. It did not want rival nations to copy the new machines. Therefore, the British Parliament passed a law forbidding anyone to take plans of the new machinery out of the country.
Slater Breaks the Law Samuel Slater soon proved that this law could not be enforced. Slater was a skilled mechanic in a British textile mill. When he heard that Americans were offering large rewards for plans of British factories, he decided to leave Britain. In 1789, Slater boarded a ship bound for New York City. He knew that British officials searched the baggage of passengers sailing to the United States. To avoid getting caught, he memorized the design of the machines in the mill.
The First American Mill Slater soon visited Moses Brown, a Quaker capitalist who had a mill in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. The mill was not doing well because its machinery constantly broke down. Slater set to work on improving the machinery. By 1793, in Pawtucket, he built what became the first successful textile mill in the United States that was powered by water. Slater's wife, Hannah Slater, contributed to the success of the
» Samuel Slater had to memorize plans for the design of water-powered factories in order to bring the plans to America without being stopped by British officials.
mill. She discovered how to make thread stronger so that it would not snap on the spindles.
Slater’s factory was a huge success. Before long, other American manufacturers began using his ideas.
Interchangeable Parts American manufacturers also benefited from the pioneering work of American inventor Eli Whitney. Earlier, skilled workers made goods by hand. For example, gunsmiths spent days making the barrel, stock, and trigger for a single musket. Because the parts were handmade, each musket differed a bit from every other musket. If a part broke, a gunsmith had to make a new part to fit that particular gun.
Whitney wanted to speed up the making of guns by having machines manufacture each part. All machine-made parts would be alike—for example, one trigger would be identical to another. Identical parts would fit together with all other parts, and gunsmiths would not have build each gun from scratch. Interchangeable parts would save time and money.
Because the government bought many guns, Whitney went to Washington, D.C., to try to sell his idea. At first, officials laughed at his plan. Carefully, Whitney sorted parts for 10 muskets into separate piles. He then asked an official to choose one part from each pile. In minutes, the first musket was assembled. Whitney repeated the process until 10 muskets were complete.
The idea of interchangeable parts spread rapidly. Inventors designed machines to produce interchangeable parts for clocks, locks, and many other goods. With such machines, small workshops grew into factories.
The Spread of Factories The War of 1812 provided a boost to American industries. The British blockade cut Americans off from their supply of foreign goods. As a result, they had to produce more goods themselves. American merchants and bankers sought new ways to meet the increased demand. To profit from the efficiency provided by manufacturing, they built more factories. As American investors took advantage of new technologies and built more factories, the American economy grew.
Where Factories Were Built The first factories were built where physical characteristics of the environment favored them. In Pennsylvania factories used charcoal, which could be made from abundant local timber, for power. These factories turned iron ore, which was mined and smelted locally, into machines, tools, and guns.
Interactive 3-D Model
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
324	7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
In New England, textile factories were built alongside the hilly region’s numerous falling streams, which provided power for mills. Investors modified the physical environment by building dams and canals to power the mills. These modifications spurred economic growth. Local wool and cotton from the South provided the raw materials for thread, yarn, and fabric. In Lynn, Massachusetts, businesses systematized shoemaking, starting shoe factories in the early 19th century. The large factories attracted new workers to the town, and the economy grew rapidly. New England became the first region in the United States to develop manufacturing on a wide scale.
Free Enterprise and the Industrial Revolution In
the United States, the Industrial Revolution took place in a period marked by the growth of free enterprise. British restrictions on trade had been lifted. Hamilton’s reforms had strengthened the banking system, and banks were able to lend more money. New access to credit, or borrowed money, allowed people to start mills and factories in cities and in rural places where swift streams provided power.
These and other businesses operated, for the most part, without much government control. Nor did the government own factories or intervene heavily in the market. The government, however, protected contracts and property. People could buy, sell, or use property as they saw fit.
Most Americans wanted the freedom to try new things. They believed in competition, which encouraged new inventions. In 1792, a group of 24 investors started the New York Stock Exchange. This stock market raised private capital to pay for new ventures. Success meant profits and brought new wealth to investors. Profits led to new investment and further economic growth.
Low taxes allowed businesses to hold onto large amounts of capital and use it to expand and create even more wealth. The desire for profit and accumulated wealth sparked new ventures under new investors.
The Role of Market Forces Investors looked to the market to decide where to invest or what businesses to start. In the free enterprise system, goods are bought and sold, and wages are determined, by the market. If a product is in high demand and the supply is limited, the price will be high. Entrepreneurs started businesses to supply high-priced or high-demand products. They abandoned businesses where the demand and price were low.
Workers faced the same market forces. People with skills that were in demand in factories could expect
» On May 17, 1792, under a buttonwood tree at 68 Wall Street in New York City, investors signed the Buttonwood Agreement that started the New York Stock Exchange, as shown in this model.
higher wages than those whose skills had less value in the market.
U RECALL
How did the British attempt to keep their technological innovations secret?
Daily Life in Factory
Towns
Slater and Whitney’s innovations were just the first steps in America’s Industrial Revolution. During the early 1800s, entire cities began to emerge around factories.
The Lowell Mills During the War of 1812, Francis Cabot Lowell, a Boston merchant, found a way to improve on British textile mills. In Britain, one factory spun thread and a second factory wove it into cloth. Why not, Lowell wondered, combine spinning and weaving under one roof? The new mill that he built in Waltham, Massachusetts, had all the machines needed to turn raw cotton into finished cloth.
After Lowell’s death, his partners took on a more ambitious project. They built an entire factory town
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
325	7-1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
and named it after him. In 1821, Lowell, Massachusetts, was a village of five farm families.
By 1836, it boasted more than 10,000 people. Visitors to Lowell described it as a model community composed of “small wooden houses, painted white, with green blinds, very neat, very snug, very nicely carpeted.”
“Lowell Girls” To work in their new mills, the company hired young women from nearby farms. The Lowell girls, as they came to be called, usually worked for a few years in the mills before returning home to marry. These young women, and women like them in other mill towns, made an important economic contribution to American society by providing labor for the Industrial Revolution. Most sent their wages home to their families.
At first, parents hesitated to let their daughters work in the mills. To reassure parents, the company built boardinghouses, or buildings with many shared bedrooms and a kitch that served meals. The company also made rules to protect the young women.
Although factory work was often tedious, hard, and dangerous, many women valued the economic freedom they got from working in the mills. One worker wrote her sister Sarah back on a farm in New Hampshire:
» Organized child labor was common during the Industrial Revolution. Many American children worked in factories like the English factory shown here. Draw Conclusions Why did reformers begin to speak out against child labor?
Since I have wrote you, another pay day has come around. I earned 14 dollars and a half ... I like it well as ever and Sarah don’t I feel independent of everyone!
— from Lowell Offering: Writings by New England Mill Women
In Lowell and elsewhere, mill owners hired mostly women and children. They did this because they could pay women and children half of what they would have had to pay men.
Child Labor Boys and girls as young as seven worked in factories. Small children were especially useful in textile mills because they could squeeze around the large machines to change spindles.
Today, most Americans look upon child labor as cruel. Yet in the 1800s, farm children also worked hard.
Most people did not see much difference between children working in a factory or on a farm. Often, a child’s wages were needed to help support the family.
Long Hours Working hours in the mills were long—12 hours a day, 6 days a week. True, farmers also put in long hours. However, farmers worked shorter hours in winter. Mill workers, in contrast, worked nearly the same hours all year round.
In the early 1800s, conditions in American mills were generally much better than in most factories in Europe. As industries grew, however, competition increased and employers took less interest in the welfare of their workers. This eventually led to worse working conditions.
Changes in Home Life The Industrial Revolution had a great impact on home life. As the factory system spread, more family members left the home to earn a living. These changes affected ideas about the role of women. In poorer families, women often had to go out to work. In wealthier families, husbands supported the family while wives stayed at home. For many husbands, having a wife who stayed at home became a sign of success.
fcl DRAW CONCLUSIONS How did competition
change working conditions in American mills?
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
326	7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
URBAN GROWTH & INDUSTRIALIZATION
GROWTH OF URBAN AREAS
|Nthe NORTH 43%
CHILDREN OF NATIVE-BORN PARENTS
57%
IMMIGRANTS AND CHILDREN OF IMMIGRANTS
y Source; National Bureau of Economic Research
UNITED STATES
1820 MANUFACTURING 1040 EMPLOYMENT
351,296
787,393
1,265,251
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
» Analyze Graphs Based on the information in the graphs, what factor best explains the rapid rate of urbanization in northern cities during the mid-1800s?
Cities Expand
In 1800, the vast majority of Americans lived in rural areas. During the Industrial Revolution, many people left farms for cities, attracted by the job opportunities to be found in factories. As investors found that factories produced a profit, they invested those profits in building more factories, which attracted still more workers from farms. Older cities expanded rapidly, while new cities sprang up around factories. This movement of the population from rural areas to cities is called urbanization. Urbanization increased as industry grew.
Urbanization was a steady but gradual process. In
1800, only 6 percent of the nation’s population lived in urban areas. By 1850, the number had risen to 15 Percent. Not until 1920 did more Americans live in cities than in rural areas.
By today’s standards, these early cities were small.
A person could walk from one end of any American city to the other in as little as 30 minutes. Buildings were only a few stories tall. As the factory system spread, the nation’s cities grew.
Hazards of Urbanization Growing cities had many Problems. Many of these were negative consequences human modification of the environment. Dirt and
Piavel streets turned into mud-holes when it rained.
Cities had no sewers, and people threw garbage into the streets. A visitor to New York reported that “The streets are filthy, and the stranger is not a little surprised to meet the hogs walking about in them, for the purpose of devouring the vegetables and trash thrown into the gutter.”
Untreated sewage and garbage often seeped into wells or flowed into streams and rivers, polluting the water. The contaminated water spread disease. Epidemics of influenza and cholera (KAHL ur uh) raged through cities, killing thousands.
At about the same time, coal became an important source of industrial and home heating power. The smoke and soot from burning coal seriously modified the environment, polluting the air and dirtying cities. It also caused health problems.
Attractions Cities had attractions besides work opportunities. Theaters, museums, and circuses created an air of excitement. In cities, people could shop in fine stores that sold the latest fashions from Europe. Some offered modern “ready-to-wear" clothing. While most women continued to sew their own clothes, many enjoyed visiting hat shops, china shops, shoe stores, and “fancy-goods” stores.
Q DESCRIBE
What were some drawbacks of urbanization? Society and Culture Before
the Civil War 327	7-1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
New Technological
Innovations
Northern industry grew steadily in the mid-1800s. Most northerners still lived on farms. However, more and more of the northern economy began to depend on manufacturing and trade.
The 1800s brought a flood of new inventions in the North. "In Massachusetts and Connecticut,” a European visitor exclaimed, "there is not a laborer who has not invented a machine or a tool.” Americans of the period were a practical people. Americans, and especially northerners, looked to science for new and useful applications that could be put to work at once. They expected technology to bring economic development and to change the way people lived.
Technology refers to ways of doing things, sometimes involving advanced scientific knowledge, or tools that make use of advanced knowledge. Innovation is coming up with new ways of making or doing things.
Scientific and technological innovations during the colonial period, such as Franklin's lightning rod, had brought limited and modest changes to daily life in America. By comparison, the scientific and technological innovations of the 1800s transformed how Americans lived and worked.
» Singer’s treadle sewing machine was powered by foot and allowed the seamstress or tailor to sew quickly and evenly.
Interactive Timel ine
In 1834, Philo Stewart developed a cast-iron stove small enough for use in an average kitchen. His factory-built wood-burning stove was a great success. About 90,000 were sold. The cast-iron stove was only one sign of the way northern factories were changing the lives of ordinary people.
Joseph Henry, a New Yorker, showed that electric current could be sent through a wire over long distances to ring a bell. His work paved the way for later inventions. Thomas Davenport, a blacksmith, invented a type of electric motor in 1834.
Both inventions were adapted and marketed. Competition among inventors brought about more innovation.
In 1846, Elias Howe patented a sewing machine. A few years later, Isaac Singer improved on Howe’s machine. Soon, clothing makers bought hundreds of the new sewing machines. Workers could now make dozens of shirts in the time it took a tailor to sew one by hand.
Farm Machines Some new inventions made work easier for farmers. In 1825, Jethro Wood began the manufacture of an iron plow with replaceable parts. John Deere improved on the idea when he invented a lightweight steel plow. Earlier plows made of heavy iron or wood had to be pulled by slow-moving oxen. A horse could pull a steel plow through a field more quickly.
In 1847, Cyrus McCormick opened a factory in Chicago that produced mechanical reapers. The reaper was a horse-drawn machine that mowed wheat and other grains. McCormick’s reaper could do the work of five people using hand tools.
Other farm machines followed. There was a mechanical drill to plant grain, a threshing machine to beat grain from its husk, and a horse-drawn hay rake. These machines helped farmers raise more grain with fewer hands. As a result, thousands of farmworkers left the countryside. Some went west to start farms of their own. Others found jobs in new factories in northern cities.
A
New Communications System, the Telegraph Samuel F. B. Morse received a patent for a “talking wire,” or telegraph, in 1844. The telegraph was a device that sent electrical signals along a wire. It was a new technology that was made possible by scientific discoveries about electricity. The signals were based on a code of dots, dashes, and spaces. The dots stood for short tones, the dashes for long tones. Later, this system of dots and dashes became known as the Morse code.
Congress gave Morse funds to run wire from Washington, D.C., to Baltimore. On May 24,1844, Morse
J 7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
z
Society and Culture Before the Civil War J
set up his telegraph in the Supreme Court chamber in Washington.
As a crowd, of onlookers watched, Morse tapped out a short message. What hath God wrought!” A few seconds later, the operator in Baltimore tapped back the same message. The telegraph worked!
Morse’s invention was an instant success. Telegraph companies sprang up everywhere. Thousands of miles of wire soon stretched across the country. As a result of the telegraph, news could now travel long distances in a matter of minutes.
The telegraph helped many businesses to thrive. Merchants and farmers could have quick access to information about supply demand, and prices of goods in different areas of the country. For example, western farmers might learn of a wheat shortage in New York and ship their grain east to meet the demand. The availability of instant information about markets changed the way goods were marketed across the country and contributed to the development of a nationwide market.
The quick and widespread use of the telegraph connected the nation in a completely new way. Almost every American town eventually had a telegraph, providing nearly instant communication from coast to coast. By the late 1850s, a telegraph cable connected the United States with Europe. Just as the telegraph transformed national marketing, it also helped change the way goods were marketed internationally.
Not only commerce and industry benefited from the telegraph, but ordinary people could communicate quickly with distant family and friends. The presence of telegraph offices in cities and towns was yet another of the many attractions that helped drive urbanization. The telegraph is an example of how scientific discoveries influenced daily life during the 1800s.
H INFER
How did the invention of new farm machines contribute to urbanization in the North? The Age of Steam Power
At first, railroads were used to provide transportation to canals. In time, however, the railroad became a more practical means of transportation than canals. The first railroads were built in the early 1800s. Horses or mules Pulled cars along wooden rails covered with strips iron. Then, in 1829, an English family developed a steam-powered locomotive engine to pull rail cars.
The engine, called the Rocket, barreled along at 30 uuiles per hour.
» This engraving shows an early steam-powered locomotive. The steam-powered locomotive was the main way to travel and ship goods across America by the mid-1800s.
Interactive Gallery
Early Difficulties Not all Americans welcomed the new railroads. Workers who moved freight on horse-drawn wagons feared that they would lose their jobs. People who had invested in canals worried that competition from the railroads might cause them to lose their investments.
There were problems with the early railroads. They were not always safe or reliable. Soft roadbeds and weak bridges often led to accidents. Locomotives often broke down. Even when they worked, their smokestacks belched thick black smoke and hot embers. The embers sometimes burned holes in passengers’ clothing or set nearby buildings on fire.
Part of the problem was the way in which railroads were built. Often, instead of two tracks being laid—one for each direction—only one was set. Signals to control traffic on a single track did not yet exist. This increased the likelihood of a collision.
Another problem with early railroads was that there was no standard gauge, or distance between the rails. As a result, different railroads often used different gauges. To transfer from one railroad line to another, people and goods had to be moved off one train and then loaded onto another.
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
329	?•! The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
A
Railroad Boom Gradually, railroad builders overcame problems and removed obstacles. Engineers learned to build sturdier bridges and solid roadbeds. They replaced wooden rails with iron rails. Railroads developed signaling systems and agreed on a standard gauge. Such improvements made railroad travel safer and faster. By the 1850s, railroads crisscrossed the nation. The major lines were concentrated in the North and West. New York, Chicago, and Cincinnati became major rail centers. The South had much less track than the North.
Railroads played an important role in urban growth. Cities with good rail connections attracted factories and other businesses. Railroads also made it possible for people to migrate more easily to new cities, increasing urban populations.
Yankee Clippers Railroads increased commerce within the United States. At the same time, trade also increased between the United States and other nations. At seaports in the Northeast, captains loaded their ships with cotton, fur, wheat, lumber, and tobacco. Then, they sailed to other parts of the world.
Speed was the key to successful trade at sea. In 1845, an American named John Griffiths launched the Rainbow, the first of the clipper ships. These sleek vessels had tall masts and huge sails that caught every gust of wind. Their narrow hulls clipped swiftly
through the water. These technological innovations gave up cargo space for speed, which gave American merchants an advantage.
In the 1840s, American clipper ships broke every speed record. One clipper ship sped from New York to Hong Kong in 81 days, flying past older ships that took many months to reach China. The speed of the clippers helped the United States win a large share of the world’s sea trade in the 1840s and 1850s.
The golden age of clipper ships was brief. In the 1850s, Britain launched the first oceangoing iron steamships. These sturdy vessels carried more cargo and traveled even faster than clippers.
The Effects of Technological and Scientific Innovations In the late 1700s and early 1800s, scientists and inventors had found ways to harness heat, in the form of steam, to power machines. By the 1830s, factories began to use steam power instead of water power. Machines that were driven by steam were powerful and cheap to run. Also, factories that used steam power could be built almost anywhere, not just along the banks of swift-flowing rivers. As a result, American industry expanded rapidly.
At the same time, new machines made it possible to produce more goods at a lower cost. These more affordable goods attracted eager buyers. Families no longer had to make clothing and other goods in their homes. Instead, they could buy factory-made products.
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 330	7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
The Impact of Railroads Railroads allowed factory owners to transport large amounts of raw materials and finished goods cheaply and quickly Also, as railroads stretched across the nation, they linked distant towns with cities and factories. These towns became new markets for factory goods. Railroads greatly increased the size of the American marketplace and fueled even more factory production.
The growth of railroads also affected northern farming. Railroads brought cheap grain and other foods from the West to New England. New England farmers could not compete with this new source of cheap foods. Many left their farms to find new jobs in towns and cities as factory workers, store clerks, and sailors.
The Benefits of Free Enterprise The early rise of industrialization in the United States under the free enterprise system brought striking economic and social benefits. Mass producation lowered prices and raised Americans' purchasing power and standard of living. Wages increased for average workers. Food canned in factories improved peoples’ year-round diets.
The use of stoves improved meals and home heating. Factory-made clothing was cheaper than homemade. Great numbers of newspapers and magazines reported regularly about the new inventions and advertised the new products. Along with these changes, though, there were also challenges.
DRAW CONCLUSIONS
What was the principal advantage of steam power over water power?
Workers Respond to
Challenges
Factories of the 1840s and 1850s were very different from the mills of the early 1800s. As industrialization grew, life changed for workers. The factories were larger, and they used steam-powered machines. Laborers worked longer hours for lower wages. Usually, workers lived in dark, dingy houses in the shadow of the factory.
Changing Roles The emphasis on mass production changed the way workers felt about their jobs. Before the growth of factories, skilled workers, or artisans, were proud of the goods they made. The factory owner, however, was more interested in how much could be produced than in how well it was made. Workers could not be creative. Furthermore, unlike the artisan who could have his or her own business, the factory worker was not likely to rise to a management position.
» The broad sail area of clipper ships like the one shown here made them the fastest ships available for ocean transport until the development of steam-powered oceangoing ships in the 1850s.
» With the emphasis on mass production in the midnineteenth century, workers like the ones in this rubber processing factory worked long hours for low wages.
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 331	7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
Families in Factories As the need for workers increased, entire families labored in factories. In some cases, a family agreed to work for one year. If even one family member broke the contract, the entire family might be fired.
The factory day began when a whistle sounded at 4 A.M. The entire family—father, mother, and children— headed off to work. Many factories, at that time, employed young children. The workday did not end until 7:30 P.M., when a final whistle sent the workers home.
Hazards at Work Factory workers faced discomfort and danger. Few factories had windows or heating systems. In summer, the heat and humidity inside the factory were stifling. In winter, the extreme cold contributed to frequent sickness.
Factory machines had no safety devices, and accidents were common. There were no laws regulating factory conditions, and injured workers often lost their jobs.
Trade Unions and Strikes Poor working conditions and low wages led workers to organize into groups to improve their conditions. The first workers to organize
» As working conditions in factories worsened during the 1800s, workers, such as this group of women and their supporters in Lynn, Massachusetts, demanded reduced working hours and better pay.
were artisans. In the 1820s and 1830s, artisans in each trade united to form trade unions. Trade unions were part of a labor reform movement.
The concentration of workers in cities helped the formation of unions by allowing people working in the same industry for different companies to organize together. Their trade unions called for a shorter workday, higher wages, and better working conditions. Sometimes, unions went on strike to gain their demands. In a strike, union workers refuse to do their jobs until managers agree to address their concerns.
In the early 1800s, strikes were illegal in many parts of the United States. Strikers faced fines or jail sentences. Employers often fired strike leaders. Employers were politically opposed to workers organizing.
Progress for Artisans Slowly, however, the labor reform movement made progress. In 1840, President Van Buren approved a ten-hour workday for government employees. Workers celebrated another victory in 1842 when a Massachusetts court declared that they had the right to strike.
Artisans won better pay because factory owners needed their skills. Unskilled workers, however, were unable to bargain for better wages since their jobs required little or no training. Because these workers were easy to replace, employers did not listen to their demands.
During the Industrial Revolution, a new awareness of class differences began to emerge. As a farming people, Americans had long viewed labor with deep respect. The changing conditions of factory labor and the gaps between the wages of unskilled workers, managers, and business owners led to a sense of people grouped in classes with shared interests. The interests of these classes were often different. By bringing together workers and managers in the same factories and cities, urbanization led to a rise in conflicts resulting from differences in social class.
Women Workers Organize The success of trade unions encouraged other workers to organize. Workers in New England textile mills were especially eager to protest cuts in wages and unfair work rules. Many of these workers were women.
Women workers faced special problems. First, they had always earned less money than men did. Second, most union leaders did not want women in their ranks. Like many people at the time, they believed that women should not work outside the home. In fact, the goal of many unions was to raise men’s wages so that their wives could leave their factory jobs.
Despite these problems, women workers organized. They staged several strikes at Lowell, Massachusetts,
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
332	7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
in the 1830s. In the 1840s, Sarah Bagley organized the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association. The group petitioned the state legislature for a ten-hour workday
B DRAW CONCLUSIONS
Why could artisans command higher wages while other workers could not? Ethnic Minorities in the North
By the late 1840s, many factory workers in the North were immigrants. An immigrant is a person who enters a new country in order to settle there. In the 1840s and 1850s, about 4 million immigrants arrived in the United States. They were attracted, in large part, by the opportunities for farming the land or working in the cities. Among them were immigrants from Britain who came to earn higher wages. There was a greater demand in the United States for skilled machinists, carpenters, and miners.
From Ireland and Germany In the 1840s, a disease destroyed the potato crop in Ireland, which was the mam food of the poor people. Other crops, such as wheat and oats, were not affected. At the time, Ireland was under British rule and most Irish crops were exported to England. When a large part of the potato crop was lost to disease, British landowners continued to ship the wheat and oats to England. There was little left for the Irish to eat. This situation caused a famine, or severe food shortage. Thousands of people died of starvation. Nearly as many died from disease. Between 1845 and 1860, over 1.5 million Irish fled to the United States seeking freedom from hunger and British rule.
Meanwhile, many Germans were also arriving in the United States. Harsh weather conditions from 1829 to 1830 resulted in severe food shortages in Germany. By 1832, more than 10,000 Germans were coming to the United States in a single year seeking fertile land to farm and a better life. In 1848, revolutions had broken out in several parts of Germany. The rebels fought for democratic reforms. When the revolts failed, thousands had to flee. Attracted by its democratic political system, many came to the United States.
Many other German immigrants came simply to make a better life for themselves. Between 1848 and f86O, nearly one million Germans arrived in the United States.
Enriching the Nation Immigrants supplied much °f the labor that helped the nation’s economy grow.
» This scene shows immigrants landing in New York City in the 1850s. Many immigrants had little money when they first arrived in the United States and had to remain in the cities where they disembarked.
Although most of the Irish immigrants had been farmers, few had money to buy farmland. Many settled in the northern cities where low-paying factory jobs were available. Other Irish workers transformed the environment by helping to build many new canals and railroads. Irish women often worked as servants in private homes.
Immigrants from Germany often had enough money to move west and buy good farmland. These immigrants transfomed the environment by turning prairie into farmland. Others were artisans and merchants. Cities of the Midwest such as St. Louis, Milwaukee, and Cincinnati had German grocers, butchers, and bakers.
A small minority of the immigrants from Germany were Jewish. German Jews began immigrating to the United States in the 1820s. By the early 1860s, there were about 150 communities in the United States with substantial Jewish populations.
Most Irish immigrants and many German immigrants were Catholic. By contrast, most Americans in the early 1800s were Protestant. Because many immigrants, especially from Ireland, were drawn to America’s growing cities, the process of urbanization led to an increase in both ethnic and religious diversity.
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 333	7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
A
Reaction Against Immigrants Not everyone welcomed the flood of immigrants. One group of Americans, called nativists, wanted to preserve the country for native-born, white citizens. Using the slogan “Americans must rule America,” they called for laws to limit immigration. They also wanted to keep immigrants from voting until they had lived in the United States for 21 years. At the time, newcomers could vote after only 5 years in the country. Some nativists protested that newcomers “stole” jobs from native-born Americans because they worked for lower pay. Furthermore, when workers went out on strike, factory owners often hired immigrant workers to replace them. Many distrusted the different language, customs, and dress of the immigrants. Others blamed immigrants for the rise in crime in the growing cities. Still others mistrusted Irish newcomers because many of them were Catholics. Until the 1840s, the majority of immigrants from Europe had been Protestants. As American cities attracted Catholic immigrants, these cities became centers of conflicts over religion.
By the 1850s, hostility to immigrants was so strong that nativists formed a new political party. Members of the party were anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant. Many meetings and rituals of the party were kept secret. It was called the Know-Nothing party because members answered, “I know nothing,” when asked about the
» The African Meeting House on Beacon Hill in Boston is the oldest standing black church in the United States.
party. The message of the party did gain supporters, but its support was limited to the North, where most immigrants settled. In 1856, Millard Fillmore, the Know-Nothing candidate for President won 21 percent of the popular vote. Soon after, however, the party died out.
In time, conflicts between ethnic groups were resolved as immigrants or their children became part of American society. Also, different ethnic groups became incorporated into the nation’s political fabric as political parties, particularly the Democratic Party, began to speak for their interests.
African Americans Face Discrimination During the nation’s early years, slavery was legal in the North. By the early 1800s, however, all of the northern states had passed laws to bring an end to slavery. In some states, only the children of slaves gained freedom at first. Many did not completely abolish slavery until the mid-1800s. Still, thousands of free African Americans lived in the North, and their number grew steadily during the early 1800s.
Free African Americans in the North faced discrimination. Discrimination is a policy or an attitude that denies equal rights to certain groups of people. As one writer pointed out, African Americans were denied “the ballot-box, the jury box, the halls of the legislature, the army, the public lands, the school, and the church.”
Even skilled African Americans had trouble finding good jobs. One black woodworker was turned away by every furniture maker in Cincinnati. At last, a shop owner hired him. However, when he entered the shop, the other woodworkers dropped their tools. Either he must leave or they would, they declared. Similar experiences occurred throughout the North. In addition, African Americans faced competition from immigrants who settled in northern cities.
Yet Some Find Success Despite such obstacles, free blacks in North had some choice over where they lived and worked, unlike enslaved blacks in the South. In fact, some northern African Americans achieved notable success in business. William Whipper grew wealthy as the owner of a lumberyard in Pennsylvania. He devoted much of his time and money to fighting slavery. Henry Boyd operated a profitable furniture company in Cincinnati.
African Americans made strides in other areas as well. Henry Blair invented a corn planter and a cottonseed planter.
In 1845, Macon Allen became the first African American licensed to practice law in the United States. After graduating from Bowdoin College in Maine, John
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
334	7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life in the North
Russwurm became one of the editors of Freedom’s Journal, the first African American newspaper.
0RECALL Why did skilled African Americans have
trouble finding jobs in the North?
assessment
1.	Identify Cause and Effect How did the War of 1812 affect American manufacturing?
2.	Describe the workers and working conditions in factories in the mid-1800s.
3.	Generate Explanations Why did many farmhands leave the countryside to start their own farms or to work in factories?
4.	Summarize the ways in which the invention of the telegraph changed life in America.
5.	Draw Conclusions What do the conditions in factories in the mid-1800s suggest about the pros and cons of the free enterprise system?
» Despite discrimination, some free African Americans such as William Whipper beat the odds to become successful. He used his wealth to promote abolition.
Society and Culture
Before the Civil War 335
7.1 The Industrial Revolution and Life m the North
This photograph shows a ball of cotton on a cotton plant. Before the invention of the cotton gin, workers had to separate the seeds of picked cotton from the fibers by hand. This work was very time-consuming.
I
Interactive Flipped Video During the 1800s, cotton continued to grow in importance in the South. It was so profitable, southerners did not even feel a need to invest in factories. Even though southerners grew other crops, cotton remained the region’s leading export. Cotton plantations—and the slave system on which they depended— shaped the way of life in the South.
7.B, 10.B, 12.A, 12.D, 27.A
» Objectives
Identify how the development of the cotton gin affected the South.
Describe the agricultural economy of the South.
King Cotton and Life in the South
The Cotton Kingdom
The Industrial Revolution greatly increased the demand for southern
Describe southern society.
Compare the economic, social, and political conditions of free and enslaved African Americans.
Explain the impact of slavery.
cotton. Textile mills in the North and in Britain needed more and more cotton to make cloth. At first, southern planters could not meet the demand. They could grow plenty of cotton because the South’s soil and climate were ideal. However, removing the seeds from the cotton by hand was a slow process. Planters needed a better way to clean cotton.
» Key Terms
boom
cultivate “cottonocracy” slave codes extended family
Eli Whitney Invents the Cotton Gin Eli Whitney, a young Connecticut schoolteacher, was traveling to Georgia in 1793. He was going to be a tutor on a plantation. At that time, there were few public schools in the South. When Whitney learned of the planters’ problem, he decided to build a machine to clean cotton.
In only 10 days, Whitney came up with a model. His cotton engine, or gin, had two rollers with thin wire teeth. When cotton was swept between the rollers, the teeth separated the seeds from the fibers.
ze
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
This technological innovation had an enormous effect on the southern economy. A single worker using a cotton gin could do work of 50 people cleaning cotton by hand. Because of the gin, planters
336
r
1
could now grow cotton at a huge profit. As a result, this technological innovation brought economic growth.
Cotton Kingdom and Slavery The cotton gin led to a boom, or swift growth, in cotton production. In 1792, planters grew only 6,000 bales of cotton a year. By 1850, the figure was over 2 million bales.
There was not enough farmland suitable for growing cotton in the original southern states along the Atlantic coast to meet the demand. Cotton farmers needed new land to cultivate, or prepare for planting.
After the War of 1812, cotton planters began to move west. They brought enslaved African Americans with them. The huge demand for cotton, the efficiency offered by cotton gins, and southern planters reliance on slave labor led to the growth of large plantations, each with many enslaved workers.
By the 1850s, there were cotton plantations extending in a belt from South Carolina to Texas. This area of the South became known as the Cotton Kingdom. Physical aspects of the environment in this part of the South, including rich soils, warm temperatures, and abundant rainfall, encouraged an economy focused on cotton farming.
Tragically, as the Cotton Kingdom spread, so did slavery. Even though cotton could now be cleaned by machine, it still had to be planted and picked by hand. The result was a cruel cycle in which slave labor brought profits to planters, who then used the profits to buy more land and more enslaved workers.
Id GENERATE EXPLANATIONS How did the invention
of the cotton gin lead to an increase in slavery in the South?

» With the top of this cotton gin folded down, workers would feed cotton balls through the gin’s teeth and the barbed roller. These metal parts separated the fibers from the seeds in a cotton ball and straightened the cotton fibers. With the gin, workers could produce much more cotton in a day. Predict Consequences How would this invention affect the demand for slaves?
Reliance on Agriculture
Cotton was the South’s most profitable cash crop. However, the best soils and climate for growing cotton could be found mostly in a belt stretching across inland South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas. In other areas of the South, rice, sugar cane, and tobacco were major crops. In addition, southerners raised much of the nation’s livestock. Physical characteristics of the environment in different regions of the South influenced what farmers in those regions produced.
Rice was an important crop along the coasts of South Carolina and Georgia. Sugar cane was important in Louisiana and Texas. Growing rice and sugar cane required expensive irrigation and drainage systems end a warm, moist climate, all found mainly along the coasts.
Interactive 3-D Model
> This print from the 1800s shows the intense physical abor involved in harvesting sugar cane.
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 337
7.2 King Cotton and Life in the South
Cane growers also needed costly machinery to grind their harvest. Small-scale farmers could not afford such expensive equipment, however. As a result, rice and sugar farmers relied on the plantation system just as cotton farmers did.
Tobacco had been an export of the South since 1619, and it continued to be planted in Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Kentucky. However, in the early 1800s, the large tobacco plantations of colonial days had given way to small tobacco farms. On these farms, a few field hands tended five or six acres of tobacco.
In addition to the major cash crops of cotton, rice, sugar, and tobacco, the South also led the nation in livestock production. Southern livestock owners profited from hogs, oxen, horses, mules, and beef cattle. Much of this livestock was raised in areas that were unsuitable for growing crops, such as the pine woods of North Carolina and hilly regions of Georgia, western Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Arkansas. Kentucky developed a rural economy that included the breeding of horses.
Limited Southern Industry Because the South relied on agriculture, most of the industry in the South remained small and existed only to meet the needs of a farming society. This contrasted with the North, with
its increasingly urban society and large and diverse industries. Agricultural tools such as cotton gins, planters, and plows were manufactured. Factories also made goods such as ironware, hoes, and jute, or hemp cloth, which was used to make bags for holding bales of cotton. Cheap cotton cloth was made for use in enslaved workers’ clothing. Some southerners wanted to encourage the growth of industry in the South. William Gregg, for example, modeled his cotton mill in South Carolina on the mills in Lowell, Massachusetts. Gregg built houses and gardens for his paid workers and schools for their children.
The South also developed a few other successful industries. In Richmond, Virginia, for example, the Tredegar Iron Works turned out railroad equipment, machinery, tools, and cannons. Flour milling was another important southern industry.
Even so, the South lagged behind the North in manufacturing. This difference had several causes. Rich planters invested their money in land and in purchasing enslaved African Americans rather than in factories.
Slavery also reduced the need for southern industry. In the North, most people had enough money to buy factory goods. In the South, however, millions of enslaved African Americans could not buy anything.
SOUTHERN DEPENDENCE
on AGRICULTURE A COTTON PRODUCTION
southern states’ SHARE of COTTON PRODUCTION
GROWTH OF THE SOUTHERN
ENSLAVED POPULATION
1820 1860
ALABAMA
ARKANSAS
FLORIDA
GEORGIA
LOUISIANA
MISSISSIPPI
N. CAROLINA
S. CAROLINA
TENNESSEE
TEXAS
VIRGINIA
» Analyze Data Based on the information in the graphs and chart, why did the number of slaves in South Carolina increase even though its share of cotton production declined?
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 338	7.2 King Cotton and Life in the South
Agriculture in the South, 1860
» Analyze Maps Based on the information in the map, what would you expect to be true about the economies of major Southern cities?
As a result, the demand for manufactured goods in the South was not as great as it was in the North.
Southern Cities Although the South was mainly rural, there were some cities. The major ones were New Orleans, Louisiana; Charleston, South Carolina; and Richmond, Virginia. These cities had the same problems as northern cities, including poor housing and poor sanitation.
Fewer than 8 percent of white southerners lived in towns of more than 4,000 people. However, many free African Americans lived in towns and cities.
Economically Dependent The South’s lack of industry had a number of effects on the South. Because there were few industrial jobs, small farmers in the South had few ways to escape the poverty of life on a small farm, whereas northern farmers could move to cities and take factory jobs. With little industry °f its own, the South also came to depend more and We on the North and on Europe. Southern planters °ften borrowed money from northern banks in order to expand their plantations. They also purchased much of their furniture, farm tools, and machines from northern or European factories.
Many southerners resented this situation. One southerner described a burial to show how the South upended on the North for many goods in the 1850s.
The grave was dug through solid marble, but the marble headstone came from Vermont. It was in a pine wilderness but the pine coffin came from Cincinnati. An iron mountain overshadowed it but the coffin nails and the screws and the shovel came from Pittsburgh. ... A hickory grove grew nearby, but the pick and shovel handles came from New York. . . . That country, so rich in underdeveloped resources, furnished nothing for the funeral except the corpse and the hole in the ground.
—Henry Grady, Speech to the Bay Street Club, Boston, 1883
Still, most southerners were proud of the booming cotton economy in their region. As long as cotton remained king, southerners believed, they could look to the future with confidence.
B DRAW CONCLUSIONS
Why was the South dependent on the North and Europe for non-agricultural goods? Society and Culture Before the Civil War
339	King Cotton and Life in the South
Southern Whites
The Old South is often pictured as a land of vast plantations worked by hundreds of enslaved African Americans. Such grand estates did exist in the South. However, most white southerners were not rich planters. In fact, most whites owned no enslaved African Americans at all.
The “Cottonocracy” A planter was someone who owned at least 20 enslaved workers. In 1860, only one white southerner in 30 belonged to a planter family. An even smaller number—less than 1 percent— owned 50 or more enslaved workers. These wealthy families were called the “cottonocracy” because they made huge amounts of money from cotton. These rich planters lived mainly in the cotton belt of the lowland South and in coastal areas of South Carolina, Georgia, and Louisiana. Though few in number, their views and way of life dominated the South.
The richest planters built elegant homes and filled them with expensive furniture from Europe. They entertained lavishly. They tried to dress and behave like European nobility.
Because of their wealth and influence, many planters became political leaders. Planters hired white overseers to run day-to-day affairs on their plantations and to manage the work of enslaved African Americans.
» Wealthy white southerners lived in elegant homes on plantations, like this plantation home in Mississippi.
®ll Interactive Chart
Small Farmers About 75 percent of southern whites were small farmers. These “plain folk” owned the land they farmed. They might also own one or two enslaved African Americans. Unlike planters, plain folk worked with their enslaved workers in the fields. Small farmers could be found in most parts of the South, but their numbers were fewer in the cotton belt and in coastal regions where plantation agriculture was dominant.
Among small farmers, helping one another was an important duty. “People who lived miles apart counted themselves as neighbors,” wrote a farmer in Mississippi. “And in case of sorrow or sickness, there was no limit to the service neighbors provided."
Poor Whites Lower on the social ladder were poor whites. These whites did not own enslaved African Americans. Many did not own the land they farmed. Instead, they rented it, often paying the owner with part of their crop. Many barely made a living.
Poor whites often lived in the hilly, wooded areas of the upland South, north and west of the cotton belt. They planted crops such as corn, potatoes, and other vegetables. They also herded cattle and pigs. Poor whites had hard lives, but they enjoyed rights that were denied to all black people, enslaved or free.
Comparing Northern and Southern Whites Like northern whites, most southern whites were farmers. Most white farmers in both regions were small farmers. However, there were important differences in the white populations of the two regions. In the South, the wealthiest whites were planters who made their money from the work of enslaved African Americans. In the North, the wealthiest whites were capitalists who made their money from investing in industry. There were many white industrial workers and middle class people living in cities in the North. Relatively few southerners of any class lived in cities.
U RECALL
Who made up the “cottonocracy” in the Old South?
Southern African Americans
Both free and enslaved African Americans lived in the South. Their legal and political conditions were different. Although free under the law and with certain legal rights, free African Americans faced harsh discrimination. Enslaved African Americans had no rights at all.
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
340	7.2 King Cotton and Life in the South
Free African Americans Most free African Americans were descendants of enslaved people who were freed during and after the American Revolution. Others had bought their freedom. In 1860, over 200,000 free blacks lived in the South. Most lived in Maryland and Delaware, where slavery was in decline. Others lived in cities such as New Orleans, Richmond, and Charleston.
Many free African Americans reached an impressive level of success. Working as farmers, laborers, and artisans, such as blacksmiths, carpenters, and cobblers, they contributed to and influenced southern life. Some owned and operated businesses, such as inns and barbershops. A few became large plantation owners, growing cotton and owning enslaved workers.
White slave owners did not like free African Americans living in the South. They feared that free African Americans set a dangerous example, encouraging enslaved African Americans to rebel. Also, slave owners justified slavery by claiming that African Americans could not take care of themselves. Free African Americans proved this idea wrong.
To discourage free African Americans, southern states passed laws that made life even harder for them. Free African Americans were not allowed to vote or travel. In some southern states, they had to move out of the state or risk the chance of being kidnapped and enslaved.
Despite these limits, free African Americans were able to make a life for themselves and make valuable contributions to southern life. For example, Norbert Rillieux (rihl yoo) invented a machine that revolutionized the way sugar was refined. Another inventor, Henry Blair, patented a seed planter.
Enslaved African Americans By 1860, enslaved African Americans made up one third of the South’s population. Most worked as field hands on cotton plantations. Both men and women cleared new land and planted and harvested crops. Children helped by pulling weeds, collecting wood, and carrying water to the field hands. By the time they were teenagers, they worked between 12 and 14 hours a day. Daily labor in the fields bound enslaved workers into a community of people who tried to help and protect one another.
On large plantations, some enslaved African Americans had better positions. They might work as household servants or as skilled artisans, such as carpenters and blacksmiths. Such jobs might entitle Workers to better food or clothing than field hands. A few enslaved people worked in cities. Their earnings, however, belonged to their owners. Unlike free African Americans, enslaved African Americans could not easily start businesses of their own.
» These reconstructed slave cabins in Louisiana, which would have housed up to two families of enslaved African Americans each, appear as they would have on mid-nineteenth century plantations.
Another major difference between the social circumstances of free and enslaved African Americans was that enslaved African American families could be broken up by their owners, with family members sold separately. While they faced discriminations, free African American families were not forced to separate.
COMPARE AND CONTRAST
How was life in the South similar and different for free and enslaved African Americans? Slavery in the South
The life of enslaved African Americans was determined by strict laws and the practices of individual slave owners. Conditions varied from plantation to plantation. Some owners made sure their enslaved workers had clean cabins, decent food, and warm clothes. Other planters spent as little as possible on their enslaved workers.
Slave Codes Southern states passed laws known as slave codes to keep enslaved African Americans from either running away or rebelling. These codes applied to enslaved blacks but not to free blacks. Under the
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 341	7.2 King Cotton and Life in the South
codes, enslaved African Americans were forbidden to gather in groups of more than three.
They could not leave their owner’s land without a written pass from their owner. They were not allowed to own guns.
Slave codes also made it a crime for enslaved African Americans to learn how to read and write. Owners hoped that this law would make it hard for African Americans to escape slavery. They reasoned that uneducated enslaved African Americans who escaped their owners would not be able to use maps or read train schedules. They would not be able to find their way north.
Some laws were meant to protect enslaved African Americans, but only from the worst forms of abuse. However, enslaved African Americans did not have the right to testify in court. As a result, they were not able to bring charges against owners who abused them.
Enslaved African Americans had only one real protection against mistreatment. Owners looked on their enslaved workers as valuable property. Most slave owners wanted to keep this human property healthy and productive.
Hard Work Even the kindest owners insisted that their enslaved workers work long, hard days. Enslaved
» Slave owners expected enslaved children to work alongside their parents, such as these children working on a cotton field in Georgia.
African Americans worked from “can see to can’t see," or from dawn to dusk, up to 16 hours a day. Frederick Douglass, who escaped slavery, recalled his life under one harsh master:
We were worked in all weathers. It was never too hot or too cold; it could never rain, blow, hail, or snow too hard for us to work in the field. Work, work, work. . . . The longest days were too short for him and the shortest nights too long for him.
—Frederick Douglass, Ncinative? ot I: tie Life of Frederick
Douglass, An American Slave
Family Life It was hard for enslaved African Americans to keep their families together. Southern laws did not recognize slave marriages or slave families. As a result, owners could sell a husband and wife to different buyers. Children were often taken from their parents and sold.
On large plantations, many enslaved families did manage to stay together. For those African Americans, the family was a source of strength, pride, and love. Grandparents, parents, children, aunts, uncles, and cousins formed a close-knit group. This idea of an extended family had its roots in Africa.
Enslaved African Americans preserved other traditions as well. Parents taught their children traditional African stories and songs. They used folk tales to pass on African history and moral beliefs.
Religion Offers Hope By the 1800s, many enslaved African Americans were devout Christians. Planters often allowed white ministers to preach to their slaves. African Americans also had their own preachers and beliefs.
Religion helped African Americans cope with the harshness of slave life. Bible stories about how the ancient Hebrews had escaped from slavery inspired a new type of religious song called a spiritual. As they worked in the fields, enslaved workers would often sing about a coming day of freedom.
Enslaved African Americans had to be cautious even in their religious practice. While they sang of freedom in spirituals, the words of the spirituals suggested that this freedom would come after death, so as not to alarm slave owners.
fell RECALL Why was it difficult for enslaved African
Americans to keep their families together?
©
Interactive Chart
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
342	7.2 King Cotton and Life in the South
Resisting Slavery
Enslaved African Americans struck back against the system that denied them both freedom and wages. Some broke tools, destroyed crops, and stole food.
Many enslaved African Americans tried to escape to the North. Because the journey was long and dangerous, very few made it to freedom. Every county had slave patrols and sheriffs ready to question an unknown black person.
In the North, as you will learn, African Americans were able to fight slavery with peaceful means. Because southern laws offered no means to resist slavery, a few African Americans turned to violence to resist the brutal slave system. Denmark Vesey, a free African American, planned a revolt in 1822. Vesey was betrayed before the revolt began. He and 35 other people were executed.
In 1831, an African American preacher named Nat Turner led a major revolt. An enslaved worker on a plantation in Southampton County, Virginia, Turner believed his mission was to take revenge on plantation owners.
Turner led his followers through Virginia, killing more than 57 whites. For nearly two months terrified whites hunted the countryside looking for Turner. They killed many innocent African Americans before catching and hanging him.
Nat Turner’s revolt increased southern fears of an uprising of enslaved African Americans. Revolts were rare, however. Since southern whites were well armed and kept careful track of African Americans, a revolt by African Americans had almost no chance of success.
H DRAW CONCLUSIONS
What do the actions of Denmark Vesey and Nat Turner reveal about the conditions under which enslaved Africans were forced to live?
ASSESSMENT
t Summarize the effects of the cotton gin
» In 1831, Nat Turner led other enslaved African Americans on a violent campaign against slave owners. In this image, Nat Turner is being captured. Predict Consequences How would Turner’s rebellion affect the lives of enslaved African Americans who did not rebel?
2.	Identify Central Issues How did the economy in the South encourage a dependence on slavery that the economy in the North did not?
3.	Generate Explanations What worried white slave owners about free African Americans living in
the South, and what stereotypes did successful African Americans disprove?
Draw Conclusions Why were so many enslaved African Americans devout Christians?
Check Understanding Why were slave revolts so dangerous for the slaves who rebelled?
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
343	7.2 King Cotton and Life in the South
The period between 1815 and 1860 is sometimes known as the Reform Era in the United States, because there were so many movements for social reform during this period. Social reform is an organized attempt to improve what is unjust or imperfect in society. The impulse toward social reform had political, social, and religious causes.
J
I
1.A, 23.D, 23.E, 24.B,, 25.B
Reform Movements
which people would attain salvation after death. This belief led many people to worry that they could do nothing to be saved.
During the 1700s, Protestant thinkers in England and the colonies began to argue that salvation depended on a person’s actions in this life. Its leaders stressed free will rather than predestination. They taught that individuals could choose to save their souls by their own actions. In the early 1800s, a dynamic religious movement known as the Second Great Awakening swept the nation. Arguments by religious thinkers were the main cause of this movement. Another cause was the democratic spirit of the Jacksonian era, which encouraged people to think independently and not blindly obey established religious authorities.
To stir religious feelings, preachers held revivals, huge outdoor meetings. Revivals might last for days and attract thousands of people. A witness recalled the excitement of a revival at Cane Ridge, Kentucky:
The vast sea of human beings seemed to be agitated as if by storm. I counted seven ministers all preaching at once. . . . Some of the people were singing, others praying, some crying for mercy.
One of the most vigorous social reformers was Dorothea Dix, a Boston schoolteacher whose strong religious beliefs spurred her to care for those less fortunate. She turned her attention to what one minister called the “outsiders” in society: criminals and the mentally ill.
Reforming Care of the Disabled In 1841, Dix visited a jail for women near Boston. She was outraged to discover that some of the prisoners were not criminals, but mentally ill.
Dix demanded to know why these women were locked in small, dark, unheated cells. The jailer replied that “lunatics” did not feel the cold.
During the next 18 months, Dix visited every jail, poorhouse, and hospital in Massachusetts. Her shocking reports helped persuade state legislators to fund a new mental hospital:
I proceed, gentlemen, briefly to call your attention to the present state of Insane Persons confined . , . in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained,
» Objectives
Explain how political and religious trends, including the Second Great Awakening, inspired reform movements.
Describe the impact of movements for temperance and for the reform of mental health care and prisons.
Explain the impact of movements for the reform of education and care for the disabled.
» Key Terms
debtor
temperance
movement
social reform predestination Second Great
Awakening
revival
An Era of Reform
Political Ideals Lead to Reform As you have read, during the Jacksonian era, politics was becoming more democratic. More people could vote and take part in government than ever before.
Still, some critics said American society was not democratic enough. They pointed to the promise of liberty and equality expressed in the Declaration of Independence. A true democracy, they argued, ' would not allow slavery. Others asked why women had fewer rights than men. By changing such injustices, reformers hoped to move the nation closer to its political ideals.
Social Conditions Call for Reform As you have learned, the Industrial Revolution was changing the American economy and working conditions, especially in the North, and cities were growing rapidly. Crowded cities created new challenges for social well being. At the same time, there was a growing need for an educated workforce.
As American society changed, it required new institutions to meet its changing needs.
©
One leader of the Second Great Awakening was a minister named Charles Grandison Finney. A powerful speaker, Finney taught that individual salvation was the first step toward “the complete reformation of the whole world.” Such teachings had effects that changed the country inspiring a number of new social reform movements. By working to reshape American society, these religiously inspired reformers contributed the idea of improving society to the American national identity.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
What was the central premise on which the Second Great Awakening rested? » During the Second Great Awakening, preachers like the one at this camp meeting stressed the ability to save one’s soul through action. Identify Central Ideas How did this teaching influence reform movements in the 1800s?
The Second Great Awakening and Its Causes During the colonial era, many American Protestant Christians believed in predestination. According to this idea, God decided in advance
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Social Reform Movements
The emphasis the Second Great Awakening placed on improving society inspired many Americans. Women often played a leading role in these reform movements. These Americans launched a number of reform Movements, with far-reaching effects on prisons, care of the disabled, education, and attitudes toward slavery.
344
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 345
7.3 Reform Movements
naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience.
—Dorothea Dix, “Memorial to the State Legislators of Massachusetts”
Dix went on to inspect jails as far away as Louisiana and Illinois. Her reports persuaded most legislatures to treat the mentally ill as patients, not criminals.
The Impact of Prison Reform Dix also joined a growing movement to improve conditions in prisons. Men, women, and children were often crammed together in cold, damp rooms. When food supplies were low, prisoners went hungry—unless they had money to buy meals from jailers.
Five out of six people in northern jails were debtors, or people who could not pay money they owed. While behind bars, debtors had no way to earn money to pay back their debts. As a result, many debtors remained in prison for years.
Dix and others called for changes in the prison system. As a result, some states built prisons with only one or two inmates to a cell. Cruel punishments were banned, and people convicted of minor crimes received
» Analyze Political Cartoons This cartoon shows a tree growing fruits with labels such as “Goodness,” “Knowledge,” “Morality,” and "Patience.” How did these
fruits reflect reformers’ hopes for the temperance movement?
shorter sentences. Slowly, states stopped treating debtors as criminals.
The Impact of the Temperance Movement Alcohol abuse was widespread in the early 1800s. At political rallies, weddings, and funerals, men, women, and sometimes even children drank heavily. Men could buy whiskey in candy stores or barbershops.
The temperance movement, a campaign against alcohol abuse, took shape in the late 1820s. Women often took a leading role in the battle. They knew that “demon rum” could lead to the physical abuse of wives and children and the breakup of families.
Some temperance groups urged people to drink less. Others sought to end drinking altogether. They won a major victory in 1851, when Maine banned the sale of alcohol. Eight other states passed “Maine laws." Most states later repealed the laws, but the temperance crusade would gain new strength in the late 1800s.
Id DESCRIBE Dorothea’s Dix’s legacy as a social
reformer.
The Impact of Educational Reform
In 1800, few American children attended school. Massachusetts was the only state that required free public schools supported by the community. Teachers were poorly trained and ill paid. Students of all ages crowded together in a single room.
As more men won the right to vote, reformers acted to improve education. They argued that a republic required educated citizens.
Education Reform Gives Rise to Public Schools
Horace Mann became head of the Massachusetts board of education in 1837. A Unitarian inspired by the Second Great Awakening, Mann believed that education would help citizens become better Christians. He hounded legislators to provide more money for education. Under his leadership, Massachusetts built new schools, extended the school year, and raised teachers’ pay. The state also opened three colleges to train teachers.
Other states followed the lead of Massachusetts. By the 1850s, most northern states had set up free tax-supported elementary schools. Schools in the South improved more slowly. In both the North and the South, schooling usually ended in the eighth grade. There were few public high schools.
Expanding Education for African Americans In
most areas, African Americans had little chance to
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 346	7.3 Reform Movements
attend school. A few cities, like Boston and New York, set up separate schools for black students. However, these schools received less money than schools for white students did. In the North, African American men and women often opened their own schools to educate their children.
Some attempts to educate African Americans met with hostility. In the 1830s, Prudence Crandall, a Connecticut Quaker, began a school for African American girls. Crandall continued to teach even as rocks smashed through the window. Finally, a mob broke in one night and destroyed the school.
Despite such obstacles, some African Americans went on to attend private colleges such as Harvard, Dartmouth, and Oberlin. In 1854, Pennsylvania chartered the first college for African American men.
Reforming Education for People With Disabilities
Some reformers improved education for people with disabilities. In 1817, a Christian evangelical Thomas Gallaudet (gal uh deht) set up a school for the deaf in Hartford, Connecticut.
Samuel Gridley Howe founded the first American school for the blind in 1832. Howe was active in many reform movements spurred by the Second Great Awakening, working for improvements in public schools, prisons, and treatment of the disabled. Howe used a system of raised letters to enable students to read with their fingers. One of Howe’s pupils, Laura Bridgman, was the first deaf and blind student to receive a formal education.
U GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
Why did reformers insist that states set up publicly funded schools for their residents?
ASSESSMENT
» As part of the social and educational reform movements, Thomas Gallaudet opened this school in Connecticut to serve deaf children.
©
Interactive Gallery
2.	Analyze Information What was the Second Great Awakening, and why did it have the effects it had?
3.	Summarize Dorothea Dix’s efforts to improve society.
4.	Hypothesize why women so often took a leading role in the temperance movement.
5.	Contrast the educational opportunities available for white children and African American children in the North while educational reform was going on.
1- Identify Central Issues What did critics of American society feel was unjust about it?
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 347
7.3 Reform Movements
In the Declaration of Independence, Thomas Jefferson had written that “all men are	*
created equal.” Yet many Americans, including Jefferson himself, did not believe that this statement applied to enslaved African Americans. A growing number of reformers began to think differently.
Abolitionism
» Objectives
Describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement.
Explain the roles of Frederick Douglass and others in the abolitionist movement.
Identify the Underground Railroad and the role that civil disobedience played in it.
Describe the different points of view of interest groups on abolition.
» Key Terms
American
Colonization
Society
abolitionist The Liberator Underground
Railroad
Frederick Douglass civil disobedience
Early Opposition to Slavery
Early Reforms in the North Religious beliefs led some Americans to oppose slavery. Since colonial times, Quakers had taught that it was a sin for one human being to own another. All people, they said, were equal in the sight of God. Later, during the Second Great Awakening, ministers such as Charles Grandison Finney called on Christians to join a crusade to stamp out slavery. A movement to abolish slavery developed in response to religious teachings in England in the late 1700s.
In the North, slavery was not important to the economy As growing numbers of northerners opposed it, slavery gradually came to an end in the North. By 1804, all the states from Pennsylvania through New England had ended slavery or promised to free their enslaved African Americans over time. The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 had banned slavery in the Northwest Territories, which became the Midwestern states north of the Ohio River and east of the Mississippi River. Efforts to end slavery had little effect in the South. There were only 50,000 enslaved African Americans in the North in 1800, compared with nearly one million in the South.
At the same time as northern leaders were ending slavery in their states, the South was growing ever more dependent on slavery. As you have learned, plantation agriculture was growing rapidly in the South
ze
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
348
I in the early 1800s. As a result, there was little support I in the South for ending slavery.
The Colonization Movement The American Colonization Society proposed to end slavery by
; setting up an independent colony in Africa for Africans and African Americans who had gained freedom from slavery. In 1822, President Monroe helped the society found a colony in western Africa. This colony gained control over a territory that later became the nation of Liberia.
Some African Americans favored colonization, believing that they would never have equal rights in the United States. Most, however, opposed the movement. Nearly all, enslaved or free, had been born in the United States. They wanted to stay in their homeland. In the end, only a few thousand African Americans settled in Liberia.
BRECALL
Why did the colonization movement fail? Abolitionism Gains Momentum
A growing number of reformers, known as abolitionists, wanted to end slavery completely in the United States. Some abolitionists favored a gradual end to slavery. They expected slavery to die out if it was kept out of the western territories. Other abolitionists demanded that slavery end everywhere, at once. Almost all abolitionists were northerners. The abolitionist movement gradually gained strength from the 1820s through the 1840s. It grew more rapidly during the 1850s.
African American Abolitionists Free African Americans played a key role in the abolitionist movement. Some tried to end slavery through lawsuits and petitions. In the 1820s, Samuel Cornish and John Russwurm set up an abolitionist newspaper, Freedom’s Journal. They hoped to turn public opinion against slavery by printing stories about the brutal treatment of enslaved African Americans.
Other African American abolitionists called for stronger measures. In An Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World, David Walker encouraged enslaved African Americans to free themselves by any means necessary. Walker’s friend Maria Stewart also spoke out against slavery. Stewart was the first American woman to make public political speeches.
The Contributions of Frederick Douglass The
best-known African American abolitionist was
» This small village has been carved out of the tropical rainforest in Liberia, West Africa. In the early 1800s, some Americans founded a colony in what became Liberia where they hoped to send freed African Americans.
» Samuel Cornish published stories revealing the harsh treatment of enslaved African Americans. Identify Cause and Effect How did Cornish’s stories affect American public opinion on slavery?
Society
and Culture Before the Civil War 349	7.4 Abolitionism
Frederick Douglass. Douglass was born into slavery in Maryland. As a child, he defied the slave codes by learning to read.
Douglass escaped in 1838 and made his way to New England. One day at an antislavery meeting, he felt a powerful urge to speak. Rising to his feet, he talked about the sorrows of slavery and the meaning of freedom. The audience was moved to tears. Soon, Douglass was lecturing across the United States and Britain. In 1847, he began publishing an antislavery newspaper, the North Star.
William Lloyd Garrison Speaks Out The most outspoken white abolitionist was a fiery young man named William Lloyd Garrison. To Garrison, slavery was an evil to be ended immediately. In 1831, Garrison launched The Liberator, the most influential antislavery newspaper. On the first page of the first issue, Garrison revealed his'commitment:
I will be as harsh as truth, and as uncompromising as justice. ... I am in earnest. ... I will not excuse—I will not retreat a single inch—and I WILL BE HEARD.
—-William Lloyd Garrison, The Liberator, January 1831
A year later, Garrison helped to found the New England AntiSlavery Society. Members included Theodore Weld, a young minister and follower of Charles Grandison Finney. Weld brought the energy of a religious revival to antislavery meetings.
The Grimke Sisters Contribute to Reform
Angelina and Sarah Grimke were the daughters of a South Carolina slaveholder. Hating slavery, they moved to Philadelphia to work for abolition. Their lectures drew large crowds.
Some people, including other abolitionists, objected to women speaking out in public. “Whatsoever it is morally right for a man to do,” replied Sarah Grimke, “it is morally right for a woman to do.” As you will see, this belief helped spark a crusade for women’s rights.
Civil Disobedience and the Underground Railroad Some abolitionists formed the Underground Railroad. It was not a real railroad, but a network of black and white abolitionists who secretly helped enslaved African Americans escape to freedom in the North or Canada.
“Conductors” guided runaways to “stations" where they could spend the night. Some stations were homes of abolitionists. Others were churches or even caves. Conductors sometimes hid runaways under loads of hay in wagons with false bottoms. It was illegal to
The Underground Railroad
0	400 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
PACIFIC
OCEAN
>> The Underground Railroad offered a network of routes African Americans fleeing slavery could take to reach free states in the North or Canada.
KEY
Underground Railroad routes IBM Free states Q Slave states (~) Territories
Massachusetts Rhode Island toJLConnecticut —New Jersey
Delaware
Maryland
District of Columbia
ATLANTIC OCEAN
0	400 mi
Interactive Map
©
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 350	7.4 Abolitionism
help enslaved African Americans to escape, but these conductors felt strongly about disobeying laws they considered unjust. Such acts of civil disobedience ted thousands of enslaved people to freedom.
One daring conductor, Harriet Tubman, had escaped slavery herself. She felt deeply committed to freeing others from slavery. Risking her freedom and her life, Tubman returned to the South 19 times. She led more than 300 enslaved African Americans, including her parents, to freedom. Those who admired Tubman’s civil disobedience called her the “Black Moses" after the biblical leader who led the Israelites out of slavery in Egypt. Slave owners offered a $40,000 reward for her capture.
A
Novel Promotes Abolitionism In 1852, a writer named Harriet Beecher Stowe published Uncle Tom's Cabin, a novel describing the suffering of enslaved African Americans. The novel’s characters were often unrealistic and stereotyped, or based on inaccurate assumptions and beliefs about supposed characteristics of African Amerrcans. However, the novel sold widely and convrnced many northerners during the 1850s that slavery was evil and should be outlawed.
As abolitionism spread during the 1850s, it had a powerful impact on the United States. It increased tensions between the North and the South and helped set the stage for the Civil War.
GENERATE EXPLANATIONS
Explain rhe role of the press in the abolition movement.
Abolitionism Faces
Opposition
By the mid-1800s, slavery existed only in the South. Still, abolitionists like Douglass and Garrison made enemies in the North as well.
Northerners Against Abolition As you have learned, abolitionists were one interest group in the controversy over slavery. Their view was that slavery had to end.
However, northern mill owners, bankers, and Merchants depended on cotton from the South. Some saw attacks on slavery as a threat to their livelihood. Some northern workers also opposed abolition. They feared that African Americans might come north and W their jobs by working for low pay.
These interest groups in the North took the view that slavery should be left up to individual states. Because few southerners opposed slavery, their view was that slavery should be allowed to continue.
» Some abolitionists, such as William Lloyd Garrison, took a hard line on the issue of slavery by demanding that it be ended immediately. Here, Garrison makes an anti-slavery speech in Boston.
» This engraving shows the burning of the print shop of Elijah P. Lovejoy, an abolitionist who published a newspaper opposed to slavery in Illinois. Anti-abolition rioters murdered Lovejoy during their attack on his shop. Identify Central Ideas Why did some northerners resist abolition?
©
Interactive Chart
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 351
7.4 Abolitionism
» Edmund Ruffin was a wealthy southern plantation owner who spoke out against abolitionism and in support of slavery.
accused abolitionists of preaching violence. Many southerners blamed Nat Turner’s rebellion on William Lloyd Garrison, who had founded The Liberator only a few months earlier. David Walker’s call for a slave revolt seemed to confirm the worst fears of southerners.
Slave owners responded to the abolitionist crusade by defending slavery even more. If enslaved African Americans were treated well, wrote one slave owner, they would “love their master and serve him . . faithfully.” Others argued that enslaved African Americans were better off than northern workers who
labored long hours in dusty, airless factories.
Even some southerners who owned no enslaved African Americans defended slavery. To them, slavery was essential to the southern economy. Many southerners believed northern support for the antislavery movement was stronger than it really was. They began to fear that northerners wanted to destroy their way of life.
B SUMMARIZE
the reasons many Northerners opposed abolition.
Women had few political or legal I rights in the mid-1800s. They could < not vote or hold office. When a woman married, her husband became owner of all her property. If a woman worked outside the home, her wages belonged to her husband. A husband also had the right to hit his wife as long as he did not seriously injure her.
ASSESSMENT
Interactive Flipped Video
In northern cities, mobs sometimes broke up antislavery meetings or attacked homes of abolitionists. At times, the attacks backfired and won support for the abolitionists. One night, a Boston mob dragged William Lloyd Garrison through the streets at the end of a rope. A witness wrote, “I am an abolitionist from this very moment.”
Southerners Defend Slavery Against the North
Most white southerners were disturbed by the growing abolitionist movement. Because the southern economy depended on slavery, southerners formed a powerful interest group supporting slavery. They
1.	Generate Explanations Why did so many free African Americans oppose the American Colonization Society’s movement?
2.	Hypothesize Why did William Lloyd Harrison, a white man, devote his professional life to the abolitionist movement?
3.	Identify Central Issues What was the connection between civil disobedience and the abolition movement?
4.	Draw Conclusions What can you tell about Harriet Tubman from her actions?
5.	Summarize the reaction of southerners to abolitionists.
Women’s Rights
21.A, 22.B, 23.E, 24.B
Early Calls for Women’s Rights
Many women, such as Angelina and Sarah Grimke, had joined the abolitionist movement. As these women worked to end slavery, they became aware that they lacked full social and political rights themselves. Both black and white abolitionists, men and women, joined the struggle for women’s rights.
The Contributions of Sojourner Truth One of the most effective women’s rights leaders was born into slavery in New York. Her original name was Isabella. After gaining freedom, she came to believe that God wanted her to fight slavery. Vowing to sojourn, or travel, across the land speaking the truth, she took the name Sojourner Truth.
Truth was a spellbinding speaker. Her exact words were rarely written down. However, her message spread by word of mouth. According to one witness, Truth ridiculed the idea that women were inferior to men by nature:
» Objectives
Describe the origins of the women’s rights movement.
Explain the impact of the Seneca Falls Convention, including the roles of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony.
Describe the impact of the women’s rights movement on opportunities for women.
» Key Terms
Seneca Falls Convention
women’s rights movement
Elizabeth Cady Stanton
Susan B. Anthony
I have as much muscle as any man, and can do as much work as any man. I have plowed and reaped and husked and chopped and mowed, and can any man do more than that?
—Sojourner Truth, speech at Akron Women's Rights Convention. 1851
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
id Culture Before the Civil War
7.4 Abolitionism
353
c
The Contributions of Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton Other abolitionists also turned to the cause of women’s rights. The two most influential were Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Lucretia Mott was a Quaker and the mother of five children. A quiet speaker, she won the respect of many listeners with her persuasive logic. Mott also used her organizing skills to set up petition drives across the North.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton was the daughter of a New York judge. As a child, she was an excellent student and an athlete. However, her father gave her little encouragement. Stanton later remarked that her “father would have felt a proper pride had I been a man.”
In 1840, Stanton and Mott joined a group of Americans at a World Antislavery Convention in London. However, convention officials refused to let women take an active part in the proceedings. Female delegates were even forced to sit behind a curtain, hidden from view. After returning home, Mott and Stanton took up the cause of women’s rights with new energy.
U INFER
What is surprising about women being forced to sit behind a curtain, hidden from view, at the World Antislavery Convention?
» Susan B. Anthony was probably the most powerful and influential leader of the women’s rights movement during the 1800s.
A
Women’s Movement Organizes Even in London, Mott and Stanton had begun thinking about holding a convention to draw attention to the problems women faced. “The men . . . had [shown] a great need for some education on that question," Stanton later recalled. The meeting finally took place in 1848 in Seneca Falls, New York.
Different Views of Suffrage at the Seneca Falls Convention About 200 women and 40 men attended the Seneca Falls Convention. Stanton’s greatest contribution to the convention was the Declaration of Sentiments, which she had modeled on the Declaration of Independence. The delegates approved the declaration. It proclaimed, “We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal.”
The women and men at Seneca Falls voted for resolutions that demanded equality for women at work, at school, and at church. Only one resolution met with any opposition at the convention. It demanded that women be allowed to vote. Even the bold reformers at Seneca Falls hesitated to take this step. In the end, the resolution narrowly passed.
Women Struggle for Justice The Seneca Falls Convention marked the start of an organized campaign for equal rights, or the women’s rights movement. This movement was one of the most important reform movements of the Reform Era. New leaders took up the struggle. Susan B. Anthony built a close working partnership with Elizabeth Cady Stanton. While Stanton usually had to stay at home with her seven children, Anthony was free to travel across the country. Anthony’s contribution to the movement was her lifelong work convincing people that women deserved equal rights. Anthony was a tireless speaker. Even when audiences heckled her and threw eggs, she always finished her speech.
Around the country, Anthony campaigned for women’s suffrage. She petitioned Congress repeatedly, and was even arrested in 1872 for trying to vote. Anthony did not live to see the passage of the 19th Amendment in 1920 granting women the right to vote, but the amendment is also called the Susan B. Anthony Amendment in her honor.
In the years after 1848, women worked for change in many areas. They won additional legal rights in some states. For example, New York passed laws allowing married women to keep their own property and wages. Still, many men and women opposed the women's
Interactive Timeline
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 354	7.5 Women’s Rights
NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN
COLLEGES OR UNIVERSITIES
ADMITTING
WOMEN
FOR THE FIRST TIME
Before 1800 1800-1819 1820-1829 1830-1839 1840-1849 1850-1859
Source: Compiled from a variety of sources
FEMALE
LABOR
FORCE
1800-1860

STATES SLOWLY GRANT
MARRIED WOMEN FUU. PROPERTY RIGHTS
1844
Maine
1845
Massachusetts
1848
New York Pennsylvania Rhode Island
1850
Wisconsin
1852
New Jersey
1855
Michigan
Florida
1860
Maryland
The remaining states gradually gave married women property rights between 1860 and 1980.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
» Analyze Graphs What details in the graphs support the conclusion that women’s educational opportunities expanded during the mid-1800s?
Source: Journal of Economic History, 1996; Law Library of Congress
©
Interactive Gallery
rights movement. The struggle for equal rights would last many years.
kl RECALL For what act of civil disobedience was
Susan B. Anthony arrested in 1872?
Women Gain New
Opportunities
The women at Seneca Falls believed that education was a key to equality. Elizabeth Cady Stanton said:
"The girl must be allowed to romp and play, climb, skate, and swim. Her clothing must be more like those of the boy—strong, loose-fitting garments, thick boots... She must be taught to look forward to life of self-dependence and, like the boy, prepare herself for some [profitable] trade profession."
—Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Letter, 1851
Such an idea was startling in the early 1800s. Women from poor families had little hope of learning even to read. Middle-class girls who went to school learned dancing and drawing rather than science or
mathematics. After all, people argued, women were expected to care for their families. Why did they need an education?
Opportunities for Women’s Education Possibly the greatest impact of the women’s movement in the mid-1800s was the creation of greater opportunities for women in education. Emma Willard opened a high school for girls in Troy, New York. Here, young women studied “men’s” subjects, such as mathematics and physics.
Mary Lyon opened Mount Holyoke Female Seminary in Massachusetts in 1837. She did not call the school a college because many people thought it was wrong for women to attend college. In fact, however, Mount Holyoke was one of the first women’s colleges in the United States.
New Employment Opportunities for Women At
about this time, a few men’s colleges began to admit women. As their education improved, women found jobs teaching, especially in grade schools.
A few women entered fields such as medicine. Elizabeth Blackwell attended medical school at Geneva College in New York. To the surprise of school officials, she graduated first in her class. Women had provided medical care since colonial times, but Blackwell was the first woman in the United States to earn a medical
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 355	7.5 Women s Rights
» Antoinette Blackwell served as a role model for women seeking career opportunities when she became the first ordained female minister in the United States.
continues today. As in the 19th century, different groups have differing points of view.
One issue on which interest groups differ today is whether companies or the government should be required to pay women on maternity leave, or a period away from their jobs to give birth and take care of babies. Some women’s groups today, such as the National Organization for Women, believe that employers, including the government, should be required to pay women during maternity leave. They argue that women need this support. Other groups, such as the Independent Women’s Forum, argue that requiring employers to pay for maternity leave might make them less willing to hire women.
M draw conclusions What effects did the
women’s movement have during the 1800s?
elps
ELPS LISTENING
2.1.2 Read the quotation by Elizabeth Cady Stanton. With a partner, summarize what you think the quote means in your own words. ASSESSMENT
1. Generate Explanations What made Sojourner Truth an effective women’s rights leader?
Before 1800, most American painters studied in Europe. Benjamin West of Philadelphia was appointed historical painter to King George III. Many American painters journeyed to London to study with West. Two f of them, Charles Wilson Peale and Gilbert Stuart, later painted famous portraits of George Washington.
degree. She later helped found the nation’s first medical school for women.
Women made their mark in other fields as well. Maria Mitchell was a noted astronomer. Sarah Josepha Hale edited Godey's Lady's Book, an influential magazine for women. Antoinette Blackwell became the first American woman ordained a minister. She also campaigned for abolitionism, temperance, and women’s right to vote.
Different Points of View on Contemporary Women’s Issues The struggle for women’s rights
2.	Draw Conclusions What would you conclude about the 40 men who attended the Seneca Falls Convention?
3.	Generate Explanations Why was it fitting that the 19th Amendment was named the Susan B. Anthony Amendment?
4.	Hypothesize Why do women have different opinions on issues of women's rights today?
5.	Summarize the results of the women’s rights movement of the mid-1800s.
Arts and Literature
A
New American Art Style By the mid-1800s, American artists began to develop their own style. The first group to do so became known as the Hudson River School. Artists such as Thomas Cole and Asher B. Durand painted vivid landscapes of New York’s Hudson River region and other parts of the Northeast. African American artist Robert S. Duncanson reflected the style of the Hudson River School.
Other artists painted scenes of hard-working country people. George Caleb Bingham of Missouri created a timeless picture of frontier life along the rivers that feed the great Mississippi. George Catlin and Alfred Jacob Miller traveled to the Far West to record the daily life of Indians on the Great Plains and in the Rockies.
John James Audubon was a wildlife artist who traveled across the country painting birds and mammals. His collection of 435 life-size prints, entitled The Birds of America, portrayed every bird known in the United States at the time.
American artists in the early and mid-1800s showed that the American landscape and people were worthy subjects of art. They portrayed continuity in the American way of life. Their paintings reflected continuity in the timelessness of the country’s geography end in the patterns of farm work. They also reflected the great changes that were underway in this new era. Artists depicted the effects of westward movement and the settlement of the frontier, capturing
In his 1849 painting Kindred Spirits, Hudson River School painter Asher Durand depicts the grandeur of New York’s Catskill Mountains. The painting shows nature poet William Cullen Bryant and Durand’s fellow painter Thomas Cole.
Interactive Flipped Video
20.C, 26.A, 26.B, 26.C
» Objectives
Describe American painting in the early to mid-1800s, including the Hudson River School and the work of John James Audubon.
Analyze American literature and music during the early to mid-1800s.
Describe transcendentalism.
» Key Terms
Hudson River School
transcendentalist individualism Henry David
Thoreau John James
Audubon
c
RSVl PEARSON 1 _
Bl realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 356	7.5 Women’s Rights
357
» Emily Dickinson, shown here in an early photograph, wrote poems that reflected the loneliness of her life. She is still considered one of the greatest American poets.
» John James Audubon’s painting of mourning doves shows his effort to capture the character of birds and his attention to detail.
Interactive Gallery
the nation’s expansion and growth. In their attention to these themes, the work of these painters reflected American society in their day.
Q IDENTIFY
common themes found in the works of American artists during the early to mid-1800s. A
New Nation Finds a Voice Like painters, early American writers also depended on Europe for their ideas and inspiration. In the 1820s, however, a new crop of poets and fiction writers began to write about American themes. At the same time, uniquely American forms of music began to emerge. These new forms of literature and music reflected American society in the early and mid-1800s.
A
New American Poetry Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was the favorite poet of Americans in the mid-1800s. Longfellow based many poems on events from the past. “Paul Revere's Ride” honored the Revolutionary War hero. “The Song of Hiawatha” idealized Native American life. Other poets spoke out on social issues. John Greenleaf Whittier, a Quaker from Massachusetts, and Frances Watkins Harper, an African American woman from Maryland, reflected change in American society as abolitionism gained supporters. They used their pens to make readers aware of the evils of slavery
Walt Whitman’s greatest work was a book of poems titled Leaves of Grass. He added to this collection over a period of 27 years. Like Longfellow, Whittier, and Harper, Whitman focused on themes that are unique to American culture. Whitman had great faith in the common people. His poetry celebrated democracy. He wrote proudly of being part of a “nation of many nations”:
At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine, or the Texan ranch, comrade of Californians, comrade of free North-Westerners. . . . of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion.
—Walt Whitman, Song of Myself
Only seven of Emily Dickinson’s more than 1,700 poems were published in her lifetime. A shy woman who rarely left her home, Dickinson called her poetry “my letter to the world I That never wrote to me.” Today, she is recognized as one of the nation’s greatest poets.
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 358	7.6 Arts and Literature
American Writers Begin to Tell American Stories
One of the most popular American writers was Washington Irving, a New Yorker. Irving first became known for The Sketch Book, a collection of tales published in 1820. Two of his bestloved tales are “Rip VanWinkle” and “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.”
The exciting novels of James Fenimore Cooper were also set in the American past. In The Deerslayer and The Last of the Mohicans, Cooper created Natty Bumppo, a heroic model of a strong, solitary frontiersman. The novels gave an idealized view of relations between whites and Native Americans on the frontier.
The stories of Cooper and Irving gave Americans a sense of the richness of their past. Their appeal went beyond the United States, however. Washington Irving was the first American writer to enjoy fame in Europe.
Later Writers In 1851, Herman Melville published Moby-Dick. The novel tells the story of Ahab, the crazed captain of a whaling ship. Ahab vows revenge on the white whale that years earlier bit off his leg. Moby-Dick had only limited success when it was first published. Today, however, critics rank it among the finest American novels.
Nathaniel Hawthorne often drew on the history of New England in his novels and short stories. In The Scarlet Letter, published in 1850, Hawthorne explored Puritan notions of sin and salvation. The novel shows how a young man is consumed by guilt when he tries to hide his wrongdoing from the world.
Edgar Allan Poe became famous for his many tales of horror. His short story “The Tell-Tale Heart” is about a murderer, driven mad by guilt, who imagines he can hear his victim’s heartbeat. Poe is also known as the "father of the detective story” for his mystery stories, such as "The Murders in the Rue Morgue.”
William Wells Brown was the first African American to earn his living as a writer. He published Clotel, a novel about slave life, in 1853. Brown also wrote a play inspired by his own experiences as a fugitive slave and a conductor on the Underground Railroad. His lectures and readings drew large audiences in Europe as well as throughout the North.
Women Writers Flourish in the 1800s Many test-selling novels of the period were written by women. Some novels told about young women who gained wealth and happiness through honesty and self-sacrifice. Others showed the hardships faced by widows and orphans.
Few of these novels are read today. However, writers tee Catherine Sedgwick and Fanny Fern earned te more than Hawthorne or Melville. Hawthorne
» Whalers face the angry whale Moby Dick in a scene from Herman Melville’s epic tale Moby-Dick, considered one of the greatest American novels.
complained about the success of a “mob of scribbling women.”
American Music American classical music in the 1800s continued to follow European traditions. Yet as American society changed and grew and different groups of people came into contact with one another, distinctly American musical forms began to emerge. Early songs were often patriotic or religious, such as “My Country Tis of Thee,” written by Samuel Francis Smith in 1831, or “Amazing Grace,” published in 1835.
The 1800s saw the rise of a middle class interested in music that was entertaining and emotionally stirring. The songs of Stephen Foster, which drew on American themes, were especially popular. Although Foster was a northerner, many of his songs, such as “Dixie,” referred to southern traditions and were popular in the South. Western expansion, immigration, and migration mingled musical traditions together, creating new American sounds.
African American music in particular had a strong influence on the new forms that were developing. African American spirituals and work songs combined African and European musical traditions. During the 1800s, a new style of music now known as gospel music began to develop in African American religious
Society and Culture
Before the Civil War 359	7-6 Arts and Literature
congregations. These styles would later combine with European and American folk traditions to shape blues, jazz, country, and rock music.
El DRAW CONCLUSIONS What do many of the works
of American literature of the early to mid-1800s have in common?
The Development of
Transcendentalism
In New England, a small but influential group of writers and thinkers emerged. They called themselves transcendentalists because they believed that the most important truths in life transcended, or went beyond, human reason. They produced a unique body of literature reflecting transcendentalist thought. Transcendentalists valued the spark of deeply felt insights more than reason. They believed that each individual should live up to the divine possibilities within. This belief influenced many transcendentalists to support social reform.
» Ralph Waldo Emerson lectures before a large audience during a meeting of the Summer School of Philosophy in Concord, Massachusetts. The successful school drew participants from across the United States and Europe.
Emerson’s Lectures Emphasize the Individual
The leading transcendentalist was Ralph Waldo Emerson. Emerson was the most popular essayist and lecturer of his day. Audiences flocked to hear him talk on subjects such as self-reliance and character. Emerson believed that the human spirit was reflected in nature. Civilization might provide material wealth, he said, but nature exhibited higher values that came from God.
In his essays and lectures, Emerson stressed individualism, or the importance of each individual. In its individual focus, transcendentalism is unique to American culture. Individualism and individual responsibility are central to America’s democracy. Each person, Emerson said, has an “inner light.” He urged people to use this inner light to guide their lives and improve society. “Trust thyself,” he wrote. “Every heart vibrates to that iron string.”
Henry David Thoreau and Civil Disobedience Henry David Thoreau (thuh roh), Emerson’s friend and neighbor, believed that the growth of industry and the rise of cities were ruining the nation. He urged people to live as simply and as close to nature as possible. In Walden, his best-known work, Thoreau describes spending a year alone in a cabin on Walden Pond in Massachusetts.
Like Emerson, Thoreau believed that each individual must decide what is right or wrong. “If a man does not keep pace with his companions,” he wrote, in Walden, “perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer. Let him step to the music he hears.”
Thoreau’s “different drummer” told him that slavery was wrong. He argued in favor of civil disobedience and once went to jail for refusing to pay taxes to support the U.S.-Mexican War, which he felt promoted slavery. Thoreau wrote an essay titled “Civil Disobedience” that explained why an individual may feel the need to break laws that are unjust without resorting to violence.
He argued, though, that anyone who chooses this course has to be prepared to be imprisoned or otherwise punished. This essay had a great impact on future leaders. Thoreau’s ideas on civil disobedience and nonviolence later influenced Mohandas Gandhi, who led a struggle in India for independence from Britain, and Martin Luther King, Jr., an American civil rights leader during the 1900s.
RECALL
What was the core belief of the transcendentalists?
ELPS LISTENING
2.1.3 Ask a partner a factual question and an opinion question related to the text.. Have your partner respond and then have your partner ask you
ELPS
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 360	7.6 Arts and Literature
wo similar questions. Use this question starter for the opinion question: What do you think about______?.
assessment
1,	Draw Conclusions How did American artists during the early 1800s contribute to the historical record?
2.	Hypothesize why the works of a “mob of scribbling women,” as Nathaniel Hawthorne described them, were more successful than the works of their male counterparts, such as Herman Melville, and Hawthorne.
3.	Support Ideas with Evidence How might you cite evidence to support the argument that American music would not be the same without the contributions of African Americans?
4.	Compare and Contrast transcendentalism with what had been taught by the leaders of the Second Great Awakening.
5.	Identify Central Ideas Although Thoreau encouraged individuals to follow their consciences and disobey those laws they believed were unjust, he added one important caution. What was that caution?
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
361	7.6 Arts and Literature
TEKS ASSESSMENT
Explain Interchangeable Parts Explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations, such as interchangeable parts. Write a paragraph explaining how Eli Whitney’s use of interchangeable parts to make guns changed American manufacturing. Define the term interchangeable parts, and explain the advantage of interchangeable parts over the system of building guns from handmade parts, and how Whitney’s idea of interchangeable parts affected American manufacturing. 27.A
Explain Effects of War of 1812 on
Manufacturing Explain the effects of the War of 1812 by analyzing how the War of 1812 caused economic changes in the nation, including the increase in factories. Write a paragraph analyzing the effect of the War of 1812 on American manufacturing. Consider how the war affected American access to foreign goods, how American merchants and bankers responded to the situation, and what effect this response had on the nation’s economy. 5.D, 12.C, 13.A
Describe Characteristics of Free-Enterprise System Describe the characteristics of the U.S. free-enterprise system during the nineteenth century. Write a paragraph describing the characteristics of the free-enterprise system in the nineteenth century. Consider the effects of Alexander Hamilton’s banking reforms, the role of the government in the economy, the role of the New York Stock Exchange in spurring economic growth, and the role of low taxes in spurring growth. 14.B
Locate Important Places Locate places of importance in the United States during the nineteenth century, such as the Lowell Mills. Write a paragraph identifying the location of the Lowell Mills and describing their importance. Consider the following questions:
What important idea led Francis Cabot Lowell to build a new factory in Massachusetts and where did he locate it? How did the town of Lowell, Massachusetts, come into existence? How quickly did the town of Lowell grow? 10.A
Describe the Women’s Rights Movement Describe the causes of reform movements, including the women’s rights movement. Write a paragraph explaining why some reformers in the mid-1800s began calling for greater rights for women. Describe the limits on women’s rights in the mid-1800s and explain how the abolitionist movement helped launch the women’s rights movement. 1.A
6.	Identify Economic Contributions of Women Identify the economic contributions of women to American society. Using the quotation below and other sources, write a paragraph identifying the contributions of the Lowell girls to the Industrial Revolution. Identify who the Lowell girls were, what economic contributions they made to the factories and their families, what the quotation tells you about why many Lowell girls valued their experiences, and why mill owners mostly hired women and children. 23.E
Since I have wrote you, another pay day has come around. I earned 14 dollars and a half... I like it well as ever and Sarah don't I feel independent of everyone!
— from. Lowell Offering: Writings by New England Mill Women
7.	Describe Consequences of Rapid Urbanization Describe the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States, including the consequences of rapid urbanization. Write a paragraph describing the benefits and drawbacks of life in early industrial cities. Describe the features that attracted people to city life and the hazards of urbanization, including the negative consequences of the human modification of the environment. 11 .B
8.	Compare Effects of Innovations Compare the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history. Write a paragraph comparing the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations on daily life in the colonial era to their effects on daily life in the 1800s. Explain what is meant by technology and innovation, explain what Americans in the 1800s expected science and technology to do for them, and compare the impact on daily life in the two eras and provide examples. 28.A
9.	Analyze How Fine Arts Depicted American Continuity and Change Analyze the relationship between fine arts and continuity and between fine arts and change in the American way of life. Write a paragraph that analyzes how American artists painted what was timeless in America and also painted the great changes that were occurring in the young nation. Analyze the continuity and the changes that American artists recorded. 26.C
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 362
URBAN GROWTH & INDUSTRIALIZATION
EEOWTH
Or URDU ABEiS IN THE NORTI 1,200
1821	1830	1840	1850	I860
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
43%
CHILDREN
Of NATIVE-BORN PARENTS 57%
IMMIGRANTS
AND CHILDREN OF IMMIGRANTS
Source: National Bureau of Economic Research
UNITED STATES
MANUFACTURING
351,296
EMPLOYMENT
1840
1860
787,393
1,265,251
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
10.	Explain Reasons for Rapid Urbanization Explain the reasons for the increase in urbanization, including identifying the economic factors that brought about rapid urbanization. Using the graphs above and other sources, write a paragraph explaining the relationship between industrialization and the growth of northern cities. Define urbanization, and explain the relationship between factory work and the movement of people from farms to cities and what the text indicates about the relationship between the number of factories and the size of cities over time and about the speed of urbanization. Also analyze what the graphs show about the relationship between manufacturing and the growth of cities over time. 12.C,13.B
11.	Analyze Unique Examples of American
Music Identify examples of American music that reflect society before the Civil War and describe developments in music that are unique to American culture. Write a paragraph analyzing the contributions of different music traditions to American musical culture. Explain the emergence of patriotic or religious songs, describe how Stephen Foster’s music reflected American society, and analyze the emergence of gospel music. 26.A, 26.B
12.	Identify Points of View and Frames of Reference Identify the points of view and frames of reference of Americans who supported the abolition of slavery in the United States and those who did not. Write a paragraph identifying the points of view and frames of reference of those who supported the abolition of slavery prior to the Civil War and those who did not. Identify the points of view and frames of reference of both supporters and opponents of the abolitionist movement. 24.A, 29.D
13.	Evaluate Database Information about Abolition Evaluate the impact of reform movements, including abolition, by organizing and interpreting information from databases and posing questions about the geographic distributions and patterns shown in databases. Using a variety of sources, including online databases, locate information on which states in the Union abolished slavery before the Civil War. Pose and answer two questions about the geographic distributions and patterns you find. Then write a paragraph answering those questions. Consider questions such as the following: Which were the earliest states to take steps to abolish slavery? What can you tell from the data about the effectiveness of the abolition movement in the North and the South? 24.B, 29.C,
29.J
Society and Culture Before the Civil War
14.	Analyze Technological Innovations in Marketing Analyze how technological innovations changed the way goods were marketed, nationally and internationally. Write a paragraph analyzing how the telegraph affected the way merchants and farmers marketed their goods. Consider the type of information that the telegraph made available to merchants and farmers and what effect this information had on markets and marketing. 27.C
15.	Analyze the Impact of Communication Systems Analyze the impact of communication systems on the growth, development, and urbanization of the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing how the telegraph aided the nation’s growth and development. Consider the spread of the telegraph and the consequences of that spread on development and urbanization. 27.B
16.	Explain Technology and Economic Growth Explain how technological innovations brought about economic growth. Write a paragraph analyzing how the technologies of clipper ships and steam power
led to economic growth in the 1800s. Explain what technological advantage clipper ships had over other ships, how clipper ships gave American merchants an advantage, what steam power is, and how steam power helped industry expand. 27.D
17.	Analyze Impact of Transportation Systems Analyze the impact of human geographic factors, such as transportation systems, on the growth and development of the United States. Write a paragraph analyzing the railroad’s impact on the development of American industry and agriculture. Explain how railroads impacted factory owners and farmers in the West and in New England. 10.C, 27.B
18.	Identify Impact of Industrialization on Life Identify examples of how industrialization changed life in the United States. Write a paragraph identifying how life changed for workers as industrialization grew. Consider how the roles of workers changed; how the number of workers in families changed; and how wages, hours, and working conditions changed. 28.B
19.	Explain Conflicts Based on Religion and Social Class Explain the relationship between urbanization and conflicts resulting from differences in religion and social class. Write a paragraph explaining how urbanization led to an increase in conflicts based on religion and social class. Consider the religion of most native-born Americans and immigrants before the 1840, the religion of Irish immigrants, the Industrial Revolution’s effect on class difference, and the role urbanization played in conflict over religious and class differences. 23.B
20.	Explain Irish Immigration Identify selected ethnic and religious groups that settled in the United States, including the Irish, and explain their reasons for immigration. Write a paragraph about the characteristics of Irish immigration to the United States between 1845 and 1860. Consider what conditions the Irish faced in Ireland, how many Irish immigrated to the United States between 1845 and 1860, and what religion most Irish immigrants were. 23.A
21.	Describe and Analyze Immigrant Groups Describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the nineteenth century, and analyze how people from these different ethnic groups contributed to our national identity.
Write a paragraph describing how Irish and German immigrants interacted with their environments and how they contributed to our national identity. Consider where each immigrant group tended to settle and why, how each group interacted with the environment, and how these groups contributed to our national identity.
11.C, 23.D
22.	Describe Unique Developments in American
Art Describe developments in art that are unique to American culture, such as the contributions of John James Audubon. Write a paragraph that analyzes how John James Audubon made a major contribution to art in American culture. Describe Audubon’s work, explain his unique contribution to American culture, and discuss the importance of The Birds of America. (See illustration below.) 26.A
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 364
23.	Explain Impact of Cotton Gin Explain how technological innovations like the cotton gin brought about economic growth and led to the spread of the plantation system and slavery. Use the graph below and other sources to write a paragraph explaining the impact of the cotton gin on economic growth and on the spread of the plantation system and slavery. Consider what you can tell about cotton production and slavery from the graph, how the cotton gin contributed to the westward spread of the plantation system and to the increased size of plantations, and why the cotton gin led to the growth and spread of slavery even though the technology made processing cotton more efficient. (See graph below.) 12.B, 27.D
RCOTTON PRODUCTION
I810 I
820 1830 1840 1850 1860 24.	Compare Effects of Economic and Social
Factors Compare the effects of economic and social factors on slaves and free blacks. Write a paragraph discussing the effects of economic and social factors on free blacks in the North. Compare the economic and social advantages of free blacks in the North to enslaved blacks in the South, discuss some of the economic and social obstacles faced by free blacks in the North, and provide examples of free blacks who achieved economic or social success. 7.B
25.	Identify and Analyze Economic Differences Among Regions Identify economic differences among different regions of the United States, and analyze their causes, including the impact of slavery. Write a paragraph identifying economic differences between the South and the North and analyzing their causes. Identify the main economic differences between the South and the North, describe the focus of most southern industry, and explain why industry was limited in the South, including the impact of slavery. 7.C, 12.A, 12.D
26.	Identify and Analyze Economic Differences Among Regions Identify economic differences among different regions of the United States, and analyze their causes, including the impact of slavery. Write a paragraph identifying economic differences between the South and the North and analyzing their causes. Identify the main economic differences between the South and the North, describe the focus of most southern industry, and explain why industry was limited in the South, including the impact of slavery. 7.C, 12.A, 12.D
27.	Analyze Population Distribution and Settlement Patterns Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution and settlement patterns during the nineteenth century. Write a paragraph analyzing how the physical environment of the South and the reliance on agriculture influenced population distribution and settlement patterns. Consider rural versus urban populations and differences in settlement patterns among planters, small farmers, poor whites, and free African Americans. 11.A
28.	Describe Sectional Differences in Human Characteristics Describe the causes and effects of sectionalism by comparing places and regions of the United States in terms of human characteristics. Write a paragraph describing the causes and effects of sectional differences between the North and South by comparing northern and southern whites. Consider differences in the basis of wealth and in city populations. 1.A, 1O.B
29.	Describe Effects of Second Great Awakening Describe the effects of religious revivals, including the religious influence of the Second Great Awakening on social movements, and analyze the contributions of people of various religious groups to our national identity. Write a paragraph describing how the Second Great Awakening influenced reform movements in the 1800s. Identify Charles Grandison Finney, explain his views on personal salvation, and describe the effect of Finney’s ideas on social reform and the national identity. 1.A, 23.D, 25.B
Society and Culture
Before the Civil War 365
30.	Evaluate Educational Reform Evaluate the impact of reform movements, including educational reform. Write a paragraph evaluating the educational reform efforts of Horace Mann. Explain why reform was needed and who Horace Mann was. Analyze the role religion played in his reform efforts and evaluate the effect of Mann’s reform efforts. 24.B
31.	Describe Contributions of People from Various Religious Groups Analyze the contributions of people of various religious groups to our national identity during the Reform Era. Write a paragraph analyzing how people from different religious groups contributed to the Reform Era. Focus on the efforts of Prudence Crandall, Thomas Gallaudet, and Samuel Gridley Howe. 23.D
32.	Analyze Slavery’s Impact Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States.
Write a paragraph analyzing the effects of slavery in the different areas of the United States. Explain the difference between the thinking of Thomas Jefferson and the Quakers, describe the importance of slavery in the North and in the South and explain the difference between the two regions, and describe the status of slavery in the Northwest Territories. 7.C
33.	Identify Bias in Oral Material Identify bias in oral material about slavery in the United States. Write a paragraph detecting bias in the excerpt from Angelina Grimke’s speech and explaining how her message aided in the development of the abolitionist movement. Identify the speaker’s point of view, identify the nature of the bias in the excerpt below, and explain how speeches such as this one helped build support for abolition. 24.A, 29.F
As a Southerner I feel that it is my duty to stand up here tonight and bear testimony against slavery. I have seen it—I have seen it. I know it has horrors that can never be described. I was brought up under its wing: I witnessed for many years its . . . destructiveness to human happiness. It is admitted by some that the slave is not happy under the worst forms of slavery. But I have never seen a happy slave. I have seen him dance in his chains, it is true; but he was not happy.
—Angelina Grimke’s speech at Pennsylvania. Half May 1838
34.	Describe the Abolitionist Movement Describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement. Using the illustration below and other sources, write a paragraph describing how the abolitionist movement developed. Analyze the meaning of the illustration and describe factors that led to the growth of the abolitionist movement. (See illustration below.) 24.A
35.	Describe the Contributions of Frederick Douglass Describe the contributions of significant social leaders of the United States, including Frederick Douglass. Write a paragraph analyzing the role of Frederick Douglass in the abolition movement. Analyze why Frederick Douglass was an effective advocate of abolition and describe how he communicated his experiences. 22.B
36.	Identify the Colonization Movement Identify different points of view of interest groups on important historical issues, such as the Colonization Movement. Write a paragraph that analyzes the point of view of the American Colonization Society toward slavery. Identify the society’s proposal on how to end slavery and analyze the response of the president and of African Americans to the proposal. 21 .A
37.	Explain Conflicts Based on Political Beliefs Explain the relationship between urbanization and conflicts resulting from differences in political beliefs, and identify the ways the conflicts between people
from various ethnic groups were resolved. Write a paragraph explaining how nativist hostility over the presence of Catholic immigrants in northern cities led to the formation of a political party. Explain what actions against immigrants nativists called for, what political party they formed and where its support was the strongest, what impact the party had in the 1856 presidential election, and what happened to the party. 23.C, 23.B
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 366
, Analyze Civil Disobedience in the United
States Analyze reasons for and the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in U.S. history, such as Henry David Thoreau’s refusal to pay taxes. Write a paragraph that analyzes Henry David Thoreau’s acts of civil disobedience and nonviolence. Identify Henry David Thoreau, analyze the meaning of Thoreau’s “different drummer,” discuss Thoreau’s act of civil disobedience, and analyze the impact of his ideas about civil disobedience. 20.C
If a man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer. Let him step to the music he hears.
39. Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: Why is culture important? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
Hem y

Society and Culture Before the Civil War
367
1 In the late 1700s, a British innovation that made manufacturing goods easier and helped spur the start of the Industrial Revolution was—
A motors driven by electrical current B factory machines driven by fire power C water power generated by a water wheel D a new method of harnessing the power of horses
$txsr<e	of the Urwed Stores
Based on these graphs and what you have read, what did the free enterprise system in the form of industrialization have to do with urbanization in the northern part of the United States?
F
Cities grew as agricultural employment increased at factory farms. G
The stylish shops and fancy restaurants of Boston enticed more workers than those of Philadelphia. H
The more people moved to the cities, the more farm workers were needed to grow crops to feed them. J
As factories in the cities prospered, more workers from farms and rural areas moved to the city to take industrial jobs. Society and Culture Before the Civil War 368
access aaamonai practice questions
The influences and ideas listed above sparked reform movements because—
A they caused people to re-evaluate the political ideals of the Declaration of Independence
B they encouraged people to support social reforms as a route to their predestined religious rewards
C they frightened people into believing they would be punished if they did not support reform movements
D they encouraged people to put their beliefs and principles to work to improve the lives of their fellow Americans
4	One of the reasons women began to fight for their rights was that women such as Angelina and Sarah Grimke—
F wanted to enter the world of business instead of staying home and raising children G liked having a cause to fight for, so they looked for something else they could try to change
H were professional women who were angry that they did not get paid as well as the men in the company
J were fighting for the end of slavery and realized they themselves did not have full social and political rights
If you have trouble with...
Question	1	2
See Lesson	7.1	7.1
TEKS	•	27.C	14-B
3	\	4
7.3	j	'	'	7.5
1.A	\	1-A
Society and Culture Before
the Civil War 369
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:
T
>nist
....—.... .
r
The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 banned slavery in the Northwest Territories.
I
Through newspapers and speeches, abolitionists tried to turn public opinion against slavery.
Which option best replaces the X in this flow chart?
A
Northern factory owners founded the abolitionist movement. B
Slave owners in both the North and the South disagreed with abolitionists. C
Religious leaders in the northern states encouraged the fight against slavery. D
Many southerners came to know their slaves well and realized that slavery was wrong. At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine, or the Texan ranch, comrade of Californians, comrade of free North-Westerners.... of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion.
— Walt Whitman, Song of Myself
Walt Whitman was a famous American poet of the early 1800s. His poetry celebrated— F democracy and being part of “a nation of many nations”
G the compelling meter and rhyming patterns of American dialects H all the different places he had lived within the United States and its territories J the exceptional nature of American arts and letters compared to those of Europe
Society and Culture Before the Civil War 370
access aacmionai practice questions
7	What was the main reason American settlers continued to move west? A Desire for land B Interest in traveling C Freedom from all taxes D Desire to live among Native Americans
Why was this method of transportation an important factor in the westward expansion of the young United States?
F
Canal barges were an important method of moving goods between communities in upstate New York. G
Steamboats provided a much faster method of water transportation because they could easily travel against the current of western rivers. H
Flatboats were well suited to travel on the shallow Ohio River, which was an important transportation route west of the Appalachian Mountains. J
Dugout canoes were the earliest means of traveling long distances on waterways west of the Appalachian Mountains and east of the Mississippi River. If you have trouble with...	_ .........,.................,------------ ----
Question	5	j	6	......7...... ...... J............
See Lesson '	7.4	' J	7.6	......6.1.......j........ 6.4.....
TEKS 24.A 76.1!......[ ...1'A :........?/B......
Society and Culture
Before the Civil War 371
Sectionalism and Civil War
In this Topic, you will learn about the sectionalism and the Civil War. You will also find lots of interesting ways to master the TEKS associated with this Topic.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
LESSON OUTLINE
8.1: Conflicts and Compromises 1.A, 7.D, 21 .C 8.2: Growing Tensions 8.B, 18.C, 26.A 8.3: Division and the Outbreak of War 1.A, 1.C,
8.A, 8.B, 8.C, 12.D, 17.B 8.4: The Course of War 8.A, 8.B, 22.B 8.5: Emancipation and Life in Wartime 8.A, 8.B,
23.B
8.6: The War’s End 1.A, 1.C, 8.A, 8.B, 8.C, 10.C,
22.A
1.A, 1.B, 1.C, 7.C, 7.D, 8.A, 8.B, 8.C, 10.A, 10.C, 12.D,
17.B, 18.C, 21 .A, 21.C, 22.A, 22.B, 23.B, 23.C, 23.E, 26.A, 29.B, 29.C, 30.C
Connect
Connect with this Topic by watching a video about a fascinating person or situation related to this Topic. You can think about how this Topic connects to your own life. And you’ll encounter an intriguing Essential Question: When is war justified?
Begin your study by trying the following '"4 NBC LEARN Watch My Story Video:
Robert E. Lee, The Marble Man
Launch your Project:
Build a Website on the Impact of the Civil War
I
Investigate ; The Lesson Outline lists ; all the lessons you will i investigate in this Topic. As ; you read and interact with '■ key content, the story of the ; causes and events of the Civil i War will come to life. Read the ; texts; try the interactivities.
; Investigate the fascinating ; story of sectionalism and the ; Civil War.
: And keep working on your : Project to help build your ♦ mastery of the Topic TEKS.
>> Digital interactivity from the online course
* Synthesize
I
You will get a chance to pull together everything you have learned by thinking again about the Essential Question. Consider how you would answer the question now: When is war justified?
I
Demonstrate
Now you will get to show what you know. You will get a chance to complete the TEKS Review and Assessment pages, answering questions about every TEKS for this Topic. Or you can write an essay, take part in a discussion, or share your Project. No matter which you do, it will be a real-world demonstration of the things you now understand about the Topic..
TEKS in Topic 8	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 8	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
1.A	7,10,19	18.C	4
1.B	22	21 .A	5
1.C	20	21 .C	2
7.C	3	22.A	13
7.D	1,2	22.B	12, 21
8.A	11, 13, 16, 17	23. B	14
8.B	10, 11, 16	23.C	14
8.C	4, 18	23. E	15
10. A	7,23	26.A	8
10.C	11	29. B	1,8, 12,18
12.D	6	29.C	17
17.B	9	30.C	23
I
373
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
When is war justified? *
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1.A, 1.B, 1.C, 7.C, 7.D, 8.A, 8.B, 8.C, 10.A, 10.C, 12.D, 17.B, 18.C, 21.A, 21.C, 22.A, 22.B, 23.B, 23.C, 23.E, 26.A, 29.B, 29.C, 30.C
Enduring Understandings
•	Disputes over slavery led to shaky compromises and increased tensions between the North and South.
•	Failed compromises over slavery led to outbreaks of violence.
•	When Abraham Lincoln was elected president and promised to stop the spread of slavery, southern states seceded from the Union.
•	The Civil War broke out as a result of secession, and the South won many early battles.
•	President Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation freed slaves in the Confederacy.
•	Union victories eventually led to the defeat of the Confederacy and preservation of the Union.
PEARSON
NBC LEARN

t Abraham Lincoln

7
Interactive Flipped Video
vj/ There were 11 free states in the North and 11 slave states in the South in 1819. The era of sectionalism, or tension between people loyal to their section, or region, lasted from the 1810s to the 1860s. During this era, each of these two regions, or sections, had different economies, political views, and ideas about slavery. These differences were the main causes of sectionalism. The effects of sectionalism included political conflicts over issues important to each section, or region.
1.A, 7.D, 21.C
» Objectives
Describe how the Missouri Compromise affected slavery.
Explain why conflict arose over the issue of slavery in western territories.
Identify why the Free-Soil party was founded.
Explain how the Compromise of 1850 tried to resolve the issue of slavery.
Summarize how Uncle Tom’s Cabin affected attitudes toward slavery.
» Key Terms
Missouri
Compromise
Wilmot Proviso
popular sovereignty
Free-Soil Party
secede
fugitive
civil war
Compromise of
1850
Fugitive Slave Act Uncle Tom’s Cabin John C. Calhoun
Daniel Webster Henry Clay
Purchase south of that line. It was banned north of the Missouri Compromise line. The only exception to this was Missouri itself.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did Missouri’s application to join the Union as a slave state spark a crisis in Congress?
not to allow slavery. Some also felt that slavery should be allowed where it existed at the time, but it should not be expanded to new territories.
fei DRAW CONCLUSIONS Why did the Missouri
Compromise fail to solve the issue of slavery beyond 1848?
The Free-Soil Party
Opposes Slavery in the West
The debate over slavery led to the birth of a new political party. By 1848, many northern Democrats and Whigs opposed the spread of slavery. However, the leaders of both parties refused to take a stand. They did not want to lose any southern votes. Some also feared that the slavery issue would split the nation.
In 1848, antislavery members of both parties met in Buffalo, New York. There, they founded the Free-Soil party. The main goal of the Free-Soil party was to keep slavery out of the western territories. Only a few Free-Soilers were abolitionists who wanted to end slavery in the South.
Conflicts and
Compromises
Henry Clay’s Missouri
Compromise
Before 1819, the equal number of slave and free states helped balance the sectional divide. That year, however, Congress considered Missouri’s application to join the Union as a slave state. Immediately, a crisis erupted. Missouri’s admission would give the South a majority in the Senate. Determined not to lose power, northerners opposed letting Missouri enter as a slave state.
The argument lasted many months. Finally, Senator Henry Clay made a proposal. During the long debate, Maine had also applied for statehood. Clay suggested admitting Missouri as a slave state and Maine as a free state. His plan, called the Missouri Compromise, kept the number of slave and free states equal.
Under the provisions of the Missouri Compromise, Congress drew an imaginary line extending the southern border of Missouri at latitude 36°30’ N. Slavery was permitted in the part of the Louisiana
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Western Expansion
Heightens Tension Over Slavery
The Missouri Compromise applied only to the Louisiana Purchase. In 1848, the Mexican War added vast western lands to the United States. Once again, the question of slavery in the territories arose.
The Wilmot Proviso Divides Congress Many northerners feared that the South would extend slavery into the West. David Wilmot, a member of Congress from Pennsylvania, called for a law to ban slavery in any territories won from Mexico. Southern leaders angrily opposed this Wilmot Proviso. They said that Congress had no right to ban slavery in the West.
The House passed the Wilmot Proviso in 1846, but the Senate defeated it. As a result, Americans continued to argue about slavery in the West even while their army fought in Mexico.
Opposing Views Around the Country As the debate heated up, people found it hard not to take sides. One of the effects of sectionalism was sharp division over the issue of expanding slavery. Abolitionists wanted slavery banned throughout the country. They insisted that slavery was morally wrong. Southern slaveholders thought that slavery should be allowed in any territory. They also demanded that enslaved African Americans who escaped to the North be returned to them. Even white southerners who did not own enslaved African Americans generally agreed with these ideas.
Between these two extreme views were more moderate positions. Some moderates argued that the Missouri Compromise line should be extended across the Mexican Cession to the Pacific. Any new state north of the line would be a free state. Any new state south of the line could allow slavery. Other moderates felt that the Missouri Compromise line should not be extended at all.
Still others supported the idea of popular sovereignty, or the right of people to create their government. Under popular sovereignty, voters in a new territory would decide for themselves whether or
» As Americans debated the issue of slavery, slave auctions, like this one in Virginia, continued in the South. Family members on auction had to endure the possibility of never seeing one another again.
376
Sectionalism and Civil War 377
