qtnfpg 159	4.1 A Weak Confederation
restitution for the United btates
ELPS
With its demands met, Maryland ratified the Articles of Confederation in 1781. The new American government could at last go into effect.
E3 IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What functions was Congress able to perform under the Articles of Confederation? ELPS READING 4.C.1
Before you read this text, make a list of the words that you recognize by sight as directed by your teacher. Then read the text and list new words that you have learned and will be able to recognize by sight.
Weaknesses of the
Confederation
By 1783, the United States had won its independence. Yet, the end of the American Revolution did not solve the confederation’s troubles. Americans had reason to doubt whether “these United States” could survive.
Many States Have Disagreements Disputes continued to arise among states. For example, both New Hampshire and New York claimed Vermont. The
No 45T4Z Six &£>££%&§.
’T’mS BiU entuleKk Bearer to 'receive
SIX SPANISH MILLED DOLLARS*
ot* tXe Value thereof fftvrOLD Or SILVER- uceoTd intf t o a Resolution of COV GRESS MJat Phi. luJelphia Nov-2.1 SIX DOLLARS &
» The currency issued by the Continental Congress lost value throughout the war. After the war, the United States owed millions of dollars to individuals and foreign nations.
Articles did not give the central government power to resolve such conflicts. Noah Webster, a teacher from New England, saw the problem clearly:
So long as any individual state has power to defeat the measures of the other twelve, our pretended union is but a name, and our confederation, a cobweb.
—Noah Webster, Sketches of Ainericen Policy
Concerns Over Debt and Currency After the Revolution, the United States owed millions of dollars to individuals and foreign nations. Without the power to tax, Congress had no way to repay these debts. It asked the states for money, but the states often refused.
During the Revolution, the Continental Congress had solved the problem of raising funds by printing paper currency, or money. However, the Continental dollar had little value because it was not backed by gold or silver. Before long, Americans began to describe any useless thing as “not worth a Continental.”
As Continental dollars became nearly worthless, states printed their own currency. This caused confusion. How much was a North Carolina dollar worth? Was a Virginia dollar as valuable as a Maryland dollar? Most states refused to accept the money of others. As a result, trade became very difficult.
Foreign Countries Promote Their Own Interests
Foreign countries took advantage of the confederation's weakness. Ignoring the Treaty of Paris, Britain refused to withdraw its troops from American territory on the Great Lakes. Spain closed its port in New Orleans to American shipping. This was a serious blow to western farmers, who depended on the port to ship their products to the East.
ti CHECK UNDERSTANDING Why did trade between
states become increasingly difficult?
An Orderly Expansion
Despite its troubles, Congress did pass important laws about how to govern the Northwest Territory. This was the U.S. territory west of Pennsylvania, north of the Ohio River, south of the Great Lakes, and east of the Mississippi. The laws established how territories would be governed and how they could become states.
The Land Ordinance of 1785 set up a system for settling the Northwest Territory. The law called for the territory to be surveyed and divided into townships.
A
Weak Confederation A
Constitution for the United States SETTLING THE UPPER MIDWEST
THE LAND SURVEY
5,000 	4,500	
	S 4,000	
	1 3,500	.X'	yd.'
	J? 3,000	^.X	d 33
	| 2,500	
	.2 2,000 '	
	-1 1,500	
		
	1,000	
	500	.x'^"	-	wise. \ 5 tX
36 square miles	0 -	 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850	1860 1870 1880 1890 1900
1 square mile		
	With 5,000 free white male residents,	With 60,000, residents could write
1 /640th of a square mile;	territories could elect a state assembly and	a state constitution and apply for
average size of farm was 40 acres	send non-voting representatives to Congress.	statehood.
» Analyze Information How did the Northwest Ordinance help to reduce conflict between the states as settlement expanded westward beyond traditional state boundaries?
©jbbsbseeeh
Each township would then be further divided into 36 sections of one square mile each (640 acres).
Congress planned to sell sections to settlers for a minimum of $640 apiece. One section in every township was set aside to support public schools. Selling the land provided income for the government, which was significant because Congress did not have the power to tax under the Articles of Confederation, yet the nation was in debt.
In 1787, Congress passed the Northwest Ordinance. It set up a government for the Northwest Territory, guaranteed basic rights to settlers, and outlawed slavery there. It also provided for the vast region to be divided into separate territories in the future.
The Northwest Ordinance established the principle that new territories should not become part of existing states but should be admitted as new states. It provided a procedure, or process, to admit new states to the nation. Once a territory had a population of 60,000 free settlers, it could ask Congress to be admitted as a new state. Each new state would be “on an equal footing with the original states in all respects whatsoever. In time, the states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin were created from the Northwest Territory.
Despite the drawbacks of the Articles of Confederation, the laws Congress created relating to
the Northwest Territory proved to be a major success. These laws established principles defining the basic rights of settlers and served as a model for the rights citizens would expect to be protected. Trial by jury, freedom of religion, free use of waterways, fair treatment in the courts, and other rights were guaranteed. By providing that money from each township’s land sales be used for schools, these laws also established federal support for education.
fed RECALL What was the purpose of the Northwest
Ordinance?
Economic Problems Lead to Change
The Northwest Ordinance was the finest achievement of the national government under the Articles. Still, the government was unable to solve its economic problems. After the Revolution, the nation suffered an economic depression. A depression is a period when business activity slows, prices and wages fall, and unemployment rises.
Farmers Demand Fair Treatment The depression hit farmers hard. The war had created a high demand
A
Constitution for the United States A Weak Confederation
for farm products. Farmers borrowed money for land, seed, animals, and tools. However, when the Revolution ended, demand for farm goods went down. As prices fell, many farmers could not repay their loans.
In Massachusetts, matters worsened when the state raised taxes. The courts seized the farms of those who could not pay their taxes or loans. Angry farmers felt they were being treated unfairly.
Daniel Shays, a Massachusetts farmer who had fought at Bunker Hill and Saratoga, organized an uprising in 1786. More than 1,000 farmers took part in Shays’ Rebellion. They attacked courthouses and prevented the state from seizing farms when farmers could not pay their debts. Finally, the Massachusetts legislature sent the militia to drive them off.
A
Call For Revision Many Americans saw Shays’ Rebellion as a sign that the Articles of Confederation did not work. Warned George Washington, “I predict the worst consequences from a half starved, limping government, always moving upon crutches and tottering at every step.” To avert a crisis, leaders from several states called for a convention to revise the Articles of Confederation. They met in Philadelphia in May 1787. In the end,
however, this convention would create an entirely new framework of government.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What did Shay’s Rebellion show to many people? ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the voting rights in most states in the early 1780s.
2.	Identify Central Issues What were three weaknesses of the central government under the Articles of Confederation?
3.	Generate Explanations Why did people describe something without value as “not worth a Continental?”
4.	Hypothesize about why slavery was outlawed in the Northwest Territories.
5.	Predict Consequences How do you think the convention will improve upon the Articles of Confederation?
I
The Constitutional Convention opened on May 25, 1787, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Its goal was to revise the Articles of Confederation. Every state except Rhode Island sent representatives.
The convention would prove historic because it did not revise the Articles of Confederation. Instead, it produced a new United States Constitution.
James Madison (standing) helped solve some of the most pressing problems delegates faced at the Constitutional Convention.	Why might Madison be
considered a model of civic virtue?
Drafting a
Constitution
A
Historic Convention American Leaders Come Together The convention’s 55 delegates were a remarkable group. Eight of them had signed the Declaration of Independence, including the oldest, Benjamin Franklin. At age 81, Franklin was wise in the ways of government and human nature. George Washington was a representative from Virginia. Washington was so well respected that the delegates at once elected him president of the Convention.
Still, most of the delegates represented a new generation of American leaders. Nearly half were young men in their thirties, including Alexander Hamilton of New York. During the Revolution, Hamilton had served for a time as Washington's private secretary. Hamilton despised the Articles of Confederation. “The nation,” he wrote, “is sick and wants powerful remedies.” The powerful remedy he prescribed was a strong central government.
Interactive Flipped Video
1.A, 1.C, 4.D
» Objectives
Identify the leaders of the Constitutional Convention.
Compare the main differences between the two rival plans for the new Constitution.
Summarize compromises the delegates had to reach before the Constitution could be signed.
» Key Terms
Constitutional
Convention
Virginia Plan legislative branch executive branch judicial branch New Jersey Plan compromise Great Compromise Three-Fifths
Compromise
A
Student of History and Politics Perhaps the best-prepared delegate was 36-year-old James Madison of Virginia. For months, I he had been reading books on history, politics, and commerce.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
A
Constitution for the United States 162 A
Weak Confederation 
163
Madison set a model of civic virtue when he arrived in Philadelphia with a case bulging with volumes of research.
Madison was quiet and rather shy. Still, his keen intelligence and his ideas about how to structure a democratic government strongly influenced the other delegates. Today, Madison is often called the “Father of the Constitution.”
Secret Conversations When the Convention began, the delegates decided to keep their talks secret. They wanted to speak their minds freely and be able to explore issues without pressures from outside.
The closed windows helped keep the debates secret, but they made the room very hot. New Englanders in their woolen suits suffered terribly in the summer heat. Southerners, with clothing more suited to warm temperatures, were less bothered.
RECALL
Why was James Madison considered the best prepared delegate at the Convention?
» Roger Sherman (right), mastermind of the Great Compromise, and fellow Connecticut delegate Oliver Ellsworth (left) draft a solution to the issue of representation in 1787.
Disagreements Over a New Government
Soon after the meeting began, the delegates realized they would have to do more than simply revise the Articles of Confederation. They chose instead to write an entirely new constitution for the nation. They disagreed, however, about what form the new national government should take.
Virginia Proposes a Plan Edmund Randolph and James Madison, both from Virginia, proposed a plan for the new government. This Virginia Plan called for a strong national government with three branches. The legislative branch would pass the laws.
The executive branch would carry out the laws. The judicial branch, or system of courts, would decide whether laws or the Constitution were violated.
According to the Virginia Plan, the legislature would consist of two houses. Seats would be awarded on the basis of population. Thus, in both houses, larger states would have more representatives than smaller ones. Under the Articles of Confederation, each state, regardless of population, only had one vote in Congress.
New Jersey Disagrees Small states opposed the Virginia Plan. They feared that the large states could easily outvote them in Congress. Supporters of the Virginia Plan replied that it was only fair for a state with more people to have more representatives.
After two weeks of debate, William Paterson of New Jersey presented a plan that had the support of the small states. Like the Virginia Plan, the New Jersey Plan called for three branches of government. However, it provided for a legislature that had only one house. Each state, regardless of its population, would have one vote in the legislature.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What was the essential difference between the Virginia Plan and the New Jersey Plan?
The Great Compromise
For a while, no agreement could be reached. With tempers flaring, it seemed that the Convention would fall apart without adopting any plan. Finally, Roger Sherman of Connecticut worked out a compromise that he hoped would satisfy both the large and small states. A compromise is a settlement, or peaceful solution, in which each side gives up some of its demands in order to reach an agreement.
164	4.2 Drafting a Constitution
A
Constitution for the United States Virginia and New Jersey Plans
VIRGINIA PLAN
•	Population as basis for house representation
•	Two houses with seats based on population
•	One house is elected by the people, the other house by state legislators
•	Chief executive is chosen by the legislature
•	Judicial branch is chosen by the legislature
■ Three branches of government to prevent abuse of power Legislative branch consists of elected representatives
NEW JERSEY PLAN
•	Drafted in response to Virginia Plan
•	One house with one seat and one vote regardless of population as in the Articles of Confederation
•	Executive branch consists of several executives
•	Judicial branch is chosen by the executive branch
» Analyze Information How did the New Jersey Plan and Virginia Plan differ in their approach to the executive branch of government?
r®
Interactive Chart
Sherman’s compromise called for the creation of a two-house legislature. Members of the lower house, known as the House of Representatives, would be elected by popular vote. As the larger states wished, seats in the lower house would be awarded to each state according to its population.
Members of the upper house, called the Senate, would be chosen by state legislatures. Each state, no matter what its size, would have two senators. This part of Sherman’s compromise appealed to the smaller states.
On July 16, the delegates narrowly approved Sherman's plan. It became known as the Great Compromise. Each side, in an admirable show of civic virtue, gave up some demands to achieve unity. With a margin of just one vote, the delegates had found a peaceful resolution to a problem that had threatened to bring the convention to a halt.
IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did the Great Compromise address the concerns of small and large states?
The Three-Fifths
Compromise
Just as there were disagreements between large states and small states, there were also disagreements between northern states and southern states. The most serious disagreements concerned the issue of slavery. Would enslaved people be counted as part of a state’s population? Would the slave trade continue to bring enslaved Africans into the United States?
The States Reach an Agreement Southerners wanted to include enslaved African Americans in the population count even though they would not let those people vote. If enslaved African Americans were counted, southern states would have more representatives in the House of Representatives. Northerners objected. They argued that, since enslaved African Americans could not vote, they should not be counted when assigning representatives.
Once again, the delegates compromised. They agreed that three fifths of the enslaved people in any state would be counted.
In other words, if a state had 5,000 enslaved residents, 3,000 of them would be included in the state’s population count. This agreement became known as
the Three-Fifths Compromise.
The fraction in the Three-Fifths Compromise had come from a rule in the Articles of Confederation. That
A
Constitution for the United States 165 4.2 Drafting a Constitution rule tied taxes to population and counted only three fifths of enslaved residents when a state was being taxed. The new compromise balanced the concerns of Northerners and Southerners by using the three-fifths rule—which had already been agreed upon—as an acceptable way to assign both representatives and taxes to each state.
Further Disagreement Over Slavery There was another disagreement over slavery. By 1787, some northern states had banned the slave trade within their borders. Delegates from these states urged that the slave trade be banned in the entire nation. Southerners argued that such a ban would ruin their economy.
In the end, northern and southern states compromised once more. Northerners agreed that Congress could not outlaw the slave trade for at least 20 years. After that, Congress could regulate the slave trade if it wished. Northerners also agreed that no state could stop a person fleeing slavery from being returned to an owner.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
Why did many of the northern states object to including enslaved people in population counts?
» Despite the fact some delegates from northern states urged that slavery be banned throughout the nation, the Constitutional Convention did not succeed in ending the slave trade.
The Convention Comes to a Conclusion
As the long, hot summer drew to a close, the weary delegates struggled with one difficult question after another. How many years should the President, head of the executive branch, serve? How should the system of federal courts be organized? Would members of Congress be paid?
Finally, on September 17, 1787, the Constitution was ready to be signed. Its opening lines, or Preamble, expressed the goals of the framers: “We the People of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union
Gathering for the last time, delegates listened quietly as Benjamin Franklin rose to speak. He pleaded that the document be accepted:
I doubt . . . whether any other
Convention . . . may be able to make a better Constitution. ... I cannot help expressing a wish, that every member of the Convention who may still have objections to it, would with me, on this occasion, doubt a little of his own infallibility, and . . . put his name to this instrument.
—Benjamin Franklin, Iduvidu < >( t.tit ? /u ?, 1< 'i, d (fmv >■ of. V7S7
One by one, delegates came forward to sign the document. All but three of the delegates remaining in Philadelphia did so. Edmund Randolph and George Mason of Virginia, along with Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, refused to sign. They feared that the new Constitution gave too much power to the national government.
The main effect of the Constitution's creation was to set in motion a process in which states had to decide whether to approve the Constitution. The Constitution called upon each state to hold a convention to approve or reject the plan for the new government. Once nine states endorsed it, the Constitution would become the law of the land.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why did some delegates choose not to sign the Constitution?
Constitution for the United States 166	4.2 Drafting a Constitution
ASSESSMENT
Contrast the ideas of Alexander Hamilton with those of George Mason. Which one was more pleased with the final Constitution?
Hypothesize Why did New Jersey propose the plan that it did?
Evaluate Arguments The Great Compromise is so named because it was considered vital to the
success of the Convention. What proof is there that it was a Great Compromise?
4.	Draw Conclusions How did the agreement that no state could stop a fugitive slave from being returned to his or her owner affect slaves?
5.	Determine Relevance What is so significant about the Preamble’s opening words, “We the People of the United States ...”?
x xu TT„ifOd States 167	4.2 Drafting a Constitution
A
Constitution for the United States xo ■W.	1
_	1 J	1   - -
T|®V’W "

4.3
Long before the Revolution, John Adams called on Americans to investigate how governments worked.
The tradition of representative government in colonial history dates back to the Mayflower Compact, written and signed at sea in 1620 to provide rules for settling Plymouth.
Interactive Flipped Video j
3.B, 14.A, 15.A, 15.C, 20.A
» Objectives
Identify what American leaders learned about government from studying ancient Rome.
Summarize the traditions of freedom that Americans inherited from England and from their own colonial past.
Describe how the Enlightenment ideas shaped the development of the Constitution.
Ideas That Influenced the Constitution
Principles from the Roman Republic
» Key Terms
Founding Fathers republic dictatorship Magna Carta English Bill of Rights habeas corpus separation of
powers
|onTexas.com
' Digital Lesson.
Let us . . . search into the spirit of the British constitution; read the histories of ancient ages; contemplate the great examples of Greece and Rome; [and] set before us the conduct of our own British ancestors. . . .
—John Adams. 1 w , ,, ,	/ ‘ n , a ,, . / , ,
The delegates to the Constitutional Convention followed this advice. They wanted to create a republic, a government in which citizens rule themselves through elected representatives. Few republics in the history of the world survived very long. In order to create one that would last, American leaders looked first to the ancient examples of Greece and, especially, Rome.
168
The Virtues of a Republic Americans greatly admired the Roman Republic. General Charles Lee, one of George Washington’s commanders, commented, “I used to regret not being thrown into the World in the glorious [era] of the Romans.”
Independence and public service were virtues that the Founding Fathers saw in the citizens of Rome. Roman citizens were willing to serve in public office, not for money, but because they were devoted to their republic. The founders wrote the Constitution with these same civic virtues in mind and hoped Americans would live by the same principles.
Many American colonists admired Rome so much that when they debated politics in the newspapers, they often signed their opinions with Roman names such as Cincinnatus or Cicero.
A
Belief in Independent Citizens At the same time, the Founding Fathers saw the collapse of Rome’s republic as a warning to the United States. No republic could survive unless its citizens remained independent and devoted to public service without the desire for personal or financial gains. Under the ruler Caesar Augustus, Rome eventually became a dictatorship, a government in which one person or a small group holds complete authority. The leaders of the American Revolution believed that Romans stumbled once they allowed corruption to take over. Historians today admit that the Founding Fathers somewhat exaggerated the virtues of Rome’s republic. Yet, the lessons they learned still have force. Republics do not always die because they are invaded from outside. Without educated and dedicated citizens who put the nation’s needs above their own, republics can decay from within due to corruption.
El LIST What qualities of citizens in the Roman Republic did many early colonists admire?
English Influences
Greece and Rome were not the only examples of democratic government. Despite their quarrel with Britain, leaders of the Revolution valued British traditions of freedom.
The Magna Carta King John of England signed the Magna Carta in 1215. The Magna Carta contained two basic ideas that helped to shape both British and American government. First, it made it clear that English monarchs themselves had to obey the law.
King John agreed not to raise taxes without first consulting the Great Council of nobles and church
» The Founders, including Thomas Jefferson shown here, looked to the Roman Republic for inspiration as they drafted the Constitution.
» This illustration shows King John of England signing the Magna Carta in 1215. Infer How might the Magna Carta have influenced the ideas of the writers of the United States Constitution?
351 Interactive Timeline
A
Constitution for the United States 169
4.3 Ideas That Influenced the Constitution
officials. Eventually, the Great Council grew into the British Parliament.
Just as important, the Magna Carta stated that English nobles had certain rights—rights that were later extended to other classes of people as well. These included rights to trial by jury and the right to private property. The idea of private property rights strongly influenced the beliefs of early Americans, which partly explains the development of a free-enterprise system throughout the nation.
The English Bill of Rights In 1689, the English Bill of Rights went further in protecting the rights of citizens. The document said that parliamentary elections should be held regularly.
It upheld the right to a trial by jury and allowed citizens to bear arms. It also affirmed the right of habeas corpus, the idea that no person could be held in prison without first being charged with a specific crime.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL ISSUES
What are some of the essential ideas found in the Magna Carta?
» In this engraving, William and Mary of England receive the English Bill of Rights. Cite Evidence How did the English Bill of Rights expand the rights given to citizens in the Magna Carta?
ELPS
ELPS READING 4-C.3
Read the first two of the text. Use words such as examples in paragraphs
sentences.
America Draws on Its Own Traditions
Americans enjoyed a long tradition of representative government. The Virginia colonists set up the House of Burgesses. Eventually, each colony elected its own legislature.
Self-Government Americans were also used to relying on written documents that clearly identified the powers and limits of government. The Mayflower Compact, written in 1620, was the first document of self-government in North America. Each of the 13 colonies had a written charter granted by the monarch or by Parliament.
Answerable to the People The framers of the Constitution also drew on their own experiences. The Founding Fathers bitterly remembered their grievances against the English king. In writing the Constitution, they sought to prevent such abuses.
For example, the Declaration of Independence accused the king of placing military power above civilian authority. The Constitution made the elected President “Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy . . . and of the militia of the several states.” The Declaration protested that the king had made judges “dependent on his will alone.” The Constitution set up a court system independent of the President and legislature.
The framers were very familiar with the workings of the Second Continental Congress, the Articles of Confederation, and their own state governments. Much that went into the Constitution came either from the Articles or from the state constitutions.
The Influence of the Enlightenment The
Constitution was also based on the ideas of the European Enlightenment. Enlightenment thinkers believed that people could improve society through the use of reason. Many of the Constitution's framers had read the works of Enlightenment thinkers.
John Locke The English writer John Locke published Wo Treatises of Government in 1690. In it, he stated two important ideas. First, Locke declared that all people had natural rights to life, liberty, and property.
Second, he suggested that government is an agreement between the ruler and the ruled. The ruler
A
Constitution for the United States 170	4.3 Ideas That Influenced the Constitution
must enforce the laws and protect the people. If a ruler violates the people’s natural rights, the people have a right to rebel.
Locke’s ideas were popular among Americans. The framers of the Constitution wanted to protect people’s natural rights and limit the power of government. They saw the Constitution as a contract between the people and their government.
Locke’s principle of a natural right to property was established in the Constitution. Certain guarantees in the Constitution protect the rights of people to own private property, enforce contracts, and engage freely in business activities. These freedoms are essential to free enterprise. Article I of the Constitution also gave Congress the power to regulate commerce and encourage the free flow of goods between states, creating an environment in which business could thrive.
Baron de Montesquieu The French Enlightenment thinker Baron de Montesquieu (mahn tus kyoo) influenced American ideas of how a government should be constructed. In his 1748 book The Spirit of the Laws, Montesquieu stressed the importance of the rule of law. The powers of government, he said, should be clearly defined and divided up. He suggested that three separate branches be created: the legislative, executive, and judicial. This idea, known as the separation of powers, was designed to keep any person or group from gaining too much power.
A
New Tradition Emerges from Others The Founding Fathers drew on many traditions. In the end, though, the new system of government was not quite like anything that came before it.
When John Adams received the news from Philadelphia while serving as an ambassador to Great Britain, he wrote, ‘As we say at sea, huzza for the new world and farewell to the old one!” He called the Constitution “the greatest single effort of national deliberation that the world has ever seen.”
RECALL
What idea from Baron de Montesquieu influenced American government?
TWO -	'
TREATISES
OF
Government:
In the former,
The falfe Principles and Foundation
SixROBERT FILMER,
And his Foilow ers,
ARE
2>etectrt> and
The latter is an
E S S A Y
CONCERNING
The True Original, Extent, and End O F Civil - Government.
’	Sije Oceano gg^iaonCo^ggea,
&0NPOJV, Printed 1® jtovjhatit and JtknCbtrckM at the Slack in PttrnWkr-Htv, 1694.
» John Locke’s writings suggested the idea that governments exist to secure and protect the rights of their citizens.
©
Interactive Gallery
ASSESSMENT
1.	Support Ideas with Examples The text says that the founders admired the Romans because they had successfully built a republic. What are some examples of the Roman ideas that the founders admired?
2.	Make Predications What do you think the Americans’ attitude toward the English Bill of Rights would lead to?
3.	Draw Conclusions Why is the right of habeas corpus so important in the U.S. criminal justice system?
4.	Draw Conclusions Why do you think the founders learned to value written documents around the time they wrote the Constitution?
5. Summarize the influences of Enlightenment thinkers on the United States Constitution.
A
Constitution for the United States 171 4.3 Ideas That Influenced the Constitution
Interactive Flipped Video
*
The framers of the Constitution sent the document to Congress, along with a letter from George Washington. Washington warmly approved the document, predicting that the Constitution would “promote the lasting welfare of that country so dear to us all.”
1.A, 4.E, 15.A, 15.C, 17.A
» Objectives
Identify the key issues in the constitutional debate.
Explain how the Constitution was finally ratified.
Describe how the Bill of Rights was added to the Constitution.
» Key Terms
Federalist
Antifederalist
Federalist Papers
amend
Bill of Rights
ratify
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
of people. Besides, they said, the Constitution protected citizens well enough as it was.
Antifederalists responded that a bill of rights was needed to protect such basic liberties as freedom of speech and religion. Unless these rights were spelled out, they could be too easily ignored or denied by the government. Americans, after all, had just fought a revolution to protect their freedoms against a too-powerful government. Violations of those freedoms were the main grievances cited in the Declaration of Independence. Antifederalists argued that a bill of rights was needed to address those grievances. Under the new Constitution, the President would have veto power over Congress—the people’s representatives. Surely placing so much power in one man’s hands, the Antifederalists argued, likewise demanded the protection of a bill of rights.
One of the strongest supporters of a bill of rights was George Mason of Virginia. In 1776, Mason had written the bill of rights for Virginia’s constitution. After the Constitutional Convention refused to include a bill of rights, Mason joined the Antifederalists. Mason wrote a pamphlet opposing the ratification of the Constitution. The pamphlet was titled, simply, “Objections to This
Federalists,
Antifederalists, and the Bill of Rights
The Federalists and the
Antifederalists
The framers had set up a process for the states to approve, or ratify, J the new government. The Constitution would go into effect when at least 9 of the 13 states had ratified it. In 1787 and 1788, voters in each state elected delegates to special state conventions. These delegates would decide whether or not to ratify the Constitution.
For Ratification: The Arguments of the Federalists In every state, heated debates took place. Supporters of the Constitution ' called themselves Federalists because they favored a strong federal, or national, government. They called people who opposed the Constitution Antifederalists.
Federalists argued that the Articles of Confederation left too much power with the individual states. This imbalance produced a dangerously weak central government. Disputes among the states, Federalists said, made it too difficult for the government to function.
Federalists believed that the Constitution gave the national government the authority it needed to function effectively. At the same time, they said, the Constitution still protected the rights and powers of the individual states.
Federalists James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay wrote a series of essays, known today as the Federalist Papers. Their purpose was to explain and defend the Constitution. They used pen names, but most people knew who they were. Today, the Federalist Fapersremain among the best discussions of the political theory behind the American system of government.
Courts still refer to the Federalist Papers in making decisions about the principles and role of government. In this way, they have had a lasting influence on the U.S. system of government.
Against Ratification: The Arguments of the Antifederalists Antifederalists felt that the Constitution made the national government too strong and left the states too weak. They also thought that the Constitution gave the President too much power. Patrick Henry of Virginia protested:
This Constitution is said to have beautiful features, but . . . they appear to me horribly frightful. . . . Your President may become king ... If your American chief be a man of ambition and abilities, how easy is it for him to render himself absolute!
—Patrick Henry, Speech to the Virginia Convention,
June '1788
Most people expected George Washington to be elected President. Antifederalists admired Washington, but they warned that future Presidents might lack Washington’s honor and skill. For this reason, they said, the office should not be too powerful.
IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
What was the Antifederalists’ primary objection to the Constitution?
A
Bill of Rights The chief objection of Antifederalists was that the Constitution had no bill, or list, of rights. Federalists held that it was impossible to list all the natural rights
» Federalist Alexander Hamilton, shown here with his arms outstretched outside of King’s College in New York City, favored ratification of the Constitution.
Interactive Chart
172
A
Constitution for the United States 173 4.4 Federalists, Antifederalists, and the Bill of Rights Constitution of Government.” Its opening words were equally direct: “There is no Declaration of Rights.”
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What was the purpose of George Mason’s pamphlet?
The Ratification Process
One by one, the states voted. Delaware led the way, ratifying on December 7, 1787. Pennsylvania and New Jersey soon followed. In these states, as in the states that ratified later, the main cause behind ratification was that Federalists were able to convince a majority of delegates that the Constitution would bring an improved system of government.
The Debate in New England Massachusetts was the first key battleground. There, the old patriots Sam Adams and John Hancock held back their support. The delay seemed “very ominous,” wrote Madison. Finally, Adams and Hancock convinced the state convention to recommend adding a bill of rights to the Constitution.
Still the debate continued. “Some gentlemen say, don’t be in a hurry . . . don’t take a leap in the dark,” a Federalist farmer told his fellow delegates. “I say . . . gather fruit when it is ripe.” In February 1788, Massachusetts became the sixth state to ratify.
In June, New Hampshire joined ranks as the ninth state. The new government could now go into effect. Still, the nation’s unity remained in doubt. New York and
Virginia, two of the largest states, had not yet ratified the plan. In both states, Federalists and Antifederalists were closely matched.
A
Vote to Ratify After Long Debates In Virginia, Patrick Henry, George Mason, and Governor Edmund Randolph led the opposition. Still a spellbinding speaker, Henry at one point spoke for seven hours. Soft-spoken, James Madison could not match Henry’s dramatic style. Yet his arguments in favor of the Constitution were always clear, patient, and to the point. The tide finally turned when Governor Randolph changed his mind. He gave his support only when the Federalists promised to support a bill of rights. Virginia voted to ratify in late June.
In New York, the struggle went on for another month. In July 1788, the state convention voted to ratify. North Carolina followed in November 1789. Only Rhode Island, which had refused to send delegates to the Constitutional Convention, remained. On May 29, 1790, Rhode Island became the last state to ratify the Constitution. The effect of ratification was to create a new system of government for the United States, the same basic system that remains in effect today.
Celebration of a New Constitution Throughout the land, Americans celebrated the news that the Constitution was ratified. The city of Philadelphia set its festival for July 4, 1788.
A festive parade filed along Market Street, led by soldiers who had fought in the Revolution. Thousands
A
Constitution for the United States 174 4.4Federalists, Antifederalists, and the Bill of Rights cheered as six colorfully outfitted horses pulled a blue carriage shaped like an eagle. Thirteen stars and stripes were painted on the front, and the Constitution was raised proudly above it. Benjamin Rush, a Philadelphia doctor and strong supporter of the Constitution, wrote to a friend, ‘“Tis done. We have become a nation.”
RECALL
What factor encouraged many states to vote for ratification?
New Amendments
Americans voted in the first election under the Constitution in January 1789. As expected, George Washington was elected President, while John Adams was chosen as Vice President.
The first Congress met in New York City, which was chosen as the nation's first capital. Congress quickly turned its attention to adding a bill of rights to the Constitution. Several states had agreed to ratify the Constitution only on the condition that a bill of rights be added.
Amending the Constitution The framers had establisheda way to amend, or change, the Constitution to modify the rules for the national government. They did not want people to make changes lightly, however. Thus, they made the process of amending the Constitution fairly difficult. In 1789, the first Congress proposed a set of 12 amendments, written by James Madison. As required by the Constitution, the amendments then went for ratification by the states, three fourths of which had to ratify an amendment for it to take effect. By December 1791, three fourths of the states had ratified 10 of the 12 amendments. These 10 amendments became known as the Bill of Rights.
The Bill of Rights James Madison insisted that the Bill of Rights does not give Americans any rights. The rights listed, he said, are natural rights that belong to all human beings. The Bill of Rights simply prevents the government from taking these rights away.
Some of the first 10 amendments were intended to prevent the kind of abuse Americans had suffered under English rule. For example, the Declaration of Independence had condemned the king for forcing colonists to quarter troops in their homes and for suspending trial by jury. The Third Amendment forbids the government to quarter troops in citizens homes without their consent. The Sixth and Seventh Amendments guarantee the right to trial by jury.
Other amendments protected individual rights as uiany states had already done. In 1786, the Virginia
» George Washington was inaugurated as the first President of the United States on April 30, 1789.
Statute of Religious Freedom stated that “No man shall be compelled to frequent or support any religious worship ... or otherwise suffer, on account of his religious opinions or belief.” Religious freedom became the very first right listed in the First Amendment. The First Amendment also emphasized a key element of the republic: freedom of speech, or the ability to express different points of view.
At first, individual state governments were not considered subject to the Bill of Rights. It was only after the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868 and subsequent Supreme Court decisions that the Bill of Rights was applied to the states.
Still, with the Bill of Rights in place, the new framework of government was complete. Over time, the Constitution would grow and change along with the nation.
Id IDENTIFY What amendments make up the Bill of
Rights in the Constitution?
EX323 ELPS READING 4.C.4
Read aloud the text with a partner. Pay attention to the numbers used in the text and how they are related to the words that follow them. A
Constitution for the United States 175 4.4Federalists, Antifederalists,andtheBillofRights ASSESSMENT
4.
1.	Summarize the ratification procedure for the Constitution.
2.	Hypothesize the reasons that the Anti-Federalists feared too much power resting with the central government.
3.	Support Ideas with Examples What examples can you think of that support the idea that a bill of rights is a good idea?
5.
Draw Conclusions What do you think is the most likely reason that Rhode Island was the last state to ratify the Constitution?
Generate Explanations Why do you suppose James Madison, a Federalist, was the person responsible for writing amendments to the Constitution, which became the Bill of Rights?
The Constitution is divided into three main parts: the Preamble, or opening statement, the articles, and the amendments.
The original U.S. Constitution is on display at the National Archives in Washington, D.C.
Interactive Flipped Video
Understanding the Constitution
15.D, 18.A, 21.A
The Preamble, the Articles, and the Amendments
The Preamble identifies six goals of the Constitution:
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
—Preamble to the Constitution
» Objectives
Explain the basic goals of the Constitution as defined by the Preamble.
Identify the framework of government that the Constitution established.
Summarize the seven basic principles of American government.
Identify the powers and duties of the legislative branch, executive branch, and judicial branch of the American government.
To Form a More Perfect Union When the Constitution was written, the states saw themselves almost as separate nations. The framers wanted to work together as a unified nation. Fortunately for us, they achieved this goal. Think of what it would be like if you had to
» Key Terms
preamble
domestic tranquillity civilian
general welfare
liberty
article
popular sovereignty limited government checks and balances federalism House of
Representatives
Senate
bill
electoral college Supreme Court appeal
unconstitutional
veto
override
impeach
constitutional
initiative
local government judicial review infrastructure
177
©
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
A
Constitution for the United States 176
4-4Federalists, Antifederalists, and the Bill of RigWs
» In order to ensure domestic tranquillity, the National Guard helps provide assistance during local and national crises.
exchange your money every time you visited another state!
To Establish Justice The framers knew the nation needed a uniform system to settle legal disputes, 1 Today the American justice system requires that the law be applied fairly to every American, regardless of race, religion, gender, or country of origin.
To Insure Domestic Tranquillity Under the Constitution, the national government has the power to insure domestic tranquillity, or peace and order > at home. Have you seen reports of the National Guard providing assistance in a disaster area? By such actions, the government works to insure domestic tranquillity.
To Provide for the Common Defense Every country has a duty to protect its citizens against foreign attack. The framers of the Constitution gave the national government the power to raise armies and navies. At the same time, they placed the military under civilian, f or nonmilitary, control.
Separation of Powers
Legislative Branch
(Congress)
Passes Laws
•	Can override President's veto
•	Approves treaties and presidential appointments
•	Can impeach and remove President and other high officials
•	Creates lower federal courts
•	Appropriates money
•	Prints and coins money
•	Raises and supports armed forces
•	Can declare war
•	Regulates foreign and interstate trade
Executive Branch
Judicial Branch
(President)
f
Carries Out Laws
•	Proposes laws
•	Can veto laws
•	Negotiates foreign treaties
•	Serves as commander in chief of the armed forces
•	Appoints federal judges, ambassadors, and other high officials
•	Can grant pardons to federal offenders
(Supreme Court and Other Federal Courts) <
Interprets Laws
•	Can declare laws unconstitutional
•	Can declare executive actions unconstitutional
» Analyze Charts How is the power to make and enforce laws divided among the three branches of government?

Interactive Chart
» As one of the three branches of the U.S. government, the U.S. Congress meets regularly to revise existing laws and make new ones.
To Promote the General Welfare The Constitution set out to give the national government the means to promote the general welfare, or the well-being of all its citizens. For example, today the National Institutes of Health leads the fight against many diseases.
To Secure the Blessings of Liberty During the Revolution, the colonists fought and died for liberty, or freedom. It is no surprise that the framers made ! liberty a major goal of the Constitution. Over the years, amendments to the Constitution have extended the “blessings of liberty” to all Americans.
The Articles and the Amendments The main body of the Constitution is a short document, divided into seven sections called articles. Together, they establish the framework for our government.
Seven Articles The first three articles describe the three branches of the national government: legislative, executive, and judicial. Article I establishes the powers of and limits on Congress. Articles II and III do the same for the President and the courts.
Article IV deals with relations among the states. It requires states to honor one another’s laws and legal decisions. It also sets out a system for admitting new states. Article V provides a process to amend the Constitution.
Article VI states that the Constitution is the supreme law of the land.” This means that states may
not make laws that violate the Constitution. If a state law conflicts with a federal law, the federal law prevails. The final article, Article VII, sets up a procedure for the states to ratify the Constitution.
Twenty-Seven Amendments In more than 200 years, only 27 formal changes have been made to the Constitution. The first 10 amendments, known as the Bill of Rights, were added in 1791.
H DEFINE
What is each section of the Constitution called?
ELPS READING 4.D.1
Read the text’s title and subheadings. Create a graphic organizer and then fill it in while reading this text.
ELPS
Seven Basic Principles
The Constitution reflects seven basic principles. They are popular sovereignty, limited government, separation of powers, checks and balances, federalism, republicanism, and individual rights.
Popular Sovereignty The framers of the Constitution lived at a time when monarchs claimed that their power came from God. The Preamble, with its phrase "We the people,” reflects a revolutionary new idea: that a government gets its authority from the people. This
principle, known as popular sovereignty, states that the people have the right to alter or abolish their government.
Limited Government The colonists had lived under a British government with nearly unlimited powers. To avoid giving too much power to their new government, the framers made limited government a principle of the Constitution. In a limited government, the government has only the powers that the Constitution gives it. Just as important, everyone from you to the President must obey the law.
Separation of Powers To further limit government power, the framers provided for separation of powers. The Constitution separates the government into three branches. Congress, or the legislative branch, makes the laws. The executive branch, headed by the President, carries out the laws. The judicial branch, composed of the courts, judges whether actions violate laws and whether laws violate the Constitution.
Checks and Balances A system of checks and balances safeguards against abuse of power. Each branch of government has the power to check, or limit, the actions of the other two. The separation of powers allows for this system of checks and balances.
-ution for the United States
178	4.5 Understanding the Constitution
A
Constitution for the United States 179 4.5 Understanding the Constitution » In a republican form of government, people elect representatives to carry out their will, rather than taking part directly. Draw Conclusions Why is it important for people to vote in elections?
» Congress meets at the U.S. Capitol in Washington D.C. The building is home to the Senate, the House of Representatives, and many congressional offices.
Interactive Gallery
institution for the United States
4.5 Understanding
Federalism The Constitution also reflects the principle of federalism, or the division of power between the federal government and the states. Among the powers the Constitution gives the federal government are the power to coin money, declare war, and regulate trade between the states. States regulate trade within their own borders, make rules for state elections, and establish schools. Some powers are shared between the federal government and the states. Powers not clearly given to the federal government belong to the states.
Republicanism The Constitution provides for a republican form of government. Instead of taking part directly in government, citizens elect representatives to carry out their will. Once in office, representatives vote according to their own judgment. However, they must remain open to the opinions of the people they represent. For that reason, members of Congress maintain websites and offices in their home districts.
Individual Rights The final principle the U.S. Constitution reflects is individual rights, such as freedom of speech, freedom of religion, and the right to trial by jury. You will read more about the rights protected by the Constitution later.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What is the principle of federalism?
ELPS
ELPS LISTENING 2.C.3
Read the text. Then listen to words presented in class and to sentences you and your classmates will create using those words.
The Legislative Branch— Congress
The first and longest article of the Constitution deals with the legislative, or lawmaking, branch. Article I sets up the Congress to make the nation’s laws. Congress is made up of two bodies: the House of Representatives and the Senate.
The House of Representatives The larger of the two bodies is the House of Representatives, which currently has 435 members. Representation in the House is based on population, with larger states having more representatives than smaller states. Every state has at least one representative.
Representatives are elected by the people of their district for two-year terms. As a result, the entire House is up for election every other year. Representatives may run for reelection as many times as they want.
the Constitution

The leader of the House is called the Speaker. The Speaker of the House is one of the most powerful people in the federal government. The Speaker regulates debates and controls the agenda. If the President dies or leaves office, the Speaker of the House is next in line after the Vice President to become President.
The Senate Unlike the House, the Senate is based on equal representation of the states, with two senators for each state. Senators are elected to six-year terms. Their terms overlap, however, so that one third of the members come up for election every two years. This way, there is always a majority of experienced senators.
Not all of the Founders trusted the judgment of the common people. As a result, they called for senators to be chosen by state legislatures. Over the years, the nation slowly became more democratic. The Seventeenth Amendment, ratified in 1913, provided that senators be directly elected by the people of each state, like members of the House.
The Vice President of the United States is president of the Senate. The Vice President presides over the Senate and casts a vote when there is a tie.
The Vice President cannot, however, take part in Senate debates. When the Vice President is absent, the Senate’s president pro tempore, or temporary president, presides.
Powers of Congress The most important power of Congress is the power to make the nation’s laws. All laws start as proposals called bills. A new bill may be introduced in either the House or the Senate. However, an appropriations bill, which is a bill that sets aside money for government programs or operations, must be introduced in the House. After a bill is introduced, it is debated. If both houses vote to approve the bill, it is then sent to the President. If the President signs the bill, it becomes a law.
The Constitution gives Congress many other powers besides lawmaking. Article I, Section 8, lists most of the powers of Congress. They include the power to levy, or require people to pay, taxes and to borrow money. Congress also has the power to coin money, to establish post offices, to fix standard weights and measures, and to declare war.
The Elastic Clause Not all the powers of Congress are specifically listed. Article I, Section 8, Clause 18, states that Congress can “make all laws which shall be necessary and proper” for carrying out its specific duties. This clause is known as the elastic clause because it enables Congress to stretch its powers to deal with the changing needs of the nation.
» United States senators sit for a formal portrait in the Senate chamber of the Capitol.
Americans have long debated the true meaning of the elastic clause. What did the framers mean by the words necessaryand proper?For example, early leaders debated whether the elastic clause gave Congress the right to set up a national bank, even though the Constitution does not specifically give Congress that power.
Today, political parties still have different points of view on how the elastic clause should be used. Some Americans continue to worry that Congress might use the elastic clause to abuse its powers. Sometimes, the terms strict constructionists and loose constructionists are used to refer to people with different views of the clause.
Strict constructionists think that Congress (and the courts that interpret laws) should strictly construe, or narrowly interpret, the elastic clause. They believe the elastic clause should be used to stretch the powers of government rarely, and only to a small degree. Partly because many members of the Republican Party today are strict constructionists, that party particularly believes in reducing or eliminating some government programs.
In contrast, loose constructionists think that Congress (and the courts that interpret laws) should loosely construe, or broadly interpret, the elastic clause. They think the elastic clause should be used to stretch
A
Constitution for the United States 181	4.5 Understanding the Constitution
the powers of government as often as needed, and to a greater degree. Many members of the Democratic Party today are loose constructionists. Because they believe that the role of the federal government can and should expand as needed, they may support government programs opposed by members of the Republican Party.
The Committee System The First Congress, meeting from 1789 to 1791, considered a total of 31 new bills. Today, more than 10,000 bills are introduced in Congress each year. Clearly, it would be impossible for every member of Congress to give each new bill careful study. To deal with this problem, Congress relies on committees.
Both the House and the Senate have permanent, or standing, committees. Each committee deals with a specific topic, such as agriculture, banking, business, defense, education, science, or transportation. Members who have served in Congress the longest are usually appointed to the most important committees.
Congress may sometimes create joint committees made up of both Senate and House members. One of the most important kinds of joint committees is the
» One presidential duty is to honor American soldiers. Here President Barack Obama awards a Medal of Honor to a member of the U.S. Armed Forces in the White House.
conference committee. Its task is to settle differences between House and Senate versions of the same bill.
Q IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How does a bill become a law? : The Executive Branch— The President
Article II of the Constitution sets up an executive branch to carry out the laws and run the affairs of the national government. The President is the head of the executive branch. Other members include the Vice President, and the executive departments. The heads of the executive departments, who advise the President, are called the Cabinet.
The Many Roles of the President You are probably more familiar with the President than with any other government leader. You see him on television climbing in and out of airplanes, greeting foreign leaders, or making speeches. Yet, many Americans do not know exactly what the President does.
The framers thought that Congress would be the , most important branch of government. Thus, while the Constitution is very specific about the role of the legislature, it offers fewer details about the powers of the President. Beginning with George Washington, Presidents have often taken those actions they thought necessary to carry out the job. In this way, they have ' shaped the job of President to meet the nation’s changing needs.	s
The President is our highest elected official and, along with the Vice President, the only one who represents all Americans. As head of the executive branch, the President has the duty to carry out the nation’s laws. The President directs foreign policy and has the power to make treaties with other nations and to appoint ambassadors.	’
The President is commander in chief of the armed forces. (Only Congress, however, has the power to declare war.) As the nation’s chief legislator, the President suggests new laws and works for their passage.
The President can grant pardons and call special sessions of Congress. The President is also the living symbol of the nation. Presidents welcome foreign leaders, make speeches to commemorate national holidays, and give medals to national heroes.
The Electoral College The President is elected for a four-year term. As a result of the Twenty-second j
Ititution for the United States
182	4.5 Understanding the Constitution
Electoral College Votes, 2012-2020
New Hampshire (4),
Vermont (3).
Rhode Island (4) 'Connecticut (7) New Jersey (14) Delaware (3)
400 km Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
KEY
(9) Indicates the number of electoral votes for the state
» The number of electors each state has is based on the combined total of the state’s Senators and Representatives. Analyze Maps Why might the number of a state’s electors change?
Massachusetts (11)
' i	<2°> 2?^
Indiana 9ftl?
' Illinois I (11) 1 Wesr (20)	k .Virginia'
'	1	g) .Virginia J;KMaryland (10)
(13)^D^ District of Columbia (3)
/North Carolina^
(15)
Souths Carolina
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
400 mi
Amendment, adopted in 1951, no President may be elected to more than two complete terms.
The framers set up a complex system for electing the President, known as the electoral college. When Americans vote for President, they do not vote directly for the candidate of their choice. Rather, they vote for a group of electors who are pledged to the candidate. The number of a state’s electors equals the number of its Senators and Representatives. No state has fewer than three electors.
A few weeks after Election Day, the electors meet in each state to cast their votes for President. In most states, the candidate with the majority of the popular vote in that state receives all that state's electoral votes. The candidate who receives a majority of the electoral votes nationwide becomes President.
Because of the “winner-take-aH” nature of the electoral college, a candidate can lose the popular vote nationwide but still be elected President. This has happened four times. Today, some people favor replacing the electoral college with a system that directly elects the President by popular vote. Others oppose any change, pointing out that the electoral
college has served the nation well for more than 200 years.
RECALL
How many terms is the President allowed to serve?
The Judicial Branch—The Supreme Court
Article III of the Constitution establishes a Supreme Court and authorizes Congress to establish any other courts that are needed. Under the Judiciary Act of 1789, Congress set up the system of federal courts that is still in place today.
Lower Courts Most federal cases begin in district courts. Evidence is presented during trials, and a jury or a judge decides the facts of the case. A party that disagrees with the decision of the judge or jury may appeal it, that is, ask that the decision be reviewed by a higher court. The next level of courts is the appellate courts, or courts of appeal.
Appellate court judges review decisions of district courts to decide whether the lower court judges interpreted and applied the law correctly.
A
Constitution for the United States 183 4.5 Understanding the Constitution Supreme Court At the top of the American judicial system is the Supreme Court. The Court is made up of a Chief Justice and eight Associate Justices. The President appoints the justices, but Congress must approve the appointments. Justices serve for life.
The main job of the Supreme Court is to serve as the nation's final court of appeals. It hears cases that have been tried and appealed in lower courts. Because its decisions are final, the Supreme Court is called “the court of last resort.”
The Supreme Court hears and decides fewer than 100 cases each year. Most of the cases are appeals from lower courts that involve federal laws. After hearing oral arguments, the justices vote. Decisions require a majority vote of at least five justices.
Early on, the Court asserted the right to declare whether acts of the President or laws passed by Congress are unconstitutional, that is, not allowed under the Constitution. This power is called judicial review. The need for judicial review was first discussed in the Federalist Papers, and the Supreme Court has argued that the power is implicit in the Constitution, but it was not established until the 1803 case Marbury v. Madison,which gave the Supreme Court the power of judicial review.
Although powerful, the Supreme Court is limited by the system of checks and balances. One check on its power is that Congress can, in certain circumstances, remove Supreme Court justices from office. Also, the
Supreme Court does not have the power to pass or enforce laws, it can only provide judicial review of laws.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What was the significant about the Supreme Court decision in the case Marbury v. Madison (1803)?
Preventing Abuse of
Power
The framers hoped that the separation of powers among three branches would prevent the rise of an all-powerful leader who would rob the people of their liberty. But how could the framers prevent one of the branches from abusing its power? To answer this problem, they set up a system of checks and balances.
The system of checks and balances allows each of the three branches of government to check, or limit, the power of the other two. The President, for example, can check the actions of Congress by vetoing, or rejecting, bills that Congress has passed. Congress can check the President by overriding, or overruling, the veto, with a two-thirds vote in both houses. Congress must also approve presidential appointments and ratify treaties made by the President. The Supreme Court can check both the President and Congress by declaring laws unconstitutional through its power of judicial review.
Congress's most extreme check on the President is its power to remove the President from office. To do this, the House of Representatives must impeach, or bring
Reviews more than 7,000 petitions a year and selects 100-150 cases based on:
•	National importance of the case
•	Need to eliminate conflicting court opinions related to a case
•	Opportunity to set a precedent
•	Agreement among 4 of 9 Justices to accept a case
•	Disputes between states or between a state and citizens of another state
•	Actions involving ambassadors or vice consuls of foreign nations
•	Actions between the U.S. and a state
State Supreme Court
•	Appeals of appellate court cases
Appellate Court
•	Appeals of trial court cases Trial Court
•	Civil and criminal cases
•	Juries render verdicts
•	Judges enforce procedures
Court of Appeals
•	Appeals of cases originating in U.S. district courts
•	Reviews decisions by federal agencies
District Court
•	Civil and criminal cases
•	Juries render verdicts
•	Judges ensure fair trial
» A case can reach the Supreme Court through several paths. Draw Conclusions Why do you think so few cases reach the Supreme Court?
A
Constitution for the United States 184 4.5 Understanding the Constitution charges of serious wrongdoing against, the President. The Senate then conducts a trial. If two thirds of the senators vote to convict, the President must leave office. Throughout our history, only two Presidents—Andrew Johnson and Bill Clinton have been impeached by the House. Neither was convicted by the Senate.
The principle of checks and balances is based on the principle of separation of powers. Because the powers of government are separated into three branches, each branch can check the power of the other two. Like many principles in the Constitution, separation of powers and the system of checks and balances came from European philosophers of the Enlightenment.
One of these philosophers was Baron de Montesquieu, who wrote The Spirit of Laws. Montesquieu argued that the powers of government should be split among three equal branches: legislative, executive, and judicial. This would prevent any branch of government from becoming too powerful and protect individuals’ rights. We can see many of Montesquieu’s ideas reflected in the Constitution today.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What checks does Congress have over the President?
» The members of both houses of the Texas State Legislature, as well as the governor, carry out their duties at the State Capitol Building in Austin.
State Government
One principle of the Constitution is federalism, or the division of powers between the federal and state governments. The federal government deals with national issues. The states have the power to meet more local needs. There are also some powers that are shared. But state governments provide many basic services that Americans use each day.
The Question of States’ Rights Many Americans originally opposed the Constitution because they thought it gave too much power to the federal government at the expense of the state governments. The Tenth Amendment was written to help ensure that the states keep powers not granted the federal government:
The powers not delegated to the
United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people.
Tenth Amendment to the Constitution
Some Americans point to the Tenth Amendment as support for what is often called states rights, or the idea that the federal government should not infringe
IF
A
Constitution for the United States 1£ on states’ powers. A similar idea is that of state sovereignty, or the idea that, within a state, the state government is supreme.
The federal government has used the elastic clause to assume powers that some believe belong to the states. Thus, the debate over how power should be shared between the federal and state governments has been a matter of controversy through most of American history.
State Constitutions Each of the 50 states has a constitution that sets forth the principles and framework of its government. Although constitutions vary from state to state, they must all conform to the Constitution of the United States. If a conflict arises, the national Constitution—the “supreme law of the land”—prevails.
Most state constitutions resemble the national Constitution in form. They start with a preamble stating their goals and include a bill of rights guaranteeing individual liberties. State constitutions tend to be longer and more detailed than the national Constitution. Many include provisions on finance, education, and other matters.
State constitutions set up a government with three branches. The powers of the legislative, executive, and judicial branches on the state level are similar to those of the national government.
i 4.5 Understanding the Constitution
» The California state government established the Golden Gate State Park in the 1870s, and ordered the construction of the Golden Gate Bridge, which opened to the public in 1937.
» Locally-supported public education is important not only to the states, but also to the nation.
institution for the United States
Changing State Constitutions State constitutions can be changed in several ways. In the most common method, amendments are proposed by the state legislature and approved by the people in an election.
In almost one half of the states, citizens can act directly to change the constitution. In a process known as the constitutional initiative, sponsors of an amendment gather signatures on a petition. When the required number of signatures is attained, the petition goes to the legislature or to the voters for approval.
Finally, a state can rewrite its constitution. With the approval of the legislature or the people, the state may call a constitutional convention. The new constitution is then submitted to the people for official approval.
The States’ Obligations to Citizens State governments provide a wide range of services. They maintain law and order, enforce criminal law, protect property, and regulate business. They also supervise public education, provide public health and welfare programs, build and maintain highways, operate state parks and forests, and regulate use of state-owned land.
The states, not the federal government, have the main responsibility for public education in the United States. Most students attend schools paid for and overseen by the state. The state sets general standards for schools and establishes a recommended course of study. It also sets requirements for promotion and graduation.
Each state must build and maintain its own infrastructure, or system of transit lines, roads, bridges, and tunnels. State departments or agencies manage more than 6,000 state parks and recreation areas. To help maintain high standards, state governments license the professionals who serve you, such as doctors, lawyers, and teachers.
When you are old enough to drive, the state will test you and, if you pass, give you a license. State police keep highways safe and protect us against criminal acts.
M IDENTIFY
What are some examples of services that states provide to their citizens?
The Responsibilities of Local Government
The Constitution defines the powers of the federal and state governments. But it does not mention local government, that is, government on the county parish, city, town, village, or district level. Local governments are created entirely by the states and
186	4.5 Understanding the Constitution
have only those powers and functions that states give them.
Local governments have perhaps the greatest impact on our daily lives. At the same time, it is on the local level that citizens have the greatest opportunity to influence government.
Public Education The service that local governments spend the most money on is education. While state governments set standards for schools, it is the cities, towns, or school districts that actually run them. Local school boards build schools and hire teachers and staff. They also have a strong say in which courses will be taught. However, school officials must make all decisions within the guidelines set by state law.
Education is one area of local government where citizens exert a great deal of control. Local residents may give up part of their time to serve on local school boards. In most communities, voters have the right to approve or turn down the annual school budget.
Many Other Services Local governments provide a variety of other services. They hire or support firefighters, police, and garbage collectors. Local governments provide sewers and water, maintain local roads and hospitals, and conduct safety inspections of buildings and restaurants. In many cases, water and sewage treatment plants are owned and run by local governments. Other communities hire private companies to supply local needs.
Over the years, Americans have looked to local government for more than basic services. Today, most local governments provide libraries and parks and other cultural and recreational facilities.
In larger cities, citizens expect their local governments to support airports, sports arenas, and civic centers. Public funding for such facilities is often the subject of debate in major cities.
fei IDENTIFY On what service for citizens do local
governments spend the most money?
ASSESSMENT
1- Determine Relevance What is the significance of the Preamble’s opening words, “We the people of the United States”?
A
Constitution for the United States 187 » Local governments take responsibility for providing citizens with public services, such as firefighters and police.
2.	Generate Explanations Why is Article VI, which declares that the Constitution is the “supreme law of the land,” so important?
3.	Analyze Information What is meant by the statement that representatives “must remain open to the opinions of the people they represent.”
4.	Compare and Contrast the viewpoints of strict constructionists and loose constructionists.
5.	Support Ideas with Evidence How would you use the Tenth Amendment of the Constitution to support the idea that the federal government should not assume more power than it already has?
4.5	Understanding the Constitution
The First Amendment protects freedom of speech and freedom of the press, or media. The media provide the public with a variety of perspectives on local, state, and national issues.
The framers foresaw that Americans might need to change the Constitution to address flaws or changed circumstances, However, they did not want to make it too easy to change the Constitution.
As a result, they created a complex amendment process. The process may take months, or even years, to complete.
Interactive Flipped Video
16.A, 19.B, 21.B, 25.A, 25.C
» Objectives
Explain how the Constitution can be amended.
Identify the rights that the Bill of Rights protects.
Summarize how later amendments expanded democratic rights.
» Key Terms
Bill of Rights First Amendment Second Amendment incriminate Civil War
Amendments
Nineteenth
Amendment
Twenty-sixth
Amendment
civil
Amending the
Constitution
Constitutional Amendment
Article V outlines two ways to propose an amendment. An amendment may be proposed by two thirds of both the House and the Senate, or by i a national convention called by Congress at the request of two thirds of the state legislatures. The second method has never been used.
An amendment may also be ratified in one of two ways. An amendment may be approved by the legislatures of three fourths of the states. Every amendment but the Twenty-first was ratified using this method. In the second method, an amendment may be approved by special conventions in three fourths of the states.
Not all amendments proposed by Congress have been ratified. In fact, Congress has proposed six amendments that the states refused to ratify.
Id IDENTIFY Which article of the Constitution outlines the amendment
process?
The Bill of Rights
As one of its first acts, the new Congress drafted a series of amendments in 1789 and sent them to the states for approval. In 1791, the Bill of Rights, the first ten amendments, became part of the Constitution.
Free Speech, Press, and Religious Freedom The First Amendment safeguards basic individual liberties. It protects freedom of religion, speech, and the press. It also guarantees the right to assemble peacefully and to petition the government to change its policies.
Because of the First Amendment, you cannot be arrested for criticizing a government official. You can attend the house of worship of your choice or none at all.
You can read newspapers that do not represent the views of an official political party. These freedoms are important in a constitutional republic because they allow citizens to make informed decisions and take part freely in political life. Still, there are limits on the First Amendment. For example, the government can limit free speech if there is “a clear and present danger,” such as in time of war.
The First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of religion has a long history. Many colonists came to America to escape religious persecution. They wanted
to be able to pray and worship freely. Today, Americans are allowed to practice religion as they please, without fear of government interference. The guarantee of freedom of religion has allowed the religious diversity that is part of the American way of life.
Protection Against Abuse of Power The Second Amendment states, “A well-regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.” Other amendments reflect the colonists’ experiences under British rule. The Third Amendment says that Congress may not force citizens to put up troops in their homes. The Fourth Amendment protects Americans from unlawful searches of home or property.
Since early times, Americans have debated the exact meaning of the Second Amendment. Some believe that it guarantees individuals a basic right to bear arms. Others argue that it simply guarantees the individual states the right to maintain militias. The question of limits to gun ownership is one of the most complex and controversial constitutional issues facing Americans today.
Protecting the Rights of the Accused The Fifth through Eighth amendments deal with the rights of people accused of crimes. The Fifth Amendment states
Methods of Amending the Constitution > PROPOSED


es
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.



OjR
By national convention
called by Congress at request of % of state legislature
y
RATIFIED
I
By legislature
in % of states
«SI
By state convention
in % of states
ELPS LISTENING 2.C.4
Read the text. Then learn new academic vocabulary through interaction with a partner, as directed by your teacher. » Analyze Information After an amendment to the Constitution has been Proposed by both the Senate and the House of Representatives, what two options exist for the states to ratify the amendment?
|7)W«1
188
A
Constitution for the United States 189 4.6 Amending the Constitution that people cannot be forced to incriminate, or give evidence against, themselves. The Sixth Amendment guarantees the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial, or fair, jury. It also states that people accused of crimes have the right to know the charges against them, as well as the right to confront the person making the charges. The Seventh Amendment provides for juries for civil, or noncriminal, trials. The Eighth Amendment forbids judges from ordering excessive bail or fines or “cruel and unusual punishments.”
Upholding Individual Rights Some Americans had opposed adding a Bill of Rights. They argued that, if specific rights were listed in the Constitution, Americans might lose other rights that were not listed. The Ninth Amendment solved that problem. It makes clear that a citizen’s individual rights are not limited to those listed in the Constitution.
The Tenth Amendment reaffirmed the framers’ plan to create a limited federal government. It states that all powers not given to the national government or denied to the states are reserved for the states or for the people.
BT RECALL
Which amendments protect the rights of those accused of a crime?
ELPS
ELPS READING 4.C.2
Move around the classroom as directed by your teacher. Note the meanings of labels and other kinds of writing on objects around the classroom.
Additional Amendments
Since the addition of the Bill of Rights, the Constitution has been amended only 17 times. Many later amendments reflect changing attitudes about equality and the expansion of democracy.
The Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth amendments are known as the Civil War Amendments. The Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery. The Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed citizenship to former slaves. The Fifteenth Amendment declared that states may not deny the vote to any citizen on the basis of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” This guaranteed African American men the right to vote.
Other amendments further expanded voting rights. The Nineteenth Amendment, ratified in 1920, gave women the right to vote.
Women achieved this victory after more than 70 years of struggle. In 1971, changing attitudes toward the rights and responsibilities of young people gave
CHOOSING AMENDMENTS ' BILL OF RIGHTS
Another of the original 12 amendments was ratified in 1992.

W
Finally, 10 AMENDMENTS were ratified by the states in 1791 as the Bill of Rights.
» Analyze Information Approximately what percentage of the more than 200 amendments proposed by the states’ ratifying conventions finally made it into the Bill of Rights?

A
Constitution for the United States 190 4.6 Amending the Constitution birth to the Twenty-sixth Amendment. It lowered the minimum voting age from 21 to 18.
ITlDENTlFY Which amendment gave women the
right to vote?
assessment
1.	Hypothesize why the framers of the Constitution did not want to make it easy to amend the Constitution.
2.	Support Ideas with Examples Give and explain an example of something that supports the idea
that “In order to self-govern, people must be able to access information and make their own decisions”?
3.	Summarize What fear did the Ninth Amendment address and how did it do so?
4.	Hypothesize why the framers of the Constitution thought it was important to be able to change it with amendments, although they made it difficult to do so.
5.	Draw Conclusions Why do you think the Constitution has been amended seventeen times in addition to the amendments called the Bill of Rights?
4.6	Amending the Constitution
A
Constitution for the United States 1
j Interactive Flipped Video
©
A citizen is a person who owes loyalty to a particular nation and is entitled to all its rights and protections.
19.C, 19.D, 19.F, 20.B
» Objectives
Summarize what makes a person a citizen of the United States.
Identify how Americans can develop democratic values.
Describe the responsibilities of citizenship.
» Key Terms
citizen
naturalize immigrant resident alien civic virtue patriotism jury duty
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Citizens' Rights and Responsibilities
American Citizenship
To be a citizen of the United States, you must have fulfilled one of three requirements:
You were born in the United States, or at least one parent is a citizen of the United States.
You were naturalized, that is, you have completed the official legal process for becoming a citizen if you were born outside the United States.
You were 18 or younger when your parents were naturalized.
Becoming a Citizen Throughout American history, many millions of immigrants have become naturalized citizens. An immigrant is a person who enters another country in order to settle there.
To illustrate the naturalization process, we will look at one immigrant’s story.
At age 15, Carla Rojas came to the United States from Argentina. Her mother returned home two years later, but Rojas decided to remain. After submitting numerous documents and photographs and attending several interviews, she received permission to remain in the country as a resident alien, or noncitizen living in the country.
192
After a required five-year waiting period, Carla submitted an application for citizenship. She had to take a test to show that she was comfortable with the English language and that she was familiar with American history and government. She also had to show that she was of “good moral character.” Then, a naturalization examiner interviewed her about her reasons for becoming a citizen.
At last, Rojas stood before a judge and took the oath that confirmed her as an American citizen:
I hereby declare, on oath, that
... I will support and defend the
Constitution and laws of the United
States against all enemies . . . that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same ... so help me God.
—Oath of Allegiance to the United States
A naturalized citizen enjoys every right of a natural-born citizen except one. Only natural-born citizens may serve as President or Vice President.
The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizens All
American citizens have equal rights under the law. Americans have the right to speak freely, to worship as they choose, to vote, and to serve on juries. These rights are not based on inherited wealth or family connections. They are the rights of American citizens.
Still, nothing is free. As you will see, if we want to enjoy the rights of citizenship, we must also accept its responsibilities.
These rights and responsibilities reflect America’s national identity—the common set of values that unites Americans. For example, citizens have both the right and the responsibility to vote. This reflects the principles of independence, liberty, and self-governance upheld in the Constitution and valued by the American people.
0
DEFINE
What is a citizen? The Importance of Civic Virtue
The Founding Fathers admired civic virtue, that is, the willingness to work for the good of the nation or community even at great sacrifice. They looked to Toman models such as Cincinnatus, who, it was said, gave up a peaceful life on his farm when called upon to load Rome. Again and again, leaders such as George
L
Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and John Adams put the common good ahead of their own wishes. These three presidents maintained that democracy requires virtuous behavior by citizens. Citizens must put the greater good ahead of their own desires when they follow the law, serve on juries, and make informed decisions about voting.
The leaders feared that without this responsible behavior, American liberty would be at risk. How can a democracy run if individuals do not think about what is best for society and not just for themselves?
You do not have to go to great lengths to be a good citizen. At home, at school, and in the community, you can work to develop the values that are the foundation of our democratic system. Among these basic values are honesty and compassion. Others include patriotism, respect, responsibility, and courage.
A key democratic value is patriotism, or a feeling of love and devotion toward one’s country. A sense of patriotism inspires Americans to serve their nation. It also encourages us to fulfill the ideals set forth in the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights.
As citizens, we must respect ourselves, our families, our neighbors, and the other members of our community. Respect may also involve objects or ideas.
» Participating in community projects such as this clean-up activity strengthens the ties between community members and helps to ensure that public spaces remain usable.
Interactive Chart
A
Constitution for the United States 193 4.7 Citizens’ Rights and Responsibilities For example, a good citizen respects the property of others and the laws of the nation.
Responsibility may be both personal and public. We must accept responsibility for ourselves and the consequences of our actions and behaviors. In a democracy, individuals are expected to look out for themselves and for one another. For example, parents have a duty to support their families and teach their children. This is important because children depend on parents and families depend on one another. As a student, you have a responsibility to learn.
Courage may be either physical or moral. Soldiers, police, or firefighters display physical courage when they risk their lives for the good of others. Moral courage enables us to do the right thing even when it is unpopular, difficult, or dangerous. Americans such as George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, Susan B. Anthony, and Martin Luther King, Jr., faced risks in order to defend democratic values.
DEFINE
What is civic virtue? ELPS
ELPS READING 4.F.1
With a partner, look at the two photographs and describe them. Then use that information and information from the text surrounding key words to help you understand the text as you read it.
Responsible Citizenship
As citizens, we must accept our own civic responsibilities. Only if government and citizens work together can we meet our needs as a democratic society.
Responsible Citizens Vote As citizens of a republic, we have the right to select the people who will represent us in government. But if that right is to have any meaning, then we must fulfill our responsibility to vote. A good citizen studies the candidates and the issues in order to make responsible choices.
Responsible Citizens Obey Laws and Rules In the
Constitution, “we the people” give the government the power to make laws for us. Thus, we have a duty to obey the nation’s laws. We have thousands of laws that keep us from hurting one another, regulate contracts, and protect citizens’ rights. No one can know them all, but you must know and obey the laws that affect your life and actions.
You also have a responsibility to obey rules. You already have rules at home and rules at school—even rules to games you play. These rules are not enforced by the government as laws are. Like laws, however, they keep us safe, help us live together, and teach us to be accountable for our behavior. By learning to obey rules such as not to hit or cheat when we are young, we learn about responsible citizenship.
Voter Turnout, 1900-2012
100
c
1900	1920	1940	1960	1980	2012
Year
SOURCES: U.S.
Census Bureau, Historical Statistics of the United States, Statistical Abstracts of the United States, and the Federal Election Commision
» Analyze Data Based on the information in the chart, what trend can you identify in the percentage of the population actually voting from 1960 to 2000?
§11 Interactive Chart
V
4.7	Citizens’ Rights and Responsibilities
A
Constitution for the United States 19Z Responsible Citizens Defend the Nation
Americans have the duty to help defend the nation against threats to its peace or security. At age 18, all men must register for the draft. In time of war, the government may call them to serve in the armed forces. Many young citizens feel the duty to enlist in the military without being called.
Responsible Citizens Serve on Juries The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to trial by jury. In turn, every citizen has the responsibility to serve on a jury when called. Jury duty is a serious matter. Jurors must take time out from their work and personal lives to decide the fate of others.
Responsible Citizens Participate in Their Communities Many Americans use their time and skills to improve their communities or to help others. As you read, David Levitt was in middle school when he started a program to help the needy in his Florida community. Many young people participate in walk-a-thons or bike-a-thons for charity. Others volunteer in hospitals or fire departments. When serious natural disasters damage cities and regions, millions of citizens aid in rescue efforts, donate blood, or contribute money and supplies.
Responsible Citizens Stay Informed on Public
Issues Thomas Jefferson observed, “If a nation expects to be ignorant and free ... it expects what never was and never will be.” You cannot protect your rights as a citizen unless you know what they are. You cannot choose elected officials who will make good decisions unless you know where they stand on the issues. It is your responsibility to be informed. You can watch television news programs and read newspapers, magazines, or government pamphlets. Your work in school will help you become educated about our history, our government, and the workings of our society.
IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What are some ways a citizen can stay informed about public issues?
» Waiting to cross the street until the light is green illustrates one way that citizens observe their responsibility to obey the law.
ASSESSMENT
1.	Hypothesize why someone who wants to become a citizen must take an oath of allegiance to the United States.
2.	Generate Explanations Why is bullying an example of being an irresponsible citizen?
3.	Draw Conclusions Why do you think the text says that, to be a good citizen, you have a responsibility to learn?
4.	Apply Concepts Why do you think George Washington was a good role model for citizenship?
5.	Summarize what you, as a student, should do to be a good citizen.
A
Constitution for the United States 195 4.7 Citizens’ Rights and Responsibilities 1.	Explain Articles of Confederation Explain the issues surrounding important events of the American Revolution, including writing the Articles of Confederation. Write a paragraph explaining why the Continental Congress drafted the Articles of Confederation. Consider what
the Articles of Confederation were, why the Continental Congress believed that it needed the Articles of Confederation, and what made the process of writing the Articles of Confederation difficult. 4.C
2.	Summarize Weaknesses of Articles of Confederation Summarize the weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation. Write a paragraph summarizing the weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation. Consider the limits placed on Congress and what the Articles of Confederation lacked. 15.B
3.	Explain Significance of 1787 Explain the significance of 1787, the year the U.S. Constitution was written. Write a paragraph explaining the significance of the Constitutional Convention. Answer the following questions: When and where did the Constitutional Convention open? What was the original goal of the Convention? What did the delegates to the Convention decide to do instead? 1.C
4.	Analyze the Great Compromise Summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution by analyzing the issues of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, including the Great Compromise. Write a paragraph analyzing how the Great Compromise peacefully settled the debate over the Virginia and New Jersey Plans. Define the term compromise, describe the Great Compromise, and explain why it was a compromise. 4.D, 21 .C
5.	Analyze Importance of Virginia House of Burgesses Analyze the importance of the Virginia House of Burgesses to the growth of representative government. Write a paragraph analyzing how Virginia’s House of Burgesses contributed to the growth of representative government. Identify what the Virginia House of Burgesses was and what tradition it established. 3.B
6.	Explain Grievances Addressed in U.S.
Constitution Explain how the grievances listed in the Declaration of Independence were addressed in the U.S. Constitution. Write a paragraph explaining how the Founding Fathers sought to prevent the abuses that the Declaration of Independence accused King George of committing. Explain how the Constitution handled the grievances that the king placed military power above civilian authority and made judges “dependent on his will alone.” 15.C
7.	Explain Role of John Locke Explain the role of significant individuals, such as John Locke, in the development of self-government in colonial America. Use the quotation above and the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to write a paragraph explaining how John Locke influenced the development of self-government embodied in the U.S. Constitution. Identify John Locke, use the quotation below to identify the two important ideas about government Locke contributed, and explain how these ideas influenced the framers of the U.S. Constitution. 20.A
The reason why men enter into society is the preservation of their property; and the end while they choose and authorize a legislative is that there may be laws made, and rules set, as guards and fences to the properties of all the society, . . .
Whensoever, therefore, the legislative [power] shall transgress [go beyond; break] this fundamental rule of society, and either by ambition, fear, folly, or corruption, endeavor to grasp themselves, or put into the hands of any other, an absolute power over the lives, liberties, and estates of the people, by this breach of trust they forfeit [give up] the power the people had put into their hands. . .
— John Locke., Two Treatises cd Government. Kkh
8.	Explain How Rights and Responsibilities Reflect National Identity Explain how the rights and responsibilities of U.S. citizens reflect our national identity. Write a paragraph explaining how rights and responsibilities of citizens reflect our national identity. Explain how rights and responsibilities are tied together, define the term national identity, and provide an example of how the right to vote reflects our national identity. 19.F
A
Constitution for the United States 196 5,000
4.500 4,000
3.500 3,000
2.500 2,000
1.500 1.000
500
1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 i860 1870 1880 1890 1900
With 5,000 free white male residents, territories could elect a state assembly and send non-voting representatives to Congress,
With 60,000, residents could write a state constitution and apply for statehood.
9- Explain Northwest Ordinance Explain how the Northwest Ordinance established principles and procedures for orderly expansion of the United States. Use the graph above and other sources to write a paragraph explaining the principles and procedures the Northwest Ordinance established for how the Northwest Territory would be governed and how its territories could become states. Explain what the ordinance set up for the Northwest Territory, what the ordinance protected and banned, what could happen once a territory had 5,000 free white residents, and what could happen once a territory had 60,000 free residents. (See graph above.) 6.A
Explain Development of Property Rights Explain why a free-enterprise system of economics, including property rights, developed in the new nation. Write a Paragraph explaining how John Locke’s principle of a natural right to property was established in the U.S. Constitution. Explain the rights related to property guaranteed by the Constitution and how these rights contribute to free enterprise. 14.A
11.	Analyze Arguments For Ratification Analyze the arguments for ratification of the Constitution. Write a paragraph analyzing the arguments the Federalists put forward for ratifying the Constitution. Identify who the Federalists were, analyze why the Federalists thought the Articles of Confederation needed to be replaced, and analyze why the Federalists believed the Constitution should be ratified. 4.E
12.	Identify Influence of the Federalist Papers Identify the influence of ideas from historic documents, including the Federalist Papers, on the U.S. system
of government. Write a paragraph identifying the role the Federalist Papers played in ratifying the Constitution and the influence of this document on the U.S. system of government. Identify the purpose of the Federalist Papers, identify who wrote the Federalist Papers, and identify the influence of the Federalist Papers. 15.A
A
Constitution for the United States tST	IMATING 1 HL EPHCT OP COMPROMISE	',
POPULATION J
FREE WHITES
HO	442,177 FREE
HZ3>
Counting only the free population, 	
TT»
13.	Identify Influence of Antifederalist Writings Identify the influence of ideas from historic documents, including selected Antifederalist writings, on the U.S. system of government, and support a point of view on a social studies issue. Using Antifederalist primary sources and other sources, write a paragraph explaining the Antifederalists’ point of view that the Constitution needed a bill of rights. Identify how the Antifederalists’ ideas influenced the U.S. system of government and use details to explain whether or not you agree with the Antifederalists’ position that a bill of rights was necessary to the Constitution. 15.A, 29.E
14.	Analyze Three-Fifths Compromise Summarize a historical event in which a compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution by analyzing the issues of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, including the Three-Fifths Compromise. Using the chart above and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing how the Three-Fifths Compromise peacefully settled disagreements between northern states and southern states. Describe the issue and the compromise, and use the chart to analyze the effect of the compromise on Virginia’s representation in Congress. (See graphic above.) 4.D, 21 .C
15.	Analyze Arguments of George Mason Analyze the arguments of the Anti-Federalists, including those of George Mason. Use the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing George Mason’s argument against the Constitution. Identify George Mason and analyze his reasons for joining the Antifederalists in opposing the Constitution. 17.A
16.	Describe Effects of U.S. Constitution Describe the effects of creation and ratification of the U.S. Constitution. Using the quotation below and other sources, write a paragraph about the six goals of the U.S. Constitution listed in the Preamble. Identify the goals and describe why the framers thought these goals were important. 1.A
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America-
Preamble to the U.S. Constitution
17.	Analyze Principle of Checks and Balances Analyze how the U.S. Constitution reflects the principle of checks and balances. Write a paragraph analyzing the principle of checks and balances. Identify what is meant by the term checks and balances, analyze why the framers made checks and balances a principle of the Constitution, and provide examples of how the different branches can check each other. 15.D
18.	Identify Origin of Judicial Review Identify the origin of judicial review. Write a paragraph identifying what judicial review is and when it was established. Identify what is meant by judicial review and which Supreme Court case established judicial review. 18.A
19.	Identify and Support Different Points of View of Political Parties Identify different points of view of political parties on important contemporary issues, and support a point of view on a social studies issue or event. Identify the Republican and Democratic points of view on the elastic clause of the Constitution and write a paragraph supporting either the Republican or Democratic point of view. Identify what the elastic clause is and each party’s view of it, and use evidence to support your point of view. 21 .A, 29.E
20.	Analyze the Principle of Individual Rights Analyze how the U.S. Constitution reflects the principle of individual rights by summarizing the rights guaranteed
in the Bill of Rights. Write a paragraph summarizing how the Bill of Rights protects individual rights. Address each amendment in your paragraph. 15.D, 19.B
21.	Analyze Impact of First Amendment on Religious Freedom Trace the development of religious freedom in the United States by analyzing the impact of the First Amendment guarantees of religious freedom on the American way of life. Write a paragraph describing how the First Amendment protects religious freedom. Indicate how the First Amendment protects religious freedom and how protecting religious freedom is important to the American way of life, both in colonial times and today. 25.A, 25.C
22.	Describe Importance of Free Speech and Free Press Describe the importance of free speech and free press in a constitutional republic. Write a paragraph describing why free speech and a free press are important in a constitutional republic. 21.B
23.	Summarize and Explain Becoming a Naturalized Citizen Write a paragraph about becoming a naturalized U. S. citizen. Summarize the criteria and explain the process. 19.E
24.	Summarize Amending U.S. Constitution Summarize the purposes and processes for amending the U.S. Constitution. Use the chart above and other sources
to write a paragraph summarizing the amendment process. Describe the purpose of the amendment process and explain why the framers created a complex system for amending the Constitution. Describe the process for proposing and ratifying amendments. (See graphic above.) 16.A

A
Constitution for the United States 198 A
Constitution for the United States 199
TEKS ASSESSMENT
25.	Evaluate Founding Fathers As Models of Civic Virtue Evaluate the contributions of the Founding Fathers as models of civic virtue. Write a paragraph evaluating the Founding Fathers as models of civic virtue. Define the term civic virtue and give examples of how the Founding Fathers showed this trait. 20.B
26.	Explain Importance of Personal Responsibilities Explain the importance of personal responsibilities, including accepting responsibility for one’s behavior and supporting one’s family. Write
a paragraph explaining the importance of personal responsibility. Explain the importance of taking responsibility for one’s own behavior and supporting one’s family. 19.C
27.	Identify Responsible Citizenship Identify examples of responsible citizenship, including staying informed on public issues. Using the quotation below and other sources, write a paragraph identifying why responsible citizens stay informed on public issues. Answer the following questions: What did Jefferson mean by his statement? Why is it important to be informed? How can people stay informed? 19.D
If a nation expects to be ignorant and free ... it expects what never was and never will be.
—T horn a s Jeffers o n.
28.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: How much power should the government have? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
i
A
Constitution for the United States 200 Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
PRACTICE
'iWKi ‘‘r’.-fffi'i!
A
Constitution for the United States 201
1 A major strength of the Articles of Confederation was that they— A prevented Congress from declaring war B gave states freedom to make decisions C created a very powerful federal government D prevented Congress from levying taxes on individual states
2 After the Revolutionary War ended, demand for farm goods went down, leading to— F an economic boom G an economic depression H a period of agricultural reform J the government printing more money
A
Constitution for the United States 202 Access additional practice questions
•	Regular Parliamentary elections
•	Right to bear arms
•	Right of habeas corpus
Which historical document gave the Founding Fathers the ideas for these rights? A The Magna Carta B The English Bill of Rights C The Mayflower Compact D The Articles of Confederation
FEDERALIST:
A COLLECTION
ESSAYS,
K L W C O N S T
T V T I O K,
iion, v o L. I.
The authors of the papers pictured argued that the—
F states should not ratify the Constitution because they wanted George Washington to be president
G states should not ratify the Constitution because more power should be granted to individual states
H states should ratify the Constitution because power should be taken away from the federal government
J states should ratify the Constitution because the Articles of the Confederation left too much power with the states
If you have trouble with... Question	1
See Lesson	4.1
TEKS	!	15.B
2	l"	3	i	4
4.1	j	4.3	I	4.4
I 4.E
A
Constitution for the United States 5	How does the Constitution reflect the principle of checks and balances?
A
It gives states the power to establish schools. B
It separates the government into three branches. C
It gives the federal government the power to coin money. D
It states that each branch of government can limit power of the other two. I hereby declare, on oath, that... I will support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States against all enemies... that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same...
so help me God.
—Oath of Allegiance to the United States
This oath is made when a person—
F becomes a resident alien G takes the citizenship examination H becomes a naturalized American citizen J is interviewed by a naturalization examiner
A
Constitution for the United States 204 Access additional practice questions
7


PACIFIC
OCEAN
KEY
□ Claimed by Britain
■	Claimed by Spain
■	Claimed by France [ ) Claimed by Russia
■	13 Colonies
— Territory boundary from the Proclamation of 1763
North America in 1763
Based on the map above, the Proclamation of 1763 angered colonists because— A it made no effort to claim lands west of the Mississippi River B it provoked Indians in lands west of the Appalachian Mountains C it allowed Spanish traders and trappers access to the Ohio River D it banned settlement on British lands west of the Appalachian Mountains
8 Minutemen were able to make British forces retreat at the Battle of Concord because— F they outnumbered them G they were well-trained soldiers H they knew the geography of the region J they surrounded them on the village green
Jf you have trouble with...
Question	5	6	7	8
See Lesson	4.5	4.7	3.2	3.3
TEKS 15.D 19.E 4.A 4.C
A
Constitution for the United States * TOPIC 5 TEKS Master
The Early Republic
In this Topic, you will learn about the years of the early republic in the United States.
You will also find lots of interesting ways to master the TEKS associated with this Topic.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
LESSON OUTLINE
5.1: Washington’s Presidency 1.A, 5.A, 5.B,5.E, 14.A, 22.A, 22.B
5.2: The Origin of Political Parties 5.C 5.3: John Adams’s Presidency 5.E, 22.A 5.4: Jefferson’s Presidency 1.C, 5.E, 6.E, 14.A,
18.A, 18.B, 21 .A, 22.A
5.5: Madison and the War of 1812 5.A, 5.D, 5.E 5.6: Monroe’s Presidency 5.E, 7.A, 18.B, 22.B
TEKS
1.A, 1.C, 5.A, 5.B, 5.C, 5.D, 5.E, 6.E, 7.A, 7.D, 10.A,
10.C, 12.A, 13.A, 14.A, 18.A, 18.B, 21 .A, 22.A, 22.B,
23.C, 31 .A
Connect
Connect with this Topic by watching a video about a fascinating person or situation related to this Topic. You can think about how this Topic connects to your own life. And you’ll encounter an intriguing Essential Question: What should governments do?
Begin your study by trying the following
NBC LEARN
Watch My Story Video: William Clark, Mapping the American Frontier
Launch your Project:
Hold a Mock Cabinet Meeting
r
206
I
• Investigate
; The Lesson Outline lists : all the lessons you will ; investigate in this Topic. As : you read and interact with : key content, the story of the ; early republic will come to ; life. Read the texts; try the ; interactivities. Investigate ; the fascinating story of ; the early years of the U.S.
; republic.
; And keep working on your ; Project to help build your i mastery of the Topic TEKS.
>> Digital interactivity from the online course
•	Synthesize
: You will get a chance to pull : together everything you have : learned by thinking again about the : Essential Question. Consider how : you would you answer the question
•	now: What should governments do?

Demonstrate
Now you will get to show what you know. You will get a chance to complete the TEKS Review and Assessment pages, answering questions about every TEKS for this Topic. Or you can write an essay, take part in a discussion, or share your Project. No matter which you do, it will be a real-world demonstration of the things you now understand about the Topic.................
TEKS in Topic 5	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 5	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
1.A	9, 20	10.C	12,13,15
1.C	11	12. A	19
5.A	14	13. A	18
5.B	2,6	14. A	4
5.C	3	18. A	5
5.D	16,17, 18	18.B	6
5.E	8,16	21 .A	21
6.E	10	22.A	1
7.A	19	22.B	11,17
7.D	20	23.C	15
10. A	7,10	31 .A	13
I
I
I
207
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
What should governments do? 5 The Early Republic (1789-1825)
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1.A, 1.C, 5.A, 5.B, 5.C, 5.D, 5.E, 6.E, 7.A, 7.D, 10.A, 10.C, 12.A, 13.A, 14.A, 18.A, 18.B, 21.A, 22.A, 22.B, 23.C, 31 .A
Enduring Understandings
•	Washington’s presidency created the Cabinet, court system, and other government institutions that continue today.
•	Under Washington, political parties developed over disagreements about policies.
•	Washington, Adams, and Jefferson all worked to keep the early republic neutral in the face of war between Britain and France.
•	The Louisiana Purchase greatly expanded the territory of the United States.
•	The War of 1812 against Britain defended American interests but made little change in relations with Britain.
•	The United States backed newly independent Latin American countries with the Monroe Doctrine.
PEARSON
NBC LEARN
Washington’s inauguration as Resident of the United States
to learn more about William Clark, an explorer of the American West.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com

Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
209
George Washington took the presidential oath of office on April 30, 1789. As the new nation’s first President, Washington shaped the presidency for those who took office after him.
George Washington was inaugurated in New York City on April 30, 1789. A presidential inauguration is the ceremony in which the President officially takes the oath of office. A witness reported that the new President looked “grave, almost to sadness.” Washington, no doubt, felt a great burden. He knew that Americans were looking to him to make the new government work.
lOl Interactive Flipped Video
1.A, 5.A, 5.B, 5.E, 14.A, 22.A, 22.B
» Objectives
Describe the steps Washington took to set up the government of the new republic.
Explain how Hamilton aimed to create a stable economic system.
Describe arguments around Hamilton’s tax plan and the causes and effects of the Whiskey Rebellion.
Explain Washington’s foreign policy, including the goal of neutrality and the impact of his Farewell Address.
» Key Terms
inauguration
precedent
Cabinet
Judiciary Act of
1789
national debt bond peculator
st Bank of the
Jnited States iff
.key Rebellion Revolution
foreign policy
neutral
Neutrality
Proclamation Jay’s Treaty Farewell Address early republic George Washington Thomas Jefferson Alexander Hamilton
Washington’s
Presidency
The First American Presidency
Washington’s presidency marked the beginning of what historians call the early republic. This period, between 1789 and about 1825, began when the first U.S. government was formed under the Constitution. Decisions made during the early republic had a lasting impact on the institutions and culture of the United States. As the first President, Washington showed his leadership qualities and set an example for future generations.
Although the Constitution provided a framework for the new government, it did not explain how the President should govern from day to day. “There is scarcely any part of my conduct,” he said, “which may not hereafter be drawn into precedent.” A precedent (PRES uh dent) is an act or a decision that sets an example for others to follow.
Washington set an important precedent at the end of his second term. In 1796, he decided not to run for a third term. Not until 1940 did any President seek a third term.
Washington’s Cabinet The Constitution said little about how the executive branch should be organized. It was clear, however, that the President needed talented people to help him carry out his duties.
ze
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
210
In 1789, the first Congress created five executive departments. They were the departments of State, Treasury, and War and the offices of Attorney General and Postmaster General. The heads of these departments made up the President’s Cabinet. Members of the Cabinet gave Washington advice and were responsible for directing their departments.
As a proven leader himself, Washington knew he needed to appoint others with similar qualities to his Cabinet. He needed effective leaders who had the ability to persuade others to adopt new proposals and ideas.
Washington set a precedent by choosing well-known leaders to serve in his Cabinet. The two most influential were the Secretary of State, Thomas Jefferson, and the Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton.
Setting Up the Court System The Constitution called for a Supreme Court. Congress, however, had to set up the federal court system. As one of its first actions, Congress passed the Judiciary Act of 1789. It called for the Supreme Court to consist of one Chief Justice and five Associate Justices. Today, the Supreme Court has eight Associate Justices because Congress later amended the Judiciary Act. Washington named John Jay the first Chief Justice of the United States.
The Judiciary Act also set up a system of district courts and circuit courts across the nation. Decisions
made in these lower courts could be appealed to the Supreme Court, the highest court in the land.
LIST
What positions were included in the first presidential Cabinet?
Alexander Hamilton and the National Debt
As Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton faced many problems. Among the most pressing was the large national debt. The national debt is the total amount of money that a government owes to others.
During the Revolution, both the national government and individual states had desperately needed money. They had borrowed heavily from foreign countries and ordinary citizens to pay soldiers and buy supplies. Then, as now, governments borrowed money by issuing bonds. A bond is a certificate that promises to repay the money loaned, plus interest, on a certain date. For example, if a person pays $100 for a bond, the government agrees to pay back $100 plus interest (an additional sum of money) by a certain time.
A
Plan to Reduce the Debt Hamilton wanted to pay off the government’s debts and create a stable economic system for the United States. The plan > Analyze Data Based on the information in the chart, ™^at can^rou conchide tout the economic situation of the federal government when Washington took
The Early Republic 211
