The Revolutionary Era 109	3.1 The French and Indian War
Surprise Attacks in the Forests Braddock's men moved slowly and noisily through the forests. Although warned of danger by Washington and by Indian scouts, Braddock pushed ahead.
As the British neared Fort Duquesne, the French and their Indian allies launched a surprise attack. Sharpshooters hid in the forest and picked off British soldiers, whose bright red uniforms made easy targets.
Braddock himself had five horses shot out from under him before he fell, fatally wounded. Almost half the British were killed or wounded. Washington, too, was nearly killed.
British Setbacks at Lake Ontario and Lake George During the next two years, the war continued to go badly for the British. British attacks against several French forts failed. Meanwhile, the French won important victories, capturing Fort Oswego on Lake Ontario and Fort William Henry on Lake George. (Both forts occupied land that is now part of New York state.) All these defeats put a serious strain on the alliances with the Iroquois who had been counting on the British to protect them from the French. The Iroquois faced
» The French and their Indian allies had the advantage of familiarity with the forests of North America. General Braddock’s forces were ambushed in the forests on their way to Fort Duquesne in 1755.
increasing danger from enemy tribes, who fought them for prisoners and goods.
M inFNTlFY SUPPORTING DETAILS Why were French attacks in the forests successful?	1
Quebec and New France Fall
In 1757, William Pitt became prime minister, meaning he was the new head of the British government. Pitt made it his first job to win the war in North America. Once that goal was achieved, he argued, the British would be free to focus on victory in other parts of the world. So Pitt sent Britain's best generals to North America. To encourage the colonists to support the war, he promised large payments for military services and supplies.
Under Pitt’s leadership, the tide of battle turned.
In 1758, Major General Jeffrey Amherst captured Louisbourg, the most important fort in French Canada. That year, the British also seized Fort Duquesne, which they renamed Fort Pitt after the British leader. The city of Pittsburgh later grew up on the site of Fort Pitt.
The War Turns in Favor of the British The British enjoyed even greater success in 1759. By summer, they had pushed the French from Fort Niagara, Crown Point, and Fort Ticonderoga (ty kahn duh ROH guh). Next, Pitt sent General James Wolfe to take Quebec, capital of New France.
)
Climbing Cliffs to Attack Quebec Quebec was vital to the defense of New France. Without Quebec, the French could not supply their forts farther up the St. Lawrence River. Quebec was well defended, though. ! The city sat on the edge of the Plains of Abraham, ; on top of a steep cliff high above the St. Lawrence. An , able French general, the Marquis de Montcalm, was / prepared to fight off any British attack.
General Wolfe devised a bold plan to capture Quebec. He knew that Montcalm had only a few soldiers guarding the cliff because the French thought that it was too steep to climb. Late at night, Wolfe ordered British troops to row quietly in small boats to , the foot of the cliff. In the dark, the soldiers swarmed ashore, climbed up the cliff, and assembled at the top.
The next morning, Montcalm awakened to a surprise. A force of 4,000 British troops was drawn up and ready for battle on the Plains of Abraham.
Quickly, Montcalm marched his own troops out to join in battle. By the time the fierce fighting was over, both Montcalm and Wolfe lay dead. Moments before
L2 3.1 The French and Indian War	I
North America in 1763
KEY
I
Claimed by Britain 1 Claimed by Spain n Claimed by France I I Claimed by Russia | 13 Colonies - Territory boundary from the Proclamation of 1763
» How did the balance of European power in North America change between 1753 and 1763? What role did Spain play in the war, and what effect did the Treaty of Paris have on New Spain?
interactive Chart
Wolfe died, a soldier gave him the news that the British had won. Wolfe is said to have whispered, "Now, God be praised, I will die in peace.” On September 18, 1759, Quebec surrendered to the British.
British Make Huge Gains The fall of Quebec sealed the fate of New France, though fighting dragged on in Europe for several more years. Finally, in 1763, Britain and France signed the Treaty of Paris, bringing the long conflict to an end.
The Treaty of Paris marked the end of French power in North America. By its terms, Britain gained Canada and all French lands east of the Mississippi River except New Orleans. France was allowed to keep only two islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence and its prosperous sugar-growing islands in the West Indies. Spain, which had entered the war on the French side in 1762, gave up Florida to Britain.
In return, Spain received all French land west of the Mississippi. In addition, Spain gained the vital port city of New Orleans. Spain retained control of its vast empire in Central America and South America.
After years of fighting, peace returned to North America. Yet, in a few short years, a new conflict would
©
break out. This time, the struggle would pit Britain against its own 13 colonies.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did Pitt persuade more colonists to support the war?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Interpret Why did the Iroquois choose to side with the British?
2.	Make Predications about George Washington as a military leader based on what he did in the Ohio River Valley in 1754.
3.	Identify Central Issues What choices did General Braddock make that endangered himself and his men?
4.	Draw Conclusions Based on the text, how much of a priority do you think the French and Indian War was to Britain before William Pitt became head of the British government?
5.	Summarize what the British gained in North America by defeating the French and signing the Treaty of Paris.
The Revolutionary Era
The Revolutionary Era 113
3.1 The French and Indian War
By 1760, the British and their Indian allies had driven France from the Ohio Valley. Their troubles in the region were not over, however. For many years, fur traders had sent back glowing reports of the land beyond the Appalachian Mountains. The dense forests of the Ohio Valley offered new resources that were in short supply in the East, and with the French gone, British colonists wanted to head west to claim the lands for themselves.
The British Secure the Frontier Later that year, Pontiac led an attack on British troops at Fort Detroit. A number of other Indian nations joined him. In a few short months, they captured most British forts in the Ohio country. British and colonial troops then struck back and regained much of what they had lost.
Pontiac’s War, as it came to be called, did not last long. In October 1763, the French told Pontiac that they had signed the Treaty of Paris. Because the treaty marked the end of French power in North America, the Indians could no longer hope for French aid against the British. One by one, the Indian nations stopped fighting and returned home.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What arguments did Pontiac have against the British?
)
I I I I

Tensions with Britain
» Objectives
Describe conflicts in the west after the French and Indian War.
Explain how Britain attempted to ease tensions with the Proclamation of 1763.
Explain why colonists opposed new British taxes such as the Stamp Act.
Describe new colonial leaders who emerged as conflicts with Britain escalated.
Summarize the significance of the Boston Massacre.
» Key Terms
Pontiac’s War Proclamation of
1763
Stamp Act petition boycott repeal
Townshend Acts writ of assistance Boston Massacre committee of
correspondence Abigail Adams
Samuel Adams Mercy Otis Warren Orispus Attucks Patrick Henry John Adams King George III free-enterprise
system
Conflict Over Land
Conflicts in the Ohio Valley Many Native American nations lived * in the Ohio Valley. They included the Senecas, Delawares, Shawnees, Ottawas, Miamis, and Hurons. As British settlers moved into the valley, they often clashed with these Native Americans.
In 1760, the British made Lord Jeffrey Amherst military commander and governor general of its North American colonies. The British sent Amherst to the frontier to keep order. French traders had always treated > Native Americans as friends, holding feasts for them and giving them presents. Amherst refused to do this. Instead, he raised the price of goods traded to Indians. Also, unlike the French, Amherst allowed settlers to build farms and forts on Indian lands.
Angry Native Americans found a leader in Pontiac, an Ottawa chief who had fought on the French side during the French and Indian War. l> An English trader remarked that Pontiac “commands more respect ' amongst these nations than any Indian I ever saw.” In April 1763, Pontiac spoke out against the British, calling them “dogs dressed in red, who have come to rob [us] of [our] hunting grounds and drive away the game.” Pontiac led violent raids against British forts. Hundreds of British were tortured and killed, leading some officials to fear for the safety of colonists near Native American land.	\
Causes of the American Revolution—The Proclamation of 1763
Pontiac’s violent raids against British troops convinced officials that they should prevent British subjects from settling beyond the western frontier for their own safety. To do this, the government issued the Proclamation of 1763. The proclamation drew an imaginary line along the crest of the Appalachian Mountains. Colonists were forbidden to settle west of the line. All settlers already west of the line were “to remove themselves” at once.
The Purposes of the Proclamation The proclamation was meant to protect Indians in the western lands. To enforce it, Britain sent 10,000 troops to the colonies. Few troops went to the frontier, however. Most stayed in cities along the Atlantic coast.
The proclamation also created four new places where colonists could settle. French Canada became part of the province of Quebec. Florida, once a Spanish colony, was divided into East and West Florida. British territories in the Caribbean became the province of Granada.
Colonists Disagree with the Proclamation The
proclamation angered many colonists. They thought it was unnecessary and unjust. They did not think the British government had the power to restrict state settlements. Nor were they concerned with the rights of Native Americans. After winning the French and
www.PearsonTexas.com
Recess your Digital Lesson.
Indian War, many colonists felt they had rights to the land.
Also, colonists now had to pay for the additional British troops that had been sent to enforce the proclamation. In the end, many settlers simply ignored the proclamation and moved west anyway. The proclamation remained most controversial in the west, where colonists clashed with Native Americans. Some colonies, including New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia, claimed lands in the west. The Proclamation would continue to cause problems up to the American Revolution from the tension it caused between the colonists and Britain.
One colonist who defied the Proclamation of 1763 was Daniel Boone. In 1767, Boone visited Kentucky, west of the Appalachians. In 1769, he began what became a two-year journey of exploration through Kentucky. He traveled as far as the Falls of the Ohio, the site of the present-day city of Louisville. Later, he led settlers through the Cumberland Gap along an old Indian path. During his travels, Boone fought a number of battles against the Indians and was taken captive for a short period.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What was the reasoning behind the Proclamation of 1763?
» In April 1763, Chief Pontiac of the Ottawa addressed a gathering of Native Americans to rally them against the British. Soon after, Pontiac led an attack on British troops at Fort Detroit.

Interactive Chart
114
The Revolutionary Era 115	3.2 Tensions with Britain
Causes of the American Revolution—Mercantilism and Taxation
The Seven Years’ War, which included the French and Indian War, plunged Britain deeply into debt. As a result, the taxes paid by citizens in Britain rose sharply. The British prime minister, George Grenville, decided that colonists in North America should help share the burden. In a mercantilist system, colonies were expected to serve the colonial power. Grenville reasoned that the colonists would not oppose small tax increases. The colonists, however, strongly resented these taxes. They argued that mercantilism was unfair because it limited trade and made goods more expensive. Many colonists also objected that the power to raise these new taxes was not granted by the English constitution. Grenville’s policy led to the political and economic conflicts that would divide the colonies and England.
The Sugar Act Taxes the Colonies In 1764, Grenville asked Parliament to approve the Sugar Act, which put a new tax on molasses. The Sugar Act replaced an earlier tax, which had been so high that any merchant who paid it would have been driven out of business. As a
» British Prime Minister George Grenville wanted colonists to help share the burden of debt that Britain had incurred from the Seven Years’ War.
result, most colonial merchants simply avoided the tax by smuggling molasses into the colonies. Often, they bribed tax collectors to look the other way.
The Sugar Act of 1764 lowered the tax. At the same time, the law made it easier for British officials to bring colonial smugglers to trial. Grenville made it clear that he expected the new tax to be paid.
B IDENTIFY
What arguments did the colonists have against more British taxes?
Causes of the American Revolution—The Stamp Act
Grenville also persuaded Parliament to pass the Stamp Act of 1765. The act placed new duties (taxes) on legal documents such as wills, diplomas, and marriage papers. It also taxed newspapers, almanacs, playing cards, and even dice.
All items named in the law had to carry a stamp showing that the tax had been paid. Stamp taxes were used in Britain and other countries to raise money. However, Britain had never required American colonists to pay such a tax.
Resistance to the Stamp Act When British officials tried to enforce the Stamp Act, they met with stormy protests from colonists. Lieutenant Governor Hutchinson’s house in Massachusetts was looted by a mob. He was not the only official to feel the mob’s anger. Some colonists threw rocks at agents trying to collect the unpopular tax.
In addition to riots in Boston, other disturbances broke out in New York City, Newport, and Charleston. In New York City, rioters destroyed the home of a British official who had said he would “cram the stamps down American throats” at the point of his sword.
The fury of the colonists shocked the British. After all, Britain had spent a great deal of money to protect the colonies against the French. The British at home were paying much higher taxes than the colonists. Why, British officials asked, were colonists so angry about the Stamp Act? As one English letter-writer commented,
Our Colonies must be the biggest Beggars in the World, if such small Duties appear to be intolerable Burdens in their Eyes.
—“Pacificus,” Maryland Gazette, March 20, 1766
3.2 Tensions with Britain
The Revolutionary Era H6
Lack of Representation in Parliament Colonists replied that the Stamp Act taxes were unjust and unnecessary. No taxation without representation!” they cried. That principle was rooted in English traditions dating back to the Magna Carta.
Colonists insisted that only they or their elected representatives had the right to pass taxes. Since the colonists did not elect representatives to Parliament, Parliament had no right to tax them. The colonists were willing to pay taxes—but only if the taxes were passed by their own colonial legislatures. They also felt that mercantilist policies like the Navigation Acts were unfair because they restricted their trade, which negatively affected colonists’ income.
Peaceful Protests Lead Toward Revolution The
Stamp Act crisis united colonists from New Hampshire to Georgia. Critics of the law called for delegates from every colony to meet in New York City. There, a congress would form to consider actions against the hated Stamp Act.
In October 1765, nine colonies sent delegates to what became known as the Stamp Act Congress. The delegates drew up petitions to King George III and to Parliament. A petition is a formal written request to someone in authority, signed by a group of people. In these petitions, the delegates rejected the Stamp Act and asserted that Parliament had no right to tax the colonies. Parliament paid little attention.
The colonists took other steps to change the law. They joined together to boycott British goods. To boycott means to refuse to buy certain goods and services. The boycott of British goods took its toll. Trade fell off by 14 percent. British merchants complained that they were facing ruin. So, too, did British workers who made goods for the colonies.
The colonists wanted the government to have less of a say over businesses and trade. They wanted a free-enterprise system, in which the market, rather than the government, determines what goods and services cost. British taxes, the colonists argued, unfairly restricted economic growth.
Finally, in 1766, Parliament repealed, or canceled, the Stamp Act. At the same time, however, it passed a law asserting that Parliament had the right to raise taxes in “all cases whatsoever.”
Btrace What events led to the repeal of the Stamp
Act in 1766?
» Though tarring and feathering was practiced in Britain as a form of punishment, tax collectors escaped this fate in the colonies. However, colonists imagined punishing tax collectors in this way as a protest of the Stamp Act.
!
» Rioters in Boston protest against the Stamp Act. Infer What does the sign being carried through the street imply about the impact the Stamp Act might have on the colonies’ relationship with Britain?

The Revolutionary Era 117	3.2 Tensions with Britain
Causes of the American Revolution—Townshend Acts
In May 1767, Parliament reopened the debate over taxing the colonies. In a fierce exchange, George Grenville, now a member of Parliament, clashed with Charles Townshend, the official in charge of the British treasury.
“You are cowards, you are afraid of the Americans, you dare not tax America!” Grenville shouted.
"Fear? Cowards?” Townshend snapped back. “I dare tax America!”
The next month, Parliament passed the Townshend Acts, which taxed goods such as glass, paper, paint, lead, and tea. The taxes were low, but colonists still objected. The principle was the same: Parliament did not have the right to tax them without their consent.
Searches Without Reason Cause Unrest The
Townshend Acts also set up new ways to collect taxes. Customs officials were sent to American ports with orders to stop smuggling. Using legal documents known as writs of assistance, the officers would
» The Townshend Acts are named after Charles Townshend, the British statesman who passed measures through Parliament to tax colonists for goods ^jjch as glass, paper, paint, and tea.
be allowed to inspect a ship’s cargo without giving a reason.
Colonists protested that the writs of assistance violated their rights as British citizens. Under British law, a government official could not search a person’s property without a good reason for suspecting that the person had committed a crime. Yet the writs of assistance allowed persons and their property to be searched and even seized without reason in the colonies. Colonists angrily cited the words of James Otis of Massachusetts. Arguing against a British attempt to impose writs of assistance six years earlier, he had said:
Now, one of the most essential branches of English liberty is the freedom of one’s house. A man’s house is his castle; and while he is quiet, he is as well guarded as a prince in his castle. This writ, if it should be declared legal, would totally destroy this privilege. Customhouse officers may enter our houses when they	,
please . . . break locks, bars, and everything in their way. ...
■—James Otis, Febiuaiy 24, 1761	;
Colonists Rebel Against British Economic Policies Colonists responded swiftly and strongly to ) the Townshend Acts. From north to south, colonial merchants and planters signed agreements promising to stop importing goods taxed by the Townshend Acts. The colonists hoped that the new boycott would win repeal of the Townshend Acts.
To protest British policies, some angry colonists formed the Sons of Liberty. From Boston to Charleston, | Sons of Liberty staged mock hangings of cloth or straw effigies, or likenesses, dressed as British officials. The hangings were meant to show tax collectors what might happen to them if they tried to collect the unpopular taxes.
Some women joined the Daughters of Liberty. They paraded, signed petitions, and organized a boycott of fine British cloth. They urged colonial women to raise more sheep, prepare more wool, and spin and weave their own cloth. A slogan of the Daughters of Liberty declared, “It is better to wear a Homespun coat than to lose our Liberty.”
Some Sons and Daughters of Liberty also used other methods to support their cause. They visited merchants
and urged them to boycott British imports. A few even threatened people who continued to buy British goods.
B DESCRIBE
How did many colonists respond to the Townshend Acts?
Significant Individuals Provide Colonial Leadership
As the struggle over taxes continued, new leaders emerged in all the colonies. Men and women in New England and Virginia were especially active in the colonial cause.
Massachusetts Citizens Fight for Their Beliefs Samuel Adams of Boston stood firmly against Britain. Sam Adams seemed an unlikely leader. He was a failure in business and a poor public speaker. Often, he wore a red suit and a cheap gray wig for which people poked fun at him. Still, Adams loved politics. He always attended Boston town meetings and Sons of Liberty rallies. Adams’s real talent was organizing people. He worked behind the scenes, arranging protests and stirrrng public support.
Sam's cousin John was another important Massachusetts leader. John Adams had been a schoolteacher before becoming a skilled lawyer. Adams longed for fame and could often be difficult. Still, he was more cautious than his cousin Sam. He weighed evidence carefully before taking any actions. His knowledge of British law earned him much respect.
Mercy Otis Warren also aided the colonial cause. Warren wrote plays that made fun of British officials. The plays were published in newspapers and widely read in the colonies. Warren formed a close friendship with Abigail Adams, the wife of John Adams. The two women used their pens to spur the colonists to action. They also called for greater rights for women in the colonies.
Virginians Join the Cause Virginia contributed many leaders to the struggle against taxes. In the House of Burgesses, George Washington joined other Virginians to protest the Townshend Acts.
A young lawyer, Patrick Henry, became well known as a vocal critic of British policies. His speeches in the House of Burgesses moved listeners to both tears and anger. Once, Henry attacked Britain with such fury that some listeners cried out, “Treason!” Henry boldly replied, "If this be treason, make the most of it! ’ Henry s
» Mercy Otis Warren’s popular plays making fun of British officials motivated colonists to take action against Britain.
Interactive Gallery
words moved a young listener, Thomas Jefferson. At the time, Jefferson was a 22-year-old law student.
IDENTIFY
How did some colonists show leadership? The Boston Massacre
Port cities such as Boston and New York were centers of protest. In New York, a dispute arose over the Quartering Act. Under that law, colonists had to provide housing, candles, bedding, and beverages to soldiers stationed in the colonies. The colonists did not want to house the soldiers. Many, including Sam Adams, did not think the soldiers should be stationed in the colonies at all during peacetime. When the New York assembly refused to obey the Quartering Act, Britain dismissed the assembly in 1767.
Britain also sent two regiments to Boston to protect customs officers from local citizens. To many Bostonians, the soldiers were a daily reminder that Britain was trying to bully them into paying unjust taxes. When British soldiers walked along the streets of Boston, they risked insults or even beatings. A serious clash was not long in coming.

!
i
The Revolutionary Era
118	3.2 Tensions with Britain
The Revolutionary Era 119	3.2 Tensions with Britain
A
Crowd Challenges British Soldiers On the night of March 5, 1770, a crowd gathered outside the Boston customs house. Colonists shouted insults at the “lobsterbacks,” as they called the red-coated British who guarded the building. Then the Boston crowd began to throw snowballs, oyster shells, and chunks of ice at the soldiers.
The crowd grew larger and rowdier. Suddenly, the soldiers panicked. They fired into the crowd. When the smoke from the musket volley cleared, five people lay dead or dying. Among the first to die were Samuel Maverick, a 17-year-old white youth, and Crispus Attucks, a free black sailor.
Colonists were quick to protest the incident, which they called the Boston Massacre. A Boston silversmith named Paul Revere fanned anti-British feeling with an engraving that showed British soldiers firing on unarmed colonists. Sam Adams wrote letters to other colonists to build outrage about the shooting.
The soldiers were arrested and tried in court. John Adams agreed to defend them, saying that they deserved a fair trial. He wanted to show the world that the colonists believed in justice, even if the British government did not. At the trial, Adams argued that the crowd had provoked the soldiers. His arguments convinced the jury. In the end, the heaviest punishment any soldier received was a branding on the hand.
Samuel Adams later expanded on the idea of a letter-writing campaign by forming a committee of correspondence. Members of the committee regularly wrote letters and pamphlets reporting to other colonies on events in Massachusetts. Within three months, there were 80 committees organized in Massachusetts. Before long, committees of correspondence became a major tool of protest in every colony.
The King Repeals Most Colonial Taxes By
chance, on the very day of the Boston Massacre, a bill was introduced into Parliament to repeal most of the Townshend Acts. British merchants, harmed by the American boycott of British goods, had again pressured Parliament to end the taxes. The Quartering Act was repealed and most of the taxes that had angered the Americans were ended. However, King George III asked Parliament to retain the tax on tea. “There must always be one tax to keep up the right [to tax],” he argued. Parliament agreed.
News of the repeal delighted the colonists. Most people dismissed the remaining tax on tea as unimportant and ended their boycott of British goods. For a few years, calm returned. Yet the basic issue—Britain’s power to tax the colonies—remained unsettled. The debate over taxes had forced the
©
CONFLICT0
1765
1765
of 1763
Restricted the movement of colonists west
Taxed all printed paper— legal documents, newspapers, even playing cards
Tax collectors were attacked and colonists staged violent protests.
Act repealed in 1766.
Forced colonists to house Bntish soldiers and provide them food, drink, other supplies.
Families were forced to leave their homes. Colonial expansion ends.
Colonist support for British soldiers turned to resentment. Act expired in 1767.
G	1764
G	1773
Allowed British merchants to bypass colonial merchants and sell lower-priced tea directly to colonists.
1767
Reduced molasses tax and prosecuted smugglers
Colonists resented the tax and it was repealed in 1766.
Colonists dumped tea into Boston Harbor in protest.
tea
New taxes and British soldiers could search property to look for smuggled goods
Boycotts and protests; Acts repealed in 1770.
o
©
» Analyze Charts In what way does the chart show a “rising tide” that would eventually lead to a conflict?
The Revolutionary Era 120	3.2 Tensions with Britain
colonists to begin thinking more carefully about their
political rights.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did John Adams choose to defend the British soldiers?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Contrast the way the French had treated Native Americans in the Ohio Valley with the way the British did under Jeffrey Amherst.
2.	Cite Evidence that shows Daniel Boone ignored the Proclamation of 1763.
3.	Identify Central Issues What details about the colonial response to the Stamp Act tell you that it was a cause of the American Revolution?
4.	Infer Based on James Otis’s response to British writs of assistance, what concerns did the colonists have about British searches?
5.	Interpret How did the Boston Massacre influence the colonists’ feelings towards Britain?
JnhappyBosTon'fee thy Sens deplore, RwhaftwaWks Wmear’d with pdMef»O«w Vtole fatthlefsP--n and his fava geBands, tflth nunthwu oXauc our ftretch lheirbl<MX^Hancl5|rbe | Like time Barbarians ghsmins oertheirfhey, Approve the Carnage and enjoy the Day
IffpnechlefiSorrow Wring for a Tongue, Ot-ifawwpingWortdean ought appeals The plaintive Ohoftr of Victims foch esthete; Tt»Patriots copwttrieare for eschar* food, AsloricusTribute which embalm* the Dead
ftrjpitheMur<JV«rofW#Soul i Should wnaC-t» the foandal of the Land. ■SnetthlherelentUGViDein from her Hand. Keen Exeetatwnaon this Rate inftrlfa’d. ShaS reach aju doe who ntvtr canhehriisi.
» This engraving of the Boston Massacre by Paul Revere helped spread anti-British feeling among colonists.

The Revolutionary Era
121
3.2 Tensions with Britain
On December 16, 1773, a group of colonists emptied hundreds of tea chests into Boston Harbor to protest British taxation.	Why might this act of civil
disobedience mark a turning point?
f BjsM| Interactive Flipped Video
The calm between the colonies and England did not last long. Economic and political disputes continued, this time over a simple drink. Tea was tremendously popular in the colonies. By 1770, at least one million Americans brewed tea twice a day. People “would rather go without their dinners than without a dish of tea,” a visitor to the colonies noted.
1.A, 4.A, 4.B, 4.C, 10.A, 20.C
Taking Up Arms
» Objectives
Explain how a dispute over tea led to further tension between the colonists and Great Britain.
Describe ways that the British Parliament punished the colonists for the Boston Tea Party.
Explain how fighting broke out in Massachusetts, including battles in Lexington and Concord and Bunker Hill.
Explain actions the First and Second Continental Congress enacted to address the crisis with Britain.
» Key Terms
Olive Branch Petition Green Mountain
Boys
Continental Army
Patriot
Loyalist
Battle of Bunker Hill blockade mercenary Tea Act
Thomas Jefferson
Boston Tea Party civil disobedience Intolerable Acts Quebec Act First Continental
Congress
militia
minutemen Battles of Lexington
and Concord
The Boston Tea Party
Mercantilist Policies Lead to the Tea Act Since the 1720s Parliament had given the British East India Company exclusive rights to sell tea to the American colonies. Parliament protected this by mandating that tea sold to the colonies had to be shipped to England first so taxes could be paid. Then the tea was shipped to colonial tea merchants for sale in the American colonies.
This system met resistance due to the taxation of tea in the American colonies. Remember, to maintain its authority over the colonies, Parliament had kept a tax on tea when repealing the Townshend Acts. The tax was a small one, but colonists resented it. As a result, many colonists refused to buy British tea. Also, the colonists were able to get cheaper tea directly from Dutch and French traders who smuggled it to American merchants.
In the 1770s, the British East India Company found itself in deep financial trouble, due in part to dwindling tea sales in the American colonies. As a result, more than 15 million pounds of tea sat unsold in British warehouses.
Parliament tried to help the British East India Company by passing the Tea Act of 1773. The act let the company bypass colonial tea merchants and sell directly to colonists.
The Tea Act also gave the British E ast India Company a rebate on tea taxes. Although colonists would still have to pay the tea tax, they would not have to pay the higher price charged by colonial tea merchants. As a result, the tea itself would cost less than ever before. Parliament hoped this would encourage Americans to buy more British tea.
To the surprise of Parliament, colonists protested the Tea Act. Many colonists were opposed to British mercantilist policies that were supposed to generate wealth for England by taxing the colonies. However, American tea merchants were especially angry because they had been cut out of the tea trade. They believed that allowing the government-sponsored British East India Company to sell tea to Americans violated their right to conduct free enterprise.
Even tea drinkers, who would have benefited from the law, scorned the Tea Act. They believed that it was a British trick to make them accept Parliament’s right to tax the colonies.
A
Boycott Against Tea Once again, colonists responded to the new law with a boycott. A Philadelphia poet, Hannah Griffitts, urged American women to: Stand firmly resolved and bid
Grenville to see That rather than freedom we part with our tea, And well as we love the dear drink when a-dry, As American patriots our taste we deny.
■.Hannah Griffitts in Milcah Martha Moore’s
Daughters of Liberty and women like Griffitts led the boycott. They served coffee or made “liberty tea” from raspberry leaves. At some ports, Sons of Liberty enforced the boycott by keeping the British East India Company from unloading cargoes of tea.
An Act of Civil Disobedience Three ships loaded with tea reached Boston Harbor in late November 1773. The colonial governor of Massachusetts, Thomas Hutchinson, insisted that they unload their cargo as usual.
Sam Adams and the Sons of Liberty had other plans. On the night of December 16, they met in Old South Meeting House. They sent a message to the governor, demanding that the ships leave the harbor. When the governor rejected the demand, Adams stood up and declared, “This meeting can do nothing further to save the country.”
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Adams’s words seemed to be a signal. As if on cue, a group of men in Indian disguises burst into the meetinghouse. From the gallery above, voices cried, “Boston harbor a teapot tonight! The Mohawks are come!”
The disguised colonists left the meetinghouse and headed for the harbor. Others joined them along the way. Under a nearly full moon, the men boarded the ships, split open the tea chests, and dumped the tea into the harbor.
By 10 P.M., the Boston Tea Party, as it was later called, was over. The contents of 342 chests of tea floated in Boston Harbor. The next day John Adams wrote about the event in his diary.
This destruction of the tea is so bold, so daring, so firm ... it must have such important and lasting results that I can’t help considering it a turning point in history.
—Diary of John Adams, December 17, 1773
The Boston Tea Party was an important act of civil disobedience. Civil disobedience is the nonviolent refusal to obey laws that one considers unjust. The colonists had many reasons for this act of civil
» The Robinson Tea Chest is one of two known surviving tea chests from the Boston Tea Party.
122
The Revolutionary Era 123	3.3 Taking Up Arms
disobedience. They wanted to voice their discontent to the British without hurting anyone. They also wanted to stop the tea from entering Boston. The impact of their civil disobedience was perhaps greater than they had expected. Harsh punishment would come from Britain.
IDENTIFY
Why were many colonists dissatisfied with the Tea Act? King George III Strikes Back at Boston
Colonists had mixed reactions to the Boston Tea Party. Some cheered it as a firm protest against unfair British laws. Others worried that it would encourage lawlessness in the colonies. Even those who condemned the Boston Tea Party, though, were shocked at Britain’s harsh response to it. The unrest in Boston and the British reaction to the Tea Party would be yet another cause of the Revolution.
The Intolerable Acts Anger Massachusetts The
British were outraged by what they saw as Boston’s
» Following the Boston Tea Party, British warships closed the port of Boston. Parliament demanded that colonists repay the damages from the loss of tea before they would reopen the port.
lawless behavior. In 1774, Parliament, encouraged by King George III, acted to punish Massachusetts.
Colonists called the four laws they passed the Intolerable Acts because they were so harsh. These Acts pushed the colonists closer to revolution.
First, Parliament shut down the port of Boston. No ship could enter or leave the harbor—not even a small boat. The harbor would remain closed until the colonists paid for the tea they had destroyed in the Boston Tea Party and repaid British officials, such as Thomas Hutchinson, for damage to personal property. Boston’s harbor was central to the life of the city. With the closing of the port, merchants could not sell their goods and the colony’s economy suffered.
Second, Parliament forbade Massachusetts colonists to hold town meetings more than once a year without the governor’s permission. In the past, colonists had called town meetings whenever they wished. Public officials would now be selected by the king's governor rather than be elected by citizens.
Third, Parliament allowed customs officers and other officials who might be charged with major crimes to be tried in Britain or Canada instead of in Massachusetts. Colonists protested. They argued that a dishonest official could break the law in the colonies and avoid punishment by being tried before a sympathetic jury.
Fourth, Parliament passed a new Quartering Act. No longer would redcoats camp in tents on Boston Common. Instead, colonists would have to house British soldiers in their homes when no other housing was available. Colonists viewed this act as yet another tax, because they had to house and feed the soldiers. Many objected to having the British army stationed in the colonies at all.
The Quebec Act Redraws North American Borders About the same time, Parliament also passed the Quebec Act. It set up a government for Canada and gave complete religious freedom to French Catholics. The Quebec Act also extended the borders of Quebec to include the land between the Ohio and Missouri rivers. The act pleased French Canadians. The American colonists were angry, however, because some of the colonies claimed ownership of these lands.
The Intolerable Acts Draw Other Colonies into the Struggle The committees of correspondence spread news of the Intolerable Acts to other colonies. They warned that the people of Boston faced hunger while their port was closed. People from other colonies responded quickly. Carts rolled into the city with rice from South Carolina, corn from Virginia, and flour from Pennsylvania.

The Revolutionary Era 124
3.3 Taking Up Arms
In the Virginia assembly, Thomas Jefferson suggested that a day be set aside to mark the shame of the Intolerable Acts. The royal governor of Virginia rejected the idea. The colonists went ahead anyway. On June 1, 1774, church bells tolled slowly. Merchants closed their shops. Many colonists prayed and fasted all day.
In September 1774, colonial leaders called a meeting in Philadelphia. Delegates from 12 colonies gathered in what became known as the First Continental Congress. Only Georgia did not send delegates.
After much debate, the delegates passed a resolution backing Massachusetts in its struggle. They agreed to boycott all British goods and to stop exporting goods to Britain until the Intolerable Acts were repealed. The delegates also urged each colony to set up and train its own militia (mih LISH uh). A militia is an army of citizens who serve as soldiers during an emergency.
Before leaving Philadelphia, the delegates agreed to meet again in May 1775. Little did they suspect that before then, an incident in Massachusetts would change the fate of the colonies forever.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
How did other colonies respond to the Intolerable Acts?
» Eight colonists were killed in the skirmish between the minutemen and British soldiers at Lexington, Massachusetts, in 1775.
Interactive Chart
©
The Battles of Lexington and Concord
In Massachusetts, colonists were already preparing to resist. Newspapers called on citizens to prevent what they called “the Massacre of American Liberty.” Volunteers known as minutemen trained regularly. Minutemen got their name because they kept their muskets at hand and were prepared to fight at a minute’s notice. In towns near Boston, minutemen collected weapons and gunpowder. Meanwhile, Britain built up its forces. More troops arrived in Boston, bringing the total number of British soldiers in that city to 4,000.
Early in 1775, General Thomas Gage, the British commander, sent scouts to towns near Boston. They reported that minutemen had a large store of arms in Concord, a village about 18 miles from Boston. Gage planned a surprise march to Concord to seize the arms.
The Redcoats Cross the Charles River On April 18, about 700 British troops quietly left Boston in the darkness. Their goal was to seize the colonial arms. The Sons of Liberty were watching. As soon as the British set out, the Americans hung two lamps from the Old North Church in Boston. This signal meant that the redcoats were crossing the Charles River. The British
had decided to cross the river rather than take a much longer route toward Concord by land.
Colonists who were waiting across the Charles River saw the signal. Messengers mounted their horses and galloped through the night toward Concord. One midnight rider was Paul Revere. “The redcoats are coming! The redcoats are coming!” shouted Revere as he passed through each sleepy village along the way.
Fighting in Lexington and Concord At daybreak on April 19, the redcoats reached Lexington, a town near Concord. On the village green, some 70 minutemen were waiting, commanded by Captain John Parker. The British ordered the minutemen to go home. Outnumbered, the colonists began to leave.
Suddenly, a shot rang out through the chill morning air. No one knows who fired it. In the brief struggle that followed, eight colonists were killed.
The British pushed on to Concord. Finding no arms in the village, they turned back to Boston. On a bridge outside Concord, they met approximately 300 minutemen. Again, fighting broke out. This time, the British were forced to retreat because the minutemen used the geography of the region to their advantage. As the redcoats withdrew, colonial sharpshooters took deadly aim at them from the woods and fields and then took cover there, making it difficult for the British
The Revolutionary Era 125	3.3 Taking Up Arms
soldiers to fire back. Local women also fired at the British from the windows of their homes. By the time they reached Boston, the redcoats had lost 73 men. Another 200 British soldiers were wounded or missing.
News of the battles of Lexington and Concord spread swiftly. To many colonists, the fighting ended all hope of a peaceful settlement. Only war would decide the future of the 13 colonies.
More than 60 years after the battles of Lexington and Concord, a well-known New England writer, Ralph Waldo Emerson, wrote a poem honoring the minutemen. Emerson’s “Concord Hymn” created a vivid picture of the clash at Concord. It begins:
By the rude bridge that arched the flood, Their flag to April’s breeze unfurled, Here once the embattled farmers stood, And fired the shot heard round the world.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Concord Hymn,” 1837
The “embattled farmers” would have years of difficult fighting in front of them. Lexington and Concord marked the beginning of the Revolutionary War.
The war and disagreements between the American colonists and the British prior to the war represent
the era called the American Revolution, the period of struggle to achieve independence from Britain.
Q CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How were the minutemen able to beat the British at Concord? The Fighting Continues
Just a few weeks after the battles at Lexington and Concord, on May 10, 1775, colonial delegates met at the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia. The delegates represented the 13 British colonies from New Hampshire to Georgia. Most of the delegates still hoped to avoid a final break with Britain. However, while they were meeting, the fighting spread.
King George III Rejects Peace After much debate, the delegates sent a petition to King George. In the Olive Branch Petition, they declared their loyalty to the king and asked him to repeal the Intolerable Acts.
George III was furious when he heard about the petition. The colonists, he raged, were trying to begin a war “for the purpose of establishing an independent empire!” The king vowed to bring the rebels to justice. He ordered 20,000 more troops to the colonies to crush the revolt.
Congress did not learn of the king’s response until months later. But even before the petition was sent,
First Battles of the Revolution
KEY
---- Paul Revere's route
—	William Dawes's route
—	Samuel Prescott's ride to Concord
—	Path of advancing British troops
—	Path of Militia
Path of British retreat Battle of Concord ★ Battle of Lexington & Battle during British retreat from Concord
N
» Analyze Maps Why were colonial minutemen so prepared for the arrival of the redcoats near Concord?
The Revolutionary Era 126	3.3 Taking Up Arms
leaders like John and Sam Adams were convinced that war could not be avoided.
Vermont Rebels Gain a Route to Canada Ethan Allen, a Vermont blacksmith, did not wait for Congress to act. Allen decided to lead a band of Vermonters, known as the Green Mountain Boys, in a surprise attack on Fort Ticonderoga, located at the southern tip of Lake Champlain. Allen knew that the fort held cannons that the colonists could use, and its strategic location would help colonists control the region.
In early May, the Green Mountain Boys crept quietly through the morning mists to Fort Ticonderoga. They quickly overpowered the guard on duty and entered the fort. Allen rushed to the room where the British commander slept. “Come out, you old rat!” he shouted. The commander demanded to know by whose authority Allen acted. “In the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental Congress!” Allen replied.
The British commander surrendered Ticonderoga. With the fort, the Green Mountain Boys won a valuable supply of cannons and gunpowder. Allen’s success also gave Americans control of a key route into Canada.
George Washington Takes Command In the
meantime, the Second Continental Congress had to decide what to do about the makeshift army gathering around Boston. In June, delegates took the bold step of setting up the Continental Army. They appointed George Washington of Virginia as commander.
Washington knew that he would be fighting against one of the world’s toughest armies. Still, he was willing to do his best. He set off at once to take charge of the forces around Boston.
fel IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS Why was Fort
Ticonderoga important to the colonists?
Opposing Sides at War
The colonists who favored war against Britain called themselves Patriots. They thought British rule was harsh and unjust. About one third of the colonists were Patriots, one third sided with the British, and one third did not take sides.
Washington Leads the Patriots The Patriots entered the war with many disadvantages. Colonial forces were poorly organized and untrained. They had few cannons, little gunpowder, and no navy. Also, few colonists were willing to enlist in the Continental Army for long terms of service. They preferred to fight near home, as part of o local militia.
» The Second Continental Congress met in the summer of 1775 to discuss how to respond to the British aggression at Lexington and Concord and the failure to rescind the Intolerable Acts.
» Ethan Allen and the Green Mountain Boys from Vermont stormed Fort Ticonderoga, forcing the British commander there to surrender.
The Revolutionary Era 127	3.3 Taking Up Arms
Yet, the Patriots also had advantages. Many Patriots owned rifles and were good shots. Their leader, George Washington, had experience and developed into an able commander. Furthermore, Patriots were determined to fight to defend their homes and property. Reuben Stebbins of Massachusetts was typical of many patriotic farmers. When the British approached, he rode off to battle. "We'll see who’s going t’own this farm!” he cried.
British Advantages and Disadvantages The
British were a powerful foe. They had highly trained, experienced troops. Their navy was the best in the world. In addition, many colonists supported the British.
Still, Britain faced problems. Its armies were 3,000 miles from home. News and supplies took months to travel from Britain to North America. Also, British soldiers risked attacks by colonists once they marched out of the cities into the countryside.
Loyalists Favor the King American colonists who remained loyal to Britain were known as Loyalists. They included wealthy merchants and former officials of the royal government. However, some farmers and crafts workers were also Loyalists. There were more
» The Battle of Bunker Hill was the first major conflict of the American Revolution. The British won the battle, but suffered many more casualties than the Americans.
Loyalists in the Middle Colonies and the South than in New England.
Loyalists faced hard times during the war. Patriots tarred and feathered people known to favor the British. Many Loyalists fled to England or Canada. Others found shelter in cities controlled by the British. Those who fled lost their homes, stores, and farms.
B IDENTIFY
What positions did colonists take in regards to the war as it began? The War Comes to Boston
During the first year of conflict, much of the fighting centered around Boston. About 6,000 British troops were stationed there. Colonial militia surrounded the city and prevented the British from marching out.
War Breaks Out Near Boston Harbor Even before Washington reached Boston, the Patriots took action. On June 16, 1775, Colonel William Prescott led 1,200 minutemen up Bunker Hill, across the Charles River from Boston. From there, they could fire on British ships in Boston Harbor. Prescott, however, noticed that nearby Breed’s Hill was an even better place to use the local geography to his advantage. A hilltop would be easier to defend, so he ordered his men to move there.
At sunrise, the British general, William Howe, spotted the Americans. He ferried about 2,400 redcoats across the river to attack the rebels’ position. As the British approached, the Patriots held their fire.
When the Americans finally fired, the British were forced to retreat. A second British attack was also turned back. On the third try, the British pushed over the top. They took both Bunker Hill and Breed’s Hill, but they paid a high price for their victory. More than 1,000 redcoats lay dead or wounded. American losses numbered only about 400.
The Battle of Bunker Hill was the first major battle of the Revolution. It proved that the Americans could fight bravely. It also showed that the British would not be easy to defeat. Furthermore, it hinted that one effect of the Revolution would be continued bloodshed from a long and bitter war.
Washington Forces the British out of Boston
When Washington reached Boston a few weeks after the Battle of Bunker Hill, he found about 16,000 troops camped in huts and tents around the city.
General Washington quickly began to turn raw recruits into a trained army. His job was especially difficult because soldiers from different colonies mistrusted one another. “Connecticut wants no
The Revolutionary Era 128	3.3 Taking Up Arms
Massachusetts men in her corps,” he wrote. And “Massachusetts thinks there is no necessity for a Rhode Islander to be introduced into her [ranks].” However, Washington won the loyalty of his troops. They, in turn, learned to take orders and work together.
In January 1776, Washington had a stroke of good fortune. The cannons that the Green Mountain Boys had captured at Fort Ticonderoga arrived in Boston. Soldiers had dragged them across the mountains from Fort Ticonderoga. Washington had the cannons placed in a strategic location on Dorchester Heights, overlooking the harbor.
Once General Howe saw the American cannons in place, he knew that he could not hold Boston. In March 1776, he and his troops sailed from Boston to Halifax, Canada. About 1,000 American Loyalists went with them.
Although the British left New England, they did not give up. King George III ordered a blockade of all colonial ports. A blockade is the shutting of a port to keep people or supplies from moving in or out. The king also used mercenaries, or troops for hire, from Germany to help fight the colonists.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did the colonists use the physical geography of the region to their advantage?
» Soldiers transported the cannons captured at Fort Ticonderoga to Boston in order to force the British to leave New England.
ASSESSMENT
3. Infer why Ralph Waldo Emerson called the first shot fired in Lexington “the shot heard round the world.”
1.	Summarize Why did the colonists choose to throw British tea in Boston Harbor?
2.	Make Predications What would forming militias allow the colonies to do?
4.	Analyze Information Why do you think approximately one third of the colonists were Loyalists during the war?
5.	Summarize the importance of the Battle of Bunker Hill.
The Revolutionary Era
129
3.3 Taking Up Arms
By 1776, many colonists had come to believe that Parliament did not have the right to make laws for the 13 colonies. After all, they argued, the colonists had their own elected legislatures. Some thought it was time for the colonies to become independent from Britain. At the same time, however, most colonists still felt a bond of loyalty to Britain. They especially felt that they owed allegiance to the king.
I
i;
1.A, 1.C, 4.B, 4.C, 15.C, 19.A
» Objectives
Describe the impact of Thomas Paine’s pamphlet, Common Sense.
Explain the steps Congress took to declare independence.
Summarize the main ideas of the Declaration of Independence.
» Key Terms
traitor
Declaration of Independence
preamble
natural rights
unalienable rights
Richard Henry Lee
Robert Livingston
Roger Sherman
Common Sense
Thomas Paine
Benjamin Franklin
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Declaring
Independence
Thomas Paine's Common Sense
Thomas Paine was a British writer and editor who moved to Philadelphia in 1774. After Lexington and Concord, Paine wrote the pamphlet Common Sense, in which he set out to change the colonists' attitudes toward Britain and the king. Colonists, he said, did not owe loyalty to George III or any other monarch. The very idea of having kings and queens was wrong, he said.
In England a King hath little more to do than to make war and give away [jobs]; which in plain terms, is to impoverish the nation. ... Of more worth is one honest man to society and in the sight of God, than all the crowned ruffians that ever lived.
—Thomas Paine, Common Sonoe, 1776
The colonists did not owe anything to Britain, either, Paine went on. If the British had helped the colonists, they had done so for their own profit. It could only hurt the colonists to remain under British
130
rule. “Everything that is right or reasonable pleads for separation,” he concluded." ’Tis time to part.” Common Sense was a great success, selling over 500,000 copies in six months. Paine’s writing played an important role in moving toward revolution.
IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
What was the central idea of Common Sense?
Choosing Independence
Common Sense caused many colonial leaders to move toward declaring independence from Britain. It also deeply impressed many members of the Continental Congress. Richard Henry Lee of Virginia wrote to Washington, “I am now convinced ... of the necessity for separation." In June 1776, Lee rose to his feet in Congress to introduce a resolution in favor of independence:
Resolved, That these United Colonies are and of right ought to be, free and independent States, that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain is, and ought to be, totally dissolved.
-.Richard Henry Lee, Resolution at the Second
Continental Congress, June 7, 1776
Drafting the Declaration of Independence The
delegates faced a difficult decision. There could be no turning back once they declared independence. If they fell into British hands, they would be hanged as traitors. A traitor is a person who betrays his or her country.
After long debate, the Congress took a fateful step. They appointed a committee to draft a formal declaration of independence. The committee included John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Robert Livingston, and Roger Sherman. Their job was to tell the world why the colonies were breaking away from Britain.
The committee asked Thomas Jefferson to write the document. Jefferson was one of the youngest delegates. He was a quiet man who spoke little at formal meetings.
Among friends, however, he liked to sprawl in a chair with his long legs stretched out and talk for hours.
» Thomas Paine’s criticism of British rule in Common Sense prompted many colonists to consider the option of declaring full independence from Britain.
Interactive Gallery
ofOCttwrtea.,
» The Declaration of Independence, signed by the delegates to the Second Continental Congress, served notice to King George III that the 13 colonies had separated from Great Britain.
Interactive Gallery

The Revolutionary Era 131
3.4 Declaring Independence
His ability to write clearly and gracefully had earned him great respect.
Adopting the Declaration of Independence In
late June, Jefferson completed the declaration, and it was read to the Congress. On July 2, the Continental Congress voted that the 13 colonies were “free and independent States.” After polishing Jefferson’s language, the delegates adopted the document on the night of July 4,1776. They then ordered the Declaration of Independence to be printed.
John Hancock, president of the Continental Congress, signed the Declaration first. He penned his signature boldly, in large, clear letters. “There,” he said, “I guess King George will be able to read that.”
Copies of the Declaration were distributed throughout the colonies. Patriots greeted the news of independence with joyous—and sometimes rowdy— celebrations.
In New York, colonists tore down a statue of King George III. In Boston, the sound of cannons could be heard for hours.
fid IDENTIFY What were the potential consequences
for the delegates who chose to declare independence?
» The Declaration of Independence lists grievances against King George III, including the presence of British troops in the colonies during times of peace without the consent of colonial legislatures.
The Declaration of
Independence
The Declaration of Independence consists of a preamble, or introduction, followed by three main parts.
Unalienable Rights The first section of the Declaration stresses the idea of natural rights, or rights that belong to all people from birth. In bold, ringing words, Jefferson wrote:
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
—The Declaration of Independence
According to the Declaration of Independence, people form governments in order to protect their natural rights and liberties.
These unalienable rights—including the rights to be free and to choose how to live—cannot be taken away by governments, for governments can exist only if they have the “consent of the governed.” If a government fails to protect the rights of its citizens, then it is the people’s “right [and] duty, to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security.” Ideas such as unalienable rights, adopted by the Founding Fathers (men such as George Washington, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas Jefferson), are good examples of the civic virtues that have since become the cornerstone of American government. These values continue to ensure that human rights are protected and human needs are met in our nation.
Colonial Grievances The second part of the Declaration lists the wrongs, or grievances, that led the Americans to break away from Britain. Jefferson condemned King George III for disbanding colonial legislatures and for sending troops to the colonies in peacetime. He complained about limits on trade and about taxes imposed without the consent of the people.
Jefferson listed many other grievances to show why the colonists had the right to rebel. He also pointed out that the colonies had petitioned the king to correct these injustices. Yet, the injustices remained. A ruler who treated his subjects in this manner, he boldly concluded, is a tyrant and not fit to rule:
The Revolutionary Era 132	3.4 Declaring Independence
In every state of these oppressions, we have petitioned for redress in the most humble terms; our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. A prince whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a tyrant is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
—The Declaration of Independence
Independence The last part of the Declaration announces that the colonies are the United States of America. All political ties with Britain have been cut.
As a free and independent nation, the United States has the full power to “levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and to do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do.”
The signers closed the declaration with a solemn pledge:
And, for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor.
—The Declaration of Independence
fei LIST What are some of the grievances Jefferson
included in the Declaration?
ASSESSMENT
1. Identify Central Issues What was the main point of Thomas Paine’s Common Sense, and how did he support this idea?
JOIN, or DIE.
» Benjamin Franklin created this illustration encouraging colonists to band in 1754 during the French and Indian War. It was later used for the same purpose during the American Revolution.
2.	Hypothesize How do you think the Loyalists reacted when the Declaration of Independence was first distributed throughout the colonies?
3.	Make Generalizations Why, to this day, do many people refer to their signatures as their “John Hancocks”?
4.	Cite Evidence that the Second Continental Congress was acting like a governmental body.
5.	Evaluate Arguments What justifications for separation were included in the Declaration of Independence?
The Revolutionary Era 133
3.4 Declaring Independence
On Christmas night, 1776, Washington and his troops crossed the icy Delaware River to attack British forces at Trenton. Despite enduring the harshest conditions, Washington’s forces were victorious.
Through an odd coincidence, the British began landing troops in New York in the same month that the Continental Congress voted for independence, July 1776. General George Washington, expecting the attack, had led his forces south from Boston to New York City. His army, however, was no match for the British under the command of General Howe. Howe had about 34,000 troops and 10,000 sailors. He also had ships to ferry them ashore. Washington had fewer than 20,000 poorly trained troops, which he spread in various locations to defend New York. Worse, he had no navy.
| Interactive Flipped Video J
4.B, 4.C, 10.A, 22.B, 23.D
» Objectives
Describe the war in the middle states, including how the battles at Trenton and Saratoga marked turning points.
Describe the roles of women and African Americans in the war.
Explain how the war was fought on the western frontier and at sea.
Describe the war in the south, including the American victory at Yorktown.
Summarize the reasons why the Americans won the war.
» Key Terms
Battle of Long Island Battle of Trenton Battle of Saratoga ally
cavalry
Valley Forge Battle of Cowpens guerrilla siege
Battle of Yorktown Treaty of Paris ratify
Nathan Hale Marquis de
Lafayette Friedrich von
Steuben Haym Salomon Wentworth Cheswell James Armistead Bernardo de Galvez John Paul Jones
Winning
Independence
i
Early Challenges for the
Continental Army
In August, Howe’s army landed on Long Island. In the Battle of Long Island, more than 1,400 Americans were killed, wounded, or captured. The rest retreated to Manhattan. The British pursued. To , avoid capture, Washington hurried north.	1
Throughout the autumn, Washington fought a series of battles with Howe’s army. In November, he crossed the Hudson River into New Jersey. Chased by the British, the Americans retreated across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania.
During the campaign for New York, Washington needed information about Howe’s forces. Nathan Hale, a young Connecticut officer, j volunteered to go behind British lines. On his way back with the information, Hale was seized by the British and searched. Hidden in the soles of his shoes was information about British troop movements.
There was no trial. Howe ordered Hale to be hanged the next morning. As Hale walked to the gallows, he is said to have declared: "I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country.”
Even as Washington’s army retreated and the British took New ) York City, many people there remained as loyal to the American cause
as Hale. Haym Salomon (HY urn SAL uh mun), a Jewish immigrant from Poland, was arrested by the British in September of 1776 and thrown into prison. Salomon had supported the American cause from the start, helping the new government get loans. Salomon even gave his own money to soldiers and military units for equipment. He managed to escape to Philadelphia and continued to aid the fight for independence.
A
Surprise Attack Leads to an American Victory Months of hard campaigning took a toll on the Continental Army. In December 1776, Washington described his troops as sick, dirty, and “so thinly clad as to be unfit for service.” Every day, soldiers deserted. Washington wrote to his brother: “I am wearied to death. I think the game is pretty near up.”
Washington decided on a bold move: a surprise attack on Trenton, New Jersey. The Delaware River separated the British in Trenton and the Americans, and the soldiers guarding Trenton would not expect American troops to cross it. On Christmas night, Washington secretly led his troops across the icy river. Soldiers shivered as spray from the river froze on their faces. Once ashore, they marched through swirling snow. Some had no shoes. They tied rags around their feet. “Soldiers, keep by your officers,” Washington urged.
Early on December 26, the Americans surprised the Hessian troops guarding Trenton and took most of them prisoner. The Hessians were soldiers from Germany. An American summed up the Battle of Trenton:
“Hessian population of Trenton at 8 A.M.—1,408 men and 39 officers; Hessian population at 9 A.M.—0.”
British General Charles Cornwallis set out at once to retake Trenton and to capture Washington. Late on January 2, 1777, he saw the lights of Washington’s campfires. “At last we have run down the old fox,” he said, “and we will bag him in the morning.”
Washington fooled Cornwallis. He left the fires burning and slipped behind British lines to attack a British force that was marching toward Princeton. There, the Continental Army won another victory. From Princeton, Washington moved to Morristown, where the army would spend the winter. The victories at Trenton and Princeton gave the Americans new hope.
RECALL
What advantages did the British have in the Battle of Long Island?
The Tide Turns for the Americans
In London, British officials were dismayed by the army’s failure to crush the rebels. Early in 1777, General John Burgoyne (bur GOIN) presented a new plan for victory. If British troops cut off New England from the other colonies, he argued, the war would soon be over.
The New England Strategy Burgoyne wanted three British armies to march on Albany, New York, from
Continental vs. British Forces
BRITISH
QUALITY OF FORCES
MOTIVATION
» Analyze Charts Which forces, the Continental or the British, appear to be better prepared for battle? Why?
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
134
The Revolutionary Era 135	3.5 Winning Independence
I
s
different directions. They would crush American forces there. Once they controlled the Hudson River, the British could stop the flow of soldiers and supplies from New England to Washington’s army.
Burgoyne’s plan called for General Howe to march on Albany from New York City. George III, however, wanted Howe to capture Philadelphia first.
In July 1777, Howe sailed from New York to the Chesapeake Bay, where he began his march on Philadelphia. Howe captured Philadelphia, defeating the Americans at the battles of Brandywine and Germantown. But instead of moving toward Albany to meet Burgoyne as planned, he retired to comfortable quarters in Philadelphia for the winter. For his part, Washington retreated to Valley Forge, Pennsylvania.
Meanwhile, British armies under Burgoyne and Barry St. Leger (lay ZHAIR) marched from Canada toward Albany. St. Leger tried to take Fort Stanwix. However, a strong American army, led by Benedict Arnold, drove him back.
American Troops Prevail at Saratoga Only Burgoyne was left to march on Albany. His army moved slowly because it had many heavy baggage carts to drag through the woods. To slow Burgoyne further, Patriots cut down trees and dammed up streams to block the route.
Despite these obstacles, Burgoyne recaptured Fort Ticonderoga, shocking Americans. However, he delayed at the fort, giving American forces time to regroup. He also sent troops into Vermont to find food and horses. There, Patriots attacked the redcoats. At the Battle of Bennington, they wounded or captured nearly 1,000 British.
Burgoyne’s troubles grew. The Green Mountain Boys hurried into New York to help American forces there. At the village of Saratoga, the Americans surrounded the British. When Burgoyne tried to break free, the Americans beat him back. Realizing that he was trapped, Burgoyne surrendered his entire army to the Americans on October 17, 1777.
The American victory at the Battle of Saratoga was a major turning point in the war. It ended the British threat to New England.
It boosted American spirits at a time when Washington’s army was suffering defeats. Most importantly, it convinced France to become an ally of the United States. Nations that are allies work together to achieve a common goal.
Europeans Aid the American Cause The
Continental Congress had long hoped for French aid. In 1776, the Congress had sent Benjamin Franklin to Paris to persuade Louis XVI, the French king, to give the Americans weapons and other badly needed supplies.
.'i
N
0	300 km
Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection
Key Battles of the Revolutionary War
KEY
American victories British victories
Long Island, August 1776 ■Trenton, December 1776
*
Camden, August 1780
May 1780 ‘Savannah, December 1778
» Analyze Maps What were the results of the battles in 1777 that were part of General Burgoyne’s plan?
VA 7
^orktown, October 1781
_——-A
Greensboro?March 1781
ATLANTA
OCEAN
The Revolutionary Era
A ...
136
3.5 Winning Independence
V
^Lexington and Concord, April 1775
bunker Hill, June 1775
In addition, the Congress wanted France to declare war on Britain.
The French were eager to defeat Britain, but they were also cautious. France was still angry about its defeat at British hands in the French and Indian War. However, Louis XVI did not want to help the Americans openly unless he was sure that they could win. The American victory at Saratoga convinced France that the United States could stand up to Britain.
In February 1778, France became the first nation to sign a treaty with the United States. It recognized the new nation and agreed to provide military aid. Later, the Netherlands and Spain also joined in the war against Britain. France, the Netherlands, and Spain all provided loans to the United States.
Even before European nations agreed to help the United States, individual volunteers had been coming from Europe to join the American cause. Some became leading officers in the American army.
The Marquis de Lafayette (mar KEE dah lah fay ET), a young French noble, convinced France to send several thousand trained soldiers to help the Patriot cause. Lafayette, who fought at Brandywine, became one of Washington’s most trusted friends.
From the German state of Prussia came Friedrich von Steuben (STOO bun), who helped train Washington’s troops to march and drill. Von Steuben had served in the Prussian army, which was considered the best in Europe.
Two Polish officers also joined the Americans. Thaddeus Kosciusko (kahs ee s koh), an engineer, helped build forts and other defenses. Casimir Pulaski trained cavalry, or troops on horseback.
B DESCRIBE
In what ways did Europeans help the American war effort?
Winter at Valley Forge
The victory at Saratoga and the promise of help from Europe boosted American morale. Washington’s Continental Army began preparing for the winter of 1777-1778 by building a makeshift camp at Valley Forge.
Conditions at Valley Forge were difficult, but the soldiers endured. About 2,000 huts were built as shelter. Several soldiers were improperly dressed, although many did have proper uniforms. As the winter wore on, soldiers also suffered from disease, a common problem in military camps. An army surgeon from Connecticut wrote about his hardships:
» General John Burgoyne surrenders to General Horatio Gates after the British defeat at the Battle of Saratoga. This American victory ended the British threat to New England.
» The Marquis de Lafayette (right), shown here with George Washington (left) at Valley Forge, commanded soldiers in support of the American cause.
Interactive Timeline
The Revolutionary Era 137	3.5 Winning Independence
» This illustration first appeared in the 1780s. It is an appeal to people to recognize enslaved people as human beings.
» At the Battle of Wyoming in 1778, Loyalists and Native Americans, allied to the British, killed 360 colonial settlers in the Wyoming Valley of Pennsylvania.
The Revolutionary Era

Hampshire schoolmaster, Cheswell was an educated and free black man who was regularly elected to local and town positions.
Like Paul Revere, he rode all night from Boston to warn his community that the British were on the march. He later enlisted in the army to help fight at Saratoga.
Enslaved African Americans faced more difficult choices. If they joined the American army or continued to work on Patriot plantations, the British might capture and sell them. If they tried to flee to the British army to gain freedom, they risked being hanged by angry Patriots.
Belief in Freedom Yet, many slaves did flee their masters, especially those who lived near the coast, where the British navy patrolled. One British captain reported that “near 500” runaway slaves offered their services to him. Toward the end of the war, several thousand slaves sought freedom by following British troops through the Carolinas.
Black Patriots hoped that the Revolution would bring an end to slavery. After all, the Declaration of Independence proclaimed that “all men are created equal.” Some white leaders also hoped the war would end slavery.
James Otis wrote that “the colonists are by the law of nature free born, as indeed all men are, white or black.” Quakers in particular spoke out strongly against slavery.
By the 1770s, slavery was declining in the North, where a number of free African Americans lived. During the American Revolution, several states moved to make slavery illegal, including Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania. Other states also began to debate the slavery issue.
fei IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS What difficult consequences
did many slaves face when choosing sides in the American Revolution?
Native Americans and the Spanish Choose Sides
As the war spread to Indian lands in the West, the | Americans and British both tried to win the support of Indian tribes. In the end, the British were more successful. They convinced many Native Americans that a Patriot victory would mean more white settlers crossing the Appalachians and taking Indian lands.
Loyalist Allies In the South, the British gained the j support of the Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, and
140
.
The War in the West
0	100 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area Projection
» Analyze Maps The text calls the attack at Fort Vincennes "a surprise.” What do you see on the map that supports the conclusion that the attack surprised the British?
	v	,	. .	.
z	KEY
—	American forces
—	British forces
American victories	
n	Forts
	
Chickasaws. The British encouraged the Cherokees to attack dozens of settlements on the southern frontier. Only after hard fighting were Patriot militia able to drive the Cherokees back into the mountains.
Fighting was equally fierce on the northern frontier. In 1778, Iroquois forces led by the Mohawk leader Joseph Brant joined with Loyalists in raiding settlements in Pennsylvania and New York. The next year, Patriots struck back by destroying dozens of Iroquois villages.
Other Tribes Choose to Help the Patriots Farther west, in 1778, George Rogers Clark led Virginia frontier fighters against the British in the Ohio Valley. With help from Miami Indians, Clark captured the British forts at Kaskaskia and Cahokia near the Mississippi River.
Clark then plotted a surprise attack on the British fort at Vincennes. When Clark’s small force reached the fort, they spread out through the woods to make their numbers appear greater than they really were. The British commander thought it was useless to fight so many Americans. He surrendered Vincennes in February 1779.
Spanish Assistance On the southwestern frontier, Americans received help from New Spain. In the early years of the war, Spain was neutral. However, Bernardo de Galvez (bayr NARDO day GOLL vess),
governor of Spanish Louisiana, favored the Patriots. He secretly supplied medicine, cloth, muskets, and gunpowder to the Americans.
When Spain entered the war against Britain in 1779, Galvez took a more active role. He seized British forts along the Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico. He also drove the British out of West Florida. The city of Galveston, in Texas, is named after this courageous leader.
RECALL
Why were the British generally more successful at becoming allies with different Indian tribes? Fighting for Independence in the Southern Colonies and at Sea
At sea, the Americans could do little against the powerful British navy. British ships blockaded American ports, which were oftentimes important supply routes for Patriot troops and towns. From time to time, however, a bold American captain captured a British ship.
The greatest American sea victory took place in September 1779 in Britain’s backyard, on the North
3.5 Winning Independence
L
The Revolutionary Era 141	3.5 Winning Independence
jA


» Captain John Paul Jones shouts orders to his crew during battle aboard his ship Bonhomme Bichard. Jones and his crew captured the British warship Serapis.
Sea. After a hard-fought battle, Captain John Paul Jones captured the powerful British warship Serapis. Jones was one of many important military leaders who contributed to the American cause during the war.
Raids on the high seas and along the frontiers kept many Americans on the alert. However, the war between the Americans and Great Britain would be settled by battles in the South.
Battles in the South The South became the main battleground of the war in 1778. Sir Henry Clinton, the new British commander-in-chief, knew that many Loyalists lived in the southern backcountry. He hoped that if British troops marched through the South, Loyalists would join them.
At first, Clinton’s plan seemed to work. In short order, beginning in December 1778, the British seized Savannah in Georgia and Charleston and Camden in South Carolina. “I have almost ceased to hope,” wrote Washington when he learned of the defeats.
» Analyze Political Cartoons In this political cartoon, titled “The Horse America," what do the horse and rider symbolize? This cartoon was published in 1779. What was the cartoonist trying to convey about the Revolution?
Patriots and Loyalists Clash In the Carolina backcountry, Patriots and Loyalists launched violent raids against one another. Both sides burned farms, killed civilians, and sometimes even tortured prisoners.
After 1780, attacks by British troops and Loyalist militia became especially cruel. As a result, more settlers began to side with the Patriots. As one Loyalist admitted, “Great Britain has now a hundred enemies, where it had one before.”
Momentum Shifts Toward the Patriots After the victory at Kings Mountain, two able American generals helped turn the tide against the main British army, led by General Charles Cornwallis. They were Nathanael Greene of Rhode Island and Daniel Morgan of Virginia.
General Greene’s ability as a military leader was perhaps second only to Washington’s. In 1780, Greene took command of the Continental Army in the South. Using his knowledge of local geography, Greene > engaged the British only on ground that put them at a disadvantage. General Cornwallis wore out his soldiers trying to catch Greene’s army.
In January 1781, General Morgan won an important victory at Cowpens, South Carolina. Morgan used a clever tactic to defeat the British. He divided his | soldiers into a front line and a rear line. He ordered the front line to retreat after firing just two volleys. The British, thinking the Americans were retreating, charged forward—straight into the fire of Morgan’s second rank. In this way, the Americans won the Battle of Cowpens.
Greene and Morgan combined their armies when they fought Cornwallis at Guilford Courthouse, near
present-day Greensboro, North Carolina. The battle was one of the bloodiest of the war. Although the Americans retreated, the British sustained great losses.
Adapting Tactics to Geography Known as the Swamp Fox, Francis Marion of South Carolina added to British frustrations. He led a small band of militia, who often slept by day and traveled by night. His soldiers used guerrilla, or hit-and-run, tactics to harass the British.
Marion’s band took advantage of the region’s environment, appearing suddenly out of the swamps, attacking quickly, and retreating swiftly back into the swamps.
B DESCRIBE
What did a superior navy allow the British to do?
A
Decisive Win Brings the War to a Close Cornwallis abandoned his plan to take the Carolinas. In the spring of 1781, he moved his troops north into Virginia. He planned to conquer Virginia and cut off the Americans’ supply routes to the South.
Benedict Arnold’s Betrayal The British had achieved some success in Virginia, even before the arrival of Cornwallis. Benedict Arnold, formerly one of the Americans’ best generals, was now leading British troops. Arnold captured and burned the capital city of Richmond. His forces also raided and burned other towns.
Arnold had turned traitor to the American cause in September 1780, while commanding West Point, a key fort in New York. The ambitious general was angry because he felt that he had not received enough credit for his victories. He also needed money. Arnold secretly agreed to turn over West Point to the British. The plot was uncovered by a Patriot patrol, but Arnold escaped to join the British
Arnold’s treason and his raids on towns in Connecticut and Virginia enraged the Patriots. Thomas Jefferson, governor of Virginia, offered a sizable reward for his capture. Washington ordered Arnold to be hanged. However, he was never captured.
The British Are Trapped at Yorktown Cornwallis hoped to meet with the same kind of success in Virginia that Arnold had achieved. At first, things went well. Cornwallis sent Loyalist troops to attack Charlottesville, where the Virginia legislature was
>4
1 V'
V- „„s. ,
» Benedict Arnold’s treason left the Continental Army without one of its most able generals. It also provided the British with someone familiar with the terrain and plans of the Continental Army.
meeting. Governor Thomas Jefferson and other officials had to flee.
American troops under Lafayette fought back by staging raids against the British. Lafayette did not have enough troops to fight a major battle. Still, his strategy kept Cornwallis at bay.
Then, Cornwallis made a mistake. He disregarded an order from Sir Henry Clinton to send part of his army to New York. Instead, he retreated to Yorktown peninsula, a strip of land jutting into the Chesapeake Bay. He felt confident that British ships could supply his army from the sea.
Washington saw an opportunity to trap Cornwallis on the Yorktown peninsula. He marched his Continental troops south from New York. With the Americans were French soldiers under the Comte de Rochambeau (roh shahm BOH). The combined army rushed to join Lafayette in Virginia.
Meanwhile, a French fleet under Admiral de Grasse was also heading toward Virginia. Once in Chesapeake Bay, de Grasse’s fleet closed the trap. Cornwallis was cut off. He could not get supplies. He could not escape by land or by sea.
The Revolutionary Era 143	3.5 Winning Independence
The War Is Won By the end of September, more than 16,000 American and French troops laid siege to Cornwallis’s army of fewer than 8,000. A siege occurs when an army surrounds and blockades an enemy position in an attempt to capture it. Day after day, American and French artillery pounded the British.
For several weeks, Cornwallis held out. Finally, with casualties mounting and his supplies running low, the general decided that the situation was hopeless. The British had lost the Battle of Yorktown.
On October 19, 1781, the British surrendered their weapons. The French and the Americans lined up in two facing columns. As the defeated redcoats marched between the victorious troops, a British army band played the tune “The World Turned Upside Down.”
The talks began in Paris in 1782. Congress sent Benjamin Franklin and John Adams, along with John Jay of New York and Henry Laurens of South Carolina, to work out a treaty. Because Britain was eager to end the war, the Americans got most of what they wanted.
Under the Treaty of Paris, the British recognized the United States as an independent nation. It extended from the Atlantic Ocean to the Mississippi River. The northern border of the United States stopped at the Great Lakes. The southern border stopped at Florida, which was returned to Spain.
» American soldiers hoist the 13-star flag, a proud symbol of everything they fought for during the War for Independence.
For their part, the Americans agreed to ask the state legislatures to pay Loyalists for property they had lost in the war. In the end, however, most states ignored Loyalist claims.
On April 15, 1783, Congress ratified, or approved, the Treaty of Paris. It was almost eight years to the day since the battles of Lexington and Concord.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
What were the results of the Treaty of Paris?
Explaining the American Victory
Geography played an important role in the American victory. The British had to send soldiers and supplies to a war that was several thousand miles from home. They also had to fight an enemy that was spread over a wide area. For their part, the Americans were familiar with the local geography. They chose geographic features, like hilltops, that would provide an advantage in battle.
Assistance from Allies Help from other nations was crucial to the American cause. Spanish forces attacked the British along the Gulf of Mexico and in the Mississippi Valley. French money helped pay for supplies, and French military aid provided vital support to American troops. Without French soldiers and warships, for example, the Americans might not have won the Battle of Yorktown.
A
Growing National Identity and Patriotism Throughout their struggles with Britain, the colonists benefited from their ability to unify for a shared American cause. The American Revolution inspired people of many different racial and minority groups as well as social classes to fight for the same American ideals of freedom and rights. Debates about equality would continue long after independence was earned, but the ideals from the Revolution would further define a developing American identity.
Patriotism was another important factor in the American victory. Soldiers were fighting for their homes and their beliefs. Despite early setbacks, the Patriots continued to fight for their cause.
Gradually, Washington’s inexperienced troops learned how to drill, how to march, and how to fight the British. Perhaps most important was Washington himself. By the end of the war, the general’s leadership and military skills were respected by Americans and British alike.
The Revolutionary Era 144	3.5 Winning Independence
Washington Leaves the Army in December 1783, General Washington, before resigning, bid farewell to his officers at Fraunces Tavern in New York City. Colonel Benjamin Tallmadge recalled the event:
Such a scene of sorrow and weeping
I	had never before witnessed. . . . We were then about to part from the man who had conducted us through a long and bloody war, and under whose conduct the glory and independence of our country had been achieved.
—Benjamin Tallmadge, Memoir
All along Washington’s route home to Virginia, crowds cheered for their hero. The new nation faced difficult days ahead. In time, Americans would call on Washington to lead them once again.
B RECALL
What were the main reasons for the American victory?
ASSESSMENT
» By war’s end, Americans respected Washington's leadership and military skills. Here, Washington rides in triumph through the streets of Boston.

1.	Identify Central Issues Why was the American victory at Saratoga significant to the Patriots?
2.	Hypothesize how surviving a long winter at Valley Forge with their commander affected the Continental Army.
3.	Draw Conclusions Why did many people believe that the Declaration of Independence justified an end to slavery in the colonies?
4.	Generate Explanations How was General Cornwallis defeated at the Battle of Yorktown?
5.	Summarize Why did Benedict Arnold’s name become synonymous with being a traitor?
The Revolutionary Era 145	3.5 Winning Independence

I
TEKS ASSESSMENT
North America in 1753


PACIFIC
&
OCEAN
KEY
Cl Claimed by Britain lil Claimed by Spain j I Claimed by France n French fort
0	1,000 km
Lambert Conformal Conk
Projection
All A\nc OCEAN
1,000 mi
1.	Locate Places of Importance Interpret information from a map to locate places of importance in the United States during the eighteenth century related to French land claims. Use the map above to locate and describe French land claims in North America in 1753. First, use the key to locate French lands and forts and the lands claimed by Britain and Spain. Second, locate the major rivers and lakes in the French territory. Write a paragraph describing the French territory. Describe the location in relation to lands claimed by Britain and Spain, list the major rivers and lakes in the region, describe what you can infer about the location of French settlements from the location of the forts, and explain why controlling the Ohio River would be important to the French. (See map above.) 10.A, 29.C
2.	Analyze Effect of Human Geographic Factors Analyze the effects of human geographic factors on major historical events in the United States related to the French and Indian War by contrasting the reasons for Native American alliances. Write a paragraph analyzing why some Native American groups chose to form alliances with the French and others chose to form alliances with the British during the French and Indian War. Consider why the Algonquins and the Hurons sided with the French and why the Iroquois nations sided with the British. 10.C, 29.B
3.	Analyze Effects of Physical Geographic Factors Analyze the effects of physical geographic factors on major historical events in the United States related to the attack on Quebec during the French and Indian War. Write a paragraph analyzing how the physical geography of the area affected the British attack on Quebec. Describe what the physical geography was * like and why the French felt protected, analyze how the British used the physical geography to their advantage, and describe the consequences for the French. 10.C
4.	Analyze Causes of the American Revolution Analyze causes of the American Revolution, including peaceful opposition to the Stamp Act. Write a paragraph analyzing how peaceful colonial J protests against the Stamp Act led toward revolution. Consider the Stamp Act Congress, boycotts, calls for free enterprise, and Parliament’s actions. 4.A
5.	Create Written Presentation Describing Townshend Acts Describe the Townshend Acts as a cause of the American Revolution by creating a written presentation of social studies information using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, punctuation, I and proper citation of sources. Describe what the Townshend Acts were as well as the role of boycotts,
the Sons of Liberty, and the Daughters of Liberty in protesting the acts; use standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation; and properly cite the sources used in your presentation. 1.A, 30.B, 30.D
The Revolutionary Era
146
1
6.	Organize and Interpret Information from Reports Analyze the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in U.S. history by organizing and interpreting information from reports. Analyze the excerpt below from a report about the Boston Massacre. Then write a paragraph organizing and interpreting the information in the report by explaining whether the report is a primary or secondary source and interpreting the report to determine whether it shows bias. 20.C, 29.C
On the night of March 5, 1770, a crowd of colonial troublemakers gathered outside the Boston customs house in a massive display of civil disobedience. The angry mob shouted insults at the British troops guarding the building, even though the soldiers were showing no aggression toward the mob. Soon, the shouting turned to violence, as the crowd began to throw snowballs, oyster shells, and chunks of ice at the soldiers. As the mob grew larger and more menacing, the outnumbered British soldiers panicked and fired into the crowd. When the smoke from the musket volley cleared, five of the troublemakers lay dead or dying.
Dieoi-iedic-nce in the American Revolution
7.	Explain Roles of Crispus Attucks, Samuel Adams, and John Adams in Boston Massacre Explain
the roles played by significant individuals during the American Revolution, including Crispus Attucks, Samuel Adams, and John Adams. Write a paragraph describing the roles played by Crispus Attucks, Samuel Adams, and John Adams in the Boston Massacre. Describe what led to the Boston Massacre; who Crispus Attucks was and what happened to him; who Samuel Adams was and how he reacted to the Boston Massacre; and who John Adams was, what he did after the Boston Massacre, and why. 4.B
8.	Analyze Reasons for and Impact of Civil Disobedience Analyze reasons for and impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in U.S. history, such as the Boston Tea Party. Write a paragraph analyzing the reasons for the Boston Tea Party and the consequences of this act of civil disobedience. Define the term civil disobedience, analyze why Sam Adams and the Sons of Liberty staged the Boston Tea Party, describe what the actual act of civil disobedience
was, and analyze the impact of this act of civil disobedience. 20.C
9.	Describe Contributions of Military Leaders Describe the contributions of significant military leaders of the United States, such as Ethan Allen. Write a paragraph describing how Ethan Allen contributed to colonial war efforts in 1775 as the leader of the Green Mountain Boys. Describe who Ethan Allen was, what Allen and the Green Mountain Boys did in May 1775, and why the contribution was significant. 22.B
10.	Use Decision-Making Process Describe the effects of revolution by using a decision-making process to identify a situation that requires a decision, gather information, identify options, predict consequences, and take action to implement a decision related to choosing sides during the American Revolution. Write a paragraph describing the decision-making process a colonist might have used to decide whether to support the Patriots, the British, or remain neutral in the war. Identify the situation that requires a decision, indicate what information the colonists would need to gather, identify the colonists’ options, predict the consequences of the different options, and indicate what you would have done if the decision was yours to make. 1 .A, 31 .B
11.	Identify Major Events, Including Drafting the Declaration of Independence Identify the major events in U.S. history through 1877, including drafting of the Declaration of Independence, describe the causes and effects of the Declaration, and explain the role Thomas Jefferson played in drafting the document and the significance of July 4, 1776. Write a paragraph describing the drafting and adoption of the Declaration of Independence. Explain why Congress drafted a formal declaration of independence, explain the role Thomas Jefferson played in the process, identify the date when the Continental Congress adopted the Declaration, and explain the effects of adopting the Declaration. 1.C, 1.A, 4.B
12.	Define and Give Examples of Unalienable Rights
Use social studies terminology correctly by defining and giving examples of unalienable rights and evaluating how the adoption of the idea of unalienable rights is an example of the contributions of the Founding Fathers as models of civic virtue. Write a paragraph defining the term unalienable rights and giving examples of those rights. Define the term, give examples, and evaluate how the idea of unalienable rights adopted by the Founding Fathers represents good civic virtues. 19.A,
20.B, 30.A
The Revolutionary
Era 147
13.	Identify Colonial Grievances in the Declaration of Independence Identify colonial grievances listed in the Declaration of Independence and describe how the grievances caused the colonists to declare independence. Write a paragraph identifying the grievances that Thomas Jefferson outlined in the Declaration of Independence and describing his reasons for listing the grievances. Explain what is meant by colonial grievances, identify some of the grievances Jefferson listed, tell why Jefferson listed so many grievances and pointed out that the colonies had petitioned the king unsuccessfully to correct these injustices, and explain why the grievances caused the colonists to declare independence. 1.A, 15.C
14.	Explain Issues Surrounding Declaring Independence Explain the issues surrounding important events of the American Revolution, including declaring independence. Write a paragraph about
the issues surrounding the decision to declare independence from Britain. Using the quotation below and other sources, explain what Richard Henry Lee risked by making the resolution above and what other delegates risked in supporting the resolution. Identify what Lee suggested in the resolution and explain why this course of action was risky. 4.C
16.	Contributions of Women Identify the political and economic contributions of women to American society during the American Revolution. Write a paragraph identifying the contributions of women to the war effort. Indicate how women helped economically, how women helped on the battlefield, and how their experiences
in the Revolution encouraged women to campaign for equal treatment in later years. 23.E
17.	Contributions of African Americans Use appropriate mathematical skills to interpret social studies information in a graph about African Americans in the Revolution, and analyze the contributions of people of various racial groups to our national identity by describing the contributions of African Americans to the war effort. Use the graph below to write a paragraph analyzing the contributions of African Americans to the war effort. Use your mathematical skills to determine approximately what percentage of the African American population
in the colonies was made up of free men, and what percentage of those free men fought in the Patriot army. Identify approximately how many African Americans served in the navy and what the enlistment policy was, and analyze how and why colonial views on African Americans serving in the army changed. (See graph below.) 23.D, 29.H
Resolved, That these United Colonies are and of right ought to be, free and independent States, that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain is, and ought to be, totally dissolved.
—Richard Henry Lee, Resolution at the Second Continental Congress, June 7, 1776
15.	Identify Colonial Grievance in the Declaration of Independence Identify a colonial grievance listed in the Declaration of Independence that helps explain why a free-enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation, including minimal government intrusion. Write a paragraph drawing a connection between the Declaration’s grievance that King George III had put limits on trade and the colonists’ support for free enterprise over mercantilism. Consider how the Navigation Acts limited trade and how a free-enterprise system would benefit trade. 14.A, 15.C
African Americans and the Revolution
The Revolutionary Era
148
'T'
18.	Identify the American Revolution Identify the major eras in U.S. history through 1877, including revolution. Write a paragraph identifying the factors that contributed to the Americans winning the Revolutionary War and achieving independence during the revolutionary
era. Identify the role played by geography, how the assistance from allies helped, and the effects of a growing national identity and patriotism during the revolutionary era. 1.A
19.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: When is war justified? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.

The Revolutionary Era
149
I

Access additional practice questions
1
You and the French are like the two edges of a pair of shears. And we are the cloth which is to be cut to pieces between them.
—Native American to British trader
The Native American who said this most likely—
A welcomed British settlers, but not French settlers
B welcomed French settlers, but not British settlers
C thought British and French settlers were dangerous to Native American ways of life
D thought British and French settlers would improve trade relationships in the Ohio River Valley
3
The act of civil disobedience illustrated in this image prompted Britain to— A raise the tax on tea B pass the Intolerable Acts C grant the colonists limited independence D send troops to arrest and punish Native Americans
2	Which of the following Revolutionary War figures was good at organizing people and arranging protests?
F
Patrick Henry G Abigail Adams H Samuel Adams J Crispus Attucks 4 What role did Thomas Jefferson play in declaring independence?
F
He wrote the Declaration of Independence. G
He distributed copies of the Declaration of Independence. H
He voted against adopting the Declaration of Independence. J
He was the first person to sign the Declaration of Independence. If you have trouble	with...	
Question	i	1	I	2
See Lesson	3.1	i	3.2
TEKS 10.C ‘ 4.B
	The Revolutionary Era	151
3
3.3
20.C
4
3.3
4.B
The Revolutionary Era 150
Colonists helped soldiers at Valley Forge by— A sending food B providing horses C building brick homes D finding them a new leader
6 Continental vs. British Forces
I CONTINENTAL BRITISH
TOTAL FORCES
about 90,000 as a peak estimate more than 70,000 COMPOSITION
Continental Army, State Militias Army, Navy, hired mercenaries OF FORCES
ALLIES
France, Spain Native Americans, Loyalists QUALITY OF FORCES
untrained, unconventional trained, disciplined MOTIVATION	freedom from British control	regain British control
SUPPLIES	very limited weapons.	better availability of weapons,
	food, and clothing	food, and clothing, but moving
		supplies was difficult
Based on the chart above, which statement best explains why the United States defeated the British at Yorktown?
F
The British had a better trained fighting force but not enough troops. G
American forces had easier access to necessary supplies than the British. H
American forces used unconventional methods with the help of strong allies. J
Britain made use of hired mercenaries, whom they could not trust completely. The Revolutionary Era 152
7
Access aciaitional practice questions ]i
•	Founded by a Quaker who respected Native Americans
•	Intended to be a model of religious freedom
•	Welcomed Protestants, Catholics, and Jews, initially
This list best describes the colony of—
A
New York B
Maryland C
New Jersey D
Pennsylvania 8 Harvard, the first college in Massachusetts, opened in order to—
F make Massachusetts attractive to current and future immigrants G train highly educated physicians, public servants, lawyers, and teachers H offer apprenticeships in papermaking, printing, carriage-building, and tanning J educate future ministers and promote higher learning as a way to create and sustain wealth
I
If you have trouble with Question
See Lesson TEKS
5
3.4
4.C
6
3.5
4.C
7
2.4
25.A
8
2~6
3.A
The Revolutionary
Era 153
A
Constitution for the United States In this Topic, you will learn about the United States Constitution. You know the TEKS are very important, and this course will make it fun to learn about the things that will help you master them. Keep reading to see how.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
1.A, 1.C, 3.B, 4.C, 4.D, 4.E, 6.A, 14.A, 15.A, 15.B, 15.C,
15.D, 16.A, 17.A, 18.A, 19.B, 19.C, 19.D, 19.E, 19.F, 20.A,
20.B, 21 .A, 21.B, 21 .C, 25.A, 25.C, 29.E
LESSON OUTLINE
A
Weak Confederation 1.A, 4.C, 6.A, 15.B 4.2: Drafting a Constitution 1.A, 1.C, 4.D 4.3: Ideas That Influenced the Constitution 3.B, 14.A, 15.A, 15.C, 20.A
4.4: Federalists, Antifederalists, and the Bill of Rights 1.A, 4.E, 15.A, 15.C, 17.A
4.5: Understanding the Constitution 15.D, 18.A, 21 .A
4.6: Amending the Constitution 16.A, 19.B, 21.B, 25.A, 25.C
4.7: Citizens’ Rights and Responsibilities 19.C, 19.D, 19.F, 20.B
Connect
You will start by connecting with the Topic through a video that tells a personal story about the times. You will start to think about how the Topic connects with your own experience or to what you already know. And you’ll get a chance to think about a really big question, or Essential Question: How much power should the government have?
Begin your study by trying the following
LEARN
Watch My Story Video: James Madison, The Federalist Papers
Launch your Civic Discussion:
Senate Representation
154

•	Investigate
: Then you will investigate : the Topic through a group ; of lessons. The story of the : United States Constitution : will come to life as you read ; and interact with key content ; You will get a chance to ; read about what happened ; and why. And you’ll be \ able to interact with a lot of ; fascinating online materials.
; You’ll also keep working on ; your Civic Discussion as you
•	build further mastery of the
•	Topic TEKS.
The U.S. Congress
» Digital interactivity from the online course
O
• Synthesize
Next you will pull it all together by
reflecting on the Essential Questron. This will give you a chance to be the storyteller, to show how you		Topic Review and Assessment Questions	TEKS in Topic 4	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
would answer the big question.	1.A	16	18. A	18
	1.C	3	19.B	20
	3.B	5	19.C	26
	4.C	I	1	19.D	27
Demonstrate Finally, you can show what you know. You can write an essay, hold a discussion, or make a presentation to the class. You can	4.D	4, 14	19.E	23
	4.E	11	19.F	8
	6.A	9	20.A	7
	14. A	10	20.B	25
	15. A	12,13	21 .A	19
	15.B	2	21.B	22
answer questions about every TEKS on the Topic Review and Assessment pages. Or you can take part in the Civic Discussion on	15.C	6	21 .C	4, 14
	15.D	17,20	25.A	21
	16. A	24	25.C	21
	17.A	15	29.E	13, 19
				
I
i
155
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
How much power should the government have? A
Constitution for the United States (1776- aPresent)
*
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1.A, 1.C, 3.B, 4.C, 4.D, 4.E, 6.A, 14.A, 15.A, 15.B, 15.C, 15.D, 16.A, 17.A, 18.A, 19.B, 19.C, 19.D, 19.E, 19.F, 20.A, 20.B, 21 .A, 21.B, 21.C, 25.A, 25.C, 29.E
»Independence Hall in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Enduring Understandings
•	Weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation caused problems after the American Revolution.
•	Enlightenment and Roman principles of government influenced the Constitution.
•	After debate and ratification, the Constitution became the foundation of American government.
•	The Bill of Rights (the first ten amendments) ensures protection of basic human rights.
•	The Constitution established the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government with a system of checks and balances to limit the power of each.
•	People must meet criteria to be American citizens, and with citizenship comes rights and responsibilities.
PEARSON 1
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
©
157
I

State governments vary from state to state. In forming a government, most states wrote constitutions. A constitutionis a document that sets out the basic laws, principles, organization, and processes of a government. States wrote constitutions for two reasons. First, a written constitution would spell out the rights of all citizens. Second, it would limit the power of government.
I
1.A, 4.C, 6.A, 15.B
» Objectives
Explain why state governments wrote constitutions.
Identify the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation.
Describe the process the Articles created for admitting new states.
Explain why many Americans called for changes to the Articles.
Summarize Shays’ Rebellion and how it influenced leaders to change the Articles of Confederation.
» Key Terms
constitution bill of rights Articles of
Confederation
cede
currency
Land Ordinance of
1785
A
Weak Confederation
I
Each State Creates a Constitution
People valued the rights that state governments protected. Virginia's constitution included a bill of rights, or list of freedoms that the government promises to protect. Virginia's bill of rights guaranteed trial by jury, freedom of religion, and freedom of the press. Several other states followed Virginia’s lead. For example, the Massachusetts J state constitution guaranteed people:	;
|
. . . the right of enjoying and defending their ; lives and liberties; that of acquiring, possessing, and protecting property; in [short], that of seeking ; and obtaining their safety and happiness.	I
—Massachusetts Constitution of 1780
Northwest
Ordinance
den
However, the Articles of Confederation had weaknesses as well. Compared to the states, Congress had very limited powers. Congress could pass laws, but nine states had to approve a law before it could go into effect. Even then it was up to the states to enforce the laws passed by Congress. The Articles included no president to execute laws.
Congress could not regulate trade between states or between states and foreign countries. Nor did it have the power to tax. To raise money, Congress had to ask the states for funds or borrow them. No state could be forced to contribute funds. There was also no system of courts to settle conflicts between states.
Debates Over Western Lands One major dispute arose before the Articles of Confederation went into effect. Maryland refused to ratify the Articles unless Virginia and other states ceded, or gave up, their claims to lands west of the Appalachian Mountains. Like other small states, Maryland feared that “landed” states would become too powerful.
One by one, the states agreed to cede their western claims to Congress. Finally, only Virginia held out. However, Thomas Jefferson and other leading Virginians recognized the great need to form a central government. They persuaded state lawmakers to give up Virginia’s claims in the West.
The new state governments were somewhat similar to the colonial governments in structure. The states divided power between an executive and a legislature. The legislature was elected by the voters to pass laws. Every state but Pennsylvania had a governor to execute, or carry out, the laws.
Under the state constitutions, more people had the right to vote than in colonial times. To vote, a citizen had to be white, male, and over age 21. He had to own a certain amount of property or pay a certain amount of taxes. For a time, some women in Hew Jersey could vote. In a few states, free African American men who owned property could vote.
EJ IDENTIFY
What sort of freedoms did many states agree to protect?
The Articles of
Confederation
As citizens formed state governments, the Continental Congress was drafting a plan for the nation as a whole. Delegates believed that the colonies needed to be united by a national government in order to win independence.
It was hard to write a constitution that all states would approve. They were reluctant to give up power to a central government. Few Americans saw themselves as citizens of one nation. Instead, they felt loyal to their own states. Also, people feared replacing the “tyranny” of British rule with another strong government.
After much debate, the Continental Congress approved the first American constitution in 1777. The Articles of Confederation created a very loose alliance of 13 independent states.
Strengths and Weaknesses Under the Articles of Confederation, the United States became a union of states with a weak central government. In a sense, the Articles simply put into law the existing reality of government in the colonies—a Congress with delegates acting on behalf of states that retained most of the power. The new nation was still at war, its revolution not yet won. It was not the time to discuss the political relationship between the states and Congress. The Articles of Confederation represented an effective compromise during a difficult time.
As apian of government, the Articles of Confederation had strengths. It left states free to make decisions for themselves. It prevented the federal government from gaming too much power.
Under the Articles, each state sent one delegate to Congress. Thus each state, no matter its size or population, had one vote. Congress did have the power to declare war. It could appoint military officers, coin money, and operate post offices. It was also responsible for foreign affairs and could sign treaties.
» The Second Continental Congress adopted the Articles of Confederation in 1777. The Articles spelled out the first constitution of American government.
158
