5.1 Washington’s Presidency
he proposed showed his leadership qualities as an appointed political leader.
Hamilton called for the government to repay both federal and state debts. One of his first acts in government was to ask Congress to pass a tariff, or tax on imports, to pay for the government. Congress passed this tariff in 1789. Hamilton wanted the government to buy up all the bonds issued by both the national and state governments before 1789. He then planned to issue new bonds to pay off the old debts. As the economy improved and income from the tariff increased, the government would then be able to pay off the new bonds. Many people, including bankers and investors, welcomed Hamilton’s plan. Others attacked it.
Arguments for and Against Hamilton’s Plan
James Madison led the opposition. Madison argued that Hamilton's plan would reward speculators. A speculator is someone who invests in a risky venture in the hope of making a large profit.
During the Revolution, the government had issued bonds to soldiers and citizens who supplied goods. Many of these bondholders needed cash to survive. So, they sold their bonds to speculators. Speculators bought bonds worth one dollar for only 10 or 15 cents. If the government paid off the old bonds in full, speculators stood to make fortunes. Madison thought that speculators did not deserve to make such profits.
Hamilton replied that the United States must repay its debts in full. Otherwise, he said, it risked losing the trust of investors in the future. The support of investors, he argued, was crucial to building the new nation's economy. After much debate, Congress approved full repayment of the national debt.
As a southerner, Madison also led the fight against the other part of Hamilton’s plan, the repaying of state debts. By 1789, most southern states had paid off their debts from the Revolution. They thought that other states should do the same. The New England states, for example, still owed a lot. Thus, some northern states stood to gain more than others from the plan. As a result, the southern states bitterly opposed Hamilton’s plan.
This fight over how to use scarce capital resources fairly was only one of many in the early republic, the period from Washington’s presidency until 1824.
A
Compromise Is Reached In the end, Hamilton proposed a compromise. Many southerners wanted the nation’s capital to be located in the South. Hamilton offered to support that goal if southerners agreed to his plan to repay state debts. Madison and others accepted the compromise. In July 1790, Congress voted to repay state debts and to build a new capital city. The new capital would not be part of any state. Instead, it would be built on land along the Potomac River on land given up by two
State Debt Assumed by the New Federal Government, 1790
STATE ASSUMED DEBT (IN DOLLARS) STATE ASSUMED DEBT (IN DOLLARS)
New Hampshire	300,000	Delaware	200,000
Massachusetts	4,000,000	Maryland	800,000
Rhode Island	200,000	Virginia	3,500,000
Connecticut	1,600,000	North Carolina	2,400,000
New York	1,200,000	South Carolina	4,000,000
New Jersey	800,000	Georgia	300,000
Pennsylvania	2,200,000		
SOURCE:
Library of Congress » Analyze Data Considering the differences among the states’ debt levels, why might some states have objected to the federal government taking over every state’s debts?
The Early Republic 212	5.1 Washington’s Presidency
southern states, Virginia and Maryland. Congress called the area the District of Columbia. Washington, the new capital, would be located in the District. Today it is known as Washington, D.C., with £>.(?. standing for District of Columbia. Plans called for the new capital to be ready by 1800. Meanwhile, the nation’s capital was moved from New York to Philadelphia.
BRECALL
Why were federal and state debts so high? Creating a Stable Economy
Hamilton’s next challenge was to strengthen the faltering national economy. His economic plan was designed to help both agriculture and industry.
Hamilton called on Congress to set up a national bank. In 1791, Congress created the first Bank of the United States. The government deposited money from taxes in the Bank. In turn, the Bank issued paper money to pay the government’s bills and to make loans to farmers and businesses. Through these loans, the Bank encouraged economic growth and the development of a free-enterprise economic system.
To help American manufacturers, Hamilton asked Congress to pass a new tariff, or tax, on foreign goods brought into the country. He wanted a high tariff, to make imported goods more expensive than American-made goods. A tariff meant to protect local industry from foreign competition is called a protective tariff.
Hamilton’s plan sparked arguments over taxation. In the North, where there were more and more factories, many people supported Hamilton’s plan. Southern farmers, however, bought many imported goods. They opposed a protective tariff that would make imports more expensive.
In the end, Congress did pass a tariff, but it was much lower than the protective tariff Hamilton wanted. The tariff was also lower than American manufacturers would have liked in order to protect them from foreign competition. However, the tariff did help to pay oil government debt, a central point in Hamilton’s economic plan. The government needed to find a form of taxation that allowed it to pay off lenders, because attracting lenders is key to financing government in a fee enterprise system.
UNDERSTANDING
What is the purpose of a protective tariff?
ELPS LISTENING 2.D.2
After listening to instruction about this text, work with partners to seek olarification about what you have heard. » This building in Philadelphia was the headquarters of the first Bank of the United States. It was founded in 1791 to bring stability to the nation’s banking system.
Taxation Sparks the
Whiskey Rebellion
To help reduce the national debt, Congress approved a tax on all liquor made and sold in the United States. Hamilton wanted this tax to raise money for the Treasury. Instead, the new tax sparked a rebellion that tested the strength of the new government.
This tax was the first implemented by Congress under its new constitutional authority. Hamilton believed that reasonable taxes on alcohol would help to moderate consumption. He also hoped to gain a rich source of revenue for the federal government to pay its debts.
However, the new law varied the tax rate and often left smaller liquor manufacturers paying more than larger ones. Furthermore, the tax had to be paid in cash. This was often difficult for small distilleries. Large liquor enterprises in the East had less trouble with the tax than those on the frontier or in small towns.
Hamilton, though himself a man of humble origins, did not fully appreciate the economic concerns of Americans who lived on farms or in small towns. A large number of them opposed the new tax.
The Early Republic 213	5.1 Washington’s Presidency
» President Washington reviewed his troops as they prepared to put an end to the Whiskey Rebellion. His leadership helped show the strength and resolve of the new national government.
Interactive Chart
» In this painting from the French Revolution, a mob in Paris burns symbols of the monarchy. The increasing violence of the revolution disturbed many Americans.
©
The Whiskey Rebellion Like many Americans, backcountry farmers grew corn. However, corn was bulky and expensive to haul long distances over rough roads. The cost of transport made western corn too expensive to sell in the East. Instead, farmers converted their corn into whiskey. Barrels of whiskey were worth much more and could be sold for a profit in the East despite the cost of transport.
Backcountry farmers hated the tax on whiskey because it sharply reduced their income. Many refused to pay it. They compared it to the taxes Britain had forced on the colonies.
In 1794, when officials in western Pennsylvania tried to collect the tax, farmers rebelled. During the Whiskey Rebellion, thousands marched in protest through the streets of Pittsburgh. They sang Revolutionary songs and tarred and feathered the tax collectors.
A
Show of Leadership President Washington responded quickly. He showed his leadership qualities as a military leader once again. He called up the militia and dispatched them to Pennsylvania. When the rebels heard that thousands of troops were marching against them, they fled back to their farms. Hamilton wanted the leaders of the rebellion executed, but Washington disagreed and pardoned them. He believed that the government had shown its strength to all. Now, it was time to show mercy. The Whiskey Rebellion tested the will of the new government. Washington’s quick response proved to Americans that their new government would act firmly in times of crisis. The President also showed those who disagreed with the government that violence would not be tolerated.
fel CHECK UNDERSTANDING What was the main
cause of the Whiskey Rebellion?
Americans React to the French Revolution
Late in 1789, French ships arrived in American ports with startling news. On July 14, an angry mob in Paris, France, had destroyed the Bastille (bahs TEEL), an ancient fort that was used as a prison. The attack on the Bastille was an early event in the French Revolution. Before long, the revolution would topple the monarch and lead to the execution of thousands ol ordinary French citizens.
The French Revolution broke out a few years after Americans had won their independence. Like Americans, the French fought for liberty and equality
The Early Republic 214	5.1 Washington’s Presidency
» Analyze Information Based on the information in the web, how did Washington deal with European powers? How did his actions reflect his foreign policy preferences?
Interactive Map
©
As the French Revolution grew more violent, however, it deepened political divisions within the United States.
The French had many reasons to rebel against their king, Louis XVI. The peasants and the middle class paid heavy taxes, while nobles paid none. Reformers wanted a constitution to limit the king’s power and protect basic rights, as the American Constitution did.
Supporting Liberty in France At first, most Americans supported the French Revolution. Americans knew what it meant to struggle for liberty. Also, during the American Revolution, France had been an important ally. Many Americans admired the Marquis de Lafayette, a leading French reformer who had fought with them in the American Revolution.
However, the French Revolution frightened most European rulers and nobles. They wanted to prevent revolutionary ideas from spreading to their lands. When two European countries, Austria and Prussia, appealed to other rulers to help the French king regain his throne in 1792, France declared war.
By 1793, the French Revolution was turning more nnd more violent. Radical reformers gained power. They beheaded the king and later the queen. During the Eeign of Terror, tens of thousands of ordinary French oitizens were executed.
Different Opinions Over Violence War and
violence in France divided Americans. Some, like Thomas Jefferson, continued to support the French revolutionaries. He felt that the French had the right to use violence to win freedom, although he condemned the executions of the king and queen.
Alexander Hamilton, John Adams, and others strongly disagreed about the use of violence. One could no more create democracy through widespread violence, claimed Adams, “than a snowball can exist in the streets of Philadelphia under a burning sun.”
President Washington’s Foreign Policy French armies’ attack on Austria led Britain to declare war on France. Europe was soon plunged into a string of wars that lasted on and off for more than 20 years. The fight between France and Britain, Europe’s two leading powers, threatened the economy of the United States. These countries were America’s main trading partners.
Faced with war in Europe, President Washington had to decide on a foreign policy. Foreign policy is a nation’s plan of action toward other nations. During the American Revolution, the United States and France had signed a treaty that made the two countries allies. Now, France wanted to use American ports to supply its ships and launch attacks on British ships. Allowing France to use American ports would expose the United
The Early Republic 215	5.1 Washington’s Presidency
.
» President Washington reviewed his troops as they prepared to put an end to the Whiskey Rebellion. His leadership helped show the strength and resolve of the new national government.


Interactive Chart
» In this painting from the French Revolution, a mob in Paris burns symbols of the monarchy. The increasing violence of the revolution disturbed many Americans.
The Whiskey Rebellion Like many Americans backcountry farmers grew corn. However, corn was bulky and expensive to haul long distances over rough roads. The cost of transport made western corn too expensive to sell in the East. Instead, farmers converted their corn into whiskey. Barrels of whiskey were worth much more and could be sold for a profit in the East despite the cost of transport.
Backcountry farmers hated the tax on whiskey because it sharply reduced their income. Many refused to pay it. They compared it to the taxes Britain had forced on the colonies.
In 1794, when officials in western Pennsylvania tried to collect the tax, farmers rebelled. During the Whiskey Rebellion, thousands marched in protest through the streets of Pittsburgh. They sang Revolutionary songs and tarred and feathered the tax collectors.
A
Show of Leadership President Washington responded quickly. He showed his leadership qualities as a military leader once again. He called up the militia and dispatched them to Pennsylvania. When the rebels heard that thousands of troops were marching against them, they fled back to their farms. Hamilton wanted the leaders of the rebellion executed, but Washington disagreed and pardoned them. He believed that the government had shown its strength to all. Now, it was time to show mercy. * The Whiskey Rebellion tested the will of the new government. Washington’s quick response proved to Americans that their new government would act firmly in times of crisis. The President also showed those who disagreed with the government that violence would not be tolerated.
H CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What was the main cause of the Whiskey Rebellion?
Americans React to the French Revolution
Late in 1789, French ships arrived in American por with startling news. On July 14, an angry mob : Paris, France, had destroyed the Bastille (bahs TEEl an ancient fort that was used as a prison. The attac on the Bastille was an early event in the Frenc Revolution. Before long, the revolution would topp the monarch and lead to the execution of thousands ordinary French citizens.
The French Revolution broke out a few yea after Americans had won their independence. Lil Americans, the French fought for liberty and equalit
The Early Republic
5.1 Washington’s Presidency
» Analyze Information Based on the information in the web, how did Washington deal with European powers? How did his actions reflect his foreign policy preferences?
Interactive Map

As the French Revolution grew more violent, however, it deepened political divisions within the United States.
The French had many reasons to rebel against their king, Louis XVI. The peasants and the middle class paid heavy taxes, while nobles paid none. Reformers wanted a constitution to limit the king’s power and protect basic rights, as the American Constitution did.
Supporting Liberty in France At first, most Americans supported the French Revolution. Americans knew what it meant to struggle for liberty. Also, during the American Revolution, France had been an important ally. Many Americans admired the Marquis de Lafayette, a leading French reformer who had fought with them in the American Revolution.
However, the French Revolution frightened most European rulers and nobles. They wanted to prevent revolutionary ideas from spreading to their lands. When two European countries, Austria and Prussia, appealed to other rulers to help the French king regain his throne in 1792, France declared war.
By 1793, the French Revolution was turning more and more violent. Radical reformers gained power. They beheaded the king and later the queen. During the Beign of Terror, tens of thousands of ordinary French citizens were executed.
Different Opinions Over Violence War and
violence in France divided Americans. Some, like Thomas Jefferson, continued to support the French revolutionaries. He felt that the French had the right to use violence to win freedom, although he condemned the executions of the king and queen.
Alexander Hamilton, John Adams, and others strongly disagreed about the use of violence. One could no more create democracy through widespread violence, claimed Adams, “than a snowball can exist in the streets of Philadelphia under a burning sun.”
President Washington’s Foreign Policy French armies’ attack on Austria led Britain to declare war on France. Europe was soon plunged into a string of wars that lasted on and off for more than 20 years. The fight between France and Britain, Europe’s two leading powers, threatened the economy of the United States. These countries were America’s main trading partners.
Faced with war in Europe, President Washington had to decide on a foreign policy. Foreign policy is a nation’s plan of action toward other nations. During the American Revolution, the United States and France had signed a treaty that made the two countries allies. Now, France wanted to use American ports to supply its ships and launch attacks on British ships. Allowing France to use American ports would expose the United
The Early Republic 215	5.1 Washington’s Presidency
States, still recovering from the Revolutionary War, to new British attacks. However, Washington worried that the United States could not honor its treaty with France and still remain neutral in the European conflict. Neutral means not taking sides in a conflict.
Washington also hoped to protect the American economy from the conflict between Britain and France. Merchants and farmers in the United States depended on American ports to maintain overseas trade with Britain and other countries. The British navy ensured the safety of American trading ships. Still, many Americans favored France. Staying neutral appeared to be Washington’s best option.
Protecting American Interests The issue of the treaty deepened the divisions within Washington’s Cabinet. Hamilton pointed out that the United States had signed the treaty with Louis XVI. With the king dead, he argued, the treaty was no longer valid. Jefferson, a supporter of France, urged strict acceptance of the treaty.
After much debate, Washington issued the Neutrality Proclamation in April 1793. It stated that the United States would not support either side in the war. Further, it forbade Americans from aiding either Britain or France. The Neutrality Proclamation was a
» In this drawing, citizens burn an effigy of John Jay to protest Jay’s Treaty, which they believed favored .Britain.
defeat for Jefferson. This and other defeats eventually led Jefferson to leave the Cabinet.
I DEFINE
What is foreign policy? ELPS
ELPS READING 4.F.2
Read the introduction and the content under the first two sub-headings of this text. After listening to your teacher, view the painting of the fire in the streets of Paris and discuss its effect on your understanding of the content. Washington Defends Neutrality
Declaring neutrality was easier than enforcing it. Americans wanted to trade with both Britain and France. However, those warring nations seized American cargoes headed for each other’s ports.
Jay’s Treaty In 1793, the British captured more than 250 American ships trading in the French West Indies. Some Americans called for war. Washington, however, knew that the United States was too weak to fight. He sent Chief Justice John Jay to Britain for talks.
Jay negotiated an agreement that called for Britain to pay damages for the seized American ships. Britain also agreed to give up the forts it still held in the West. Meanwhile, Americans had to pay debts long owed to British merchants.
Jay’s Treaty sparked loud protests because it did nothing to protect the rights of neutral American ships. After furious debate, the Senate finally approved the treaty in 1795.
The Impact of Washington’s Farewell Address
After serving two terms as President, George Washington refused to serve a third. Before retiring in 1796, Washington published his Farewell Address. In it, he advised Americans against becoming involved in European affairs:
Tis our true policy to steer clear of permanent Alliances, with any portion of the foreign World. . . . The great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations is ... to have with them as little political connection as possible. —George Washington, Farewell Address, 1796
Washington did not oppose foreign trade, but he did reject alliances that could drag the country into wat
The Early Republic 216	5.1 Washington’s Presidency
His advice guided American foreign policy for many
years.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What advice did Washington give in his final address?
ASSESSMENT
1. Hypothesize Why do you think Congress chose the five executive departments that it did?
2.	Generate Explanations What did the Judiciary Act accomplish?
3.	Identify Central Issues Explain Hamilton’s argument in favor of paying the nation’s debts in full.
4.	Generate Explanations Why was the new
nation’s capital built as a new city in the South?
5.	Summarize George Washington’s response to the Whiskey Rebellion. What effect did this response have on the nation?
The Early Republic
5.1 Washington’s Presidency
___ When George Washington took
office in 1789, the United States had no political parties. In fact, most American leaders disliked even the idea of parties. “If I could not go to heaven but with a party,” said Thomas Jefferson, “I would not go at all.”
Although Thomas Jefferson came from a wealthy background, he supported the interests of small farmers.
Interactive Flipped Video J
» Objectives
Contrast the views of Hamilton and Jefferson.
Explain the origin of political parties in the early republic.
Describe how the election of 1796 increased political tensions.
» Key Terms
faction
unconstitutional
Democratic
Republican
Federalist John Adams
The Origin of Political Parties
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
Americans Divide Over Politics
Early on, though, political disagreements divided Americans. “Men who have been [friends] all their lives,” noted Jefferson, “cross streets to avoid meeting, and turn their heads another way, lest they should be obliged to touch their hats.” Before Washington left office in 1797, two rival political parties had emerged to compete for power.
Americans also saw political parties as a threat to national unity. They agreed with George Washington, who warned Americans that parties would lead to “jealousies and false alarms.”
Opposing Factions Grow in the Cabinet Despite the Presidents warning, factions grew up around two members of his Cabinet, Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson. The two men differed in background and in politics. Born in the West Indies, Hamilton had worked his way up from poverty. Hamilton believed that the wealthy and educated should control the government. He believed that supporting business and trade was the best way to improve the nation’s economy. Hamilton also favored Britain over France.
Unlike Hamilton, Jefferson came from a wealthy family of Virginia planters. He owned large plantations and enslaved African
Americans. Despite his wealth, Jefferson believed that the government should represent ordinary white people, not just the wealthy and educated. Jefferson supported policies that favored small farmers rather than businessmen. Jefferson favored France over Britain.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why did many Americans distrust political parties?
Disagreements on
Important Issues
The disagreements between Hamilton and Jefferson were not just differences of opinion. Their quarrels were rooted in their different views about what was best for the new nation.
Foundations of the American Economy The
two leaders differed on economic policy. Hamilton wanted the United States to model itself on Britain. The government, he thought, should encourage manufacturing and trade. He also favored the growth of cities and the merchant class.
Jefferson thought that farmers, rather than merchants, were the backbone of the new nation. “Cultivators of the earth,” he wrote, “are the most valuable citizens.” He feared that a manufacturing economy would corrupt the United States by concentrating power in the hands of a small group of wealthy Americans.
Differing Views: Jefferson vs. Hamilton
JEFFERSON
•Wanted strong state governments
•	Sympathetic to France
•	Opposed a national bank
•Thought the government should be controlled by ordinary Americans •Wanted liberties to be protected by law
•	Believed the American government should not be modeled on the English government
Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton held opposing views on many sues. Compare and Contrast How did Jefferson’s views on civil liberties differ r°m Hamilton’s?
Interactive Gallery
Federalism Hamilton and Jefferson also disagreed about the power of the federal government. Hamilton wanted the federal government to have greater power than state governments. A strong federal government, he argued, was needed to increase commerce. It would also be able to restrain mob violence like that of the Whiskey Rebellion.
In contrast, Jefferson wanted as small a federal government as possible, in order to protect individual freedom. He feared that a strong federal government might take over powers that the Constitution gave to the states.
Interpreting the Constitution Jefferson and Hamilton also clashed over the Bank of the United States. Jefferson worried that a national bank would give too much power to the government and to wealthy investors who would help run the bank.
Jefferson opposed the law setting up the bank. He claimed that it was unconstitutional, or not permitted by the Constitution. Nowhere did the Constitution give Congress the power to create a Bank, he argued. For Jefferson, any power not specifically given to the federal government belonged to the states.
Hamilton did not agree with Jefferson’s strict interpretation of the Constitution. He preferred a looser interpretation. The Constitution gave Congress the power to make all laws “necessary and proper” to carry out its duties. Hamilton argued that the Bank was necessary for the government to collect taxes and pay its bills.
HAMILTON
•	Wanted a strong central government
•	Sympathetic to England
•	Favored a national bank
•	Thought the government should be controlled by the elite of society
•	Opposed to protecting individual liberties by law
•	Wanted to model the American government after the English government
©
218
The Early Republic 219	5,2 The Origin of Political Parties
Britain or France Finally, the two leaders disagreed over foreign policy. Hamilton wanted close ties with Britain, a major trading partner. Jefferson favored France, the first ally of the United States.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
How did Hamilton feel about the division of power between the federal government and the states?
The Origin of American Political Parties
At first, Hamilton and Jefferson clashed in private. Then Congress began to pass many of Hamilton’s programs. James Madison shared many of Jefferson’s views, and the two men decided to organize supporters of their views.
Jefferson and Madison moved cautiously at first. In 1791, they went to New York, telling people that they wanted to study its wildlife. In fact, Jefferson was interested in nature. Their main goal, though, was to meet with leading New York politicians such as Governor George Clinton and Aaron Burr, a fierce critic of Hamilton. Jefferson asked them to help defeat
» In this cartoon, Congressman Matthew Lyon, a Democratic Republican, defends himself from Roger Griswold, a Federalist. Analyze Political Cartoons I^That does this cartoon suggest about the conflict areen the parties?
Hamilton’s program by convincing New Yorkers to vote for Jefferson’s supporters.
Republicans and Federalists Soon, leaders in other states were organizing to support either Hamilton or Jefferson. Jefferson’s supporters called themselves Democratic Republicans, often shortened to Republicans. Today’s Republican Party is not related to Jefferson’s party. The Jeffersonian Republicans included small farmers, artisans, and some wealthy planters in the South.
Hamilton and his supporters were called Federalists because they wanted a strong federal government. Federalists drew support mainly from merchants and manufacturers in such cities as Boston and New York. They also had the backing of some southern planters.
Newspapers Influence Public Opinion In the late 1700s, the number of American newspapers more than doubled. This growth met a demand for information.
A
European visitor was surprised that so many Americans could read. “The common people ... all read and write, and understand arithmetic,” he reported, and “almost every little town now furnishes a circulating library.” As party rivalry grew, newspapers took sides. In the Gazette of the United States, publisher John Fenno backed Hamilton and the Federalists. Jefferson’s friend Philip Freneau (frih NOH) started a rival paper, the National Gazette, which supported Republicans.
Newspapers had great influence on public opinion. In stinging language, they raged against political opponents. Often, articles mixed rumor and opinion with facts. Emotional attacks and counterattacks fanned the flames of party rivalry.
Choosing Washington’s Successor Political parties played a large role in the election of George Washington's successor. In 1796, Democratic Republicans backed Thomas Jefferson for President and Aaron Burr for Vice President. Federalists supported John Adams for President and Thomas Pinckney for Vice President. The election had an unexpected outcome.
Under the Constitution, the person with the most electoral votes became President. The candidate with the next highest total was made Vice President. John Adams, a Federalist, won office as President. The leader of the Democratic Republicans, Thomas Jefferson, came in second and became Vice President.
Having the President and Vice President from opposing parties further increased political tensions. John Adams took office in March 1797 as the nation's
The Early Republic 220
5.2 The Origin of Political Parties
THE ELECTION
°f 1796 * ■ "a-PWWHWIWaBIIO
KEY ISSUES FEDERALIST DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICAN
National versus state governments	Favored strong federal government	Favored states' rights and a limited federal government
Economic policy	Supported industry and a national bank	Supported farming; opposed a national bank
Foreign relations	Supported building relations with Britain	Supported building relations with France
I THOMAS JEFFERSON
\ Democratic i Republican
j JOHN ADAMS
Federalist
THOMAS PINCKNEY
Federalist
POPULAR VOTE FOR TOP TWO CANDIDATES*
35,726 (53.4%)
,115 (46.6%)
* Only 6 of 15 states held a direct popular vote; most limited the vote to white male property owners. In other states, legislators chose electors.
ADAMS
JEFFERSON
ELECTORAL
VOTE
70 needed to win
30
AARON BURR
Democratic
Republican
OTHERS
Federalist votes are assigned to Adams; Democratic Republican votes are assigned to Jefferson.
STATES’ ELECTORAL VOTES*
Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, Vermont
Georgia, Kentucky, North Carolina, Pennsylvania,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia
FEDERALIST
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLICAN
*Maryland split its votes.
» Analyze Charts Which political party championed agriculture and campaigned against the establishment of a national bank? Which candidate finished third in the electoral vote tally?
second President. Events soon deepened the distrust between him and Jefferson.
U SUMMARIZE
How did political parties begin in the United States?
ELPS READING 4.F.3
Read the section titled “Newspapers Influence Public Opinion” and view the print of men reading newspapers, Use visual and context clues to build your understanding of vocabulary.
4 ELPS
ASSESSMENT
1- Hypothesize Thomas Jefferson said that he disliked political parties. How might the United
States government work today if there were no political parties?
2.	Summarize Thomas Jefferson’s views on the economy. What did he fear most about a manufacturing economy?
3.	Compare Hamilton’s and Jefferson’s views on the power of the federal government.
4.	Identify Cause and Effect In the late 1700s, the number of newspapers in the United States exploded. What effects did this have on the nation’s politics?
5.	Generate Explanations Why did Thomas Jefferson, who claimed to dislike political parties, lead the way in founding a party?
a/"
5.2 The Origin of Political Parties
The Early Republic
221
As President, John Adams faced a political crisis over whether to go to war with France.

5.3
No sooner had John Adams taken office than he faced a crisis with France. The French objected to Jay’s Treaty because they felt that it put the United States on the side of Britain.
In 1797, French ships began to seize American ships in the West Indies, as the British had done.
Interactive Flipped Video j
5.E, 22.A
» Objectives
Explain Adams’s foreign policy.
Describe the controversy over the Alien and Sedition Acts.
Explain why Congress decided the election of 1800 and how that election set a precedent.
John Adams's Presidency
Escalating Conflict With France
Once again, Americans called for war, this time against France. To avoid war, Adams sent diplomats to Paris to discuss the rights of neutral nations.
» Key Terms
XYZ
Affair frigate Alien and Sedition Acts
sedition
nullify
Kentucky and Virginia resolutions
states’ rights
The XYZ Affair The French foreign minister, Charles Maurice de Talleyrand, did not deal directly with the Americans. Instead, he sent three agents to offer the Americans a deal. Before Talleyrand would even begin talks, the agents said, he wanted $250,000 for himself and a $10 million loan to France. “Not a sixpence!” replied one of the Americans angrily. (A sixpence was a British coin worth six pennies.)
The diplomats informed Adams about the offer. He then told Congress. Adams did not reveal the names of the French agents, referring to them only as X, Y, and Z.
Many Americans were outraged when news reached them about the XYZ Affair in 1798. They took up the slogan, “Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute!” They were willing to spend money to defend their country, but they would not pay a bribe to another nation.
ze
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
The XYZ Affair ignited war fever in the United States. Despite strong pressure, Adams refused to ask Congress to declare war on
222
France. Like Washington, he wanted to keep the country out of European affairs. However, he could not ignore French attacks on American ships, so he strengthened the navy by building frigates, fast-sailing ships with many guns. That move helped convince France to stop attacking American ships.
Adams’s Foreign Policy Divides the Federalists
Led by Hamilton, many Federalists criticized Adams. They hoped a war would weaken the Democratic Republicans, who supported France. War would also force the nation to build its military forces.
A strong military would increase federal power, a key Federalist goal. Many Federalists also favored Britain in its war against France.
Although Adams was a Federalist, he resisted Hamilton’s pressure for war. Their disagreement created a split in the Federalist party.
Over Hamilton’s opposition, Adams again sent diplomats to France. When they arrived, they found an ambitious young army officer, Napoleon Bonaparte, in charge. Napoleon was planning for war against several European powers. Thus, he had no time for a war with the United States. He signed an agreement to stop seizing American ships.
Like Washington, Adams kept the nation out of war. His actions showed his leadership qualities as an elected leader. His success, however, cost him the support of many Federalists and weakened the party for the election of 1800.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did many Federalists support a war with France?
The Alien and Sedition Acts
In 1798, during the crisis with France, Federalists pushed several laws through Congress. These laws were known as the Alien and Sedition Acts
Under the Alien Act, the President could expel any alien, or foreigner, thought to be dangerous to the country. Another law made it harder for immigrants to become citizens. Before 1798, white immigrants could become citizens after living in the United States for five years. The new law made immigrants wait 14 years. The Federalists passed this act because many recent immigrants supported Jefferson and the Democratic Republicans. The act would keep these immigrants from voting for years.
The Democratic Republicans grew even angrier when Congress passed the Sedition Act. Sedition mcans stirring up rebellion against a government.
» In this cartoon depicting the XYZ Affair, a fiveheaded monster demands a bribe from three Americans. Analyze Political Cartoons What details in the cartoon reflect the cartoonist’s attitude toward the French?
Interactive Timeline
» Representative Albert Gallatin opposed Federalists in their attempts to fund the fighting with France. As a result, he was targeted by the Federalists. The Alien and Sedition Acts were believed by some to be written to remove Gallatin from power.
The Early Republic 223
5.3 John Adams’s Presidency
Under this law, citizens could be fined or jailed if they criticized the government or its officials. In fact, several Democratic Republican newspaper editors, and even members of Congress, were fined and jailed for expressing their opinions.
Democratic Republicans protested that the Sedition Act violated the Constitution. The First Amendment, they argued, protected freedom of speech and of the press. Jefferson warned that the new laws threatened American liberties:
They have brought into the lower house a sedition bill, which . . . undertakes to make printing certain matters criminal . . . Indeed this bill & the alien bill both are so [against] the Constitution as to show they mean to pay no respect to it.
—The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, 1798
States Challenge the Federal Government Vice President Jefferson bitterly opposed the Alien and Sedition Acts. He could not ask the courts for help
because the Federalists controlled them. So, he urged the states to take strong action against the acts. He argued that the states had the right to nullify, or cancel, a law passed by the federal government. In this way, states could resist the power of the federal government.
With help from Jefferson and Madison, Kentucky and Virginia passed resolutions in 1798 and 1799. The Kentucky and Virginia resolutions claimed that each state “has an equal right to judge for itself" whether a law is constitutional. If a state decides a law is unconstitutional, said the resolutions, it has the power to nullify that law within its borders.
The Kentucky and Virginia resolutions raised the issue of states’ rights. Did the federal government have only those powers that were listed in the Constitution? If so, did the states possess all other powers—for example, the power to declare a federal law unconstitutional? Within a few years, the Alien and Sedition Acts were changed or dropped. Still, the issue of a state’s right to nullify federal laws would come up again.
E3 IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
What did some slates argue after the Alien and Sedition Acts became law?
"in

KENTUCKY LEGISLATURE.
In the Houfe of Reprefentatives,
JVOf-'SMBill sort, 1798,
THE HOUSE
tUoniinetTsiw ft.iHiny Grier it th* Day, refelj-4 atto » Cunnfetc ef the Whole vo the	the C«om^nvw*l,b,
Mr. CALDWBLL In the Chair.
the	to tU folfew-
ieg	dwteafop. wWch he deSwmt Bi
agreed lobjfttKHfli.ft. +	'4, f •
T> ESOI.VED.
that the fevera! Hate* Jx comparing the United States of America, are not united on the principle of unlimited fubmlffion to their General Government i but that by cowpafl under
vernment far ijweial purpofet, delegated to that Gdvcrnment certain definite powers, referring each flare to ftfisif, the re-' fidnaty waft of right to, their own felf Government} and that whenfoever the General Government afliunesundelcgated powers, it* aft* arennanthoritatlve, soisl, and of no force: That to thia compaft
^^*4*	m* w" At at .a.	xu •
J*
(eeh ftate steeded aa a Bate, and « an ntcgnl party, it* co-ftates forming aa to itfelf, the other party; That the Government created by thia cbmpaft wa* not ”3*4# Me exclofive oT finai of the dMgat oft he powers delegated to itfelf; - Cnee that would have made it* dtferetioo, < coaftltutlott, ‘the meafure of
its power* t got that a* in all other cafes of compaft among parties having no torn-man JSdge, each party ha* an equal right to judge for itfelf, a* well of infraaion* as of the mode and meafure of redrels.
H,
Hefolved, that the ConfiifiKioti of 'United States having delegated to COrgrefs « power topuniOt treafoc, coun- terfeiting the fecurltles and current coin, of the United State*, pirecietand felonies committed on the High Seas, and offence* agjinft the law* of nations, and no o-thcr crime* whatever, and It being trne
. *’»» a general principle, and one of the amendment* to the Confliwtioti having aifo declared, '' that the power* not delegated tq the ujtttMd State* by the C«n-ftitution,hor prohibited by it to the Hates, are referved <0 the ftate* refpe&iveiy, or to the -people?* therefore aifo the fame aft of Congreft paged on the tgth day of July, I7J>8,and entitled " An aft In addition to the a& entitled an aft for the pupilhtHent of certain crime* againft the United State*}” a» alfo the a& paired by them on the 27th day of June, »yp8, end--fled " An aft to ponifli frauds'eommitied ’on the Bank of the United State*" (and all other their aft* which aflhme to create, define, or pnntfit crlmee other than thofe enumerated in the eonliitotion) are altogether void and of no force, and that the power to create, define, and puniflt ftich other crime* i» referred, and of fight appertain* iblely and exejufively to the reftwe&lve ftatea, each within lt« own
Territory,
III,
Ke&lved, that it is true as a general principle, and is aifo expreftly declared by one of theamrndment! to tbe Coa-ftltution that '/the power*not delegated to the United State* by the ConftitatJoa, nor prohibited fay it to. the Hate*, are, referred to the fiate* refpe&iveiy, or to the peoples" and that no power over the freedom of religion, freedom of Ipeeeh, freedom of the preft being delegated the United Statet fay the Conftitniios, rprohibited by St to the ftate*, all law ful powers refpe&ing tbe fame did of right remain, and were referred to tbe Water, or to the people: Thftt thu* was manifefted their determination to retain to themfeive* the rightof judging how, . far the Merntioufoef* of fpetch and of the' preft tnav be abridged without ieffrniug their nfefet freedom, and how .far.thefi* abufc* whlets cannot be feparpted from

» The Kentucky Resolution declared that a state could nullify federal laws it deemed unconstitutional. Identify Cause and Effect Why did Jefferson and Madison urge states to pass such resolutions?
An Important Presidential Election
By 1800, the war cry against France was fading. As the election neared, Democratic Republicans focused on two issues. First, they attacked the Federalists for raising taxes to prepare for war. Second, they opposed the unpopular Alien and Sedition Acts.
Democratic Republicans backed Thomas Jefferson for President and Aaron Burr for Vice President. Despite the bitter split in the Federalist party, John Adams was again named its candidate.
Political Power Goes to a Different Party In the
race for the presidency, Democratic Republicans won the popular vote. However, when the electoral college voted, Jefferson and Burr each received 73 votes. At the time, the electoral college did not vote separately for President and Vice President. Instead, the college voted for each candidate. The candidate winning the most votes became President, and the runner-up became Vice President. However, each Democratic Republican elector cast one vote for Jefferson and one vote for Burr, so there was no clear winner.
Under the Constitution, if no candidate wins the electoral vote, the House of Representatives decides the election. Only after four days and 36 votes was the tie
The Early Republic 224
5.3 John Adams's Presidency
THE ELECTION
of 1800 + 
?WR!
KEY ISSUES FEDERALIST DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICAN
Standing army	Supported it	Opposed it
Alien and Sedition Acts	Supported them to limit power of the Democratic Republicans	Opposed them as a threat to individual liberty
Attitude toward government	Believed common people needed guidance	Believed people should govern themselves
? IWMIHMSR^^
THOMAS
JEFFERSON
Democratic
Republican
AARON BURR
Democratic
Republican
CHARLES
PINCKNEY
Federalist
JOHN ADAMS
Federalist
The House of Representatives resolved the tie after 6 days and 36 ballots, and Thomas Jefferson became president. The Twelfth Amendment (ratified 1804) gave each Electoral College member one vote for president and one for vice president, reducing the likelihood of ties.
JEFFERSON ADAMS
25,952 (21
POPULAR VOTE FOR TOP TWO CANDIDATES*
41,330(61.4%)
L6%)
* Only 6 of 15 states held a direct popular vote; most limited the vote to white male property owners. In other states, legislators chose electors.
STATES’ ELECTORAL VOTES*
FEDERALIST
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLICAN
Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Vermont
Georgia, Kentucky, New York, Sourth Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia
*Maryland, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina split their votes.
» Analyze Data Based on the data shown, what explains the controversy over the electoral system that erupted after the 1800 presidential election?
©
Interactive Chart
finally broken. The House chose Jefferson as President. Burr became Vice President. The election of 1800 set an important precedent. From then until today, power has passed peacefully from one party to another.
Soon after, Congress passed the Twelfth Amendment. It required electors to hold separate votes for President and Vice President. The states ratified the amendment in 1804.
The Federalist Era Comes to a Close After 1800, the Federalist party slowly declined. Federalists won fewer seats in Congress. In 1804, the party was greatly weakened after its leader, Alexander Hamilton, was killed in a duel with Aaron Burr. Despite its early decline, the Federalist party did help shape the new nation. Even Democratic Republican Presidents kept most of Hamilton’s economic programs.
RECALL
Why did the House of Representatives have to decide the 1800 election?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize the XYZ Affair.
2.	Generate Explanations Why did Federalists pass the Alien Acts?
3.	Hypothesize What likely would happen today if someone introduced a bill in Congress that was similar to the Sedition Act. Why?
4.	Support Ideas with Evidence How did the
Federalists contribute to shaping the United States as we know it today?
5.	Describe the important change in the Constitution that was prompted by the results of the election of 1800.
The Early Republic 225
5.3 John Adams’s Presidency
I
Chief Justice John Marshall, a Federalist, helped to strengthen the U.S. Supreme Court by establishing its power to declare laws unconstitutional.
Interactive Flipped Video
» Objectives
Explain why Jefferson acted to limit the size of the federal government.
Describe the significance and effects of Marbury v. Madison.
Identify the causes and effects of the Louisiana Purchase.
Describe the discoveries of Lewis, Clark, and Pike.
Explain Jefferson’s foreign policy, including conflict with the Barbary States, threats to U.S. neutrality, and the Embargo Act.
» Key Terms
laissez faire free-enterprise
system
Marbury v. Madison judicial review Pinckney Treaty Louisiana Purchase expedition continental divide tribute impressment embargo
Embargo Act smuggling Nonintercourse Act John Marshall James Madison
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
When Thomas Jefferson took office as the third President, some Federalists were worried about his political beliefs. They knew that he supported the French Revolution and they feared that he might bring revolutionary change to the United States. They were also afraid that he might punish Federalists who had used the Alien and Sedition Acts to jail Democratic Republicans.
Jefferson’s
Presidency
Jefferson’s Leadership Redefines Government
In his inaugural address, Jefferson tried to calm Federalists’ fears. He promised that, although the Democratic Republicans were in the majority, he would not treat the Federalists harshly. “The minority possess their egual rights, which equal laws must protect,” he told the nation. He called for an end to the political disputes of the past few years. "We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists,” the President concluded.
Jefferson had no plan to punish Federalists. He did, however, want to change their policies. In his view, the Federalists had made the national government too large and too powerful.
Promoting a Free-Enterprise System One way Jefferson wanted to lessen government power was by reducing the federal budget. Such budget cuts would also keep the federal debt low. His Secretary of the Treasury, Albert Gallatin (gal uh tin), helped him achieve this goal. A financial wizard, Gallatin reduced government spending through careful management.
226
Jefferson believed in an economic idea known as laissez faire (les ay fayr), a French term meaning “let do,” meaning letting people do as they please. The idea of laissez faire was promoted by the Scottish economist Adam Smith.
In his book The Wealth of Nations, Smith argued in favor of a free-enterprise system where goods and services are exchanged with minimal government intrusion, or as little government interference as possible. Free competition, Smith said, would benefit everyone, not just the wealthy.
Laissez faire economists believed that government should play as small a role as possible in economic affairs. Laissez faire was very different from the Federalist idea of government. Alexander Hamilton, you recall, wanted government to promote trade and manufacturing.
Jefferson Minimizes Government Intrusion
Jefferson believed that the government should protect the rights of its citizens. Beyond that, he wanted the federal government to take a less active role in governing the nation. In addition to cutting the federal budget, he decreased the size of government departments. With the approval of Congress, he reduced the size of the army and navy. He also asked Congress to repeal the unpopular whiskey tax.
The Sedition Act expired the day before Jefferson took office. Jefferson hated the law, and he pardoned those who were in jail because of it. He also asked Congress to restore the law allowing foreign-born white
people to become citizens after only a five-year waiting period.
Some Federalist Economic Policies Remain
Jefferson did not discard all Federalist programs. On the advice of Albert Gallatin, he kept the Bank of the United States. The federal government also continued to pay off state debts, which it had taken over while Washington was President. In addition, Jefferson let many Federalists keep their government jobs.
fel IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS How would you define
Jefferson’s idea of government?
ELPS
ELPS LISTENING 2.E.3
Listen to a statement about this text by your teacher. Then use clues provided by your teacher to make sure you understand the statement. Landmark Supreme Court Cases
The election of 1800 gave Democratic Republicans control of Congress. Federalists, however, remained powerful in the courts.
Several months passed between Jefferson’s election and his inauguration. In that time, Federalists in the old Congress passed the Judiciary Act of 1801, increasing the number of federal judges. President Adams then appointed Federalists to fill these new judicial positions. When Jefferson took office, Jeffersonians repealed this part of the act, firing 16 Federalist judges by abolishing their offices.
Jefferson's First Actions as President
>> Analyze Information How do Jefferson’s first actions as President reflect his	| ®
Political views?
Interactive Chart
The Early Republic 227	5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
One of the judges that Adams appointed was John Marshall, the Chief Justice of the United States. Like Jefferson, Marshall was a rich Virginia planter with a brilliant mind. Unlike Jefferson, however, Marshall was a staunch Federalist. He wanted to make the federal government stronger.
The framers of the Constitution expected the courts to balance the powers of the President and Congress. However, John Marshall found the courts to be much weaker than the other branches of government. In his view, it was not clear what powers the federal courts had.
The Issues Behind Marbury v. Madison In 1803, John Marshall showed his leadership qualities as an appointed leader by deciding a case that increased the power of the Supreme Court. The case involved William Marbury, one of the judges appointed by Adams. Adams made the appointment on his last night as President. The Republicans refused to accept this “midnight judge.” They accused Federalists of using unfair tactics to keep control of the courts. Jefferson ordered Secretary of State James Madison not to deliver the official papers confirming Marbury’s appointment.
Marbury sued Madison. According to the Judiciary Act of 1789, only the Supreme Court could decide a case
» These bronze doors lead into the Supreme Court chambers. The carved panels show important moments in legal history—including John Marshall discussing
Marbury v. Madison.
that was brought against a federal official. Therefore, the case of Marbury v. Madison was tried before the Supreme Court.
The Significance of the Marbury v. Madison Decision The Supreme Court ruled against Marbury. Chief Justice Marshall wrote the decision, stating that the Judiciary Act was unconstitutional. The Constitution, Marshall argued, did not give the Supreme Court the right to decide cases brought against federal officials. Therefore, Congress could not give the Court that power simply by passing the Judiciary Act.
As a result of Marbury v. Madison, Congress had to amend, or change, the Judiciary Act to respond to the Supreme Court’s objections. The part of the Judiciary Act of 1789 that the Supreme Court rejected could no longer be law.
The Supreme Court’s decision in Marbury v. Madison set an important precedent. It gave the Supreme Court the power to decide whether laws passed by Congress were constitutional and to reject laws that it considered to be unconstitutional. This power of the Court is called judicial review.
Presidential and Congressional Responses
Jefferson was displeased with the decision. True, Marshall had ruled against Marbury, the Federalist judge.
But Marshall’s decision gave more power to the Supreme Court, where Federalists were still strong. Jefferson also argued that the decision upset the balance of power among the three branches of government:
The opinion which gives to the judges the right to decide what laws are constitutional and what not, not only for themselves . . . but for the Legislature and Executive also . . . would make the Judiciary a [tyrannical] branch.
Thomas Jefferson, letter to Abigail Adams, 1804
Jefferson did not want the judiciary to gain power over the executive branch. He refused the Court’s order to testify at an important trial, saying it would upset the equality of the branches. He also used executive privilege to decide which government papers to show the Court and which to withhold.
In the end, the President and Congress accepted the right of the Court to overturn laws. Today, judicial
The Early Republic
5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
review remains one of the most important powers of the Supreme Court.
B IDENTIFY MAIN IDEAS
Why is the Supreme Court case Marbury v. Madison significant?
The Louisiana Purchase
The United States overcame a number of challenges in its early years, including creating a stable economic system, setting up the courts, and defining the authority of the central government. As the economy continued to grow, Americans needed to protect their economic interests. The Louisiana Territory became a key part of this effort.
Geography Shapes Domestic and Foreign Policy
A new development caused President Jefferson to pursue buying New Orleans in order to control this important port. By 1800, almost one million Americans lived between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River. Most were farmers. With few roads west of the Appalachians, western farmers relied on the Mississippi River to ship their wheat and corn. First, they sent their produce down the river to the city of New Orleans. From there, oceangoing ships carried the produce across the Gulf of Mexico, around Florida, and up to ports along the Atlantic coast.
Spain, which controlled New Orleans, sometimes threatened to close the port to Americans. In 1795, President Washington sent Thomas Pinckney to find a way to keep the vital port open. In the Pinckney Treaty, Spain agreed to let Americans ship their goods down the Mississippi and store them in New Orleans.
For a time, Americans shipped their goods through New Orleans peacefully. In 1800, however, Spain signed a new treaty giving Louisiana back to the French. President Jefferson was alarmed. He knew that the French ruler, Napoleon Bonaparte, had already set out to conquer Europe. Would he now try to build an empire in North America?
Jefferson had reason to worry. Napoleon wanted to Siow food in Louisiana and ship it to French islands in the West Indies. However, events in Haiti, a French colony in the Caribbean, soon ruined Napoleon’s plan. Inspired by the French Revolution, enslaved Africans in Haiti decided to fight for their liberty. Toussaint L’Ouverture (too SAN loo vehr TYOOR) led the revolt. By Wtt, Toussaint and his followers had nearly forced the fench out of Haiti.
Napoleon sent troops to retake Haiti. Although
French captured Toussaint, they did not regain c°ntrol of the island. In 1804, Haitians declared their independence.
» The Louisiana Purchase included the port of New Orleans, which controlled access to the North American West. As shown in this print from the mid-1800s, New Orleans became a busy American port.
» Toussaint L’Ouverture led a revolt by enslaved Africans to win independence from France for Haiti.
The Early Republic 229
5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
Negotiations for Louisiana Jefferson sent Robert Livingston and James Monroe to buy New Orleans and West Florida from Napoleon. Jefferson said they could offer as much as $10 million. Livingston and Monroe negotiated with Charles Maurice de Talleyrand, the French foreign minister. At first, Talleyrand showed little interest in their offer. However, losing Haiti caused Napoleon to give up his plan for an empire in the Americas. He also needed money to pay for his costly wars in Europe. Suddenly, Talleyrand asked Livingston if the United States wanted to buy all of Louisiana, not just New Orleans.
The question surprised Livingston. He offered $4 million. “Too low,” replied Talleyrand. “Reflect and see me tomorrow.”
Livingston and Monroe carefully debated the matter. They had no authority to buy all of Louisiana. However, they knew that Jefferson wanted control of the Mississippi.
They agreed to pay the French $15 million for Louisiana. “This is the noblest work of our whole lives,” declared Livingston when he signed the treaty. “From this day the United States take their place among the powers of the first rank.”
The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 Jefferson hailed the news from France. Still, he was not sure whether the President had the power to purchase Louisiana. He
had always insisted that the federal government had only those powers spelled out in the Constitution. The document said nothing about a President having the power to buy land.
In the end, Jefferson decided that he did have the authority to buy Louisiana. The Constitution, he reasoned, allowed the President to make treaties, and buying the Louisiana territory was part of a treaty. Federalists opposed the purchase as unconstitutional and feared it would weaken the other states. But the Democratic Republicans supported it and the Senate approved the treaty. The Louisiana Purchase went into effect. In 1803, the United States took control of the vast lands west of the Mississippi. With one stroke, the size of the nation had almost doubled.
Id RECALL Why was the port of New Orleans
important to many Americans?
Exploring the Louisiana Territory
Few Americans knew anything about the Louisiana territory. In 1803, Congress provided money for a team of explorers to study the new lands. Jefferson chose Meriwether Lewis, his private secretary, to head the
Louisiana Purchase, 1803
UntedStete™aPS H°W did the L°uisiana Purchase change the territory of the
0	400 km
\ Albers Conic Equal-Area Projection

The Early Republic 230	5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
KEY
Continental Divide -► Lewis and Clark's route — Modern borders
Campsite
» The Lewis and Clark expedition helped Americans learn more about the West. Make Predictions How might westward expansion lead to conflict with other nations?
@1 Interactive Map
400 km
Spanish \ Albers Conic Equal-Area -M.\	Projection
■Or/ *
Gulf of Mexico
expedition, or long voyage of exploration. Lewis asked William Clark to go with him.
Jefferson asked Lewis and Clark to map a route to the Pacific Ocean. He also told them to study the geography of the territory, including:
. . . climate as characterized by the thermometer, by the proportion of rainy, cloudy, and clear days, by lightning, hail, snow, ice . . . the dates at which particular plants put forth or lose their flower, or leaf, times of appearance of particular birds, reptiles, or insects.
—Thomas Jefferson, letter to Meriwether Lewis, 1803
Jefferson also instructed Lewis and Clark to learn about the Native American nations who lived in the Louisiana Purchase. These Native Americans carried on a busy trade with English, French, and Spanish rnerchants. Jefferson hoped that the Indians might trade with American merchants instead. Therefore, he Wed Lewis and Clark to tell the Indians of “our wish to Le neighborly, friendly, and useful to them.”
The Expedition Begins Dozens of adventurous young men eagerly competed to join the expedition. Lewis and Clark judged volunteers on the basis of their character, strength, hunting skills, and ability to survive in the wilderness. In the end, about 50 men made up the “Corps of Discovery."
In May 1804, Lewis and Clark started up the Missouri River from St. Louis. At first, the expedition’s boats made slow progress against the Missouri’s swift current. One night, the current tore away the riverbank where they were camping. The party had to scramble into the boats to avoid being swept downstream.
Lewis and Clark Cross the Plains Eventually the expedition reached the plains of the Midwest. Lewis and Clark marveled at the broad, grassy plains that stretched “as far as the eye can reach.” Everywhere, they saw “immense herds of buffalo, deer, elk, and antelope.”
As they traveled across the plains, the expedition met people of various Native American nations. Lewis and Clark had brought many gifts for Native Americans, such as “peace medals” stamped with the United States seal. They also brought mirrors, beads, knives, blankets, and thousands of sewing needles and fishhooks.
The Early Republic
231
5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
» Not only did Lewis and Clark record their observations in words, they also drew maps and illustrations of the new things they encountered.
» This painting shows Sacajawea interpreting for Lewis and Clark. Her help made communication much easier for the expedition.
During the first winter, Lewis and Clark stayed with the Mandans in present-day North Dakota. The explorers planned to continue up the Missouri in the spring. The members of the expedition built a fort to live in over the winter. They took the opportunity to repair equipment in preparation for spring’s new challenges.
The Mandans lived along the upper Missouri River. They grew corn, beans, and squash, and hunted buffalo. During the winter, they helped the explorers find food and hunt buffalo. They also in exchange fo traded with the expedition members.
Staying with the Mandans was a woman named Sacajawea (sak uh juh WEE uh). Sacajawea belonged to the Shoshone (shoh SHOH nee) people, who lived in the Rockies. She and her French Canadian husband agreed to accompany Lewis and Clark as translators. Sacajawea carried her baby with her on the journey.
Exploring the Rocky Mountains In early spring, the party set out again. In the foothills of the Rockies, the landscape and wildlife changed. Bighorn sheep ran along the high hills. The thorns of prickly pear cactus jabbed the explorers’ moccasins. Once, a grizzly bear chased Lewis while he was exploring alone.
Crossing the Rocky Mountains meant crossing the Continental Divide. A continental divide is a ridge that separates river systems flowing toward opposite sides of a continent. In North America, some rivers flow east from the crest of the Rockies into the Mississippi, which drains into the Gulf of Mexico. Other rivers flow west from the Rockies and empty into the Pacific Ocean.
Past the Rockies, Lewis and Clark would be able to travel by river toward the Pacific. But to cross the Continental Divide, they needed horses. They began looking for the Shoshone, who had been using horses since Europeans brought them in the 1600s.
Finally, Lewis and Clark met some Shoshones. One of them was Sacajawea’s brother, whom she had not seen for many years. Upon seeing her own people, wrote Clark, she began to “dance and show every mark of the most extravagant joy.” The Shoshones supplied the expedition with the food and horses Lewis and Clark needed. They also advised them about the best route to take over the Rockies.
Lewis and Clark Reach the Pacific After building canoes, Lewis and Clark’s party floated toward the Columbia River into the Pacific Northwest. Finally, on November 7, 1805, Clark wrote in his journal, “Great joy in camp. We are in view of the ocean, this great Pacific Ocean which we have been so long anxious to see.” Lewis and Clark had reached their goal. Viewing
The Early Republic 232	5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
KEY
Continental Divide -> Pike's route, 1805-1806
Pike's route, 1806-1807 — Modern borders
Campsite
» Zebulon Pike explored the Louisiana Purchase and Spanish territory. Analyze Maps What prominent geographic feature may have influenced Pike’s route?
the Pacific from present-day Oregon, Lewis and Clark claimed the region for the United States by right of discovery.
The return trip to St. Louis took another year. In
1806,	Americans celebrated the return of Lewis and Clark. Their journey had been difficult. Clark described some of the storms and high winds he faced as “the most disagreeable time I have experienced.” But the explorers brought back much useful information about the Louisiana Territory, the land now part of the United States.
Pike’s Expedition Before Lewis and Clark returned, another explorer set out from St. Louis. From 1805 to
1807,	Zebulon Pike explored the upper Mississippi River, the Arkansas River, and parts of present-day Colorado and New Mexico. In November 1806, Pike viewed a mountain peak rising above the Colorado plains. Today, this mountain is known as Pikes Peak.
Continuing southward, Pike entered Spanish territory. Spanish troops soon arrested Pike and his men and took them into present-day Mexico. The Americans were later escorted through Texas back into the United States. The Spanish took Pike’s maps and journals, but he was able to hide one map in the barrel of his gun. His report on the expedition greatly expanded Americans’ knowledge about the Southwest.
The journeys of Pike and Lewis and Clark excited Americans. However, settlers did not move into the rugged western lands for a number of years. As you will read, they first settled the region closest to the Mississippi River. Soon, the territory around New Orleans had a large enough population of American citizens for the settlers to apply for statehood. In 1812, this territory entered the Union as the state of Louisiana.
H IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why did President Jefferson want Lewis and Clark to treat Native Americans fairly on their journey?
American Shipping Faces Challenges
After the Revolution, American overseas trade grew rapidly. Ships sailed from New England on voyages that sometimes lasted three years. President Jefferson’s foreign policy during this time centered around protecting American shipping.
An Era of Trade Wherever they went, Yankee captains kept a sharp lookout for new goods and new markets. Clever traders sawed winter ice from New England ponds into blocks, packed it in sawdust, and
The Early Republic 233	5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
carried it to India. There, they traded the ice for silk and spices. In 1784, the Empress of China, became the first American ship to trade with China. New England merchants quickly built up a profitable China trade.
More than 10 years before Lewis and Clark, Yankee merchants sailed up the Pacific coast of North America. So many traders from Boston visited the Pacific Northwest that Native Americans there called every white man “Boston.” Traders bought furs from Native Americans and sold them for large profits in China.
Jefferson Protects Trade Abroad Traders ran great risks, especially in the Mediterranean Sea. Pirates from the Barbary States, countries along the coast of North Africa, attacked passing vessels. To protect American ships, the United States paid a yearly tribute, or bribe, to rulers of the Barbary States such as Tripoli.
In 1801, Tripoli increased its demands. When Jefferson refused to pay, Tripoli declared war on the United States. Jefferson then ordered the navy to blockade the port of Tripoli.
During the blockade, the American ship Philadelphia ran aground near Tripoli. Pirates boarded the ship and hauled the crew off to prison. The pirates planned to use the Philadelphia to attack other ships.
To prevent this, American naval officer Stephen Decatur and his crew quietly sailed into Tripoli harbor by night. They then set the captured American ship on fire.
In the meantime, American marines landed on the coast of North Africa, marched 500 miles, and successfully captured, with the help of allies, the port of Derna. However, during the fight, the ruler of Tripoli signed a treaty promising not to interfere with American ships.
Caught Between France and Britain American ships faced another problem. Britain and France went to war again in 1803. At first, Americans profited from the conflict. British and French ships were too busy fighting to engage in trade. American merchants eagerly traded with both sides. As profits increased, Americans hurried to build new ships.
Neither Britain nor France wanted the United States to sell supplies to its enemy. As in the 1790s, they ignored American claims of neutrality. Napoleon seized American ships bound for England. At the same time, the British stopped Yankee traders on their way to France. Between 1805 and 1807, hundreds of American ships were captured.
Barbary States and the March to Derna, 1805

FRENCH /\ EMPIRE
z )F< 4
/ITALY H
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
KEY
I ] Barbary States h Derna is captured by the Americans in 1804 U.S.S Philadelphia is captured in 1803 and later burned by Americans — Route taken by William Eaton's army
» Pirates based in ports on the Barbary Coast attacked American merchant ships. In 1805. American Marines launched a successful attack on one of these ports, Derna, after a 500-mile march. Analyze Maps How might events in Tripoli have affected the other Barbary States?
KINGDOM
OF
NAPLES
Black
Sea
T/
e di
1 t e r r a n e a n S c tl Derna
TRIPOLI
Alexandria
EGYPT
The Early Republic 234	5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
Needing more sailors, the British navy stepped up impressment, the practice of forcing people into service. In Britain, impressment gangs raided English villages and took young men to serve in the navy. On the seas, British ships stopped American vessels, seizing any British sailors serving on American ships. Many American-born sailors were also impressed. Furious Americans clamored for war.
B IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why were Britain and France seizing American ships?
ELPS READING 4.F.5
Look at the image on the last page. Describe what you see with a partner. Compare it to what you know about enlisting in the military. Then read the last part of the text and discuss the meaning of impressment.
A
Painful Embargo Jefferson knew that the small American fleet was no match for the powerful British navy. Like Washington and Adams, he sought a foreign policy that would avoid war.
An Embargo on Foreign Trade Jefferson hoped that an American embargo, or ban on trade, would hurt France and Britain by cutting off needed supplies. “Our trade is the most powerful weapon we can use in our defense,” one Democractic Republican newspaper wrote. In 1807, Jefferson persuaded Congress to impose a total embargo on foreign trade. This meant that American traders could not receive goods from European traders, and American traders could not ship their goods to Europe.
The Embargo Act did hurt Britain and France. But it hurt Americans even more. Supplies of imports such as sugar, tea, and molasses were cut off. Exports dropped by more than $80 million in one year. Docks in the South were piled high with cotton and tobacco. The Embargo Act hurt New England merchants most of all.
Merchants protested loudly against the embargo. Some turned to smuggling, importing or exporting goods in violation of trade laws. Jefferson began using the navy and federal troops to enforce the embargo. On the border between New York and Canada, some smugglers engaged in skirmishes with federal troops.
The two political parties had different points of view on the embargo. Democratic Republicans mostly supported the embargo as a way to protect the country and punish France and Britain. Most Federalists apposed the embargo as damaging to the economy.
» This illustration shows American sailors being impressed, or taken by force, into the British navy before the Revolution. Even after the Revolution, the British continued to impress American sailors at sea.
» In this cartoon, an American merchant carrying a barrel to a British ship is bitten by a turtle called “Ograbme,” or “embargo" spelled backwards. Draw Conclusions How did American merchants view the Embargo Act?
The Early Republic 235
5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
AMERICA IMPOSES A TRADE EMBARGO
» Analyze Data Cite data that explains why Congress canceled Jefferson’s Embargo Act in 1809.
Jefferson Scales Back the Embargo In 1809, Jefferson admitted that the Embargo Act had failed. Congress replaced it with the milder Nonintercourse Act. It allowed Americans to carry on trade with all nations except Britain and France. The Embargo Act had decreased support for the Democratic Republican party, as Americans hurt by the policy turned to the Federalists instead. Federalists favored maintaining closer relations with Britain.
They wanted to build ties with Britain because Britain was the main trading partner of the United States, and the powerful British navy could protect American merchants.
Although the embargo was the most unpopular measure of Jefferson’s presidency, the Democratic Republicans still remained strong. Following President Washington’s precedent, Jefferson refused to run for a third term. Democratic Republican James Madison easily won the 1808 presidential election. Madison hoped that Britain and France would soon agree to respect American neutrality.
B DEFINE
Why did Americans turn against the Embargo Act?
ASSESSMENT
1.	Summarize Jefferson’s economic policies.
2.	Analyze Information What might have been considered surprising about John Marshall’s action in establishing judicial review?
3.	Draw Conclusions Why do you think President Jefferson, who believed in a strict interpretation of the Constitution, decided that the President had the power to buy land when that was not mentioned in the Constitution?
4.	Compare How were the Lewis and Clark expedition and the Pike expedition similar and different?
5.	Generate Explanations Why was the Embargo Act so unpopular?
The Early Republic 236
5.4 Jefferson’s Presidency
\~S About 900,000 white settlers moved west of the Appalachians between 1790 and 1810. Some Native American groups resented these newcomers, who built farms on Indian lands and hunted the animals Indians needed for food. The settlers ignored treaties that the United States had signed with Native American nations of the region.



Madison and the War of 1812
Conflict in Ohio
Fighting often broke out between these Native American groups and the settlers. Isolated acts of violence led to larger acts of revenge. As both sides killed innocent people, warfare spread. In Ohio, Little Turtle of the Miamis and Blue Jacket of the Shawnees organized a resistance movement in 1791. Armed with British muskets and gunpowder, the Miamis and Shawnees drove white settlers from the area.
President Washington had sent General Anthony Wayne into Ohio in 1794. Forces from the Delaware, Miami, Iroqouis, Wabash, and others gathered at a place called Fallen Timbers.
They thought that Wayne would have trouble fighting there because fallen trees covered the land. But Wayne’s well-trained army pushed through the tangle of logs and defeated the Indians.
In 1795, leaders of the Miamis and other Native American nations signed the Treaty of Greenville. They gave up land that would later become part of Ohio. In return, they received $20,000 and the promise of more money if they kept the peace.
Tecumseh’s Confederation Confronts the New Republic Ohio Joined the Union in 1803. By then, white settlers were pushing beyond
» Objectives
Explain the reasons for conflict between white settlers and Native Americans during the early 1800s.
Identify the causes of the War of 1812.
Explain the challenges that the United States faced in preparing for war.
Describe the important events and effects of the War of 1812.
» Key Terms
Treaty of Greenville confederation Battle of Tippecanoe War Hawks nationalism Battle of Lake Erie Battle of New
Orleans
Hartford Convention Treaty of Ghent Henry Clay Andrew Jackson John Quincy Adams
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
237
» Tenskwatawa, a Shawnee prophet, is shown here with his brother, Tecumseh, and some of their followers.
» Native Americans sold furs to white merchants and purchased manufactured goods from them. Tecumseh urged his followers to end their dependence on whites.
Ohio into the Indiana Territory. Angry Shawnee, Kickapoo, and Ottawa vowed to keep settlers from taking more Indian land. They included two Shawnee leaders: Tecumseh and his brother Tenskwatawa (ten SKWAH tuh wuh), a religious leader also called the Prophet. The Kickapoo, Ottawa, Chippewa, and Piankashaw joined with the Shawnee leaders. The Miami initially remained neutral.
The Wyandot, Seneca, and Delaware stayed allied with the United States. So did the Chocktaw, Cherokee, Chickasaw, and some sections of the Creek.
The U.S. government had treaties with several of these Native American groups that said both sides would cease fighting. The treaties kept these groups from rallying together against the United States.
A
New Settlement in Indiana Territory The Prophet and Tecumseh taught that white customs corrupted the Indian way of life. They said that many Indians depended too much on white trade goods, such as muskets, cloth, cooking pots, and whiskey. They believed that by returning to their old ways, Native Americans could gain the power to resist the white invaders. In 1808, the Prophet built a village for his followers along Tippecanoe Creek in Indiana Territory. Indians from lands as far away as Missouri, Iowa, and Minnesota traveled to Prophetstown to hear his message.
Tecumseh worked to organize the tribes of the Northwest into a confederation, or alliance with a shared military command. He called for unity against settlers:
The whites have driven us from the great salt water, forced us over the mountains. . . . The way, the only way, to check and stop this evil is for all red men to unite in claiming a common equal right in the land.
—Tecumseh, quoted in Tecuniwh: Vision oi.
Glory( Tucker)
Tecumseh impressed white leaders. Governor William Henry Harrison grudgingly admitted, “He is one of those uncommon geniuses which spring up occasionally to produce revolutions and overturn the established order of things.”
A
Major Battle at Tippecanoe Rivalries among Native American nations kept Tecumseh from uniting all Indians east of the Mississippi River. Still, white settlers were alarmed at his success. The Early Republic
238	5.5 Madison and the War of 1812
In 1811, Harrison marched 1,000 soldiers against Prophetstown on the Tippecanoe Creek. The Prophet was in charge because Tecumseh was away trying to organize Indians in the South. The Prophet led a surprise night attack on Harrison s troops. Both sides suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Tippecanoe.
In the end, Harrison’s troops defeated the Prophet’s forces and destroyed Prophetstown. Whites celebrated the battle as a major victory. Still, Tecumseh and his followers continued to resist white settlement.
IDENTIFY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Why did Tecumseh advise many Native Americans to stop trading with the settlers?
The Causes of the War of 1812
Fighting with Native Americans hurt relations between the United States and Britain. The British were supplying guns and ammunition to the Native Americans on the frontier. They also encouraged Indians to attack United States settlements.
Meanwhile, the ban on trade with Britain and France expired. Congress then authorized President Madison to make a tantalizing offer. If either the British or French stopped seizing American ships, the United States would reopen trade with that nation. Napoleon quickly announced that France would respect American neutrality. Britain did not respond to the offer. As promised, the United States resumed trade with France, but continued to ban all shipments to or from Britain.
The War Hawks Push for War While Madison did not want war, other Americans were not as cautious. In New England, antiwar feelings ran strong. However, members of Congress from the South and the West called for war. They were known as War Hawks.
War Hawks were stirred by a strong sense of nationalism, or devotion to one's country. War Hawks felt that Britain was treating the United States as if it were still a British colony. They were willing to fight a war to defend American rights.
The most outspoken War Hawk was Henry Clay of Kentucky. Clay wanted to punish Britain for seizing American ships. He also hoped to conquer Canada. The militia of Kentucky are alone [able] to place Montreal and Upper Canada at your feet,” Clay boasted to Congress.
War Hawks saw other advantages of war with Britain. If Americans went to war with Britain, War Bfewks said, the United States could seize Florida from
» Both sides suffered heavy losses, but General Henry Harrison’s troops were able to destroy Prophetstown during the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811.
» British forts, like the one in Ontario pictured here, served as supply houses for the arms that the British supplied to the Native Americans living on the frontier.
The Early Republic 239
5.5 Madison and the War of 1812
Britain’s ally, Spain. They also pointed out that Britain was arming Native Americans on the frontier and encouraging them to attack settlers.
The War Hawks felt that winning a war against Britain would bring lasting safety to settlers on the frontier.
War Is Declared The United States and Britain drifted closer to war as the security of American ships remained an issue. The British continued to board American ships and impress American seamen. To cut off American trade with France, British warships blockaded some American ports. In May 1811, near New York Harbor, a brief battle broke out between an American frigate and a British warship. The Americans crippled the British ship and left 32 British sailors dead or wounded.
The War Hawks urged Congress to prepare for war. Others in Congress disagreed. John Randolph of Virginia warned that the people of the United States would “not submit to be taxed for this war of conquest and dominion.” Representatives of New England were especially concerned. They feared that the British navy would attack New England seaports.
At last, President Madison gave in to war fever. In June 1812, he asked Congress to declare war on Britain. The House and Senate both voted in favor of war.
ELPS
Americans would soon learn, though, that declaring war was easier than winning.
Q DEFINE
Who were the War Hawks? ELPS READING 4.F.6, 4.F.8
Read the text as directed by your teacher. When you encounter an unfamiliar word, ask your teacher or another student for help in determining its meaning.
Early Events in the War of 1812
The American declaration of war took the British by surprise. They were locked in a bitter struggle with Napoleon and could not spare troops to fight the United States. As the war began, however, the United States faced difficulties of its own.
The Difficulties of Building a Military The United States was not ready for war. Because Jefferson had reduced spending on defense, the navy had only 16 ships to meet the huge British fleet. The army was small and ill equipped, and many of the officers knew little about warfare.“The state of the army," said a member of Congress, “is enough to make any man who has the smallest love of country wish to get rid of it."
CAUSES
British interfere with American shipping.
THE WAR OF
CONGRESS IS DIVIDED OVER THE
FIRST DECLARATION
OF WAR
PREPAREDNESS FOR WAR
UNITED STATES
BRITAIN

British kidnap American sailors.
Americans believe British are persuading Native Americans to fight settlers.
Some members of Congress ("War Hawks") want U.S. expansion into Canada.
11
Source: Library of Congress
12,000
TROOPS
r • i »
10,000
BRITISH & CANADIAN TROOPS
Sources: Donald R. Hickey, War of 1812; U.S. Naval Institute
6
WARSHIPS
t00° Til
SAILORS L R J
l,800|
MARINES I
584
WARSHIPS (2 WERE AVAILABLE)
140,000
SAILORS (WORLDWIDE)
31,000
MARINES
» The United States faced the world’s greatest power in the War of 1812. Analyze Charts How does the graph on the right help to explain the graph < the left?
The Early Republic 240	5.5 Madison and the War of 1812
These problems made it difficult to maintain national security.
Since there were few regular troops, the government relied on volunteers. Congress voted to give them a bounty of cash and land.
The money was equal to about a year’s salary for most workers. Attracted by the high pay and the chance to own their own farms, young men eagerly enlisted. They were poorly trained, however, with little experience in battle. Many deserted after a few months.
Surprising Victories at Sea The British navy blockaded American ports to stop American trade. Though unable to break the blockade, several American sea captains won stunning victories.
One famous battle took place early in the war, in August 1812. As he was sailing near Newfoundland, Isaac Hull, captain of the USS Constitution, spotted the British ship HMS Guerriere (geh ree air). For nearly an hour, the two ships jockeyed for position. At last, the guns of the Constitution roared into action. They tore holes in the sides of the Guerriere and shot off both masts. Stunned, the British captain had no choice but to surrender.
American sea captains won other victories at sea. These victories cheered Americans but did little to win the war.
H DESCRIBE
What problems did the United States military face?
The War in Canada
One goal of the War Hawks was to conquer Canada. They were convinced that Canadians would welcome the chance to throw off British rule and join the United States.
An Untested Force General William Hull moved American troops into Canada from Detroit. The Canadians had only a few untrained troops to ward off the invasion. However, they were led by a clever British general, Isaac Brock.
Brock paraded his soldiers in red coats to make it appear that experienced British troops were helping the Canadians. He also led Americans to think that a large number of Native Americans were fighting alongside the Canadians. Brock’s scare tactics worked. Hull retreated from Canada. Other attempts to invade Canada also failed.
However, on April 27, 1813, U.S. soldiers crossed Lake Ontario and successfully captured York, present-
» After the British destroyed his flagship, the Lawrence, Captain Oliver Perry escaped to another American ship. Perry’s fleet would regroup and eventually win the Battle of Lake Erie.
day Toronto. The Americans seized British guns and supplies, and they set fire to public buildings.
American Victory on Lake Erie In 1813, the Americans, armed with the guns and supplies they had seized at York, set out to win control of Lake Erie. Captain Oliver Hazard Perry had no fleet, so he designed and built his own ships. In September 1813, he sailed his tiny fleet against the British.
During the Battle of Lake Erie, the British battered Perry's own ship and left it helpless. Perry rowed over to another American ship and continued to fight. Finally, the Americans won the battle. Captain Perry wrote his message of victory on the back of an envelope: “We have met the enemy and they are ours.”
Native American Losses in the War of 1812 After losing control of Lake Erie, the British and their ally Tecumseh retreated from Detroit into Canada. General William Henry Harrison, veteran of Tippecanoe, pursued them. The Americans won a decisive victory at the Battle of the Thames (temz). Tecumseh died in
The Early Republic 241	5.5 Madison and the War of 1812
the fighting. Without Tecumseh’s leadership, the Indian confederation soon fell apart.
B CHECK UNDERSTANDING
What became of the War Hawks’ plan to conquer Canada? J
The War’s Conclusion I I II
I
While Tecumseh was defeated in Canada, some sections ,	!,	of the Creeks continued their fight against U.S. settlers
'!	in the South. Andrew Jackson, a Tennessee officer,
, j;;	took command of American troops in the Creek War.
i r	In March 1814, with the help of Cherokees, Choctaws,
;|	and friendly Creeks, Jackson won a crushing victory at
f !	the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. The leader of the enemy
!j	Creeks walked alone into Jackson’s camp to surrender.
i f h I	"Your people have destroyed my nation,” he said.
The Burning of Washington and Victory in Baltimore In the spring of 1814, Britain and its allies defeated France. With the war in Europe over, Britain could send more troops and ships against the United States.
In August 1814, British ships sailed into Chesapeake Bay and landed an invasion force about 30 miles from Washington, D.C. American troops met the British at Bladensburg, Maryland. As President Madison
» This woodcut shows Fort McHenry’s position at the entrance of Baltimore Harbor.
watched, the battle-hardened British quickly scattered the untrained Americans. The British met little further resistance on their march to the capital.
In the White House, First Lady Dolley Madison waited for her husband to return. Hastily, she scrawled a note to her sister:
Will you believe it, my sister? We have had a battle or skirmish near Bladensburg and here I am still within sound of the cannon! Mr. Madison comes not. May God protect us. Two messengers covered with dust come bid me fly. But here I mean to wait for him.
—Dolley Madison, Memoirs -uni /,< ■/!<.7<){	M.iHisor;
Soon after, British troops marched into the capital. Dolley Madison gathered up important papers of the President and a portrait of George Washington. Then, she fled south. She was not there to see the British set fire to the White House and other buildings. The British considered this an act of revenge for the burning of York.
From Washington, the British marched north toward the city of Baltimore. The key to Baltimore’s defense was Fort McHenry on Baltimore Harbor. From the evening of September 13 until dawn on September 14 during the Battle of Baltimore, British rockets bombarded the harbor.
When the early morning fog lifted, the "broad stripes and bright stars” of the American flag still waved over Fort McHenry. American forces had won the Battle of Baltimore. The British withdrew and the threat to the nation’s capital ended. Francis Scott Key, a young American lawyer who witnessed the battle, wrote a poem about it. Soon, his poem, "The Star-Spangled Banner,” was published and set to music. Today, it is the national anthem of the United States.
Success in New Orleans Makes Jackson a Hero
In late 1814, the British prepared to attack New Orleans. From there, they hoped to sail up the Mississippi However, Andrew Jackson was waiting. Jackson had turned his frontier fighters into a strong army.
He took Pensacola in Spanish Florida to keep the British from using it as a base. He then marched through Mobile and set up camp in New Orleans.
Jackson s force included thousands of frontiersmen and Choctaws. The Choctaws were longtime of the Indian nations who had been allied with the British. Many of Jackson’s troops were expert riflemen
The Early Republic 242	5.5 Madison and the War of 1812
The War of 1812
KEY
—► American forces £ American victories —► British forces British victories
, Claimed by Britain , and the United States
f'Q
ATLANTIC S OCEAN
200 mi
200 km
» Both sides won victories in the War of 1812, with no clear overall winner. Analyze Maps Where did Andrew Jackson’s forces win victories on their route to New Orleans?
Interactive Map
Citizens of New Orleans also joined the army to defend their city from the British. Among the volunteers were hundreds of African Americans.
The American soldiers dug trenches to defend themselves. On January 8, 1815, the British attacked. Again and again, British soldiers marched toward the American trenches. More than 2,000 British fell under the deadly fire of American sharpshooters and, especially American cannons. Only seven Americans died.
Americans cheered the victory at the Battle of New Orleans. Overnight, Andrew Jackson became a national hero. His fame did not dim even when Americans learned that the battle had taken place two weeks after the war had ended.
The United States and Britain had already signed a heaty in Europe, but news took two months to cross the ocean by sail and had not yet reached the United States.
African Americans in the War The Battle of New Orleans was not the only place where black and white soldiers fought side by side. Throughout the War of 1812, African Americans joined in defending the nation gainst the British.
Following the British attacks on Washington and Baltimore, African American volunteers helped
defend Philadelphia against a possible British attack. Bishop Richard Allen and the Reverend Absalom Jones recruited more than 2,000 men to help build Philadelphia’s fortifications. The state of New York organized two regiments of black volunteers to serve in the army.
African Americans also served with distinction in the United States Navy. They helped win the Battle of Lake Erie as well as other naval battles. Commander Nathaniel Shaler praised one particular black sailor who was killed in battle:
He fell near me, and several times requested to be thrown overboard, saying he was only in the way of others. When America has such [sailors], she has little to fear from the tyrants of the ocean.
—Nathaniel Shaler, letter to his agent, January 1, 1813
fci mFNTiFY What achievement made Andrew Jackson well known throughout the country?
The Early Republic 243	5.5 Madison and the War of 1812
» As the commander who won victory during the Battle of New Orleans, shown here, General Andrew Jackson became a military hero. His fame would later help him become President.
The Effects of the War of 1812
By late 1814, Americans knew that peace talks had begun, but they did not know if they would succeed or how long they would last. As Jackson was preparing to fight the British at New Orleans, New Englanders were meeting to protest “Mr. Madison’s War.”
New Englanders Protest Economic Instability
The British blockade had hurt New England’s sea trade. Also, many New Englanders feared that the United States might win land in Florida and Canada. If new states were carved out of these lands, the South and the West would become more influential than New England.
Delegates from around New England met in Hartford, Connecticut, in December 1814. Most were Federalists. They disliked the Democratic Republican President and the war.
Some delegates to the Hartford Convention threatened to nullify, or cancel, the state of war in their states if the war continued. Others threatened to leave the Union.
Then, while the delegates debated what to do, news of the peace treaty arrived. The Hartford Convention ended guickly. With the war over, the protest was meaningless. In the end, the threat of secession further weakened the dying Federalist party.
The Varied Effects of the War A peace treaty was signed in the city of Ghent, in present-day Belgium, on December 24,1814. John Quincy Adams, son of John Adams and one of the American delegates, summed up the Treaty of Ghent in one sentence: "Nothing was adjusted, nothing was settled.”
Britain and the United States agreed to restore prewar conditions. The treaty said nothing about impressment or neutrality. These issues had faded due to the end of the wars in Europe. Other issues were settled later. In 1818, for example, the two nations settled a dispute over the border between Canada and the United States.
Looking back, some Americans felt that the War of 1812 had been a mistake. Others argued that Europe would now treat the young republic with more respect. The victories of heroes like Oliver Hazard Perry, William Henry Harrison, and Andrew Jackson gave Americans new pride in their country. As one Democratic Republican leader remarked, “The people are now more American. They feel and act more as a nation.”
H RECALL
What was the purpose of the Hartford Convention? ASSESSMENT
1.	Draw Conclusions Why were Native American groups resistant to white settlement west of the Appalachians?
2.	Generate Explanations Why, when the Americans had already defeated a British ship near New York Harbor, were New England merchants fearful of British attacks on their seaports?
3.	Compare the ability of the U.S. Army in 1812 with that of the Patriots at the beginning of the American Revolution.
4.	Summarize what Andrew Jackson did that made him a national hero.
5.	Contrast U.S. military might before and after the War of 1812.
In 1816, the Democratic Republican candidate for President, James Monroe, easily defeated the Federalist, Senator Rufus King of New York. The election showed how seriously the Federalist party had declined in popularity. Many Federalists had joined the Democratic Republican party and voted for Monroe.
President James Monroe faced little opposition as a Democratic Republican.
What does the lack of opposition imply about the the Federalist party at
this time?
Interactive Flipped Video
Monroe’s Presidency
Sectionalism in the Era of Good Feelings
Monroe was the last Revolutionary War officer to become President. He was almost 60 years old when he took office, and he had old-fashioned manners.
Americans were fond of his old-fashioned ways. In 1817, he made a goodwill tour of the country. In Boston, crowds cheered Monroe enthusiastically. Boston newspapers expressed surprise at this warm welcome for a Democratic Republican from Virginia. After all, Boston had long been a Federalist stronghold.
An Era of Good Feelings Monroe hoped to create a new sense of national unity. One newspaper wrote that the United States was entering an “era of good feelings.” By the time Monroe ran for a second term in 1820, no candidate opposed him. The Federalist party had disappeared.
While conflict between political parties declined, disputes between different sections of the nation sharpened. These disputes We a result of sectionalism, or loyalty to one’s state or section rather than to the nation as a whole. In Congress, three ambitious young men took center stage in these disputes. All three would play key roles in Congress for more than 30 years, as well as serving in other offices.
5.E, 7.A, 18.B, 22.B
» Objectives
Explain the significance of regional differences during the Era of Good Feelings. Identify different points of view on tariffs.
Explain how the Supreme Court under John Marshall expanded federal power.
Describe the impact of revolution in Latin America.
Explain U.S. foreign policy under Monroe, including the Monroe Doctrine and policies
toward Florida.
» Key Terms
sectionalism American System internal
improvements McCulloch v.
Maryland Gibbons v. Ogden interstate commerce creole
Republic of Great
Colombia
United Provinces of
Central America
Negro Fort Monroe Doctrine intervention Adams-Onis Treaty James Monroe John C. Calhoun Daniel Webster Henry Clay
PEARSON 1
el realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
0
The Early Republic 244	5.5 Madison and the War of 1812
245
Each represented a different section of the country, and each had unique leadership qualities.
Calhoun Stands for the South Against Federal Power John C. Calhoun spoke for the South. He had grown up on a frontier farm in South Carolina. Calhoun s immense energy and striking features earned him the nickname “young Hercules.”
He was slim and handsome, with deep-set eyes and a high forehead. His way of speaking was so intense that it sometimes made people uncomfortable to be in his presence.
Calhoun had supported the War of 1812. Like many southerners, he was a firm defender of slavery. In general, he opposed policies that would strengthen the power of the federal government.
Webster Speaks for the North Against Slavery and War Daniel Webster of New Hampshire was perhaps the most skillful public speaker of his time. With eyes flashing and shoulders thrown back, Webster was an impressive sight when he stood up to speak in Congress. An observer described him as a “great cannon loaded to the lips.”
Like many New Englanders, Webster had opposed the War of 1812. He even refused to vote for taxes to pay for the war effort. After the war, he wanted the federal government to take a larger role in building the nation’s
Sectional Leaders: Calhoun, Webster, and Clay
JOHN C. CALHOUN
DANIEL WEBSTER
HENRY CLAY
•	From South Carolina
•	Skilled orator, lawyer, and senator
•	Sectional leader and spokesman for his region (South)
•	Supported the War of 1812
•	Opposed the idea of a strong federal government
•	Strong supporter of slavery
•	Showed a concern for the country's economy
•	Opposed the Compromise of 1850
•	From New Hampshire
•	Skilled orator, lawyer, and senator
•	Sectional leader and spokesman for his region (North)
•	Against the War of 1812
•	Supported the idea of a strong federal government
•	Wanted slavery abolished
•	Showed a concern for the country's economy
•	Defended the Compromise of 1850
» Analyze Information Who supported the War of 1812 and the idea of a strong federal government?
§11 Interactive Chart
economy. Unlike Calhoun, Webster thought that slavery ! was evil.
Clay Speaks for the West in Favor of Active I Government Henry Clay spoke for the West. You J have already met Clay as a leader of the War Hawks, who pushed for war against Britain in 1812.
Clay was born in Virginia but moved to Kentucky when he was 20. As a young lawyer, he was once fined for brawling with an opponent. Usually, however, he charmed both friends and rivals. Supporters called him t "Gallant Harry of the West.” Like Webster, Clay strongly ’ favored a more active role for the central government in promoting the country’s growth.
H RECALL
Which position did Webster share with Clay?
Creating a Stable Economy After the War
After the War of 1812, leaders such as Calhoun, Webster, and Clay had to deal with serious economic issues. Despite the nation’s great physical growth and the > soaring spirits of its people, the United States economy faced severe problems. This was due in part to the lack of a national bank.
•	From Kentucky
•	Skilled orator, lawyer, and senator
•	Sectional leader and spokesman for his region (West)
•	Supported the War of 1812
•	Supported the idea of a strong federal government
•	Supported compromise over slavery
•	Showed a concern for the country's economy
•	Defended the Compromise of 1850
THE HOOTS
of AMERICAN INDUSTRIALIZATION 	Ff fWiiiTiiSTJfs x aid tint a
1810	1810
1815	
1820	
1825	1849 1859
» Cotton played a key role in the early U.S. economy, especially in the South. Analyze Charts As cotton production soared, what other features of the American economy also grew?
The charter that had set up the first Bank of the United States ran out in 1811. Without the Bank to lend money and regulate the nation's money supply, the economy suffered. State banks made loans and issued money. However, they often put too much money into circulation. With so much money available to spend, prices rose rapidly
In the nation’s early years, Democratic Republicans such as Jefferson and Madison had opposed a national bank because they saw it as unconstitutional.
They thought that the Constitution did not give the federal government the right to charter corporations, such as a national bank. By 1816, however, many Democratic Republicans believed that a bank was needed. They supported a law to charter the second Bank of the United States. By lending money and restoring order to the nation's money supply, the Bank helped American businesses grow.
Policies Protect Against Foreign Competition
Another economic problem facing the nation was foreign competition, especially from Britain. In the oarly 1800s, the Embargo Act and then the War of 1812 kept most British goods out of the United States. In response, ambitious American business leaders such as Francis Cabot Lowell established their own mills
and factories. As a result, American industry grew quickly until 1815.
Domestic Problems Caused by Foreign Goods
With the end of the War of 1812, British goods again poured into the United States. Because the British had a head start in industrializing, they could make and sell goods more cheaply than Americans could. Most British factory buildings and machines were older and had already been paid for. In contrast, Americans still had to pay for their new factory buildings.
Sometimes, British manufacturers sold cloth in the United States for less than it cost to make so that they could capture the market. British manufacturers hoped to put American rivals out of business. Then, the British planned to raise prices.
The Regional Impacts of Tariffs This British strategy caused dozens of New England businesses to fail. Angry owners asked Congress to place a protective tariff on all goods imported from Europe. As you have read, the purpose of a protective tariff is to protect a country's industries from foreign competition.
Congress responded by passing the Tariff of 1816. It greatly raised tariffs on imports. This increase made imported goods far more expensive than similar American-made goods.
The Early Republic 246	5.6 Monroe’s Presidency
The Early Republic 247	5.6 Monroe’s Presidency
» Daniel Webster supported a tariff to help northern industry.
» A slow freight wagon and a fast mail coach make their way down the National Road, built with federal support. Congress spent little on such roads, however.
The Tariff of 1816 impacted the North, West, and South differently because each region had a different economy. The North was the base of America’s manufacturing. It therefore benefited the most. Higher prices on foreign goods made American goods more competitive. American factories sold more products, and businesses grew.
The economies of the South and West relied heavily on farming. They were not as financially invested in manufacturing and therefore did not experience the same benefits as the North. Goods like cloth and iron became more expensive to southern and western consumers. Northerners gained income as a result.
Higher tariffs led to angry protests. Lacking factories, southerners did not benefit from the tariff. Also, southerners bought many British goods. The new tariff drove up the price of British-made goods. Southerners complained that the tariff made northern manufacturers rich at the expense of the South.
Henry Clay Combats Sectionalism The bitter
dispute over tariffs contributed to the growth of sectionalism. Americans identified themselves as southerners, northerners, or westerners. In Congress, representatives from different sections often clashed.
Henry Clay wanted to promote economic growth for all sections. His program, known as the American System, called for high tariffs on imports, which would help northern factories. With wealth from industry, Clay believed, northerners would have the money to buy farm products from the West and the South. High tariffs would also reduce American dependence on foreign goods.
Clay also urged Congress to use money from tariffs to build roads, bridges, and canals. A better transportation system, he believed, would make it easier and cheaper for farmers in the West and the South to ship goods to city markets.
Clay’s American System never fully went into effect. While tariffs remained high, Congress spent little on internal improvements—new roads, bridges, and canals. Southerners in particular disliked Clay’s plan. The South had many fine rivers on which to transport goods. Many southerners opposed paying for roads and canals that brought them no direct benefits.
Some Americans also thought Clay's plan for developing transportation with federal support was unconstitutional. They did not believe the federal government had the authority to build such projects. They believed that by regulating industry and building
The Early Republic 248
5.6 Monroe’s Presidency
roads and canals, the federal government would gain too much power.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did many states in the South and West oppose the Tariff of 1816?
Supreme Court Decisions Expand Federal Power
Under Chief Justice John Marshall, the Supreme Court strengthened the power of the federal government. The Court gave the federal government the power to regulate the economy.
A
Broad Definition of “Necessary and Proper” After Congress chartered the second Bank of the United States, Maryland tried to tax the Bank in order to drive it out of the state. James McCulloch, the Bank cashier, refused to pay the tax.
In the case of McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), the Court ruled that states had no right to interfere with federal institutions within their borders. The ruling strengthened federal power. It also allowed the Bank of the United States to continue, which helped the economy to expand.
The Court decision addressed the issue of the meaning of the “necessary and proper” clause of the U.S. Constitution. It ruled that the federal government had the power to charter the Bank of the United States under the clause. This clause states that “The Congress shall have Power ... To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper” for carrying out functions outlined elsewhere in the Constitution. Since the Constitution gave the federal government the power to tax and borrow money and to regulate business, the Court stated that creating a bank could be considered "necessary and proper” to carrying out these powers.
The Supreme Court took a “loose constructionist” view of the Constitution, believing that the “necessary and proper” clause should be interpreted loosely as circumstances changed. Many Americans disagreed with the Court. Those who disagreed took a “strict constructionist” view that the “necessary and proper” clause permitted only actions absolutely necessary for performing the government’s constitutional duties. Strict constructionists generally agreed that the Bank of the United States was not truly necessary for the government to function.
Broad Powers Over Interstate Trade In another case, Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), the Supreme Court
» Of all the capitols in the United States, the Maryland State Capitol building, built in 1784, has spent the most years in operation.
Interactive Gallery
upheld the power of the federal government to regulate trade between states. The Court struck down a New York law that tried to control steamboat travel between New York and New Jersey. The Court ruled that a state could regulate trade only within its own borders. Only the federal government had the power to regulate interstate commerce, or trade between different states. This decision helped the national economy by making it easier for the government to regulate trade.
These rulings not only affected the government. They also changed daily life for people in the United States. The New York law had given a monopoly, or exclusive rights, to Robert Fulton’s steamboat company to run ferries to New Jersey. Fulton’s company was the only one allowed to run ferries between the two states.
When the Supreme Court struck down this New York law, Fulton’s monopoly on steamboat traffic ended. As a result, his company could not compete with companies that charged a lower fare, and people working for Fulton lost their jobs. However, the increased competition was good for consumers because it led to lower fares.
Many people also liked this ruling because it created a single national market for goods and services, regulated by the federal government. Having clear
The Early Republic 249	5.6 Monroe’s Presidency
national laws to follow made it easier for people to do business and move goods and services nationwide.
BCHECK UNDERSTANDING
How did the decision in McCulloch v. Maryland increase federal power?
Latin America Wins
Independence
By 1810, many people in Spain’s colonies in the Americas were eager for independence. They had many reasons to be unhappy. Most people, even wealthy creoles, had little or no say in government. In Latin America, the term creole described people born to Spanish parents there. They demanded a role in government. Opposition to Spain was also growing among Native Americans. Harsh rules kept Native Americans forever in debt. All over Latin America, people were eager to be free of the Spanish.
Mexico Gains Independence A Mexican priest named Miguel Hidalgo (mee GEL ee DAHL goh) called on Mexicans to fight for independence from Spain in 1810. Many Mexicans answered his call. Rebel forces won control of several provinces before Father Hidalgo was captured. In 1811, Hidalgo was executed.
Another priest, Jose Morelos (hoh SAY moh RAYlohs), took up the fight. Because he called for a program to give land to peasants, wealthy creoles opposed him. Before long, Morelos, too, was captured and killed by the Spanish.
Slowly, though, creoles began to join the revolutionary movement. In 1821, revolutionary forces led by creoles won control of Mexico. A few years later, Mexico became a republic with its own constitution.
Freedom From Spanish Rule in South America In
South America, too, a series of revolutions freed colonies from Spanish rule. The best-known revolutionary leader was Simon Bolivar (see MOHN boh LEE vahr). He became known as the Liberator for his role in the Latin American wars of independence.
Bolivar came from a wealthy creole family in Venezuela. As a young man, he took up the cause of Venezuelan independence. Bolivar promised, "I will never allow my hands to be idle, nor my soul to rest until I have broken the shackles which chain us to Spain.”
Bolivar rose to become a leader of the rebel forces. In a bold move, he led an army from Venezuela over the high Andes Mountains into Colombia. There, Bolivar took the Spanish forces by surprise and defeated them in 1819.
New Nations in Latin America, 1810-1825
» Analyze Maps In the early 1800s, colonies across South America were freed from Spanish rule as a result of revolution. Which European countries continued to exercise control on that continent?
The Early Republic 250	5.6 Monroe’s Presidency

»Infer Based on the illustration, what can you infer about the purpose of Negro Fort?
BISSIb
Soon after, Bolivar became president of the independent Republic of Great Colombia. It included the present-day nations of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, and Panama.
Independence Movements Spread Other independent nations emerged in Latin America. Jose de San Martin (sahn mahr teen) led Argentina to freedom in 1816. He then helped the people of Chile and Peru win independence.
In 1821, the peoples of Central America declared independence from Spain. Two years later, they formed the United Provinces of Central America.
It included the present-day nations of Nicaragua, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala. By 1825, Spain had lost all its colonies in Latin America except Puerto Rico and Cuba.
The Portuguese colony of Brazil won independence peacefully. When Brazilian revolutionaries demanded independence, Prince Pedro, son of the Portuguese king, joined their cause. He became emperor of the new independent nation of Brazil in 1822.
The New Republics Spain’s former colonies modeled their constitutions on that of the United States. Yet, their experience after independence was very different fr°ni that of their neighbor to the north. Unlike the People of the 13 British colonies, the peoples of Latin
America did not unite into a single country. In part, geography made unity difficult. Latin America covered a much larger area than the British colonies. Thick rain forests and mountains such as the high, rugged Andes acted as barriers to travel and communication. Also, the Spanish colonies were spread out over a huge area. Therefore, several separate republics formed.
The new republics had a hard time setting up stable governments. Under Spanish rule, the colonists had gained little or no experience in self-government. Powerful leaders took advantage of the turmoil to seize control. As a result, the new nations were often unable to achieve democratic rule.
B IDENTIFY CENTRAL IDEAS
What characteristics of physical geography made it more difficult for Latin American colonies to unite than it had been for the United States?
Gaining Florida
Spain lost another one of its colonies, Florida—not to independence, but to the United States. Many Americans wanted to gain possession of Florida. White southerners were especially worried about disturbances across the border. Creeks and Seminoles in Florida sometimes raided settlements in Georgia.
The Early Republic 251	5.6 Monroe’s Presidency
Also, Florida was a refuge for many Africans and African Americans who escaped slavery.
Jackson Invades Spanish Florida Since the 1700s, Spanish officials had protected enslaved Africans who had fled from plantations in Georgia and South Carolina. Seminoles allowed Africans to live near their villages. In return, these “black Seminoles” gave the Seminoles a share of the crops they raised. The black Seminoles adopted many Seminole customs.
One settlement on the Apalachicola River known as the Negro Fort contained about 1,000 black Seminoles. General Andrew Jackson demanded that Spain demolish the Negro Fort. When the Spanish governor refused, the United States invaded Florida and destroyed the fort.
Adams Buys Florida In 1818, Jackson again headed to Florida with a force of more than 3,000 soldiers. Spain protested but did little else. It was busy fighting rebels in Latin America and could not risk war with the United States.
In the end, Spain agreed to peace talks. Secretary of State John Quincy Adams worked out a treaty with Spain’s foreign minister, Luis de Onis (loo ess day oh NEES). In it, Spain agreed to give Florida to the United
» In this political cartoon, Uncle Sam brandishes a big stick, labeled "Monroe Doctrine," as a warning to European nations not to attempt to re-colonize territory in the Americas.
States in exchange for $5 million. The Adams-Onis Treaty took effect in 1821.
E2 DESCRIBE
What was the result of the Adams-Onis Treaty? The Monroe Doctrine
Americans cheered as Latin American nations won independence. The actions of European powers, however, worried Secretary of State Adams and President Monroe. In 1815, Prussia, France, Russia, and Austria formed an alliance aimed at crushing any revolution that sprang up in Europe. They seemed ready to help Spain regain its colonies in Latin America. In addition, Russia claimed lands on the Pacific coast of North America.
The British, too, worried about other European nations meddling in the Western Hemisphere. They feared that their profitable trade with the newly independent countries would be hurt if Spain regained control of its former colonies. Thus, they suggested that the United States and Britain issue a joint statement guaranteeing the freedom of the new nations of Latin America.
Monroe decided to act independently of Britain. In a message to Congress in 1823, he made a bold foreign policy statement, known as the Monroe Doctrine. Monroe declared that the United States would not interfere in the affairs of European nations or existing colonies of the European nations. At the same time, he warned European nations not to attempt to regain control of the newly independent nations of Latin America.
The Monroe Doctrine stated that the United States would oppose any attempt to reclaim old colonies or build new colonies in the Americas. Monroe's message showed that the United States was determined to keep European powers out of the Western Hemisphere.
The United States did not have the military power to enforce the Monroe Doctrine. Britain, however, supported the statement. With its strong navy, it could stop Europeans from building new colonies in the Americas.
As the United States became stronger, the Monroe Doctrine grew in importance. On several occasions, the United States successfully challenged European intervention, or direct involvement, in Latin America. In the 1900s, Presidents also used the Monroe Doctrine to justify sending troops to Caribbean nations. Thus,
The Early Republic 252	5.6 Monroe’s Presidency
Monroe’s bold statement helped shape United States foreign policy for more than 100 years.
MAIN IDEAS
What was the purpose of the Monroe Doctrine? ELPS READING 4.F.7
Read the third and fourth paragraphs of this text with a partner, and discuss the meaning of the Monroe Doctrine. Ask your partner or teacher questions about words or phrases you do not understand. ASSESSMENT
1. Generate Explanations After the War of 1812, British goods were again available in the United States. Why were these imported British goods less expensive than similar American goods?
2.	Identify the principal reason the South rejected the American System, Henry Clay’s plan to promote economic growth in all regions of the United States.
3.	Compare In what ways were the outcomes in McCulloch v. Maryland and Gibbons v. Ogden similar?
4.	Evaluate Arguments Evaluate the argument that a lack of experience in self-government affected the ability of Spain’s former colonies in Latin America to form stable democratic governments.
5.	Infer Why might southern slave states have supported the acquisition of Florida by the United States?
The Early Republic 253
5.6 Monroe's Presidency
TEKS ASSESSMENT
1.	Analyze Leadership Qualities of George Washington Analyze the leadership qualities of elected leaders of the United States, such as George Washington. Using the quotation below and other sources, write a paragraph analyzing George Washington’s leadership qualities and his role as the first President of the United States. Define the word precedent, analyze what the quotation shows about Washington’s leadership qualities, analyze what about the U.S. Constitution makes the point expressed in the quotation important, and describe what precedents Washington set when he established his cabinet and at the end of his second term as president. 22.A
There is scarcely any part of my conduct which may not hereafter be drawn into precedent.
—President George Washington
2. Summarize Taxation and the Whiskey I	Rebellion Summarize arguments regarding taxation
that led to the Whiskey Rebellion. Write a paragraph describing how the tax on liquor sparked the Whiskey Rebellion. Explain what the tax was meant to do and
,	why the tax presented special difficulties for small
distilleries, particularly those on the frontier, and summarize why frontier farmers opposed the tax and how the opposition turned to rebellion. 5.B
|	3. Explain the Origin of Political Parties Explain the
origin of American political parties. Write a paragraph
i	explaining how Thomas Jefferson’s and Alexander
|	Hamilton’s clashes over policies led to the formation of
I	the first political parties. Consider what caused Thomas
|	Jefferson and James Madison to start organizing their
I !	supporters, who Jefferson’s supporters were and what
they called themselves, and who Hamilton’s supporters
;;	were and what they called themselves. 5.C
J	4. Explain Development of Free-Enterprise
II
System Explain why a free-enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation, including , 1	minimal government intrusion. Write a paragraph
i ,	explaining Jefferson’s support for laissezfaire
economics and the free-enterprise system and how i	it represented a break with the Federalist policies of
j!	Alexander Hamilton. Define laissez faire and explain
what it means in economic terms. Explain the influence g	of Adam Smith on Jefferson’s economic ideas and why
i j	Jefferson’s support of laissez faire marked a change
J	from the Federalist approach to the economy. 14.A
Analyze Congressional and Presidential Responses Analyze examples of congressional and presidential responses to judicial review. Write a paragraph analyzing how President Jefferson and Congress responded to John Marshall’s decision in Marbury v. Madison and the precedent it set. Consider why Jefferson was displeased with the Court’s ruling, what Jefferson believed judicial review did to the balance of power among the branches of government, and how Jefferson and Congress finally responded to the establishment of judicial review and why that is important. 18.A
Summarize McCulloch v. Maryland Summarize arguments regarding the banking system by summarizing the issues, decisions, and significance of landmark Supreme Court cases, including McCulloch v. Maryland. Write a paragraph summarizing the arguments regarding banking involved in McCulloch v. Maryland. Summarize the issues leading to the case being heard by the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court decision, and the significance of the decision. 5.B, 18.B
Locate Regions of Importance Locate regions of importance in the United States during the nineteenth century, such as Florida. Write a paragraph describing how the United States gained Florida. Describe why white southerners wanted Florida, the role General Andrew Jackson played in acquiring Florida, and the role Secretary of State John Quincy Adams played in acquiring Florida. 10.A
Explain Monroe Doctrine Identify the foreign policy of President Monroe by explaining the impact of the Monroe Doctrine. Write a paragraph identifying what the Monroe Doctrine was and explaining its significance. Identify what concerns led President Monroe to issue the Monroe Doctrine and explain what the Monroe Doctrine stated and its short- and long-term impact. 5.E
Identify Era of Sectionalism Identify the major eras in U.S. history through 1877, including sectionalism. Write a paragraph describing what the era of sectionalism was and identifying the roles John C. Calhoun,
Daniel Webster, and Henry Clay played in it. Define sectionalism, identify what area of the nation Calhoun spoke for and what his views were, identify what area of the nation Webster spoke for and what his views were, and identify what area of the nation Clay spoke for and what his views were. 1.A
10. Identify and Locate Louisiana Purchase Identify	12.
areas that were acquired to form the United States, including the Louisiana Purchase, and locate places of importance in the United States during the nineteenth century. Using the map above and other sources, write a paragraph identifying the area of the Louisiana Purchase and the route that Lewis and Clark took on their expedition. Use the map to locate and identify the eastern and western borders of the Louisiana Purchase, and explain and identify the Continental Divide. Use the map and text to describe the route that the Lewis and Clark expedition took, and indicate what additional land Lewis and Clark claimed for the United States. (See map above.) 6.E, 10.A
11- Explain Significance of Louisiana Purchase Explain the significance of the 1803 Louisiana Purchase, including the contributions of James Monroe. Write a Paragraph explaining the events leading to the Louisiana Purchase and why the purchase was significant. Explain why Louisiana Territory was important to the economic interests of the United States, especially western farmers, why that access was in jeopardy in 1800,
Low the United States ended up acquiring Louisiana, including James Monroe’s role, and why the purchase was significant. 1.C, 22.B
Analyze Effects of Geographic Factors Analyze the effects of physical geographic factors on major historical events in the United States, such as the Lewis and Clark expedition. Write a paragraph analyzing how physical geography affected the Lewis and Clark expedition. Consider river currents, weather, landforms, plants, and animals. 10.C
13. Use Problem Solving Use a problem-solving process to identify a problem related to human or geographic factors, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution related to exploring the Louisiana Purchase. Write a short essay identifying a problem related to human or physical geography encountered on the Lewis and Clark expedition and propose possible solutions. Identify the problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, and propose and evaluate possible solutions. 10.C, 31.A
The Early Republic
255
i
KEY	
BB
Land lost before 1750 m Land lost 1750-1784	{■ \
■ Land lost 1784-1810		_	i
Present-day borders	J	1
	
UNITED STATES

MEXICO
Indian Lands Lost by 1812
CANADA
V
A TLANTIC OCEAN
0	250 mi
0	250 km
Lambert Conformal Conic Projection
14.	Describe National Security Problems Describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic, such as maintaining national security. Write a paragraph describing how the war between Britain and France that began in 1803 affected the United States and led to calls for war. Describe how American merchants responded to the war, how France and Britain responded to the American merchants’ actions, and how Britain’s need for sailors led to calls for war. 5.A
15.	Analyze Conflict Resolution Analyze the effects of human geographic factors on major historical events in the United States, such as conflicts between Native Americans and white settlers, and identify ways the conflicts between these racial groups were resolved. Using the map above and other sources, write a paragraph analyzing what human geographic factors led to conflict between Native Americans and white settlers west of the Appalachians and how these conflicts were resolved. Answer the following questions: What human geographic factors resulted from large numbers of white settlers moving west of the Appalachians beginning in
1790? What actions did Little Turtle of the Miamis and Blue Jacket of the Shawnees take, and how did the United States respond? What actions did Tecumseh and the Prophet take? What was the outcome of the Battle of Tippecanoe? (See map above.) 23.C, 10.C
16.	Explain Cause of War of 1812 Explain the causes of the War of 1812, and identify President Madison’s foreign policy attempts to prevent war. Write a paragraph explaining the factors that led to the War of 1812. Explain why fighting with Native Americans hurt relations between the United States and Britain; what foreign-policy deal Congress authorized President Madison to offer to France and Britain, and how each reacted; and what reasons the War Hawks gave in support of declaring war on Britain. 5.D, 5.E
17.	Describe Contributions of Andrew Jackson Explain
the important events of the War of 1812, including the battles of Horseshoe Bend and New Orleans, and describe the contributions of significant military leaders, such as Andrew Jackson. Write a paragraph explaining events surrounding the battles of Horseshoe Bend and New Orleans and Andrew Jackson’s contributions to the American victories. Explain how Jackson won the battles of Horseshoe Bend and New Orleans, and why the Battle of New Orleans was fought after the war officially ended. 5.D, 22.B
The Early Republic 256
18.	Explain Economic Effects of War of 1812 Explain the effects of the War of 1812 by analyzing how the war was a cause of economic changes in the nation. Using the graph below and other sources, write a paragraph explaining how the War of 1812 contributed to economic growth and American industrialization. Explain how the Embargo Act and then the War of 1812 helped spark the growth of factories in the United States, what the graph indicates about the growth of factories, and how American businesses were affected by the end of the War of 1812. (See graph below.) 5.D, 13.A
19.	Analyze Sectional Impact of Tariffs Analyze the impact of tariff policies on sections of the United States before the Civil War by identifying economic differences among different regions and summarizing arguments regarding protective tariffs. Write a paragraph analyzing how the Tariff of 1816 affected the North, South, and West in different ways. Consider why Congress passed the Tariff of 1816 and what the tariff did, how the regional economies differed, how and why the North benefited from the tariff, and how and why the tariff did not benefit the West and South. 7.A, 12.A
20.	Describe Cause and Effect of Sectionalism Describe the causes and effects of sectionalism, and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the role of Henry Clay. Write a paragraph describing how the Tariff of 1816 increased sectionalism and how Henry Clay tried to combat this sectionalism through his American System. Describe how Clay thought his American System would promote economic growth in all sections, why Clay wanted Congress to use tariff money for internal improvements and how Congress responded, and why southerners and other opposed Clay’s ideas. 1.A, 7.D
21.	Identify Points of View of Political Parties Identify different points of view of political parties on important historical issues. Using the quotation below and other sources, write a paragraph identifying Federalist and the Democratic Republican points of view concerning the Alien and Sedition Acts. Identify the effects of the acts and the Federalist point of view about the acts, and use the quotation to identify the point of view of Democratic Republicans, such as Jefferson, about the acts. 21 .A
They have brought into the lower house a sedition bill, which . . . undertakes to make printing certain matters criminal. . . Indeed this bill & the alien bill both are so [against] the Constitution as to show they mean to pay no respect to it.
-—The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, 1798
22.	Reflect on the Essential Question Write an essay on the Essential Question: What should governments do? Use evidence from your study of this Topic to support your answer.
The Early Republic
Tis our true policy to steer clear of permanent Alliances, with any portion of the foreign World.... The great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations is. .. to have with them as little political connection as possible.
—George Washington, Farewell Address, 1796
As tensions grew among European nations, Washington made this argument because he feared —
A political involvement in Britain’s affairs could negatively affect trade
B political involvement in France’s affairs would harm American trade with Austria
C establishing political alliances with foreign nations could weaken American military power
D establishing political alliances with foreign nations could eventually force the United States into war
2 Which claim did Thomas Jefferson make in his argument against the federal government establishing a national bank?
F
The U.S. Constitution does not give the federal government the power to establish a national bank. G A
system of state banks under the control of the federal government is better than one national bank. H
Congress should not have to split its power to set and oversee the federal budget with a national bank. J
The nation was already deeply in debt, and the cost of running a national bank would increase this debt further. I
The Early Republic 258
~Access additional practice questions
3	What measure did President John Adams take as a result of French attacks on American ships?
A
He bribed French diplomats to end the attacks. B
He added guns and cannons to all American naval ships. C
He went on a diplomatic trip to France to negotiate peace. D
He ordered the building of swift military ships called frigates to strengthen the navy. This map shows Lewis and Clark’s journey, which included exploring land acquired in the Louisiana Purchase and beyond. This land included —
F all the land west of the continental divide G land west of the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean H land west of the Missouri River to the Rocky Mountains J land west of the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains
i j
trouble with,,, 
Question	1	i ... . A..		3	i
See Lesson	5.1	j	5.2__	" f	5.3	I
teks	5.E	5.B	
The Early Republic 259
5	During the War of 1812, the British wanted to control New Orleans because from there they could—
A sail up the Mississippi River B reinforce their troops in Canada C develop new trade with Native Americans D stage a surprise attack on the American capital
This political cartoon is based on an American policy known as the Monroe Doctrine. The Monroe Doctrine—
F asserted that kings were unwelcome anywhere in the Western Hemisphere G discouraged European interference in Latin America for more than a hundred years H established an alliance between the United States and the Republic of Santo Domingo J started a war between the United States and Spain over control of the territory of Florida
The Early Republic 260
Access additional practice questions
7
/ m great compromise
Jras us. house or representatives;
THEP.S.SPMLTC
w
####### IP#
States with latgei	\s r •	•
populations have rnoie « r i ‘n-E representatives	.:	■'i k ’ v -
♦♦ H ## H ## ## H H H it it it it
Each state has 2 senators
} .. ‘ A
The Great Compromise pleased small states by—
A allotting each state the same number of senators B allowing state legislatures to choose representatives C requiring that senators were elected by popular vote D awarding representatives based on a state’s population
8 Why was the concept of freedom of religion important to citizens of the early United States? F They wanted everyone to worship in the same way.
G
Many came to America to establish a religious country. H
Many came to America to escape religious persecution. J
They thought the government should help shape religious practice. If you have trouble with... Question	5
See Lesson	5.5
TEKS 10.A
6
5.6
5.E
7
4.2
4.D
8
4.6
25.A
The Early Republic 261
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion
In this Topic, you will learn about the age of Jackson and westward expansion across the United States. You will also find lots of ways to investigate the ideas of this Topic and to master the TEKS.
Your study will help you master these TEKS:
TEKS
A, 11.B, 11.C, 17.B, 18.A, 21.A, 22.A,
23.A, 23.C, 23.D, 27.A, 27.B, 29.C, 29.H, 29.J, 30.D
• Connect
: My Story Video and Topic Essential Question—
: see how they connect to your past experience : or to what you have already learned. The : Essential Question for this Topic is: Why do people : move?
i Begin your study by trying the i following:
iJfeNBC LEARN Watch My Story Video:
; Narcissa Whitman and the Journey West
Launch your Civic Discussion:
ft The U.S.-Mexican War
LESSON OUTLINE
6.1: Jackson Wins the Presidency 1.A, 5.C, 5.F, 7.B, 7.D, 21 .A
6.2: Political Conflict and Economic Crisis 5.B, 7.A, 7.D, 10.A, 17.B
6.3: Native Americans on the Frontier 5.G, 10.C, 18.A, 23.C
6.4: Westward Movement 10.A, 11.B, 27.A,27.B 6.5: Settling Oregon Country 6.E 6.6: Independence for Texas 10.C 6.7: Manifest Destiny in California and the
Southwest 1.A, 6.B, 6.C, 6.D, 6.E, 10.B, 10.C, 11A 11.C
262
t Investigate
: A group of lessons will help : you investigate the Topic ; further. Each lesson has ; interesting text readings and ; fascinating interactivities.
; Together, they will bring the ; Topic to life and help you : master the TEKS for this Topic.
i And keep working on your ; Civic Discussion. You’re ; almost ready to show what i you have accomplished by i expressing your position : using the evidence you have • gathered.
» Digital interactivity from the online course
•	Synthesize
: You'll see that this Topic is about : even more than fascinating texts : and fun interactivities. It’s really : about how those things help you : think about big ideas, like the
•	Essential Question for this Topic.
* Demonstrate
: Completing this Topic is like : practicing all your soccer skills or i rehearsing the scenes in a play.
: Now you get a chance to pull it all ; together for the final game or the ; live performance. You can do this on '• the Topic Review and Assessment
•	pages. Or you can complete work
•	on your Civic Discussion, The U.S.-
•	Mexican War.......................
1.A	Topic Review and Assessment Questions	Hl j> j s’ 11.A	Topic Review and Assessment Questions
5.B	4,14	11.B	23
5.C	2	11.C	5
5.F	10	17.B	12
5.G	16,17,22	18. A	16
6.B	28	21 .A	3
6.C	29	22.A	13
6.D	30	23.A	9
6.E	26	23.C	15
7.A	4	23.D	7
7.B	1	27.A	19
7.D	6	27.B	20
8.B	11	29.C	22
10. A	26	29.H	22
10.B	27	29.J	21
10.C	8, 24, 25	30.D	4,18
263
Statue of gold miner Claude Shana, Auburn, California
Texas Essential Knowledge
1.A, 5.B, 5.C, 5.F, 5.G, 6.B, 6.C, 6.D, 6.E, 7.A, 7.B, 7.D, 8.B, 10.A, 10.B, 10.C, 11.A, 11.B, 11.C, 17.B, 18.A, 21.A,
22.A, 23.A, 23.C, 23.D, 27.A, 27.B, 29.C, 29.H, 29.J, 30.D
Enduring Understandings
• During the Jacksonian era, American democracy expanded, and the political party system developed.
Jacksonian Democrats wanted limited government, while Whigs wanted the government to support the economy.
The United States forced Native Americans to leave the Southeast to make way for settlers.
Seeking economic opportunity and religious freedom, Americans moved west, reshaping the landscape in the process.
The United States expanded its borders from the Atlantic to the Pacific through compromise and conflict, including the U.S.-Mexican War.
People from many cultures shaped the American West.
..NBC LEARN
*
ESSENTIAL QUESTION ]
Why do people move? The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion (1824-1860)
Whitman.
a..
to learn about pioneer Narcissa

PEARSON l
realize
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your digital lessons including:
Topic Inquiry • Interactive Reading Notepad • Interactivities • Assessments
265
During the early 1800s, a growing spirit of democracy changed the political system and affected American ideas	|
about social classes. The main cause stemmed from the influence of Andrew Jackson. He was an American politician during this time who supported expanding democratic rights. From the time of his first campaign for president in 1824 until his death in 1845, he dominated American politics. Jackson's policies had a significant effect on issues such as voting rights and the ways in which government functions. This period is often known as the Age of Jackson.

» Objectives
Describe who gained suffrage by the 1820s.
Identify compromises made after the 1824 election, including the roles of Henry Clay and John Quincy Adams.
Explain the origin and development of new political parties under John Quincy Adams.
Describe the causes and effects of Jacksonian democracy and the impact of the election of Andrew Jackson.
Explain the spoils system.
The Age of Jackson
Increased Suffrage During the 1820s, or the early years of the Age of Jackson, more Americans gained suffrage, or the right to vote. Others, however, were denied full participation in the growing democracy.
The United States was growing rapidly. New states were joining the Union, and there were many citizens eager to participate in elections. Some of the first states to give voting privileges to white males who did not own property were in the West. In these states, any white man over age 21 could vote.
Reformers in the East worked to expand suffrage in that region. By the 1830s, most eastern states had dropped the requirement that voters had to own land. In this way, many craft workers and shopkeepers won the right to vote.
Throughout the country, growing numbers of Americans exercised their newly acquired right to vote. Before 1828, the turnout of eligible voters was never more than 27 percent. That low percentage rose to nearly 58 percent in the election of 1828. By 1840, voter turnout was nearly 80 percent.
Limits on Suffrage Despite the nation’s growing democratic spirit, a great many Americans did not have the right to vote. They included women, Native Americans, and the vast majority of African Americans. Slaves had no political rights at all. Meanwhile, the few states that still required white men to own property to vote failed to remove that barrier during Jackson’s presidency.
Although most white men had won suffrage, free African Americans had lost it. In the early years of the nation, most northern states and a few southern states allowed free African American men to vote. By the 1820s, however, many of these states had taken away that right. By 1830, only a few New England states permitted free African American men to vote on equal terms with white men. In New York, African American men had to own property in order to vote while white men did not. No state allowed enslaved African Americans to vote.
bi RECALL How did democracy expand during the
Age of Jackson?
The Election of 1824 Leads to a “Bargain”
There were four candidates for president in 1824. All four were members of the old Republican Party. However, each had support in different parts of the country. John Quincy Adams was strong in New England. Henry Clay and Andrew Jackson had support in the West. William H. Crawford was favored in the South, but became too ill to campaign.
The Candidates John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts was the son of Abigail and John Adams, the second president. A graduate of Harvard University, the younger Adams had served as Secretary
» Key Terms
Andrew Jackson Alexis de Tocqueville suffrage
John Quincy Adams Henry Clay majority Whig Party Democratic Party spoils system
Democracy Expands
Alexis de Tocqueville Most Americans did not feel that the rich deserved special respect. Wealthy European visitors to the United States were surprised that American servants expected to be treated as equals. Others were amazed that butlers and maids refused to be summoned with bells, as in Europe.
A visitor from France, Alexis de Tocqueville became especially well known for his observations on American democracy. He arrived in the United States in 1831. The French government had sent him to study the American prison system. For several months, Tocqueville toured much of the United States. However, he observed much more than prisons. He observed a society that was becoming more and more democratic.
After his return to France, Tocqueville recorded his experiences and observations in a book titled Democracy in America. In it, he admired the American democratic spirit and the American goals of equality and freedom. He found that the results of the social “revolution taking place” in America, while “still far from coming to an end," were “already incomparably greater than anything which has taken place in the world before.”
Class in America and Europe
QUESTION
Who had voting rights?
Who had power?
How did people act toward those with more wealth?
How did ordinary people expect to be treated by those with more wealth?
SITUATION IN AMERICA
Almost all white men
White men of all incomes
They treated them the same as those without wealth. They expected respect.
SITUATION IN EUROPE
Wealthy men in countries with elections; not all countries had elections.
Depending on the country, the king or queen, the nobility, and in some countries, wealthy male voters
They gave them special recognition.
They expected to be looked down upon.
Attitudes toward social class privilege in the United States and Europe differed during the Age of Jackson. Interpret Based on what you've learned, what exPlains these differences?
5511 Interactive Timeline
ze
www.PearsonTexas.com
Access your Digital Lesson.
266
The Age of Jackson and Westward Expansion 267	6-1 The Age of Jackson
of State and helped end the War of 1812. People admired Adams for his intelligence and high morals. Adams, however, was uncomfortable campaigning among the common people. In fact, to most people he seemed hard and cold.
A
Kentuckian, Henry Clay was a shrewd politician who became Speaker of the House of Representatives. In Congress, Clay was a skillful negotiator who had worked out several important compromises. Despite his abilities, Clay was less popular than the other candidate from the West, Andrew Jackson. William H. Crawford had served as Treasury Secretary, War Secretary, Ambassador to France after the War of 1812, and as a senator from Georgia. Crawford’s support was concentrated in the Southeast.
To many Americans, especially on the western frontier, Andrew Jackson was a hero. A general during the War of 1812, he had defeated the British and a group of Creek Indians who were allied with the British. He had gone on to defeat the Seminoles and the Spanish in Florida, gaining that territory for the United States. He was known as the “Hero of New Orleans” for his victory in the War of 1812. He also earned the nickname “Old Hickory” after a soldier said he was “tough as hickory.” Jackson’s fame as a general helped him launch a political career. Although he was a
landowner and a slave owner, many saw him as a man of the people. Jackson had been born in a log cabin, and his parents had been poor farmers. He was admired by small farmers and others who felt left out of the growing economy in the United States. The expansion of the vote to white men without property helped account for Jackson’s political popularity.
The “Corrupt Bargain” No clear winner emerged from the election of 1824. Jackson won the popular vote, but no candidate won a majority, or more than half, of the electoral votes. As a result, under the provisions of the Constitution, the House of Representatives had to choose the president from among the top three candidates. Because he had finished fourth, Clay was out of the running. As Speaker of the House, though, he played an important role in influencing the results and reaching a compromise to settle the conflict.
Clay urged members of the House to vote for Adams. Clay’s support was enough for Adams to win the vote in the House. After he became president, Adams named Clay his Secretary of State. In the past, Secretaries of State had gone on to become president. Jackson and his backers were furious. They accused Adams and Clay of making a “corrupt bargain” and stealing the election from Jackson. In fact, the election was decided based on provisions of the Constitution. Still, the anger
The Election of 1824
CANDIDATE
HOME STATE
MAIN
POSITIONS
POPULAR VOTE*
41
4
Henry
Clay
Kentucky
Supports tariffs and spending on roads and canals to promote business, compromise between North and South
47,531
‘The popular vote does not accurately measure candidates' popular support, because in several electors were chosen by state legislatures.
» This chart shows information about the four candidates in the presidential election of 1824. Compare Which two candidates' positions were most similar, and how were they similar?
37
Not on ballot
states there
was no popular vote, and
tf Jackson and Westward Expansion 268	6,1 The Age of Jackson
of Jackson and his supporters seriously hampered President Adams’s efforts to unify the nation.
CHECK UNDERSTANDING
Why did some people refer to the 1824 election result as a “corrupt bargain”?
The Presidency of John Quincy Adams
Adams knew that the outcome of the election had angered many Americans. To “bring the whole people together, he pushed for a program of economic growth through internal improvements. His plan backfired, however, and opposition to him grew.
Promoting Economic Growth Like Alexander Hamilton and Henry Clay, Adams thought that the federal government should promote economic growth. He called for the government to pay for new roads and canals. These internal improvements would help farmers to transport goods to market.
Adams also favored projects to promote the arts and the sciences. He suggested building a national university and an observatory from which astronomers could study the stars. Most Americans objected to spending money on such programs. They feared that the federal government would become too powerful. Congress approved money for a national road and some canals but turned down most of Adams’s other programs.
Origin of New Political Parties During the 1820s, nearly all politicians were members of Jefferson’s Democratic-Republican Party. In the 1830s, however, new political parties took shape. These parties grew out of the conflict between John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson.
The Whig Party Democratic-Republicans who supported Adams and his programs for national growth called themselves National Republicans. In 1834, many of them joined a new party, organized by Henry Clay and known as the Whig Party.
Whigs had very specific points of view. Whigs wanted the federal government to promote business by paying for roads and canals. Whigs believed that the federal government should oversee banks. They believed that a stable banking system would encourage business. Whigs also wanted higher tariffs.
The Whigs had their strongest support the Northeast, with some support in cities and towns in the South and West. People from these places backed the Whigs because these places relied on manufacturing
» John Quincy Adams, the sixth President of the United States, thought that the federal government should adopt policies and pay for projects that would help the economy.
and commerce, and Whig policies aimed to help those parts of the economy.
Tariffs are taxes or fees placed on imported goods. By making imports more expensive, they help domestic producers. However, they may prompt foreign governments to impose tariffs in response. So tariffs can threaten exporters. Those who supported the Whigs included eastern factory owners and other businessmen, some southern planters, and many former Federalists. Whigs were often divided into factions, and not all of the party’s members always followed the party’s direction.
The Democratic Party Jackson and other Democratic-Republicans who supported him began to call themselves the Democratic Party. Today’s Democratic Party traces its roots to Andrew Jackson’s time. Like the Whig Party, Democrats also had a point of view. They called for more political power for ordinary white men and opposed privileges for the wealthy or educated. Democrats were opposed to tariffs and a federal government role in the economy.
Democrats opposed high tariffs, because farmers counted on being able to sell their goods overseas and did not want to risk retaliatory tariffs. They also did not want to pay more for imported goods. Democrats
