chapter 7 democracy and dissent force of public opinion how did the ideas of jeffersonians differ from those of the federalists.
while presiding over the first meeting of the u s senate in 1789 vice president john adams called the senators attention to a pressing procedural question how would they address george washington the newly elected president.
adams insisted that washington deserved an impressive title a designation lending dignity and weight to his office.
the vice president warned the senators that if they called washington simply president of the united states the common people of foreign countries as well as the sailors and soldiers would despise him to all eternity adams recommended his highness the president of the united states and protector of their liberties but some senators favored his elective majesty or his excellency adamss initiative caught many persons including washington completely by surprise.
they regarded the entire debate as ridiculous.
james madison a member of the house of representatives announced that pretentious european titles were ill suited to the genius of the people and the nature of our government thomas jefferson who was then residing in paris could not comprehend what motivated the vice president and in private correspondence he repeated benjamin franklins judgment that adams means well for his watch the video george washington the father of our country well wishers spread flowers in front of george washington as he rides through trenton on his way from virginia to new york for his inauguration as the first president of the united states in 1789.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 country is always an honest man often a wise one but sometimes and in some things absolutely out of his senses when the senators learned that their efforts embarrassed washington they dropped the topic.
the leader of the new republic would be called president of the united states.
one wag however dubbed the portly adams his rotundity he comic opera quality of the debate about how to address washington should not obscure the participants serious concern about setting government policy.
the members of the first congress could not take the survival of republican government for granted.
all of them of course wanted to secure the revolution.
the recently ratified constitution transferred sovereignty from the states to the people a bold and unprecedented decision that many americans feared would generate chronic instability.
translating constitutional abstractions into practical legislation would have been difficult even under the most favorable conditions.
but these were especially trying times.
great britain and france rivals in a century of war put nearly unbearable pressures on the leaders of the new republic and in the process made foreign policy a bitterly divisive issue.
although no one welcomed them political parties gradually took shape during this period.
neither the jeffersonians also called the republicans nor the federalists as the two major groups were called doubted that the united states would one day become a great commercial power.
they differed however on how best to manage the transition from an agrarian household economy to an international system of trade and industry.
the federalists encouraged rapid integration of the united states into a world economy but however enthusiastic they were about capitalism they did not trust the people or local government to do the job effectively.
a modern economy they insisted required strong national institutions that would be directed by a social elite who understood the financial challenge and who would work in the best interests of the people.
such claims frightened persons who came to identify themselves as jeffersonians.
strong financial institutions they thought had corrupted the government of great britain from which they had just separated themselves.
they searched for alternative ways to accommodate the needs of commerce and industry.
unlike the federalists the jeffersonians put their faith in the people defined for the most part politically as white yeoman farmers.
the jeffersonians insisted that ordinary entrepreneurs if they could be freed from intrusive government regulations could be trusted to resist greed and crass materialism and to sustain the virtue of the republic.
during the 1790s former allies were surprised to discover themselves at odds over such basic political issues.
one person hamilton for example would stake out a position.
another such as jefferson or madison would respond perhaps speaking a little more extravagantly than a specific issue demanded goaded by the rhetorical nature of public debate.
the first in turn would rebut passionately the new position.
by the middle of the decade this dialectic had almost spun out of control taking the young republic to the brink of political violence.
t leaders of every persuasion had to learn to live with public opinion the revolutionary elite had invited the people to participate in government but the gentlemen assumed that ordinary voters would automatically defer to their social betters.
instead the founders discovered they had created a rough and tumble political culture a robust public sphere of cheap newspapers and street demonstrations.
the newly empowered public followed the great debates of the period through articles they read in hundreds of highly partisan journals and magazines.
just as television did in the twentieth century print journalism opened politics to a large audience that previously might have been indifferent to the activities of elected officials.
by the time john adams left the presidency in 1800 he had learned this lesson well.
the ordinary workers and farmers of the united states feisty individuals who thought they were as good as anyone else and who were not afraid to let their political opinions be known were not likely to let their president become an elective majesty principle and pragmatism establishing a new government why was george washington unable to overcome division within the new government.
in 1788 george washington enjoyed great popularity throughout the nation.
the people remembered him as the selfless leader of the continental army and even before the states had ratified the constitution everyone assumed he would be chosen president of the united states.
he received the unanimous support of the electoral college an achievement that no subsequent president has duplicated.
adams a respected massachusetts lawyer who championed national independence in 1776 was selected vice president.
as washington left his beloved virginia plantation mount vernon for new york city he recognized that the people now so vocal in their support could be fickle.
i fear he explained with mature insight if the issue of public measures should not correspond with their sanguine expectations they will turn the extravagant.
into equally extravagant.
censures washington owed much of his success as the nations first president to an instinctive feeling for the symbolic possibilities of political power.
although he possessed only modest speaking abilities and never matched the intellectual brilliance of some contemporaries washington sensed that he had come to embody the hopes and fears of the new republic and thus without ever quite articulating the attributes necessary to achieve charisma an instinctive ability that some leaders have to merge their own personality with the abstract goals of the government he carefully monitored his official behavior.
washington knew that if he did not convincingly demonstrate the existence of a strong republic people who championed the sovereignty of the individual states would attempt to weaken federal authority before it was ever properly established.
the first congress quickly established executive departments.
some congressmen wanted to prohibit presidents from dismissing cabinet level appointees without senate approval but james madison still a voice for a strong independent executive led conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton a successful fight against this restriction on presidential authority.
madison recognized that the chief executive could not function unless he had personal confidence in the people with whom he worked.
in 1789 congress created the departments of war state and the treasury and as secretaries washington nominated henry knox thomas jefferson and alexander hamilton respectively.
edmund randolph served as part time attorney general a position that ranked slightly lower in prestige than the head of a department.
since the secretary of the treasury oversaw the collection of customs and other future federal taxes hamilton could anticipate having several thousand jobs to dispense an obvious source of political patronage.
to modern americans accustomed to a huge federal bureaucracy the size of washingtons government seems amazingly small.
when jefferson arrived in new york to take over the state department for example he found two chief clerks two assistants and a part time translator.
with this tiny staff he not only maintained contacts with the representatives of foreign governments collected information about world affairs and communicated with u s officials living overseas but also organized the entire federal census.
since the constitution tied congressional representation to state population it was extremely important to count the number of inhabitants fairly and efficiently a task that strained the resources of the new administration.
in 1790 at a cost of only 44 377 28 hundreds of federal enumerators were dispatched to obtain an accurate tally of the nations inhabitants.
anxious to impress predatory european monarchies with the rapid growth of the united states washington hoped the number would be large.
the final figure of 3 929 214 people of which some 700 000 were african american slaves disappointed the president.
jefferson immediately recognized that his new job would allow him little leisure for personal interests.
the situation in other departments was similar.
overworked clerks scribbled madly just to keep up with the press of correspondence.
john adams reviewing a bundle of letters and memos grumbled that often the handwriting is almost illegible considering these working conditions it is not surprising that the president had difficulty persuading able people to accept positions in the new government.
it is even more astonishing that hamilton and jefferson were able to accomplish as much as they did with so little assistance.
congress also provided for a federal court system.
the judiciary act of 1789 the work primarily of connecticut congressman oliver ellsworth created a supreme court staffed by a chief justice and five associate justices.
in addition the statute set up thirteen district courts authorized to review the decisions of the state courts.
john jay a leading figure in new york politics agreed to serve as chief justice but since federal judges in the 1790s were expected to travel hundreds of miles over terrible roads to attend sessions of the inferior courts few persons of outstanding talent and training joined jay on the federal bench.
one who did judge james iredell complained that service on the supreme court had transformed him into a travelling postboy remembering the financial insecurity of the old confederation government the newly elected congressmen passed the tariff of 1789 a tax of approximately 5 percent on imports.
the new levy generated considerable revenue for the young republic.
even before it went into effect however the act sparked controversy.
southern planters who relied heavily on european imports and the northern shippers who could control the flow of imports into the south claimed that the tariff discriminated against southern interests in favor of those of northern merchants.
conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton why did alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of washingtons cabinet.
washingtons first cabinet included two extraordinary personalities alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson.
both had served the country with distinction during the revolution were recognized by contemporaries as men of special genius as well as high ambition and brought to public office a powerful vision of how the american people could achieve greatness.
the story of their opposing views during the decade of the 1790s provides insight into the birth and development of political parties.
it also reveals how a common political ideology republicanism see chapter 6 could be interpreted in such vastly different ways that decisions about government policy turned friends into adversaries.
indeed the falling out of hamilton and jefferson reflected deep potentially explosive political divisions within american society.
hamilton was a brilliant dynamic young lawyer who had distinguished himself as washingtons aide de camp during the revolution.
born in the west indies the child of an adulterous relationship hamilton employed charm courage and intellect to fulfill his inexhaustible ambition.
he strove not for wealth but for reputation.
men and women who fell under his spell found him almost irresistible but to enemies hamilton appeared a dark calculating even evil genius.
he advocated a strong central government and refused to be bound by the strict wording of the constitution a document hamilton once called a shilly shally thing while he had fought for american independence he admired british culture and during the 1790s he advocated closer commercial and diplomatic ties with the former mother country with whom he said we have a similarity of tastes language and general manners jefferson possessed a profoundly different temperament.
this tall virginian was more reflective and shone less brightly in society than hamilton.
contemporaries sometimes interpreted his retiring manner as lack of ambition.
they misread jefferson.
he thirsted not for power or wealth but for an opportunity to advance the democratic principles that he had stated so eloquently in the declaration of independence.
when jefferson became secretary of state in january 1790 he had just returned from paris where he witnessed the first exhilarating moments of the french revolution.
these earthshaking events he believed marked the beginning of a worldwide republican assault on absolute monarchy and aristocratic privilege.
his european experiences biased jefferson in favor of france over great britain when the two nations clashed.
the contrast between these two powerful figures during the early years of washingtons administration should not be exaggerated.
they shared many fundamental beliefs.
indeed both chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 read the document alexander hamilton opposing visions for the new nation during the first years of washingtons administration neither hamilton top nor jefferson bottom recognized the full extent of their differences.
but as events forced the federal government to make decisions on economic and foreign affairs the two secretaries increasingly came into open conflict.
hamilton and jefferson insisted they were working for the creation of a strong prosperous republic one in which commerce would play an important role.
hamilton was publicly accused of being a secret monarchist but he never repudiated the ideals of the american revolution.
rather than being spokespersons for competing ideologies hamilton and jefferson were different kinds of republicans who during the 1790s attempted as best they could to cope with unprecedented political challenges.
however much these two men had in common serious differences emerged.
washingtons secretaries disagreed on precisely how the united states should fulfill its destiny.
as head of the treasury department hamilton urged his fellow citizens to think in terms of bold commercial development of farms and factories embedded within a complex financial network that would reduce the nations reliance on foreign trade.
because great britain had already established an elaborate system of banking and credit the secretary looked to that country for economic models that might be reproduced on this side of the atlantic.
hamilton also voiced concerns about the role of the people in shaping public policy.
his view of human nature caused him to fear democratic excess.
he assumed that in a republican society the gravest threat to political stability was anarchy rather than monarchy.
the truth he claimed unquestionably is that the only path to a subversion of the republican system of the country is by flattering the prejudices of the people and exciting their jealousies and apprehensions to throw affairs into confusion and bring on civil commotion the best hope for the survival of the republic hamilton believed lay with the countrys monied classes.
if the wealthiest people could be persuaded that their economic self interest could be advanced or at least made less insecure by the central government then they would work to strengthen it and by so doing bring a greater measure of prosperity to the common people.
from hamiltons perspective there was no conflict between private greed and public good one was the source of the other.
on almost every detail jefferson challenged hamiltons analysis.
the secretary of state assumed that the strength of the american economy lay not in its industrial potential but in its agricultural productivity.
the immensity of land represented the countrys major economic resource.
contrary to the claims of some critics jefferson did not advocate agrarian self sufficiency or look back nostalgically to a golden age dominated by simple yeomen.
he recognized the necessity of change and while he thought that persons who worked the soil were more responsible citizens than were those who labored in factories for wages he encouraged the nations farmers to participate in an expanding international market.
americans could exchange raw materials for finer manufactures than they are able to execute themselves unlike hamilton jefferson expressed faith in the ability of the american people to shape policy.
throughout this troubled decade even when the very survival of constitutional government seemed in doubt jefferson maintained a boundless optimism in the judgment of the common folk.
he instinctively trusted the people feared that uncontrolled government power might destroy their liberties and insisted public officials follow the letter of the constitution a frame of government he described as the wisest ever presented to men the greatest threat to the young republic he argued came from the corrupt activities of pseudoaristocrats persons who placed the protection of property and civil order above the preservation of liberty to tie the nations future to the selfish interests of a privileged class bankers manufacturers and speculators seemed cynical as well as dangerous.
he despised speculators who encouraged the hamiltons plan for prosperity and security rage of getting rich in a day since such gaming activities inevitably promoted the kinds of public vice that threatened republican government.
to mortgage the future of the common people by creating a large national debt struck jefferson as particularly insane.
but the responsibility for shaping the economy of the new nation fell mainly to alexander hamilton as the first secretary of the treasury.
hamiltons plan for prosperity and security why did many americans oppose alexander hamiltons blueprint for national prosperity.
the unsettled state of the nations finances presented the new government with a staggering challenge.
in august 1789 the house of representatives announced that adequate provision for the support of public credit is a matter of high importance to the national honor and prosperity however pressing the problem appeared no one was prepared to advance a solution and the house asked the secretary of the treasury to make suggestions.
congress may have received more than it bargained for.
hamilton threw himself into the task.
he read deeply in abstruse economic literature.
he even developed a questionnaire designed to find out how the u s economy really worked and sent it to scores of commercial and political leaders throughout the country.
but when hamiltons three major reports on public credit on banking and on manufacturers were complete they bore the unmistakable stamp of his own creative genius.
the secretary synthesized a vast amount of information into an economic blueprint so complex so innovative that even his allies were slightly baffled.
theodore sedgwick a congressman who supported hamiltons program explained weakly that the secretarys ideas were difficult to understand.
while we are in our infancy in the knowledge of finance certainly washington never fully grasped the subtleties of hamiltons plan.
the secretary presented his report on the public credit to congress on january 14 1790.
his research revealed that the nations outstanding debt stood at approximately 54 million.
this sum represented various obligations that the u s government had incurred during the revolutionary war.
in addition to foreign loans the figure included loan certificates the government had issued to its own citizens and soldiers.
but that was not all.
the states still owed creditors approximately 25 million.
during the 1780s americans desperate for cash had been forced to sell government certificates to speculators at greatly discounted prices and it was estimated that approximately 40 million of the nations debt was owed to twenty thousand people only 20 percent of whom were the original creditors.
funding and assumption hamiltons report on the public credit contained two major recommendations covering the areas of funding and assumption.
first under his plan the united states promised to fund its foreign and domestic obligations at full face value.
current holders of loan certificates whoever they were and no matter how they obtained them could exchange the old certificates for new government bonds bearing a moderate rate of interest.
second the secretary urged the federal government to assume responsibility for paying the remaining state debts.
hamilton reasoned that his credit system would accomplish several desirable goals.
it would significantly reduce the power of the individual states in shaping national economic policy something hamilton regarded as essential in maintaining a strong federal government.
moreover the creation of a fully funded national debt signaled to investors throughout the world that the united states was now solvent that its bonds represented a good risk.
hamilton argued that investment capital which might otherwise flow to europe would remain in this country providing a source of money for commercial and industrial investment.
in short hamilton invited the countrys wealthiest citizens to invest in the future of the united states.
critics claimed that the only people who stood to profit from the scheme were hamiltons friends some of whom sat in congress and who had purchased great numbers of public securities at very low prices.
to hamiltons great surprise madison his friend and collaborator in writing the federalist attacked the funding scheme in the house of representatives.
the virginia congressman agreed that the united states should honor its debts.
he worried however about the citizens and soldiers who because of personal financial hardship had been compelled to sell their certificates at prices far below face value.
why should wealthy speculators now profit from their hardship.
if the government treated the current holders of certificates less generously madison declared then there might be sufficient funds to provide equitable treatment for the distressed patriots.
whatever the moral justification for madisons plan may have been it proved unworkable on the national level.
far too many records had been lost since the revolution for the treasury department to be able to identify all the original holders.
in february 1790 congress soundly defeated madisons proposal.
the assumption portion of hamiltons plan unleashed even greater criticism.
some states had already paid their revolutionary debts and hamiltons program seemed designed to reward certain states massachusetts and south carolina for example simply because they had failed to put their finances in order.
in addition the secretarys opponents in congress became suspicious that assumption was merely a ploy to increase the power and wealth of hamiltons immediate friends.
the secretarys people scarce disguise their design observed william maclay a crusty scots irish senator from pennsylvania which is to create a mass of debts which will justify them in seizing all the sources of government no doubt maclay and others expressed genuine fears.
some of those who protested however were simply looking after their own speculative schemes.
these men had contracted to purchase huge tracts of vacant western lands from the state and federal governments.
they anticipated that when settlers finally arrived in these areas the price of land would skyrocket.
in the meantime the speculators had paid for the land with revolutionary certificates often purchased on the open market at fifteen cents on the dollar.
this meant that one could obtain 1 000 acres for only 150.
hamiltons assumption proposal threatened to destroy these lucrative transactions by cutting off the supply of cut rate securities.
on april 12 a rebellious house led by madison defeated assumption.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 the victory was short lived.
hamilton and congressional supporters resorted to legislative horse trading to revive his foundering program.
in exchange for locating the new federal capital on the potomac river a move that would stimulate the depressed economy of northern virginia several key congressmen who shared madisons political philosophy changed their votes on assumption.
hamilton may also have offered to give the state of virginia more federal money than it actually deserved.
whatever the details of these negotiations may have been in august washington signed assumption and funding into law.
the first element of hamiltons design was now securely in place.
interpreting the constitution the bank controversy the persistent hamilton submitted his second report to congress in january 1791.
he proposed that the u s government charter a national bank.
this privately owned institution would be funded in part by the federal government.
indeed since the bank of the united states would own millions of dollars of new u s bonds its financial stability would be tied directly to the strength of the federal government and of course to the success of hamiltons program.
the secretary of the treasury argued that a growing financial community required a central bank to facilitate increasingly complex commercial transactions.
the institution not only would serve as the main depository of the u s government but also would issue currency acceptable in payment of federal taxes.
because of that guarantee the money would maintain its value while in circulation.
madison and others in congress immediately raised a howl of protest.
while they were not oblivious to the many important services a national bank might provide for a growing country they suspected that banks especially those modeled on british institutions might perpetuate a large monied interest in the united states.
and how was one to interpret the constitution.
that document said nothing specifically about chartering financial corporations and critics warned that if hamilton and his supporters were allowed to stretch fundamental law on this occasion they could not be held back in the future.
popular liberties would be at the mercy of whomever happened to be in office.
to take a single step jefferson warned beyond the boundaries thus specifically drawn around the powers of congress is to take possession of a boundless field of power no longer susceptible to definition on this issue hamilton stubbornly refused to compromise announcing angrily this is the first symptom of a spirit which must either be killed or will kill the constitution of the united states this intense controversy involving his closest advisers worried the president.
even though the bank bill passed congress february 8 washington seriously considered vetoing the legislation on constitutional grounds.
before doing so however he requested written opinions from the members of his cabinet.
jeffersons rambling wholly predictable attack on the bank of the united states was not one of his more persuasive performances.
by contrast in only a few days hamilton prepared a masterful essay titled defense of the constitutionality of the bank he assured the president that article i section 8 of the constitution the congress shall have power.
to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers justified issuing charters to national banks.
the foregoing powers on which hamilton placed so much weight were taxation regulation of commerce and making war.
he boldly articulated a doctrine of implied powers an interpretation of the constitution that neither madison nor jefferson had anticipated.
hamiltons loose construction carried the day and on february 25 1791 washington signed the bank act into law.
hamilton triumphed in congress but the general public looked on his actions with growing fear and hostility.
many persons associated huge national debts and privileged banks with the decay of public virtue.
men of jeffersons temperament believed that great britain a country hamilton held in high regard had compromised the purity of its ancient constitution by allowing speculators to worm their way into positions of political power.
hamilton seemed intent on reproducing this corrupt system in the united states.
when news of his proposal to fund the national debt at full face value leaked out for example urban speculators rushed to rural areas where they purchased loan certificates from unsuspecting citizens at bargain prices.
to backcountry farmers making money without actually engaging in physical labor appeared immoral unrepublican and certainly un american.
when the greed of a former treasury department official led to several serious bankruptcies in 1792 ordinary citizens began to listen more closely to what madison jefferson and their associates were saying about growing corruption in high places.
setback for hamilton in his third major report report on manufactures submitted to congress in december 1791 hamilton revealed the final details of his grand design for the economic future of the united states.
this lengthy document suggested ways by which the federal government might stimulate manufacturing.
if the country wanted to free itself from dependence on european imports hamilton observed then it had to develop its own industry textile mills for example.
without direct government intervention however the process would take decades.
americans would continue to invest in agriculture.
but according to the secretary of the treasury protective tariffs and special industrial bounties would greatly accelerate the growth of a balanced economy and with proper planning the united states would soon hold its own with england and france.
in congress the battle lines were clearly drawn.
hamiltons opponents not yet a disciplined party but a loose coalition of men who shared madisons and jeffersons misgivings about the secretarys program ignored his economic arguments.
instead they engaged him on moral and political grounds.
madison railed against the dangers of consolidation a process that threatened to concentrate all power in the federal government leaving the states defenseless.
under the confederation of course madison had stood with the nationalists against the advocates of extreme states rights.
his disagreements with hamilton over economic policy coupled with the necessity of pleasing the voters of his virginia congressional district every two years transformed madison into a spokesman for the states echoing the substance of antifederalist arguments he had once hotly rejected see chapter 6.
jefferson attacked the report on manufactures from a different angle.
he assumed largely because he had been horrified by charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs europes urban poverty that cities breed vice.
the government jefferson argued should do nothing to promote their development.
he believed that hamiltons proposal guaranteed that american workers would leave the countryside and crowd into urban centers.
i think our government will remain virtuous for many centuries jefferson explained as long as they the people are chiefly agricultural.
when they get piled upon one another in large cities as in europe they will become corrupt as in europe and southern congressmen saw tariffs and bounties as vehicles for enriching hamiltons northern friends at the planters expense.
the recommendations in the report on manufactures were soundly defeated in the house of representatives.
charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs how did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s.
during washingtons second term 1793 1797 war in europe dramatically thrust foreign affairs into the forefront of american life.
the impact of this development on the conduct of domestic politics was devastating.
officials who had formerly disagreed on economic policy now began to identify their interests with either britain or france europes most powerful nations.
differences of political opinion however trivial were suddenly cited as evidence that one group or the other had entered into treasonous correspondence with external enemies eager to compromise the independence and prosperity of the united states.
as jefferson observed during the troubled summer of 1793 european conflict kindled and brought forward the two parties with an ardour which our own interests merely could never excite the spirit of nationalism even spilled over into scientific debate.
the normally dispassionate jefferson reacted very badly when a french writer claimed among other things that north american animals were smaller than those found in europe.
see the feature essay defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment pp.
formal political organizations the federalists and republicans were born in this poisonous atmosphere.
the clash between the groups developed over how best to preserve the new republic.
the republicans jeffersonians advocated states rights strict interpretation of the constitution friendship with france and vigilance against the avaricious monopolizing spirit of commerce and commercial men the federalists urged a strong national government central economic planning closer ties with great britain and maintenance of public order even if that meant calling out federal troops.
the peril of neutrality great britain treated the united states with arrogance.
the colonists had defeated the redcoats on land but on the high seas the americans were no match for the british navy the strongest in the world.
indeed the young republic could not even compel its old adversary to comply with the treaty of 1783 in which the british had agreed to vacate military posts in the northwest territory.
in 1794 approximately a thousand british soldiers still occupied american land an obstruction that governor george clinton of new york claimed had excluded u s citizens from a very valuable trade to which their situation would naturally have invited them moreover even though 75 percent of american imports came from great britain that country refused to grant the united states full commercial reciprocity.
among other provocations it barred american shipping from the lucrative west indian trade.
france presented a very different challenge.
in may 1789 louis xvi desperate for revenue authorized a meeting of a representative assembly known as the estates general.
by so doing the king unleashed explosive revolutionary forces that toppled the monarchy and cost him his life january 1793.
the men who seized power and they came and went rapidly were militant republicans ideologues eager to liberate all europe from feudal institutions.
in the early years of the french revolution france drew on the american experience and thomas paine and the marquis de lafayette enjoyed great popularity.
but the french found they could not stop the violence of revolution.
constitutional reform turned into bloody purges and one radical group the jacobins guillotined thousands of people who were suspected of monarchist sympathies during the so called reign of terror october 1793 july 1794.
these horrific events left americans confused.
while those who shared jeffersons views cheered the spread of republicanism others who sided with hamilton condemned french expansionism and political excess.
in the face of growing international tension neutrality seemed the most prudent course for the united states.
but that policy was easier for a weak country to proclaim than to defend.
in february 1793 france declared war on great britain what the leaders of revolutionary france called the war of all peoples against all kings and these powerful european rivals immediately challenged the official american position on shipping free ships make free goods meaning that belligerents should not interfere with the shipping of neutral carriers.
to make matters worse no one was certain whether the franco american treaties of 1778 see chapter 5 legally bound the united states to support its old ally against great britain.
both hamilton and jefferson wanted to avoid war.
the secretary of state however believed that nations desiring american goods should be forced to honor american neutrality and therefore that if britain treated the united states as a colonial possession if the royal navy stopped american ships on the high seas and forced seamen to serve the king in other words if it impressed american sailors then the united states should award france special commercial advantages.
hamilton thought jeffersons scheme insane.
he pointed out that britain possessed the largest navy in the world and was not likely to be coerced by american threats.
the united states he counseled should appease the former mother country even if that meant swallowing national pride.
a newly appointed french minister to the united states edmond gent precipitated the first major diplomatic crisis.
this incompetent young man arrived in charleston south carolina in april 1793.
he found considerable popular enthusiasm for the french revolution and buoyed by this reception he authorized privately owned american vessels to seize british ships in the name chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 read the document proclamation of neutrality 1793 the execution of louis xvi by french revolutionaries served to deepen the growing political division in america.
although they deplored the excesses of the reign of terror jeffersonian republicans continued to support the french people.
federalists feared that the violence and lawlessness would spread to the united states.
such actions clearly violated u s neutrality and invited british retaliation.
when u s government officials warned gent to desist he threatened to take his appeal directly to the american people who presumably loved france more than did members of washingtons administration.
this confrontation particularly embarrassed jefferson the most outspoken pro french member of the cabinet.
he described gent as hot headed all imagination no judgment passionate disrespectful and even indecent towards the president washington did not wait to discover whether the treaties of 1778 were still in force.
before he had formally received the impudent french minister the president issued a proclamation of neutrality april 22.
ironically after gent learned that the jacobins intended to cut off his head if he returned to france he requested asylum married into an extremely wealthy family and spent the remainder of his life in new york.
jays treaty sparks domestic unrest great britain failed to take advantage of gents insolence.
instead it pushed the united states to the brink of war.
british forts in the northwest territory remained a constant source of tension.
in june 1793 a new element was added.
the london government blockaded french ports to neutral shipping and in november its navy captured several hundred american vessels trading in the french west indies.
the british had not even bothered to give the united states advance warning of a change in policy.
outraged members of congress especially those who identified with jefferson and madison demanded retaliation an embargo a stoppage of debt payment even war.
before this rhetoric produced armed struggle washington made one final effort to preserve peace.
in may 1794 he sent chief justice john jay to london to negotiate a formidable list of grievances.
the effort resulted in a political humiliation known simply as jays treaty.
jays main objectives were removal of the british forts on u s territory payment for ships taken in the west indies improved commercial relations and acceptance of the american definition of neutral rights.
jeffersons supporters by now openly called the republican interest anticipated a treaty favorable to the united states.
after all they explained the war with france had not gone well for great britain and the british people were surely desperate for american foodstuffs.
even before jay departed however his mission stood charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs little chance of success.
hamilton anxious as ever to placate the british had already secretly informed british officials that the united states would compromise on most issues.
not surprisingly when jay reached london he encountered polite but firm resistance.
the chief justice did persuade the british to abandon their frontier posts and to allow small american ships to trade in the british west indies but they rejected out of hand the u s position on neutral rights.
the royal navy would continue to search american vessels on the high seas for contraband and to impress sailors suspected of being british citizens.
moreover there would be no compensation for the ships seized in 1793 until the americans paid british merchants for debts contracted before the revolution.
and to the particular annoyance of southerners not a word was said about the slaves the british army had carried off at the conclusion of the war.
while jay salvaged the peace he appeared to have betrayed the national interest.
news of jays treaty perhaps more correctly called hamiltons treaty produced an angry outcry in the nations capital.
even washington was apprehensive.
he submitted the document to the senate without recommending ratification a sign that the president was not entirely happy with the results of jays mission.
after an extremely bitter debate the upper house controlled by federalists accepted a revised version of the treaty june 1795.
the vote was 20 to 10 a bare two thirds majority.
the details of the jay agreement soon leaked to the press.
this was an important moment in american political history.
the popular journals sparked a firestorm of objection.
throughout the country people who had generally been apathetic about national politics were swept up in a wave of protest.
urban mobs condemned jays alleged sellout rural settlers burned him in effigy.
jay jokingly told friends he could find his way across the country simply by following the light of those fires.
southerners announced they would not pay prerevolutionary debts to british merchants.
the virginia legislature proposed a constitutional amendment reducing the senates role in the treaty making process.
as fisher ames a federalist congressman noted darkly these little whirlwinds of dry leaves and dirt portend a hurricane his prediction proved accurate.
the storm broke in the house of representatives.
republican congressmen led by madison thought they could stop jays treaty by refusing to appropriate funds for its implementation.
as part of their plan they demanded that washington show the house state papers relating to jays mission.
the challenge raised complex issues of constitutional law.
the house for example was claiming a voice in treaty ratification a power explicitly reserved to the senate.
second there was the question of executive secrecy in the interest of national security.
could the president withhold information from the public.
according to washington as well as all subsequent presidents the answer was yes.
he took the occasion to lecture the rebellious representatives that the nature of foreign negotiations requires caution and their success must often depend on secrecy the president still had a trump card to play.
he raised the possibility that the house was really contemplating his impeachment.
such an action was of course unthinkable.
even criticizing washington in public was politically dangerous and as soon as he redefined the issue before congress petitions supporting the president flooded into the nations capital.
the maryland read the document the jay treaty 1794 john jay 1745 1829 was a successful lawyer and politician from new york.
he served in the continental congress during the revolution co authored the federalist papers with james madison and alexander hamilton and later became the first chief justice of the u s supreme court.
legislature for example declared its unabated reliance on the integrity judgment and patriotism of the president of the united states a statement that clearly called into question the patriotism of certain republican congressmen.
the federalists won a stunning tactical victory over the opposition.
had a less popular man than washington occupied the presidency however they would not have fared so well.
the division between the two parties was beyond repair.
the republicans labeled the federalists the british party the federalists believed that the republicans were in league with the french.
by the time jays treaty became law june 14 1795 the two giants of washingtons first cabinet had retired.
late in 1793 jefferson returned to his virginia plantation monticello where despite his separation from day to day political affairs he remained the chief spokesman for the republican party.
his rival hamilton left the treasury in january 1795 to practice law in new york city.
he maintained close ties with important federalist officials and even more than jefferson hamilton concerned himself with the details of party organization.
complete the assignment defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment on myhistorylab feature essay n ationalism promotes patriotism.
however these expressions of pride can turn malicious.
the physical environment of a country can be seen as giving the people who live there special attributes.
when claims of superiority seem to have this sort of seemingly scientific justification the rhetoric of nationalism can become dangerous often outright racist.
such a situation developed during the earliest years of the american republic.
even before the revolution respected scientists such as benjamin franklin resented disparaging remarks about american inferiority.
europeans accepted as fact the notion that new world animals and humans were smaller slower and less clever than those found in the old world.
franklin dismissed the theory as nonsense and at a dinner party in paris he took the opportunity to demonstrate that if size really mattered then the americans were bigger.
when the abbe raynal a french naturalist announced that everything american was substandard compared to european experience franklin challenged his host to a test.
all the americans at the table stood so did the french.
franklin noted with satisfaction that the americans had the finest stature and form raynal he observed was a mere shrimp although franklin may have won the battle of the dinner table other americans still worried that new world creatures fell short of european standards.
the seeds of doubt could be traced to a widely read scientific treatise entitled histoire naturelle the first volumes of which appeared in 1749.
defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment the author french philosopher comte de buffon argued that the climate of north america produced animals of smaller size than those encountered in the old world.
as evidence buffon cited the absence of elephants lions and other large beasts in the new world.
the only new world creatures that exceeded their old world counterparts in size he declared were the toads and snakes that thrived in north americas abundant swamps.
worse yet buffon asserted that americas climate caused animals found in europe to shrink and diminish when transported to the new world.
for buffon native americans were a case in point.
on the basis of superficial reports of indian weakness buffon announced that conditions in the new world were pernicious to men who are degenerated debilitated and vitiated in a surprising manner in all parts of their organization the implications of this idea were not lost on people such as franklin.
if the american environment sapped the indians of vitality it was only a matter a comparative view of the quadrupeds of europe and america bear red deer beaver otter cow europe lb.
153 7 288 8 18 5 8 9 763 0 america lb.
410 0 273 0 45 0 12 0 2500 0 source adapted from thomas jefferson notes on the state of virginia 1787.
illustration of frogs from comte de buffons histoire naturelle 1749.
buffon declared that in the damp american climate only cold blooded animals such as snakes and frogs flourished and grew larger than their european counterparts.
of time until european settlers who breathed the same air drank the same water and cultivated the same land succumbed to sloth.
one of buffons followers counseled those colonists condemned to live in such an unpromising environment to know how to make themselves happy.
with mediocrity leaving intellectual greatness to those who had wisely remained in the old world.
american anger over buffons theory came to a boil following the american revolution.
the new nation had its honor to defend.
if as the french scientist had maintained the north american climate caused the physical mental and moral abilities of humans to decline then the republican experiment of the young united states seemed destined to fail.
having already asserted that all men are created equal in the declaration of independence thomas jefferson set out to prove american equality through science.
an uncompromising patriot he devoted himself almost entirely to the defense of the fledgling republic spending much of the 1780s poring over accounts of american animals in search of holes in buffons theory.
jefferson published his results in 1785.
in notes on the state of virginia he countered buffon with a lengthy series of tables comparing the weight of european and american animals.
not surprisingly jefferson always tipped the scale in favor of the new world.
while europes puny flying squirrels weighed only 2 2 pounds america could boast of impressive 4 pound squirrels.
american bears were three times fatter than old world bears.
and most telling america had once been the home of huge ice age animals called woolly mammoths.
they looked a lot like elephants and one recently unearthed in kentucky matched the best old world elephants in terms of size.
jefferson did not stop there.
determined to use science to improve the international reputation of the united states jefferson commissioned the governor of new hampshire to kill a giant moose which was then shipped to paris as a present for buffon.
the plan miscarried.
while hunters managed to shoot the moose and drag it from the forest the unrefrigerated voyage to france made for an extremely foul smelling gift.
for jefferson the unlucky mooses decay was a minor problem since by his own reasoning he had put to rest misguided european ideas about animal deficiency in the new american republic.
turning from moose to men jefferson took a step that transformed a harmless squabble over the weight of squirrels into something much more alarming.
using the latest scientific research jefferson claimed that climate had almost no effect on human beings.
instead a persons race determined his or her size vitality and intelligence.
in this scheme european americans and native americans were equal.
and according to jefferson both were vastly superior to africans.
a celebration of national pride had now become a defense of racism.
to make his case jefferson first defended native americans against buffons assertions of climate induced inferiority.
buffon had suggested that indians beardless faces and lack of ardour for their female demonstrated their physical inadequacy in comparison to manly europeans.
in response jefferson outlined the practice of face plucking.
with them it is disgraceful to be hairy he claimed of native americans because many believed it likens them to hogs moreover the indians did not value french style womanizing.
jefferson explained that their soul is wholly bent upon war a trait that procures them glory among men and makes them the admiration of women differences between whites and indians could be attributed not to the environment but to culture.
indeed he saw the two groups as a single race so closely related that he recommended letting them intermix and become one people jefferson rejected completely any notion that africans in america could be part of this one people an unbridgeable biological gulf separated whites and indians groups that jefferson lumped together as homo sapiens europaeus from blacks.
jefferson argued that while europeans and native americans produced fine arts and engaged in brilliant oratory african slaves exhibited no skill in painting or sculpture and never uttered a thought above the level of plain narration with only anecdotal evidence to support his claims jefferson concluded that blacks were inferior to the whites in the endowments of both body and mind according to jefferson the harsh truth was that whether found in africa on carolina rice plantations or on the streets of boston africans were a different species of the same genus they were a separate race unworthy of genuine political and social equality.
during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries american nationalists seized upon jeffersons ideas seeing notes on the state of virginia as a blueprint for a republican society grounded in rational science and dedicated to racial inequality.
in a world still dominated by powerful monarchies and old world cultures americans of all european backgrounds took comfort in being equal to each other and superior to african americans.
in an atmosphere of strident nationalism few were willing to explain differences between whites and blacks as culturally conditioned.
there existed in jeffersons words a real distinction which nature has made white americans were destined by nature to be free while enslaved blacks whose labor formed the backbone of the whites economy must accept their lesser place in the nations future.
jeffersons scientific thinking about race inspired by national insecurity and a frenchmans musing on new world toads promoted a divisiveness in american society that continues to trouble the nation.
questions for discussion 1.
why were americans such as thomas jefferson so defensive about the size of american animals.
what was the relationship between science and racism in jeffersons thinking.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 read the document the treaty of greenville at the treaty of greenville in 1795 negotiators shared this calumet or peace pipe a spiritually symbolic act for native americans.
this superficial recognition of the legitimacy of native american cultures barely disguised the indians crushing loss of sovereignty.
pushing the native americans aside before great britain finally withdrew its troops from the great lakes and northwest territory its military officers encouraged local indian groups the shawnee chippewa and miami to attack settlers and traders from the united states.
the indians who even without british encouragement fully appreciated that the newcomers intended to seize their land won several impressive victories over federal troops in the area that would become western ohio and indiana.
in 1790 general josiah harmar led his soldiers into an ambush.
the following year an army under general arthur st clair suffered more than nine hundred casualties near the wabash river.
but the indians were militarily more vulnerable than they realized for when confronted with a major u s army under the command of general anthony wayne they received no support from their former british allies.
at the battle of fallen timbers august 20 1794 waynes forces crushed indian resistance in the northwest territory and the native peoples were compelled to sign the treaty of greenville formally ceding to the u s government the land that became ohio.
in 1796 the last british soldiers departed for canada.
shrewd negotiations mixed with pure luck helped secure the nations southwestern frontier.
for complex reasons having to do with the state of european diplomacy spanish officials in 1795 encouraged the u s representative in madrid to discuss the navigation of the mississippi river.
before this initiative the spanish government not only had closed the river to american commerce but also had incited the indians of the region to harass settlers from the united states see chapter 6.
relations between the two countries probably would have deteriorated further had the united states not signed jays treaty.
the spanish assumed quite erroneously that great britain and the united states had formed an alliance to strip spain of its north american possessions.
to avoid this imagined disaster officials in madrid offered the american envoy thomas pinckney extraordinary concessions the opening of the mississippi the right to deposit goods in new orleans without paying duties a secure southern boundary on the 31st parallel a line roughly parallel to the northern boundary of florida and running west to the mississippi and a promise to stay out of indian affairs.
an amazed pinckney signed the treaty of san lorenzo also called pinckneys treaty on october 27 1795 and in march the senate ratified the document without a single dissenting vote.
pinckney who came from a prominent south carolina family instantly became the hero of the federalist party.
a new revolution in the americas events in the french colony of saint domingue during the 1790s presented the washington administration with a particularly difficult foreign policy question.
located in the eastern portion of the caribbean island of hispaniola saint dominique was home to a large slave population of african descent.
in fact these slaves far outnumbered the white french living in the colony.
when these slaves rebelled against their masters in 1791 both sides called upon the united states for assistance.
washington father of american liberty but also himself a slave owner had to decide whether to support the rebels in their bid for liberty or the slave masters in their battle to regain control.
american popular opinion especially in the south favored the white french population.
most white americans were uncomfortable with the idea of an independent republic governed by free black politicians.
worse yet a successful slave rebellion in the caribbean might encourage slaves in the united states to insurrection.
thomas jefferson called the expulsion of whites from saint domingue a tragedy and warned that if something was not done to prevent the contagion of slave rebellion from spreading then we shall be the murderers of our own children washington ultimately decided to support the slave owners of saint domingue.
his government loaned over 700 000 to the french planters trying to restore their authority.
american merchants supplied the french with arms and supplies but also supplied the rebels.
although the southern colonies were spared any large scale insurrections slave owners continued to worry throughout the 1790s.
the united states became home to an influx of white french refugees.
in the end the rebels succeeded in defeating their french masters.
they also drove off invasions by the spanish and british who were at war with revolutionary france and hoped to take advantage of the turmoil to seize the colony.
in 1804 the freedom fighters declared the independence of the republic of haiti the second independent republic founded in the americas after the united states.
popular political culture read the document s n j md.
r essee r spanish claim line 1785 s c r pa ille reenv y of g treat line pittsburgh territory va cincinnati ga n y e eri ke la.
ten n orth 31 n de latitu flint r r st clair s defeat nov 4 1791 northwest.
n c tenn statehood 1796 ho chatta och.
ee r ns as atlantic ocean ky mi yazoo ssissi p ark a del.
va r ft detroit ft miami br.
fallen timbers aug 20 1794 r ee um harmar s defeat a m oct 22 1790.
i spanish louisiana r i upper canada major indian battles conn pa ito ry io oh major indian battles ft niagara io r p da na a c ft miami built 1794 te rr dutchman s point vt n h ft oswego mass.
n y u sissipp t es w th mis r no ft detroit maine part of mass.
pointe au fer oswegatchie ft michilimackinac r pe ca oh ke er wa bas hr la w lo n l ad aw a re nc er.
at the treaty of san lorenzo pickneys treaty 1796 st gre ky 100 miles 50 100 kilometers apalachicola r spanish florida gulf of mexico maximum spanish claim 1784 line of pinckney s treaty 1795 spanish held forts british held forts 0 100 200 kilometers conquest of the west 200 miles withdrawal of the british defeat of native americans and negotiations with spain secured the nations frontiers.
popular political culture why was it hard for americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity.
more than any other event during washingtons administration ratification of jays treaty generated intense political strife.
even as members of congress voted as republicans or federalists they condemned the rising partisan spirit as a grave threat to the stability of the united states.
popular writers equated party with faction and faction with conspiracy to overthrow legitimate authority party conflict also suggested that americans had lost the sense of common purpose that had united them during the revolution.
contemporaries did not appreciate the beneficial role that parties could play by presenting alternative solutions to foreign and domestic problems.
organized opposition smacked of disloyalty and therefore had to be eliminated by any means fair or foul.
these intellectual currents coupled with the existence of two parties created an atmosphere that bred suspicion.
in the name of national unity federalists as well as republicans advocated the destruction of political adversaries.
informing the public news and politics more than any other single element newspapers transformed the political culture of the united states.
americans were voracious readers.
in 1789 a foreign visitor observed the common people here are on a footing in point of literature with the middle ranks of europe.
they all read and write and understand arithmetic almost every little town now furnishes a circulating library a rapidly expanding number of newspapers appealed to this large literate audience.
john fenno established the gazette of the united states 1789 a journal that supported hamiltons political philosophy.
the republicans responded in october 1790 with philip freneaus influential national gazette.
while the format of the publications was similar to that of the colonial papers their tone was quite different.
these fiercely partisan journals presented rumor chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 and opinion as fact.
public officials were regularly dragged through the rhetorical mud.
jefferson for example was accused of cowardice hamilton vilified as an adulterer.
as party competition became more bitter editors showed less restraint.
one republican paper even suggested that george washington had been a british agent during the revolution.
no wonder fisher ames announced in 1801 the newspapers are an overmatch for any government this decade also witnessed the birth of political clubs.
these democratic or republican associations as they were called first appeared in 1793 and were modeled on the political debating societies that sprang up in france during the early years of the french revolution.
perhaps because of the french connection federalists assumed that the american clubs represented the interests of the republican party.
their purpose was clearly political indoctrination.
the philadelphia society announced it would cultivate a just knowledge of rational liberty a democratic club in new york city asked each member to declare himself a firm and steadfast friend of the equal rights of man by 1794 at least twenty four clubs were holding regular meetings.
how many americans actually attended their debates is not known but regardless of the number the clubs obviously complemented the newspapers in providing the common people with highly partisan political information.
whiskey rebellion charges of republican conspiracy political tensions became explosive in 1794.
the federalists convinced themselves that the republicans were actually prepared to employ violence against the u s government.
although the charge was without foundation it took on plausibility in the context of growing party strife.
read the document the crisis developed when a group of farmers living in western pennsylvania protested a federal excise tax on distilled whiskey that congress had originally passed in 1791.
these men did not relish paying any taxes but this tax struck them as particularly unfair.
they made a good deal of money distilling their grain into whiskey and the excise threatened to put them out of business.
largely because the republican governor of pennsylvania refused to suppress the angry farmers washington and other leading federalists assumed that the insurrection represented a direct political challenge.
the president called out fifteen thousand militiamen and accompanied by hamilton he marched against the rebels.
the expedition was an embarrassing fiasco.
the distillers disappeared and predictably enough no one living in the pittsburgh region seemed to know where the troublemakers had gone.
two supposed rebels were convicted of high crimes against the united states one was reportedly a simpleton and the other insane.
washington eventually pardoned both men.
as peace returned to the frontier republicans gained much electoral support from voters the federalists had alienated.
in the national political forum however the whiskey rebellion had just begun.
spokesmen for both parties offered sinister explanations for the seemingly innocuous affair.
washington blamed the republican clubs for promoting civil unrest.
he apparently believed that the opposition party had dispatched french agents to western pennsylvania to undermine the authority of the federal government.
in november 1794 washington informed congress that these self created societies in other words the republican political clubs had inspired a spirit inimical to all order indeed the whiskey rebellion had been fomented by combinations of men who.
have disseminated from an ignorance or perversion of facts suspicions jealousies and accusations of the whole government george washington whiskey rebellion address to congress 1794 tarring and feathering federal officials was one way in which western pennsylvanians protested the tax on whiskey in 1794.
washingtons call for troops to put down the insurrection drew more volunteers than he had been able to raise during most of the revolution.
source north wind picture archives.
the adams presidency the presidents interpretation of this rural tax revolt was no less charitable than the conspiratorial explanation offered by the republicans.
jefferson labeled the entire episode a hamiltonian device to create an army for the purpose of intimidating republicans.
how else could one explain the administrations gross overreaction to a few disgruntled farmers.
an insurrection was announced and proclaimed and armed against jefferson noted but could never be found the response of both parties reveals a pervasive fear of some secret evil design to destroy the republic.
the clubs and newspapers as yet unfamiliar tools for mobilizing public opinion fanned these anxieties convincing many government officials that the first amendment should not be interpreted as protecting political dissent.
washingtons farewell in september 1796 washington published his famed farewell address formally declaring his intention to retire from the presidency.
in the address which was printed in newspapers throughout the country washington warned against all political factions.
written in large part by hamilton who drew on a draft prepared several years earlier by madison the address served narrowly partisan ends.
the product of growing political strife it sought to advance the federalist cause in the forthcoming election.
by waiting until september to announce his retirement washington denied the republicans valuable time to organize an effective campaign.
there was an element of irony in this initiative.
washington had always maintained he stood above party.
while he may have done so in the early years of his presidency events such as the signing of jays treaty and the suppression of the whiskey rebellion transformed him in the eyes of many americans into a spokesman solely for hamiltons federalist party.
washington also spoke to foreign policy matters in the address.
he counseled the united states to avoid making any permanent alliances with distant nations that had no real interest in promoting american security.
this statement guided foreign relations for many years and became the credo of later american isolationists who argued that the united states should steer clear of foreign entanglements.
the adams presidency why were some federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage.
the election of 1796 took place in an atmosphere of mutual distrust.
jefferson soon to be the vice president informed a friend that an anglican and aristocratic party has sprung up whose avowed object is to draw over us the substance as they have already done the forms of british government on their part the federalists were convinced their republican opponents wanted to hand the government over to french radicals.
by modern standards the structures of both political parties were primitive.
leaders of national stature such as madison and hamilton wrote letters encouraging local gentlemen around the country to support a certain candidate but no one attempted to canvass the voters in advance of the election.
during the campaign the federalists sowed the seeds of their eventual destruction.
party stalwarts agreed that john adams should stand against the republican candidate thomas jefferson.
hamilton however could not leave well enough alone.
from his law office in new york city he schemed to deprive adams of the presidency.
his motives were obscure.
he apparently feared that an independentminded adams would be difficult to manipulate.
he was correct.
hamilton exploited an awkward feature of the electoral college.
in accordance with the constitution each elector cast two ballots and the person who gained the most votes became president.
the runner up regardless of party affiliation served as vice president.
ordinarily the federalist electors would have cast one vote for adams and one for thomas pinckney the hero of the negotiations with spain and the partys choice for vice president.
everyone hoped of course there would be no tie.
hamilton secretly urged southern federalists to support only pinckney even if that meant throwing away an electors second vote.
if everything had gone according to plan pinckney would have received more votes than adams but when new englanders loyal to adams heard of hamiltons maneuvering they dropped pinckney.
when the votes were counted adams had 71 jefferson 68 and pinckney 59.
hamiltons treachery not only angered the new president but also heightened tensions within the federalist party.
moreover it forced adams to work with a republican vice president.
adams hoped that he and jefferson could cooperate as they had during the revolution they had served together on the committee that drafted the declaration of independence but partisan pressures soon overwhelmed the presidents good intentions.
jefferson recorded their final attempt at reconciliation.
strolling home one night after dinner jefferson and adams reached a place where our road separated his being down market street mine along fifth and we took leave and he adams never after that.
consulted me as to any measure of the government the election of 1796 candidate j adams jefferson t pinckney burr party federalist republican federalist republican electoral vote the xyz affair and domestic politics foreign affairs immediately occupied adamss full attention.
the french government regarded jays treaty as an affront.
by allowing great britain to define the conditions for neutrality the united states had in effect sided with that nation against the interests of france.
relations between the two countries had steadily deteriorated.
the french refused to receive charles cotesworth pinckney the u s representative in paris.
pierre adet the french minister in philadelphia openly tried to influence the 1796 election in favor of the republicans.
his meddling in domestic politics not only embarrassed jefferson it also offended the american people.
the situation then took a violent turn.
in 1797 french privateers began seizing american ships.
since neither the united states nor france officially declared war the hostilities came to be known as the quasi war.
hamilton and his friends welcomed a popular outpouring of anti french sentiment.
the high federalists as members of chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 hamiltons wing of the party were called counseled the president to prepare for all out war hoping that war would purge the united states of french influence.
adams was not persuaded to escalate the conflict.
he dispatched a special commission in a final attempt to remove the sources of antagonism.
this famous negotiating team consisted of charles pinckney john marshall and elbridge gerry.
they were instructed to obtain compensation for the ships seized by french privateers as well as release from the treaties of 1778.
the commission was shocked by the outrageous treatment it received in france.
instead of dealing directly with talleyrand the minister of foreign relations they met with obscure intermediaries who demanded a huge bribe.
the commission reported that talleyrand would not open negotiations unless he was given 250 000.
in addition the french government expected a loan of millions of dollars.
the americans refused to play this insulting game.
pinckney angrily sputtered no no not a sixpence and with marshall he returned to the united states.
when they arrived home marshall offered his much quoted toast millions for defense but not one cent for tribute diplomatic humiliation set off a domestic political explosion.
when adams presented the commissions official correspondence before congress the names of talleyrands lackeys were labeled x y and z the federalists burst out with a war cry.
at last they would be able to even old scores with the republicans.
in april 1798 a federalist newspaper in new york city announced ominously that any american who refused to censure france must have a soul black enough to be fit for treasons strategems and spoils rumors of conspiracy referred to as the xyz affair spread throughout the country.
personal friendships between republicans and federalists were shattered.
jefferson described the tense political atmosphere in a letter to an old colleague you and i have formerly seen warm debates and high political passions.
but gentlemen of different politics would then speak to each other and separate the business of the senate from that of society.
it is not so now.
men who have been intimate all their lives cross the streets to avoid meeting and turn their heads another way lest they should be obliged to touch their hats he would do so only on condition that adams appoint hamilton as second in command.
this demand placed the president in a terrible dilemma.
several revolutionary veterans henry knox for example outranked hamilton.
moreover the former secretary of the treasury had consistently undermined adamss authority and to give hamilton a position of real power in the government seemed awkward at best.
when washington insisted however adams was forced to support hamilton.
the chief of the high federalists threw himself into the task of recruiting and supplying the troops.
no detail escaped his attention.
he and secretary of war mchenry made certain that in this political army only loyal federalists received commissions.
they even denied adamss son in law a post.
the entire enterprise took on an air of unreality.
hamilton longed for military glory and he may have contemplated attacking spains latin american colonies.
his driving obsession however was the restoration of political order.
no doubt he agreed with a federalist senator from connecticut who predicted that the republicans never will yield till violence is introduced we must have a partial civil war.
and the bayonet must convince some who are beyond the reach of other arguments hamilton should not have treated adams with such open contempt.
after all the massachusetts statesman was still the president and without presidential cooperation hamilton could not fulfill his grand military ambitions.
yet whenever pressing questions concerning the army arose adams was nowhere to be found.
he let commissions lie on his desk unsigned he took overlong vacations to new england.
he made it quite clear his first love was the navy.
in may 1798 the president persuaded congress to establish the navy department.
for this new cabinet position he selected benjamin stoddert a person who did not take orders from hamilton.
moreover adams further infuriated the high federalists by refusing to ask congress for a formal declaration of war.
when they pressed him adams threatened to resign making jefferson president.
as the weeks passed the american people increasingly regarded the idle army as an expensive extravagance.
crushing political dissent silencing political opposition the alien and sedition acts in the spring of 1798 high federalists assumed that it was just a matter of time until adams asked congress for a formal declaration of war.
in the meantime they pushed for a general rearmament new fighting ships additional harbor fortifications and most important a greatly expanded u s army.
about the need for land forces adams remained understandably skeptical.
he saw no likelihood of french invasion.
the president missed the political point.
the army the federalists wanted was intended not to thwart french aggression but to stifle internal opposition.
indeed militant federalists used the xyz affair as the occasion to institute what jefferson termed the reign of witches the threat to the republicans was not simply a figment of the vice presidents overwrought imagination.
when theodore sedgwick now a federalist senator from massachusetts first learned of the commissions failure he observed in words that capture the high federalists vindictiveness it will afford a glorious opportunity to destroy faction.
improve it during the summer of 1798 a provisional army gradually came into existence.
george washington agreed to lead the troops but the federalists did not rely solely on the army to crush political dissent.
during the summer of 1798 the partys majority in congress passed a group of bills known collectively as the alien and sedition acts.
this legislation authorized the use of federal courts and the powers of the presidency to silence the republicans.
the acts were born of fear and vindictiveness and in their efforts to punish the followers of jefferson the federalists created the nations first major crisis over civil liberties.
congress drew up three separate alien acts.
the first the alien enemies law vested the president with extraordinary wartime powers.
on his own authority he could detain or deport citizens of nations with which the united states was at war and who behaved in a manner he thought suspicious.
since adams refused to ask for a declaration of war this legislation never went into effect.
a second act the alien law empowered the president to expel any foreigner from the united states simply by executive decree.
congress limited the acts to two years and while adams did not attempt to enforce them the mere threat of arrest caused some frenchmen to flee the country.
the third act the naturalization law was the most flagrantly political of the adams presidency read the document the alien and sedition acts 1798 created martyrs the actions of the administration persuaded republicans that the survival of free government was at stake.
time was running out.
there is no event jefferson warned.
however atrocious which may not be expected kentucky and virginia resolutions in the early years of the republic political dissent sometimes escalated to physical violence.
this fistfight took place on the floor of congress february 15 1798.
the combatants are republican matthew lyon and federalist roger griswold.
the act established a fourteen year probationary period before foreigners could apply for full u s citizenship.
federalists recognized that recent immigrants especially the irish tended to vote republican.
the naturalization law therefore was designed to keep hordes of wild irishmen away from the polls for as long as possible.
the sedition law struck at the heart of free political exchange.
it defined criticism of the u s government as criminal libel citizens found guilty by a jury were subject to fines and imprisonment.
congress entrusted enforcement of the act to the federal courts.
republicans were justly worried that the sedition law undermined rights guaranteed by the first amendment.
when they protested however the high federalists dismissed their complaints.
the constitution they declared did not condone the most groundless and malignant lies striking at the safety and existence of the nation they were determined to shut down the opposition press and were willing to give the government what seemed almost dictatorial powers to achieve that end.
the jeffersonians also expressed concern over the federal judiciarys expanded role in punishing sedition.
they believed such matters were best left to state officials.
americans living in widely scattered regions of the country soon witnessed political repression firsthand.
district courts staffed by federalist appointees indicted seventeen people for criticizing the government.
several cases were absurd.
in newark new jersey for example a drunkard staggered out of a tavern to watch a sixteen gun salute fired in honor of president adams.
when the man expressed the hope a cannonball might lodge in adamss ample posterior he was arrested.
no wonder a new york city journal declared that joking may be very dangerous even to a free country the federal courts had become political tools.
while the fumbling efforts at enforcement of the sedition law did not silence opposition indeed they sparked even greater criticism and by the fall of 1798 jefferson and madison were convinced that the federalists envisioned the creation of a police state.
according to madison the sedition law ought to produce universal alarm it threatened the free communication of ideas that he deemed the only effectual guardian of every other right some extreme republicans such as john taylor of virginia recommended secession from the union others advocated armed resistance.
but jefferson wisely counseled against such extreme strategies.
this is not the kind of opposition the american people will permit he reminded his desperate supporters.
the last best hope for american freedom lay in the state legislatures.
as the crisis deepened jefferson and madison drafted separate protests known as the kentucky and virginia resolutions.
both statements vigorously defended the right of individual state assemblies to interpret the constitutionality of federal law.
jefferson wrote the kentucky resolutions in november 1798 and in an outburst of partisan anger he flirted with a doctrine of nullification as dangerous to the survival of the united states as anything advanced by hamilton and his high federalist friends.
in the kentucky resolutions jefferson described the federal union as a compact.
the states transferred certain explicit powers to the national government but in his opinion they retained full authority over all matters not specifically mentioned in the constitution.
jefferson rejected hamiltons broad interpretation of the general welfare clause.
every state jefferson argued has a natural right in cases not within the compact.
to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits carried to an extreme this logic could have led to the breakup of the federal government and in 1798 kentucky legislators were not prepared to take such a radical stance.
while they diluted jeffersons prose they fully accepted his belief that the alien and sedition acts were unconstitutional and ought to be repealed.
when madison drafted the virginia resolutions in december he took a stand more temperate than jeffersons.
madison urged the states to defend the rights of the american people but he resisted the notion that a single state legislature could or should have the authority to overthrow federal law.
adamss finest hour in february 1799 president adams belatedly declared his independence from the hamiltonian wing of the federalist party.
throughout the confrontation with france adams had shown little enthusiasm for war.
following the xyz debacle he began to receive informal reports that talleyrand had changed his tune.
the french foreign minister told elbridge gerry and other americans that the bribery episode had been an unfortunate misunderstanding and that if the united states sent new representatives he was prepared to negotiate in good faith.
the high federalists ridiculed this report.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 but adams still brooding over hamiltons appointment to the army decided to throw his own waning prestige behind peace.
in february he suddenly asked the senate to confirm william vans murray as u s representative to france.
the move caught the high federalists totally by surprise.
they sputtered with outrage.
it is solely the presidents act pickering cried and we were all thunderstruck when we heard of it adams was just warming to the task.
in may he fired pickering and mchenry an action he should have taken months earlier.
with peace in the offing american taxpayers complained more and more about the cost of maintaining an unnecessary army.
the president was only too happy to dismantle hamiltons dream.
when the new negotiators oliver ellsworth and william davie joined murray finally arrived in france in november 1799 they discovered that yet another group had come to power there.
this government headed by napoleon bonaparte cooperated in drawing up an agreement known as the convention of mortefontaine.
the french refused to compensate the americans for vessels taken during the quasi war but they did declare the treaties of 1778 null and void.
moreover the convention removed annoying french restrictions on u s commerce.
not only had adams avoided war but he had also created an atmosphere of mutual trust that paved the way for the purchase of the louisiana territory.
the president declared with considerable justification that the second french mission was the most disinterested the most determined and the most successful act of my whole life it also cost him reelection.
the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 what did jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that we are all republicans we are all federalists.
on the eve of the election of 1800 the federalists were fatally divided.
adams enjoyed wide popularity among the federalist rank and file especially in new england but articulate party leaders such as hamilton vowed to punish the president for his betrayal of their militant policies.
hamilton even composed a scathing pamphlet titled letter concerning the public conduct and character of john adams an essay that questioned adamss ability to hold high office.
once again the former secretary of the treasury attempted to rig the voting in the electoral college so that the partys vice presidential candidate charles cotesworth pinckney would receive more ballots than adams and america would be saved from the fangs of jefferson as in 1796 the conspiracy backfired.
the republicans gained 73 votes while the federalists trailed with 65.
to everyones surprise however the election was not resolved in the electoral college.
when the ballots were counted jefferson and his running mate aaron burr had tied.
this accident a republican elector should have thrown away his second vote sent the selection of the next president to the house of representatives a lame duck body still controlled by members of the federalist party.
as the house began its work on february 27 1801 excitement ran high.
each state delegation cast a single vote with nine votes needed for election.
on the first ballot jefferson received the support of eight states burr six and two states divided evenly.
people predicted a quick victory for jefferson but after dozens of ballots the house had still not selected a president.
the scene was now ludicrous observed one witness.
many had sent home for night caps and pillows and wrapped in shawls and greatcoats lay about the floor of the committee rooms or sat sleeping in their seats the drama dragged on for days.
to add to the confusion burr unaccountably refused to withdraw.
contemporaries thought his ambition had overcome his good sense.
the logjam finally broke when leading federalists decided that jefferson whatever his faults would make a more responsible president than would the shifty burr.
even hamilton labeled burr the most dangerous man of the community on the thirty sixth ballot representative james a bayard of delaware announced he no longer supported burr.
this decision coupled with burrs inaction gave jefferson the presidency ten states to four.
the election of 1800 candidate jefferson burr j adams c pinckney party republican republican federalist federalist electoral vote the twelfth amendment ratified in 1804 saved the american people from repeating this potentially dangerous turn of events.
henceforth the electoral college cast separate ballots for president and vice president.
listen to the audio file jefferson and liberty william birchs illustration of the partially constructed united states capitol building in washington d c in 1800.
when jefferson first took office the nations new capital was little more than a swampy and isolated village.
study resources during the final days of his presidency adams appointed as many federalists as possible to the federal bench.
jefferson protested the hasty manner in which these midnight judges were selected.
one of them john marshall became chief justice of the united states a post he held with distinction for thirty four years.
but behind the last minute flurry of activity lay bitterness and disappointment.
adams never forgave hamilton.
no party the federalist president wrote that ever existed knew itself so little or so vainly overrated its own influence and popularity as ours.
none ever understood so ill the causes of its own power or so wantonly destroyed them on the morning of jeffersons inauguration adams slipped away from the capital now located in washington d c unnoticed and unappreciated.
in the address that adams missed jefferson attempted to quiet partisan fears.
we are all republicans we are all federalists the new president declared.
by this statement he did not mean to suggest that party differences were no longer important.
jefferson reminded his audience that whatever the politicians might say the people shared a deep commitment to a federal union based on republican ideals set forth during the american revolution.
indeed the president interpreted the election of 1800 as a revolutionary episode as the fulfillment of the principles of 1776.
the federalists were thoroughly dispirited by the entire experience.
in the end it had not been hamiltons foolish electoral schemes that destroyed the partys chances in 1800.
rather the federalists had lost touch with a majority of the american people.
in office adams and hamilton whatever their own differences may have been betrayed their doubts about popular sovereignty too often and when it came time to marshal broad support to mobilize public opinion in favor of the party of wealth and privilege few responded.
as secretary of war oliver wolcott observed on hearing of jeffersons victory have our party shown that they possess the necessary skill and courage to deserve.
what have they done.
they write private letters.
to each other but they do nothing to give a proper direction to the public mind conclusion danger of political extremism from a broader historical perspective the election of 1800 seems noteworthy for what did not occur.
there were no riots in the streets no attempted coup by military officers no secession from the union nothing except the peaceful transfer of government from the leaders of one political party to those of the opposition.
americans had weathered the alien and sedition acts the meddling by predatory foreign powers in domestic affairs the shrilly partisan rhetoric of hack journalists and now at the start of a new century they were impressed with their own achievement.
as one woman who attended jeffersons inauguration noted the changes of administration which in every government and in every age have most generally been epochs of confusion villainy and bloodshed in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction or disorder but as she well understood indeed as modern americans must constantly relearn extremism in the name of partisan political truth can easily unravel the delicate fabric of representative democracy and leave the republic at the mercy of those who would manipulate the public for private benefit.
study resources take the study plan for chapter 7 democracy and dissent on myhistorylab time line 1787 constitution of the united states signed september 1789 george washington inaugurated april louis xvi of france calls meeting of the estates general may congress approves hamiltons plan for funding and assumption july bank of the united states is chartered february hamiltons report on manufactures rejected by congress december 1793 frances revolutionary government announces a war of all people against all kings february gent affair strains relations with france april washington issues proclamation of neutrality april spread of democratic clubs alarms federalists jefferson resigns as secretary of state december whiskey rebellion put down by u s army july november general anthony wayne defeats indians at the battle of fallen timbers august 1795 hamilton resigns as secretary of the treasury january jays treaty divides the nation june pinckneys treaty with spain is a welcome surprise october 1796 washington publishes farewell address september john adams elected president december 1797 xyz affair poisons u s relations with france october 1798 1800 quasi war with france 1798 congress passes the alien and sedition acts june and july provisional army is formed virginia and kentucky resolutions protest the alien and sedition acts november and december 1799 george washington dies december 1800 convention of mortefontaine is signed with france ending quasi war september 1801 house of representatives elects thomas jefferson president february chapter 7 chapter review chapter review force of public opinion how did the ideas of jeffersonians differ from those of the federalists.
while both jeffersonians and federalists agreed that the new united states would eventually become a great commercial power they differed on how best to achieve the transition from an agrarian economy to an international system based on trade and industry.
the federalists believed that this would require strong national institutions directed by a social elite but jeffersonians distrusted strong financial institutions and put their faith in independent white yeomen farmers who would be free of intrusive government regulations.
p 156 principle and pragmatism establishing a new government charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs how did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s.
the french revolution split american opinion.
republicans cheered it federalists condemned it.
when france declared war on britain 1793 the extremely unpopular jays treaty 1794 with britain provoked heated political debate between its federalist supporters and republican opponents.
disagreements over how to deal with french aggression and insults during the quasi war and the xyz affair drove a wedge between the peace seeking president john adams and the high federalists who called for war and military expansion.
this divide helped jefferson win the election of 1800.
p 163 popular political culture pa n why was george washington unable to overcome division within the new government.
why was it hard for americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity.
despite his huge popularity among all segments of the american population president washington was unable to bridge the differences between the two most brilliant and strong willed members of his cabinet thomas jefferson and alexander hamilton.
these two men fought throughout washingtons presidency over their different visions for the future of the republic.
hamilton imagined an urban commercial nation with a strong central government jefferson championed a simple agrarian republic.
p 158 in the 1790s many americans equated political dissent with disloyalty.
during the whiskey rebellion 1794 both federalists and republicans feared the other party planned to use violence to crush political opposition.
in the 1790s many americans lamented the loss of unity that had tied them together during the struggle for independence.
they feared that partisan politics might lead to a conspiracy to overthrow the legitimately elected government.
p 169 conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton the adams presidency va why did alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of washingtons cabinet.
why were some federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage.
while both hamilton and jefferson insisted they were working to create a strong prosperous republic in which commerce would be important they differed profoundly on how to achieve that goal.
where hamilton was pro british and wanted the american economy to imitate britains reliance on trade and industry jefferson supported the french revolution and believed that americas economic strength lay not in developing an industrial workforce but in increasing the countrys agricultural productivity so that farmers could exchange raw materials for imported manufactured goods.
p 159 many republicans believed that the support of jeffersonian republicans for france had compromised american sovereignty.
hamilton and the high federalists believed that a standing army was necessary to defend against invasion and to silence domestic dissent so that it could not split the republic apart.
they rationalized that the sacrifice of political liberties entailed in the alien and sedition acts were necessary to protect the republic from corrupting foreign particularly french influences.
this was especially important since they anticipated the onset of a war with france.
they used the rationale of national security to justify their pursuit of party power.
p 171 hamiltons plan for prosperity and security the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 fer dutchman s point vt n h oswego mass.
n y why did many americans oppose alexander hamiltons blueprint for national prosperity.
many citizens especially farmers and former soldiers felt that hamiltons plan to fund state loan certificates at full value would reward the immoral unrepublican and un american actions of speculators by allowing them to make money without physical labor.
many also complained that this plan rewarded the financial irresponsibility of states like massachusetts and south carolina.
supporters of jefferson rejected hamiltons vision of the united states as a commercial and manufacturing nation feared that his plan for a bank of the united states would perpetuate a large monied interest and protested that his doctrine of implied powers would lead to the steady growth of governmental power.
p 161 r i conn what did jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that we are all republicans we are all federalists.
jefferson did not mean that party differences had disappeared or were no longer important after the election of 1800.
instead he wished to remind his audience that whatever their political differences the people were united by a deep commitment to a federal union based on republican ideals as set forth in the american revolution.
p 174 study resources key terms and definitions bank of the united states national bank proposed by secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton and established in 1791.
it served as a central depository for the u s government and had the authority to issue currency.
p 162 implied powers powers the constitution did not explicitly grant the federal government but that it could be interpreted to grant.
p 162 french revolution 1789 1799.
p 163 a social and political revolution in france interests and warned americans against political factions and foreign entanglements.
p 171 quasi war undeclared war between the united states and france in the late 1790s.
p 171 xyz affair a diplomatic incident in which american peace commissioners sent to france by president john adams in 1797 were insulted with bribe demands from their french counterparts dubbed x y and z in american newspapers.
the incident heightened war fever against france.
p 172 jays treaty treaty with britain negotiated by chief justice john jay in 1794.
though the british agreed to surrender forts on u s territory the treaty provoked a storm of protest in america.
p 164 alien and sedition acts collective name given to four laws congress passed in 1798 to suppress criticism of the federal government and curb liberties of foreigners living in the united states.
p 172 whiskey rebellion protests in 1794 by western pennsylvania farmers against a federal tax on whiskey.
the uprising was suppressed when president george washington called an army of 15 000 troops to the area.
p 170 kentucky and virginia resolutions statements penned by thomas jefferson and james madison to mobilize opposition to the alien and sedition acts which they argued were unconstitutional.
jeffersons statement the kentucky resolution suggested that states could declare null and void congressional acts they deemed unconstitutional.
p 173 farewell address in this 1796 document president george washington announced his intention not to seek a third term.
he also stressed federalist critical thinking questions 1.
how were the disagreements between hamilton and jefferson a 3.
how important were popular opinion and party politics in poisoning reflection of popular culture in the country during the 1790s.
how did american foreign policy during the 1790s influence the the adams presidency.
how could a constitutional republic justify the passage of highly growth of political dissent.
partisan legislation such as the alien and sedition acts.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 7 on myhistorylab force of public opinion popular political culture watch the video george washington the father of our country p 157 read the document george washington whiskey rebellion address to congress 1794 p 170 conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton the adams presidency read the document alexander hamilton opposing visions for the new nation p 160 charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs read the document p 164 the alien and sedition acts 1798 the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 proclamation of neutrality 1793 listen to the audio file jefferson and liberty p 174 read the document complete the assignment defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment p 166 read the document read the document p 173 the jay treaty 1794 p 165 the treaty of greenville p 168 read the document the treaty of san lorenzo pickneys treaty 1796 p 169 indicates study plan media assignment republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision contents and learning objectives regional identities in a new republic pg.
180 how did the republics growth shape the market economy and relations with native americans.
embarrassments overseas pg.
193 why did the united states find it difficult to avoid military conflict during this period.
the strange war of 1812 pg.
196 why is the war of 1812 sometimes thought of as a second war of independence.
jefferson as president pg.
183 how did practical politics challenge jeffersons political principles.
feature essay barbary pirates and american captives the nations first hostage crisis jeffersons critics pg.
187 how did jeffersonians deal with the difficult problems of party politics and slavery.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 6 the republican experiment a new political morality in 1788 lewis hallam and john henry petitioned the general assembly of pennsylvania to open a theater.
although a 1786 state law banned the performance of stage plays and other disorderly sports many philadelphia leaders favored the request to hold representations in their city.
a committee appointed to study the issue concluded that a theater would contribute to the general refinement of manners and the polish of society some supporters even argued that the sooner the united states had a professional theater the sooner the young republic would escape the foreign yoke of british culture.
the quakers of philadelphia dismissed such claims as out of hand.
they warned that such seminaries of lewdness and irreligion would quickly undermine the virtue of the people they pointed out that no sooner is a playhouse opened than it becomes surrounded with.
brothels since pennsylvania was already suffering from a stagnation of commerce and a scarcity of money unmistakable signs of gods displeasure it seemed unwise to risk divine punishment by encouraging new hot beds of vice such rhetoric did not sit well with other citizens who interpreted the revolutionary experience from an entirely different perspective.
at issue they insisted was not popular morality but state censorship.
if the government silenced the stage then the same authority.
may with equal justice dictate the shape and texture of our dress or the modes and ceremonies of our worship depriving those who wanted to see plays of an opportunity to do so they argued will abridge the natural right of every freeman to dispose of his time and money according to his own tastes and dispositions throughout post revolutionary america everyday matters such as the opening of a new playhouse provoked passionate public debate.
these divisions were symptomatic of a new uncertain political culture struggling to find the proper balance between public morality and private freedom.
during the long fight against although the words slave and slavery do not appear in the u s constitution debate over slavery and the slave trade resulted in a compromise in which both institutions persisted in the new republic.
not everyone was pleased with the compromise.
the library company of philadelphia commissioned this painting liberty displaying the arts and sciences 1792 by samuel jennings.
the broken chain at the feet of the goddess liberty is meant to demonstrate her opposition to slavery.
source the library company of philadelphia.
great britain americans had defended individual rights.
the problem was that the same people also believed that a republic that compromised its virtue could not long preserve liberty and independence.
in 1776 thomas paine had reminded ordinary men and women that the sun never shined on a cause of greater worth.
tis not the concern of a day a year or an age posterity are virtually involved in the contest and will be more or less affected even to the end of time by the proceedings now during the 1780s americans understood their responsibility not only to each other but also to history.
they worried however that they might not successfully meet the challenge.
the dangers were clear.
individual states seemed intent on looking out for local interests rather than the national welfare.
revolutionary leaders such as george washington and james madison concluded that the united states needed a strong central government to protect rights and property.
their creative quest for solutions brought forth a new and enduring constitution.
defining republican culture what were the limits of equality in the republican society of the new united states.
today the term republican no longer possesses the evocative power it did for most eighteenth century americans.
for them it defined not a political party but rather an entire political culture.
after all they had done something that no other people had achieved for a very long time.
they founded a national government without a monarch or aristocracy in other words a genuine republic.
making the new system work was a daunting task.
those americans who read deeply in ancient and renaissance history knew that most republics had failed often within a few years only to be replaced by tyrants who cared not at all what ordinary people thought about the public good.
to preserve their republic from such a fate victorious revolutionaries such as samuel adams chapter 6 the republican experiment recast fundamental political values.
for them republicanism represented more than a particular form of government.
it was a way of life a core ideology an uncompromising commitment to liberty and equality.
adams and his contemporaries certainly believed that creating a new nation state involved more than simply winning independence from great britain.
more than did any other form of government they insisted a republic demanded an exceptionally high degree of public morality.
if american citizens substituted luxury prodigality and profligacy for prudence virtue and economy then their revolution surely would have been in vain.
maintaining popular virtue was crucial to success.
an innocent stage play therefore set off alarm bells.
such foolish gratifications seemed to compromise republican goals.
it is not surprising that when confronted by such temptations adams thundered rome athens and all the cities of renown whence came your fall white americans came out of the revolution with an almost euphoric sense of the nations special destiny.
this expansive outlook encountered among so many ordinary men and women owed much to the spread of protestant evangelicalism.
however skeptical jefferson and franklin may have been about revealed religion the great mass of american people subscribed to an almost utopian vision of the countrys future.
to this new republic god had promised progress and prosperity.
the signs were visible for everyone.
there is not upon the face of the earth a body of people more happy or rising into consequence with more rapid stride one man announced in 1786 than the inhabitants of the united states of america.
population is increasing new houses building new lands clearing new settlements forming and new manufactures establishing with a rapidity beyond conception such experience did not translate easily or smoothly into the creation of a strong central government.
modern americans tend to take for granted the acceptance of the constitution.
its merits seem self evident largely because it has survived for two centuries.
but in the early 1780s no one could have predicted that the constitution as we know it would have been written much less ratified.
it was equally possible that the americans would have supported a weak confederation or perhaps allowed the various states and regions to go their separate ways.
in this uncertain political atmosphere americans divided sharply over the relative importance of liberty and order.
the revolutionary experience had called into question the legitimacy of any form of special privilege.
as one republican informed an aristocratic colleague in the south carolina assembly the day is arrived when goodness and not wealth are the only criterions of greatness a legislative leader in pennsylvania put the point even more bluntly no man has a greater claim of special privilege for his 100 000 than i have for my 5 the man who passionately defended social equality for those of varying economic status however may still have resisted the extension of civil rights to women or blacks.
nevertheless liberty was contagious and americans of all backgrounds began to make new demands on society and government.
for them the revolution had suggested radical alternatives and in many forums throughout the nation especially in the elected state assemblies they insisted on being heard.
in certain quarters the celebration of liberty met with mixed response.
some americans often the very men who had resisted british tyranny worried that the citizens of the new nation were caught up in a wild destructive scramble for material wealth.
democratic excesses seemed to threaten order to endanger the rights of property.
surely a republic could not long survive unless its citizens showed greater self control.
for people concerned about the loss of order the state assemblies appeared to be the greatest source of instability.
popularly elected representatives lacked what men of property defined as real civic virtue an ability to work for the common good rather than their private interests.
working out the tensions between order and liberty between property and equality generated an outpouring of political genius.
at other times in american history persons of extraordinary talent have been drawn to theology commerce or science but during the 1780s the countrys intellectual leaders thomas jefferson james madison alexander hamilton and john adams among others focused their creative energies on the problem of how republicans ought to govern themselves.
living in the shadow of revolution during the 1780s why were americans so sensitive to the dangers of aristocratic display.
revolution changed american society often in ways no one had planned.
this phenomenon is not surprising.
the great revolutions of modern times produced radical transformations in french russian and chinese societies.
by comparison the immediate results of the american revolution appear much tamer less wrenching.
nevertheless national independence compelled people to reevaluate hierarchical social relations that they had taken for granted during the colonial period.
the faltering first steps of independence raised fundamental questions about the meaning of equality in american society some of which remain as pressing today as during the 1780s.
social and political reform following the war americans aggressively ferreted out and with republican fervor denounced any traces of aristocratic pretense.
as colonists they had long resented the claims that certain englishmen made to special privilege simply because of noble birth.
even so committed a republican as george washington had to be reminded that artificial status was contrary to republican principles.
in 1783 he and the officers who had served during the revolution formed the society of the cincinnati a hereditary organization in which membership passed from father to eldest son.
the soldiers meant no harm they simply wanted to maintain old friendships.
but anxious republicans throughout america let out a howl of protest and one south carolina legislator aedanus burke warned that the society intended to create an hereditary peerage.
which would undermine the constitution and destroy civil liberty after an living in the shadow of revolution embarrassed washington called for appropriate reforms of the societys bylaws the cincinnati crisis receded.
the fear of privilege remained however and wealthy americans dropped honorific titles such as esquire lawyers of republican persuasion chided judges who had adopted the english custom of wearing great flowing wigs to court.
the appearance of equality was as important as its actual achievement.
in fact the distribution of wealth in postwar america was more uneven than it had been in the mid eighteenth century.
the sudden accumulation of large fortunes by new families made other americans particularly sensitive to aristocratic display for it seemed intolerable that a revolution waged against a monarchy should produce a class of persons legally or even visibly distinguished from their fellow citizens.
republican ferment also encouraged many states to lower property requirements for voting.
after the break with great britain such a step seemed logical.
as one group of farmers declared no man can be free independent unless he possesses a voice.
in the choice of the most important officers in the legislature pennsylvania and georgia allowed all white male taxpayers to participate in elections.
other states were less democratic but with the exception of massachusetts they reduced property qualifications.
the reforms however did not significantly expand the american electorate.
long before the revolution an overwhelming percentage of free white males had owned enough land to vote.
in any case during the 1780s republican lawmakers were not prepared to experiment with universal manhood suffrage john adams observed that if the states pushed the reforms too far new claims will arise women will demand a vote.
and every man who has not a farthing will demand an equal vote with any other the most important changes in voting patterns were the result of western migration.
as americans moved to the frontier they received full political representation in their state legislatures and because new districts tended to be poorer than established coastal settlements their representatives seemed less cultured less well trained than those sent by eastern voters.
moreover western delegates resented traveling so far to attend legislative meetings and they lobbied successfully to transfer state capitals to more convenient locations.
during this period georgia moved the seat of its government from savannah to augusta south carolina from charles town to columbia north carolina from new bern to raleigh virginia from williamsburg to richmond new york from new york city to albany and new hampshire from portsmouth to concord.
after gaining independence americans also reexamined the relationship between church and state.
republican spokespersons such as thomas jefferson insisted that rulers had no right to interfere with the free expression of an individuals religious beliefs.
as governor of virginia he strenuously advocated the disestablishment of the anglican church an institution that had received tax monies and other benefits during the colonial period.
jefferson and his allies regarded such special privilege not only as a denial of religious freedom after all rival denominations did not receive tax money but also as a vestige of aristocratic society.
in 1786 virginia cut the last ties between church and state.
other southern states disestablished the anglican church but in massachusetts and new hampshire congregational churches continued to enjoy special status.
moreover while americans championed toleration they seldom favored philosophies that radically challenged christian values.
african americans in the new republic revolutionary fervor forced americans to confront the most appalling contradiction to republican principles slavery.
the quaker leader john woolman 1720 1772 probably did more than any other white person of the era to remind people of the evils of this institution.
a trip he took through the southern colonies as a young man forever impressed upon woolman the dark gloominess of slavery.
in a sermon the outspoken humanitarian declared that men having power too often misapplied it that though we made slaves of the negroes and the turks made slaves of the christians i believed that liberty was the natural right of all men equally during the revolutionary period abolitionist sentiment spread.
both in private and in public people began to criticize slavery in other than religious language.
no doubt the double standard of their own political rhetoric embarrassed many white americans.
they hotly demanded liberation from parliamentary enslavement at the same time that they held several hundred thousand blacks in permanent bondage.
by keeping the issue of slavery before the public through writing and petitioning african americans powerfully undermined arguments advanced in favor of human bondage.
they demanded freedom reminding white lawmakers that african american men and women had the same natural right to liberty as did other americans.
in 1779 for example a group of african americans living in connecticut pointedly asked the members of the state assembly whether it is consistent with the present claims of the united states to hold so many thousands of the race of adam our common father in perpetual slavery in new hampshire nineteen persons who called themselves natives of africa reminded local legislators that private or public tyranny and slavery are alike detestable to minds conscious of the equal dignity of human nature the scientific accomplishments of benjamin banneker 1731 1806 marylands african american astronomer and mathematician and the international fame of phillis wheatley 1753 1784 bostons celebrated african muse made it increasingly difficult for white americans to maintain credibly that african americans could not hold their own in a free society.
wheatleys poems went through many editions and after reading her work the great french philosopher voltaire rebuked a friend who had claimed there never would be negro poets as voltaire discovered wheatley writes excellent verse in english banneker like wheatley enjoyed a well deserved reputation in his case for contributions as a scientist.
after receiving a copy of an almanac that banneker had published in philadelphia thomas jefferson concluded that nature has given to our black brethren talents equal to those of the other colors of men in the northern states there was no real economic justification for slavery and white laborers often recent european immigrants resented having to compete in the workplace against slaves.
this economic situation combined with the acknowledgment chapter 6 the republican experiment of the double standard represented by slavery contributed to the establishment of antislavery societies.
in 1775 franklin helped organize a group in philadelphia called the society for the relief of free negroes unlawfully held.
john jay alexander hamilton and other prominent new yorkers founded a manumission society in 1785.
by 1792 antislavery societies were meeting from virginia to massachusetts and in the northern states at least these groups working for the same ends as various christian evangelicals put slaveholders on the intellectual defensive for the first time in american history.
in several states north of virginia the abolition of slavery took a number of different forms.
even before achieving statehood vermont drafted a constitution 1777 that specifically prohibited slavery.
in 1780 the pennsylvania legislature passed a law effecting the gradual emancipation of slaves.
although the massachusetts assembly refused to address the issue directly the state courts took up the challenge and liberated the african americans.
a judge ruled slavery unconstitutional in massachusetts because it conflicted with a clause in the state bill of rights declaring all men.
free and equal according to one enthusiast this decision freed a grate number of blacks.
are held in a state of slavery within the bowels of a free and christian country by 1800 slavery was well on the road to extinction in the northern states.
these positive developments did not mean that white people accepted blacks as equals.
in fact in the very states that outlawed slavery african americans faced systematic discrimination.
free blacks were generally excluded from voting juries and militia duty they were denied rights and responsibilities usually associated with full citizenship.
they rarely enjoyed access to education and in cities such as philadelphia and new york where african americans went to look for work they ended up living in segregated wards or neighborhoods.
even in the churches institutions that had often spoken out against slavery free african americans were denied equal standing with white worshipers.
humiliations of this sort persuaded african americans to form their own churches.
in philadelphia richard allen a former slave founded the bethel church for negro methodists 1793 and later organized the african methodist episcopal church 1816 an institution of great cultural as well as religious significance for nineteenth century american blacks.
even in the south where african americans made up a large percentage of the population slavery disturbed thoughtful white republicans.
some planters simply freed their slaves and by 1790 the number of free blacks living in virginia was 12 766.
by 1800 the figure had reached 30 750.
there is no question that this trend reflected the uneasiness among white masters.
richard randolph one of virginias wealthier planters explained that he freed his slaves to make restitution as far as i am able to an unfortunate race of bond men over whom my ancestors have usurped and exercised the most lawless and monstrous tyranny george washington also manumitted his slaves.
to be sure most southern slaveholders especially those living in south carolina and georgia rejected this course of action.
their economic well being depended on slave labor.
perhaps more significant however is the fact that no southern leader during the era of republican experimentation defended slavery as a positive good.
such overtly racist rhetoric did not become part of the public discourse until the nineteenth century.
despite promising starts in that direction the southern states did not abolish slavery.
the economic incentives to maintain a servile labor force especially after the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 and the opening up of the alabama and mississippi frontier overwhelmed the initial abolitionist impulse.
an opportunity to translate the principles of the american revolution into social practice had been lost at least temporarily.
jefferson reported in 1805 i have long since given up the expectation of any early provision for the extinction of slavery among us unlike some contemporary virginians the man who wrote the declaration of independence condoned slavery on his own plantation even fathering several children by a woman who since she was his slave had little choice in the matter of her pregnancy.
the challenge of womens rights a 1797 sketch by architect and engineer benjamin henry latrobe depicting african americans in norfolk virginia shaving and dressing in preparation for a sunday afternoon.
latrobes drawings of blacks in the american south offer valuable glimpses of daily life in the region.
the revolutionary experience accelerated changes in the way ordinary people viewed the family.
at the beginning of the eighteenth century fathers claimed authority over other members of their families simply on the grounds that they were fathers.
as patriarchs they demanded obedience.
if they behaved like brutal despots so be it fathers could treat wives and children however they pleased.
living in the shadow of revolution read the document phillis wheatley religious and moral poems this engraving of phillis wheatley appeared in her volume of verse poems on various subjects religious and moral 1773 the first book published by an african american.
the english philosopher john locke 1632 1704 powerfully undermined arguments of this sort.
in his extremely popular treatise some thoughts concerning education 1693 locke insisted that the mind was not formed at birth.
the child learned from experience and if the infant witnessed violent arbitrary behavior then the baby would become an abusive adult.
as locke warned parents if you punish him the child for what he sees you practice yourself he will not think that severity to proceed from kindness in you careful to amend a fault in him but will be apt to interpret it as peevishness and arbitrary imperiousness of a father enlightened eighteenth century mothers and fathers especially fathers condemned tyranny in the home.
at the time of the american revolution few seriously accepted the notion that fathers be they tyrannical kings or heads of ordinary families enjoyed unlimited powers over women and children.
indeed people in england as well as america increasingly described the family in terms of love and companionship.
instead of duties they spoke of affection.
this transformation in the way men and women viewed relations of power within the family was most evident in the popular novels of the period.
americans devoured pamela and clarissa stories by the english writer samuel richardson about women who were the innocent victims of unreformed males usually deceitful lovers and unforgiving fathers.
it was in this changing intellectual environment that american women began making new demands not only on their husbands but also on republican institutions.
abigail adams one of the generations most articulate women instructed her husband john as he set off for the opening of the continental congress i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands john responded in a condescending manner.
the ladies would have to wait until the country achieved independence.
in 1777 lucy knox took an even stronger line with her husband general henry knox.
when he was about to return home from the army she warned him i hope you will not consider yourself as commander in chief in your own house but be convinced.
that there is such a thing as equal command if knox accepted lucys argument he did so because she was a good republican wife and mother.
in fact women justified their assertiveness largely on the basis of political ideology.
if survival of republics really depended on the virtue of their citizens they argued then it was the special responsibility of women as mothers to nurture the right values in their children and as wives to instruct their husbands in proper behavior.
contemporaries claimed that the woman who possessed virtue and prudence could easily mold the taste the manners and the conduct of her admirers according to her pleasure in fact nothing short of a general reformation of manners would take place were the ladies to use their power in discouraging our licentious manners during this period women began to petition for divorce on new grounds.
one case is particularly instructive concerning changing attitudes toward women and the family.
in 1784 john backus an undistinguished massachusetts silversmith was hauled before a local court and asked why he beat his wife.
he responded that it was partly owing to his education for his father treated his mother in the same manner the difference between backuss case and his fathers was that backuss wife refused to tolerate such abuse and she sued successfully for divorce.
studies of divorce patterns in connecticut and pennsylvania show that after 1773 women divorced on about the same terms as men.
the war itself presented some women with fresh opportunities.
in 1780 ester deberdt reed founded a large volunteer womens organization in philadelphia the first of its kind in the united states that raised more than 300 000 for washingtons army.
other women ran family farms and businesses while their husbands fought the british.
and in 1790 the new jersey legislature explicitly allowed women who owned property to vote.
despite these scattered gains republican society still defined womens roles exclusively in terms of mother wife and homemaker.
other pursuits seemed unnatural even threatening and it is perhaps not surprising therefore that in 1807 new jersey lawmakers angry over a close election in which women voters apparently determined the result repealed female suffrage in the interests of safety quiet and good order and dignity of the state even an allegedly progressive thinker such as jefferson could not imagine allowing women to participate in serious politics.
when in 1807 his secretary of the treasury albert gallatin called attention chapter 6 the republican experiment flush of independence.
these early constitutions were provisional but they nevertheless provided the framers of the federal constitution of 1787 with invaluable insights into the strengths and weaknesses of government based on the will of the people.
blueprints for state government despite disagreements over details americans who wrote the various state constitutions shared certain political assumptions.
first they insisted on preparing written documents.
for many of them of course this seemed a natural step.
as colonists they had lived under royal charters documents that described the workings of local government in detail.
the massachusetts bay charter of 1629 for example see chapter 2 guaranteed that the puritans would enjoy the rights of englishmen even after they had moved to the new world.
and in new england congregationalists drew up church covenants stating in clear contractual language the rights and responsibilities of the entire congregation.
however logical the decision to produce written documents may have seemed to the americans it represented a major break with english practice.
political philosophers in the mother country had long boasted of britains unwritten constitution a collection of judicial reports and parliamentary statutes.
but this highly vaunted system had not protected the colonists from oppression hence after declaring independence americans demanded that their state constitutions explicitly define the rights of the people as well as the power of their rulers.
abigail adams wife of president john adams was a brilliant woman whose plea to limit the power of husbands gained little sympathetic attention.
this portrait of her by benjamin blyth is from c 1766 to the shortage of educated people to serve in government jobs and suggested recruiting women jefferson responded sharply the appointment of a woman to office is an innovation for which the public is not prepared nor am i the states experiments in republicanism following independence why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions.
in may 1776 the second continental congress invited the states to adopt constitutions.
the old colonial charters fi lled with references to king and parliament were clearly no longer adequate and within a few years most states had taken action.
rhode island and connecticut already enjoyed republican government by virtue of their unique seventeenth century charters that allowed the voters to select both governors and legislators.
eleven other states plus vermont created new political structures and their deliberations reveal how americans living in different regions and reacting to different social pressures defined fundamental republican principles.
several constitutions were boldly experimental and some states later rewrote documents that had been drafted in the first natural rights and the state constitutions the authors of the state constitutions believed men and women possessed certain natural rights over which government exercised no control whatsoever.
so that future rulers potential tyrants would know the exact limits of authority these fundamental rights were carefully spelled out.
indeed the people of massachusetts rejected the proposed state constitution of 1778 largely because it lacked a full statement of their basic rights.
they demanded a guarantee of rights of conscience and.
security of persons and property which every member in the state hath a right to expect from the supreme power eight state constitutions contained specific declarations of rights.
the length and character of these lists varied but in general they affirmed three fundamental freedoms religion speech and press.
they protected citizens from unlawful searches and seizures they upheld trial by jury.
george mason a shrewd political thinker who had written important revolutionary pamphlets penned the most influential declaration of rights.
it was appended to the virginia constitution of 1776 and the words were incorporated into other state constitutions as well as the famed bill of rights of the federal constitution.
in almost every state delegates to constitutional conventions drastically reduced the power of the governor.
the constitutions of pennsylvania and georgia abolished the governors office.
in four other states terms such as president were substituted for governor.
even when those who designed the new state governments provided for a governor they severely circumscribed his authority.
stumbling toward a new national government he was allowed to make almost no political appointments and while the state legislators closely monitored his activities he possessed no veto over their decisions massachusetts being the lone exception.
most early constitutions lodged nearly all effective power in the legislature.
this decision made good sense to men who had served under powerful royal governors during the late colonial period.
these ambitious crown appointees had used executive patronage to influence members of the colonial assemblies and as the americans drafted their new republican constitutions they were determined to bring their governors under tight control.
in fact the writers of the state constitutions were so fearful of the concentration of power in the hands of a single person that they failed to appreciate that elected governors like the representatives themselves were now the servants of a free people.
the legislature dominated early state government.
the constitutions of pennsylvania and georgia provided for a unicameral or one house system and since any male taxpayer could cast a ballot in these states their legislatures became the nations most democratic.
other states authorized the creation of two houses but even as they did so some of the more demanding republicans wondered why america needed a senate or upper house at all.
what social and economic interests they asked did that body represent that could not be more fully and directly voiced in the lower house.
after all america had just freed itself of an aristocracy.
the two house form survived the revolution largely because it was familiar and because some persons had already begun to suspect that certain checks on the popular will however arbitrary they might have appeared were necessary to preserve minority rights.
power to the people massachusetts did not adopt a constitution until 1780 several years after the other states had done so.
the experience of the people of massachusetts is particularly significant because in their efforts to establish a workable system of republican government they hit on a remarkable political innovation.
after the rejection of two constitutions drafted by the state legislature the responsibility fell to a specially elected convention of delegates whose sole purpose was the formation of a new constitution john adams took a position of leadership at this convention and served as the chief architect of the governmental framework of massachusetts.
this framework included a house and senate a popularly elected governor who unlike the chief executives of other states possessed a veto over legislative bills and property qualifications for officeholders as well as voters.
the most striking aspect of the 1780 constitution however was the wording of its opening sentence we.
the people of massachusetts.
agree upon ordain and establish this powerful statement would be echoed in the federal constitution.
the massachusetts experiment reminded americans that ordinary officeholders could not be trusted to define fundamental rights.
that important task required a convention of delegates who could legitimately claim to speak for the people.
in 1780 no one knew whether the state experiments would succeed.
there was no question that a different type of person had begun to appear in public office one who seemed to the local gentry at least a little poorer and less polished than they would have liked.
when one virginian surveyed the newly elected house of burgesses in 1776 he discovered it was composed of men not quite so well dressed nor so politely educated nor so highly born as some assemblies i have formerly seen this particular virginian approved of such change for he believed that the peoples men however plain they might appear possessed honesty and sincerity.
they were in fact representative republicans people who insisted they were anyones equal in this burgeoning society.
other americans were less optimistic about the nations immediate prospects.
the health of a small republic depended entirely on the virtue of its people.
if they or their elected officials succumbed to material temptation if they failed to comprehend the moral dimensions of political power or if personal liberty threatened the rights of property then the state constitutions were no more than worthless pieces of paper.
the risk of excess seemed great.
in 1778 a group of new englanders fearful that unbridled freedom would create political anarchy observed the idea of liberty has been held up in so dazzling colours that some of us may not be willing to submit to that subordination necessary in the freest states stumbling toward a new national government why did many americans regard the articles of confederation as inadequate.
when the second continental congress convened in 1775 the delegates found themselves waging war in the name of a country that did not yet exist.
as the military crisis deepened congress gradually often reluctantly assumed greater authority over national affairs but everyone agreed such narrowly conceived measures were a poor substitute for a legally constituted government.
the separate states could not possibly deal with the range of issues that now confronted the american people.
indeed if independence meant anything in a world of sovereign nations it implied the creation of a central authority capable of conducting war borrowing money regulating trade and negotiating treaties.
articles of confederation the challenge of creating a viable central government proved more difficult than anyone anticipated.
congress appointed a committee to draw up a plan for confederation.
john dickinson the lawyer who had written an important revolutionary pamphlet titled letters from a farmer in pennsylvania headed the committee.
dickinson envisioned the creation of a strong central government and the report his committee presented on july 12 1776 shocked delegates who assumed that the constitution would authorize a loose confederation of states.
dickinsons plan placed the western territories land claimed by the separate states under congressional control.
in addition dickinsons committee called for equal state representation in congress.
since some states such as virginia and massachusetts were more populous than others the plan fueled tensions between large and small states.
also unsettling was dickinsons recommendation chapter 6 the republican experiment that taxes be paid to congress on the basis of a states total population black read the document the articles of confederation 1777 as well as white a formula that angered southerners who did not think slaves should be counted.
indeed even before the british evacuated boston dickinsons committee raised many difficult political questions that would divide americans for several decades.
not surprisingly the draft of the plan the articles of confederation that congress finally approved in november 1777 bore little resemblance to dickinsons original plan.
the articles jealously guarded the sovereignty of the states.
the delegates who drafted the framework shared a general republican conviction that power especially power so far removed from the people was inherently dangerous and that the only way to preserve liberty was to place as many constraints as possible on federal authority.
the result was a government that many people regarded as powerless.
the articles provided for a single legislative body consisting of representatives selected in 1977 the u s.
postal service issued this stamp to commemorate the bicentennial of the drafting of annually by the state legislatures.
each the nations first constitution the articles of confederation.
the second continental congress appointed state possessed a single vote in congress.
it a thirteen man committee one from each state to draft the document although only five figures are could send as many as seven delegates as shown here.
few as two but if they divided evenly on a certain issue the state lost its vote.
there was no independent execuregion was claimed by various states most of it actually belonged to tive and no veto over legislative decisions.
the articles also denied native americans.
in a series of land grabs that federal negotiators congress the power of taxation a serious oversight in time of war.
the called treaties the united states government took the land comprisnational government could obtain funds only by asking the states for ing much of modern ohio indiana illinois and kentucky.
since the contributions called requisitions but if a state failed to cooperate indians had put their faith in the british during the war they could and many did congress limped along without financial support.
do little to resist the humiliating treaty agreements at fort mcintosh amendments to this constitution required assent by all thirteen states.
1785 fort stanwix 1784 and fort finney 1786.
as john the authors of the new system expected the weak national governdickinson then serving as the president of the supreme executive ment to handle foreign relations military matters indian affairs and council of pennsylvania told the indians since great britain has interstate disputes.
they most emphatically did not award congress surrendered the back country with all the forts.
that they the ownership of the lands west of the appalachian mountains.
indians must now depend upon us for the preservation if they the new constitution sent to the states for ratification encoundared to resist we will instantly turn upon them our armies.
and tered apathy and hostility.
most americans were far more interested extirpate them from the land where they were born and now live in local affairs than in the actions of congress.
when a british army some states such as virginia and georgia claimed land all marched through a state creating a need for immediate military the way from the atlantic ocean to the elusive south seas in aid people spoke positively about central government but as effect extending their boundaries to the pacific coast by virtue soon as the threat had passed they sang a different tune.
during of royal charters.
state legislators their appetites whetted by this period even the slightest encroachment on state sovereignty aggressive land speculators anticipated generating large revrankled republicans who feared centralization would inevitably enues through land sales.
connecticut new york pennsylvania promote corruption.
and north carolina also announced intentions to seize blocks of western land.
other states were not blessed with vague or ambiguous royal western land key to the charters.
the boundaries of maryland delaware and new jersey first constitution had been established many years earlier and it seemed as if peothe major bone of contention with the articles however was the ple living in these states would be permanently cut off from the disposition of the vast unsurveyed territory west of the appalachians anticipated bounty.
in protest these landless states stubbornly that everyone hoped the british would soon surrender.
although the refused to ratify the articles of confederation.
marylanders were stumbling toward a new national government particularly vociferous.
all the states had made sacrifices for the common good during the revolution they complained and it appeared only fair that all states should profit from the fruits of victory in this case from the sale of western lands.
marylands spokesmen feared that if congress did not void virginias excessive claims to all of the northwest territory the land west of pennsylvania and north of the ohio river as well as to a large area south of the ohio beyond the cumberland gap known as kentucky then marylanders would desert their home state in search of cheap virginia farms leaving maryland an underpopulated wasteland.
virginians scoffed at the pleas for equity.
they suspected that behind the marylanders statements of high purpose lay the greed of speculators.
private land companies had sprung up before the revolution and purchased large tracts from the indians in areas claimed by virginia.
their agents petitioned parliament to legitimize these questionable transactions.
their efforts failed.
after the declaration of independence however the companies shifted the focus of their lobbying to congress particularly to the representatives of landless states like maryland.
by liberally distributing shares of stock officials of the indiana illinois and wabash companies gained powerful supporters such as benjamin franklin robert morris and thomas johnson governor of maryland.
these activities encouraged delaware and new jersey to modify their read the document northwest ordinance july 3 1787 map shows present day boundaries.
minn gre canada at l si wisconsin i r.
michigan northwest territory illinois misso ur demands and join the confederation while maryland held out for five years.
the leaders of virginia though remained firm.
why they asked should virginia surrender its historic claims to western lands to enrich a handful of selfish speculators.
the states resolved the bitter controversy in 1781 as much by accident as by design.
virginia agreed to cede its holdings north of the ohio river to the confederation on condition that congress nullify the land companies earlier purchases from the indians.
a practical consideration had softened virginias resolve.
republicans such as jefferson worried about expanding their state beyond the mountains with poor transportation links it seemed impossible to govern such a large territory effectively from richmond.
the western settlers might even come to regard virginia as a colonial power insensitive to their needs.
marylanders who dreamed of making fortunes on the land market grumbled but when a british army appeared on their border they prudently accepted the articles march 1 1781.
congress required another three years to work out the details of the virginia cession.
other landed states followed virginias example.
these transfers established an important principle for after 1781 it was agreed that the west belonged not to the separate states but to the united states.
in this matter at least the national government now exercised full sovereignty.
no one greeted ratification of the articles with much enthusiasm.
when they thought about national politics at all americans concerned themselves primarily with winning independence.
the new government gradually developed an administrative bureaucracy and in 1781 it formally created the departments of war foreign affairs and finance.
by far the most influential figure in the confederation was robert morris 1734 1806 a freewheeling philadelphia merchant who was appointed the first superintendent of finance.
although he was a brilliant manager morriss decisions as superintendent provoked controversy and deep suspicion.
he hardly seemed a model republican.
morris mixed public funds under his control with personal accounts and he never lost an opportunity to make a profit.
while such practices were not illegal his apparent improprieties undermined his own political agenda.
he desperately wanted to strengthen the central government but highly vocal critics resisted labeling morris a pecuniary dictator es ipp ak mis ss indiana i r ohio r ohio.
northwest territory the u s government auctioned off the land in the northwest territory the region defined by the ohio river the great lakes and the mississippi river.
proceeds from the sale of one section in each township were set aside for the creation and support of public schools.
northwest ordinance the confederations major achievement whatever the weaknesses of congress may have been it did score one impressive triumph.
congressional action brought order to western settlement especially in the northwest territory and incorporated frontier americans into an expanding federal system.
in 1781 the prospects for success did not seem promising.
for years colonial authorities had ignored people who migrated far inland sending neither money nor soldiers to protect them from indian attack.
tensions between the seaboard colonies and the frontier regions had sometimes flared into violence.
disorders occurred in south carolina in 1767 in north carolina in 1769 and in vermont in 1777.
with thousands of men and women most of them squatters pouring across the appalachian mountains congress had to act quickly to avoid the past errors of royal and colonial authorities.
the republican experiment view the map a western land claims ceded by the states a a c r e e w lo e s u p er i o lak r d n british north america canada er nc.
aw r chapter 6 maine st l part of mass.
northwest territory ceded by virginia 1784 ron hu ke la lake m ich iga vermont n n ca u ceded by massachusetts ke la ceded by connecticut p massachusetts rhode island connecticut pennsylvania 17 82 new jersey y ork r delaware d c maryland ew io oh new hampshire new york ntario e eri ceded by new york r a r ke o p e la ceded by conn 1800 missouri ad ce virginia by n d territory of virginia de cumberland until 1792 gap kentucky sis sip pi mis ceded by spain to france 1800 r louisiana ceded by south carolina to georgia ceded by north carolina tennessee atlantic ocean north carolina state of franklin south carolina ceded by georgia georgia ceded by spain 31 north latitude spanish fl boundary of territory ceded by new york o r id gulf of mexico 200 miles 200 kilometers boundary of territory ceded by virginia in 1784 a original thirteen states after their land cession western land claims ceded by the states after winning the war the major issue facing the continental congress under the articles of confederation was mediating conflicting states claims to rich western land.
by 1802 the states had ceded all rights to the federal government.
the initial attempt to deal with this explosive problem came in 1784.
jefferson then serving as a member of congress drafted an ordinance that became the basis for later more enduring legislation.
jefferson recommended carving ten new states out of the western lands located north of the ohio river and recently ceded to the united states by virginia.
he specified that each new state establish a republican form of government.
when the population of a territory equaled that of the smallest state already in the confederation the region could apply for full statehood.
in the meantime free white males could participate in local government a democratic guarantee that frightened some of jeffersons more conservative colleagues.
the impoverished congress was eager to sell off the western territory as quickly as possible.
after all the frontier represented a source of income that did not depend on the unreliable generosity of the states.
a second ordinance passed in 1785 and called the land ordinance established an orderly process for laying out new townships and marketing public lands.
public response disappointed congress.
surveying the lands took far longer than anticipated and few persons possessed enough hard currency to make even the minimum purchase.
finally a solution to the problem came from manasseh cutler a new england minister turned land speculator and congressional lobbyist and his associates who included several former officers of the continental army.
cutler and his associates representing the ohio and scioto companies offered to purchase more than six million strengthening federal authority land ordinance of 1785 grid pattern of a township 36 sections of 640 acres 1 square mile each income of one section reserved for the support of public education 6 miles a half section a 320 acres b quarter section 160 acres c half quarter section 80 acres d quarter quarter section 40 acres c b 6 miles unsurveyed acres of land located in present day southeastern ohio by persuading congress to accept at full face value government loan certificates that had been issued to soldiers during the revolution.
on the open market the ohio company could pick up the certificates for as little as 10 percent of their face value thus the company stood to make a fortune.
like so many other get rich quick schemes however this one failed to produce the anticipated millions.
unfortunately for cutler and his friends small homesteaders settled wherever they pleased refusing to pay either government or speculators for the land.
congress worried about the excess liberty on the frontier.
in the 1780s the west seemed to be filling up with people who by eastern standards were uncultured.
timothy pickering a new englander declared that the emigrants to the frontier lands are the least worthy subjects in the united states.
they are little less savage than the indians and when possessed of the most fertile spots for want of industry live miserably the charge was as old as the frontier itself.
indeed seventeenth century englishmen had said the same things of the earliest virginians.
the lawless image stuck however and even a sober observer such as washington insisted that the west crawled with banditti the ordinance of 1784 placed the government of the territories in the hands of people about whom congressmen and speculators had second thoughts.
these various currents shaped the ordinance of 1787 one of the final acts passed under the confederation.
the bill also called the northwest ordinance provided a new structure for government of the northwest territory.
the plan authorized the creation of between three and five territories each to be ruled by a governor a secretary and three judges appointed by congress.
when the population reached five thousand voters who owned property could elect an assembly but its decisions were subject to the governors absolute veto.
once sixty thousand persons resided in a territory they could write a constitution and petition for full statehood.
while these procedures represented a retreat from jeffersons original proposal the ordinance of 1787 contained d d 1 mile several significant features.
a bill of rights guaranteed the settlers the right to trial by jury freedom of religion and due process of law.
in addition the act outlawed slavery a prohibition that freed the future states of ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin from the curse of human bondage.
by contrast settlement south of the ohio river received far less attention from congress.
long before the end of the war thousands of americans streamed through the cumberland gap into a part of virginia known as kentucky.
the most famous of these settlers was daniel boone.
in 1775 the population of kentucky was approximately one hundred by 1784 it had jumped to thirty thousand.
speculators purchased large tracts from the indians planning to resell this acreage to settlers at handsome profits.
in 1776 one land company asked congress to reorganize the companys holdings into a new state called transylvania.
while nothing came of this selfserving request another even more aggressive group of speculators in 1784 carved the state of franklin out of a section of present day tennessee then claimed by north carolina.
rival speculators prevented formal recognition of franklins government.
by 1790 the entire region south of the ohio river had been transformed into a crazy quilt of claims and counterclaims that generated lawsuits for many years to come.
strengthening federal authority what did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives.
despite its success in bringing order to the northwest territory the confederation increasingly came under heavy fire from critics who wanted a stronger central government.
complaints varied from region to region from person to person but most disappointment reflected economic frustration.
americans had assumed that peace would restore economic growth but recovery following the revolution was slow.
chapter 6 the republican experiment the nationalist critique even before england signed a treaty with america its merchants flooded american ports with consumer items and offered easy credit.
families that had postponed purchases of imported goods either because of british blockade or personal hardship now rushed to buy european finery.
this sudden renewal of trade with great britain on such a large scale strained the american economy.
gold and silver flowed back across the atlantic leaving the united states desperately short of hard currency.
when large merchant houses called in their debts ordinary american consumers often found themselves on the brink of bankruptcy.
the disagreeable state of our commerce observed james wilson an advocate of strong national government has been the result of extravagant and injudicious importation.
we seemed to have forgot that to pay was as necessary in trade as to purchase to blame the confederation alone for the economic depression would be unfair.
nevertheless during the 1780s many people agreed that a stronger central government could somehow have brought greater stability to the struggling economy.
in their rush to acquire imported luxuries americans seemed to have deserted republican principles and a weak congress was helpless to restore national virtue.
critics pointed to the governments inability to regulate trade.
whenever a northern congressman suggested restricting british access to american markets southern representatives who feared any controls on the export of tobacco or rice bellowed in protest.
southerners anticipated that navigation acts written by the confederation would put planters under the yoke of northern shipping interests.
the countrys chronic fiscal instability increased public anxiety.
while the war was still in progress congress printed well over 200 million in paper money but because of extraordinarily high inflation the rate of exchange for continental bills soon declined to a fraction of their face value.
in 1781 congress facing insolvency turned to the states for help.
they were asked to retire the depreciated currency.
the situation was spinning out of control.
several states pressed to pay their own war related debts not only recirculated the continental bills but also issued nearly worthless money of their own.
a heavy burden of state and national debt compounded the general sense of economic crisis.
revolutionary soldiers had yet to be paid.
women and men who had loaned money and goods to the government clamored for reimbursement.
foreign creditors demanded interest on funds advanced during the revolution.
these pressures grew but congress was unable to respond.
the articles specifically prohibited congress from taxing the american people.
it required little imagination to see that the confederation would soon default on its legal obligations unless something was done quickly.
in response an aggressive group of men announced that they knew how to save the confederation.
the nationalists persons such as alexander hamilton james madison and robert morris called for major constitutional reforms the chief of which was an amendment allowing congress to collect a 5 percent tax on imported goods sold in the states.
revenues generated by the proposed impost of 1781 would be used by the confederation to reduce the national debt.
on this point the nationalists were adamant.
they recognized that whoever paid the public debt would gain the public trust.
if the states assumed the responsibility then the country could easily fragment into separate republics.
a national debt hamilton explained in 1781 if it is not excessive will be to us a national blessing.
it will be a powerful cement to our union twelve states accepted the impost amendment but rhode island where local interests argued that the tax would make congress independent of their constituents resolutely refused to cooperate.
one negative vote on this proposed constitutional change and the taxing scheme was dead.
state leaders frankly thought the nationalists were up to no good.
the localists were especially apprehensive of fiscal plans advanced by robert morris.
his profiteering as superintendent of finance appeared a threat to the moral fiber of the young republic.
richard henry lee and samuel adams men of impeccable patriotic credentials decried morriss efforts to create a national bank.
such an institution would bring forth a flock of social parasites the kind of people that americans associated with corrupt monarchical government.
one person declared that if an impost ever passed morris will have all the money in his pocket the nationalists regarded their opponents as economically naive.
a country with the potential of the united states required a complex centralized fiscal system.
but for all their pretensions to realism the nationalists of the early 1780s were politically inept.
they underestimated the depth of republican fears and in their rush to strengthen the articles they overplayed their hand.
a group of extreme nationalists even appealed to the army for support.
to this day no one knows the full story of the newburgh conspiracy of 1783.
officers of the continental army stationed at newburgh new york worried that congress would disband them without funding their pensions began to lobby intensively for relief.
in march they scheduled general meetings to protest the weakness and duplicity of congress.
the officers initial efforts were harmless enough but frustrated nationalists such as morris and hamilton hoped that if the army exerted sufficient pressure on the government perhaps even threatened a military takeover then stubborn americans might be compelled to amend the articles.
the conspirators failed to take george washingtons integrity into account.
no matter how much he wanted a strong central government he would not tolerate insubordination by the military.
washington confronted the officers directly at newburgh intending to read a prepared statement.
fumbling with his glasses before his men he commented gentlemen you must pardon me.
i have grown gray in your service and now find myself growing blind the unexpected vulnerability of this great soldier reduced the troops to tears and in an instant the rebellion was broken.
washington deserves credit for preserving civilian rule in this country.
diplomatic humiliation in foreign affairs congress endured further embarrassment.
it could not even enforce the provisions of its own peace treaty.
american negotiators had promised great britain that its citizens could collect debts contracted before the revolution.
the states however dragged their heels and several even passed laws obstructing the settlement of legitimate prewar claims.
congress was powerless to force compliance.
the british responded to this apparent provocation by refusing to evacuate troops from posts located in the northwest territory.
a strong national government would have driven the redcoats out but without adequate funds the weak congress could not provide soldiers for such a mission.
have we fought for this congresss postrevolutionary dealings with spain were equally humiliating.
that nation refused to accept the southern boundary of the united states established by the treaty of paris.
spain claimed sovereignty over much of the land located between georgia and the mississippi river and its agents schemed with indian tribes in this region to resist american expansion.
on july 21 1784 spain fueled the controversy by closing the lower mississippi river to citizens of the united states.
this unexpected decision devastated western farmers.
free use of the mississippi was essential to the economic development of the entire ohio valley.
because of the prohibitively high cost of transporting freight for long distances over land western settlers and southern planters eyeing future opportunities in this area demanded a secure water link with the worlds markets.
their spokesmen in congress denounced anyone who claimed that navigation of the mississippi was a negotiable issue.
in 1786 a spanish official don diego de gardoqui opened talks with john jay a new yorker appointed by congress to obtain rights to navigation of the mississippi.
jay soon discovered that gardoqui would not compromise.
after making little progress jay seized the initiative.
if gardoqui would allow american merchants to trade directly with spain thus opening up an important new market to ships from new england and the middle states then the united states might forgo navigation of the mississippi for twenty five years.
when southern delegates heard of jays concessions they were outraged.
it appeared to them as if representatives of northern commerce were ready to abandon the southern frontier.
angry congressmen accused new englanders of attempting to divide the united states into separate confederations for as one virginian exclaimed the proposed spanish treaty would weaken if not destroy the union by disaffecting the southern states.
to obtain a trivial commercial advantage congress wisely terminated the negotiations with spain.
by the mid 1780s the confederation could claim several notable achievements.
it designed an administrative system that lasted far longer than did the articles.
it also brought order out of the chaos of conflicting western land claims.
still as anyone could see the government was struggling.
congress met irregularly.
some states did not even bother to send delegates and pressing issues often had to be postponed for lack of a quorum.
the nation even lacked a permanent capital and congress drifted from philadelphia to princeton to annapolis to new york city prompting one humorist to suggest that the government purchase an air balloon.
this newly invented device he explained would allow the members of congress to float along from one end of the continent to the other and suddenly pop down into any of the states they please have we fought for this why did constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery.
by 1785 the country seemed to have lost direction.
the buoyant optimism that sustained revolutionary patriots had dissolved into pessimism and doubt.
many americans especially those who had provided leadership during the revolution agreed something had to be done.
in 1786 washington bitterly observed what astonishing changes a few years are capable of producing.
have we fought for this.
was it with these expectations that we launched into a sea of trouble and have bravely struggled through the most threatening dangers the genius of james madison the conviction of people such as washington that the nation was indeed in a state of crisis reflected tensions within republican thought.
to be sure they supported open elections and the right of individuals to advance their own economic well being but when these elements seemed to undermine social and political order they expressed the fear that perhaps liberty had been carried too far.
the situation had changed quite rapidly.
as recently as the 1770s men of republican persuasion had insisted that the greatest threat to the american people was concentration of power in the hands of unscrupulous rulers.
with this principle in mind they transformed state governors into mere figureheads and weakened the confederation in the name of popular liberties.
by the mid 1780s persons of property and standing saw the problem in a different light.
recent experience suggested to them that ordinary citizens did not in fact possess sufficient virtue to sustain a republic.
the states had been plagued not by executive tyranny but by an excess of democracy by a failure of the majority to preserve the property rights of the minority by an unrestrained individualism that promoted anarchy rather than good order.
as americans tried to interpret these experiences within a republican framework they were checked by the most widely accepted political wisdom of the age.
baron de montesquieu 1689 1755 a french political philosopher of immense international reputation and author of the spirit of the laws 1748 declared flatly that a republican government could not flourish in a large territory.
the reasons were clear.
if the people lost direct control over their representatives they would fall prey to tyrants.
large distances allowed rulers to hide their corruption physical separation presented aristocrats with opportunities to seize power.
in the united states most learned men treated montesquieus theories as self evident truths.
his writings seemed to demonstrate the importance of preserving the sovereignty of the states for however much these small republics abused the rights of property and ignored minority interests it was plainly unscientific to maintain that a republic consisting of thirteen states several million people and thousands of acres of territory could long survive.
james madison rejected montesquieus argument and in so doing he helped americans to think of republican government in radical new ways.
this soft spoken rather unprepossessing virginian was the most brilliant american political thinker of his generation.
one french official described madison as a man one must study a long time in order to make a fair appraisal those who listened carefully to what madison had to say however soon recognized his genius for translating theory into practice.
madison delved into the writings of a group of scottish philosophers the most prominent being david hume 1711 1776 and from their works he concluded that americans need not fear a greatly expanded republic.
madison perceived that inconveniences of popular states contrary to prevailing theory are in proportion not to the extent but to the narrowness of their limits chapter 6 the republican experiment indeed it was in small states such as rhode island that legislative majorities tyrannized the propertied minority.
in a large territory madison explained the society becomes broken into a greater variety of interest of pursuits of passions which check each other whilst those who may feel a common sentiment have less opportunity of communication and contact madison did not however advocate a modern interest group model of political behavior.
the contending parties were incapable of working for the common good.
they were too mired in their own local selfish concerns.
rather madison thought competing factions would neutralize each other leaving the business of running the central government to the ablest most virtuous persons the nation could produce.
in other words madisons federal system was not a small state writ large it was something entirely different a government based on the will of the people and yet detached from their narrowly based demands.
this thinking formed the foundation of madisons most famous political essay the federalist no.
constitutional reform a concerted movement to overhaul the articles of confederation began in 1786 when madison and his friends persuaded the virginia assembly to recommend a convention to explore the creation of a unified system of commercial regulations congress supported the idea.
in september delegates from five states arrived in annapolis maryland to discuss issues that extended far beyond commerce.
the small turnout was disappointing but the occasion provided strong nationalists with an opportunity to hatch an even bolder plan.
the annapolis delegates advised congress to hold a second meeting in philadelphia to take into consideration the situation of the united states to devise such further provisions as shall appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the union whether staunch states rights advocates in congress knew what was afoot is not clear.
in any case congress authorized a grand convention to gather in may 1787.
events played into madisons hands.
soon after the annapolis meeting an uprising known as shayss rebellion involving several thousand impoverished farmers shattered the peace of western massachusetts.
no matter how hard these men worked the soil they always found themselves in debt to eastern creditors.
they complained of high taxes of high interest rates and most of all of a state government insensitive to their problems.
in 1786 daniel shays a veteran of the battle of bunker hill and his armed neighbors closed a county courthouse where creditors were suing to foreclose farm mortgages.
at one point the rural insurgents threatened to seize the federal arsenal located at springfield.
congress did not have funds sufficient to support an army and the arsenal might have fallen had not a group of wealthy bostonians raised an army of four thousand troops to put down the insurrection.
the victors were in for a surprise.
at the next general election massachusetts voters selected representatives sympathetic to shayss demands and a new liberal assembly reformed debtor law.
nationalists throughout the united states were not so forgiving.
from their perspective shayss rebellion symbolized the breakdown of law and order that they had long predicted.
great commotions are prevailing in massachusetts madison wrote.
an appeal to the sword is exceedingly dreaded the time had come for sensible people to speak up for a strong national government.
the unrest in massachusetts persuaded persons who might otherwise have ignored the philadelphia meeting to participate in drafting a new constitution.
the philadelphia convention in the spring of 1787 fifty five men representing twelve states traveled to philadelphia.
rhode island refused to take part in the proceedings a decision that madison attributed to its wickedness and folly thomas jefferson described the convention as an assembly of demigods but this flattering depiction is misleading.
however much modern americans revere the constitution they should remember that the individuals who wrote it did not possess divine insight into the nature of government.
they were practical people lawyers merchants and planters many of whom had fought in the revolution and served in the congress of the confederation.
the majority were in their thirties or forties.
the gathering included george washington james madison george mason robert morris james wilson john dickinson benjamin franklin and alexander hamilton just to name some of the more prominent participants.
absent were john adams and thomas jefferson who were conducting diplomacy in europe patrick henry a localist suspicious of strong central government remained in virginia announcing he smelled a rat as soon as the constitutional convention opened on may 25 the delegates made several procedural decisions of the utmost importance.
first they voted that nothing spoken in the house be printed or communicated without leave the rule was stringently enforced.
sentries guarded the doorways to keep out uninvited visitors windows stayed shut in the sweltering heat to prevent sound from either entering or leaving the chamber and members were forbidden to copy the daily journal without official permission.
as madison explained the secrecy rule saved both the convention and the community from a thousand erroneous and perhaps mischievous reports it also has made it extremely difficult for modern lawyers and judges to determine exactly what the delegates had in mind when they wrote the constitution see the feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent pp.
in a second procedural move the delegates decided to vote by state but in order to avoid the kinds of problems that had plagued the confederation they ruled that key proposals needed the support of only a majority instead of the nine states required under the articles.
inventing a federal republic madison understood that whoever sets the agenda controls the meeting.
even before all the delegates had arrived he drew up a framework for a new federal system known as the virginia plan.
madison wisely persuaded edmund randolph virginias popular governor to present this scheme to the convention on may 29.
randolph claimed that the virginia plan merely revised sections of the articles but everyone including madison knew better.
my ideas madison confessed strike.
deeply at the old confederation he was determined to restrain the state assemblies and in the original virginia plan madison gave the federal government power to veto state laws.
the virginia plan envisioned a national legislature consisting of two houses one elected directly by the people the other chosen by the first house from nominations made by the state assemblies.
representation in both houses was proportional to the states have we fought for this read the document military reports of shayss rebellion this 1787 woodcut portrays daniel shays with one of his chief officers jacob shattucks.
shays led farmers in western massachusetts in revolt against a state government that seemed insensitive to the needs of poor debtors.
their rebellion frightened conservative leaders who demanded a strong new federal government.
population.
the virginia plan also provided for an executive elected by congress.
since most delegates at the philadelphia convention sympathized with the nationalist position madisons blueprint for a strong federal government initially received broad support and the virginia plan was referred to further study and debate.
a group of men who allegedly had come together to reform the confederation found themselves discussing the details of a national government.
consisting of a supreme legislature executive and judiciary the virginia plan had been pushed through the convention so fast that opponents hardly had an opportunity to present their objections.
on june 15 they spoke up.
william paterson a new jersey lawyer advanced the so called new jersey plan a scheme that retained the unicameral legislature in which each state possessed one vote and that at the same time gave congress extensive new powers to tax and regulate trade.
paterson argued that these revisions while more modest than madisons plan would have greater appeal for the american people.
i believe he said that a little practical virtue is to be preferred to the finest theoretical principles which cannot be carried into effect the delegates listened politely and then soundly rejected the new jersey plan on june 19.
indeed only new jersey new york and delaware voted in favor of patersons scheme.
rejection of this framework did not resolve the most controversial issue before the convention.
paterson and others feared that under the virginia plan small states would lose their separate identities.
these delegates maintained that unless each state possessed an equal vote in congress the small states would find themselves at the mercy of their larger neighbors.
this argument outraged the delegates who favored a strong federal government.
it awarded too much power to the states.
for whom are we forming a government wilson cried.
is it for men or for the imaginary beings called states it seemed absurd to claim that the sixty eight thousand people of rhode island should have the same voice in congress as virginias seven hundred forty seven thousand inhabitants.
compromise saves the convention mediation clearly offered the only way to overcome what roger sherman a connecticut delegate called a full stop on july 2 a grand committee of one person from each state was elected by the convention to resolve persistent differences between the large and small states.
franklin at age 81 the oldest delegate served as chair.
the two fiercest supporters of proportional representation based on population madison and wilson were left off the grand committee a sure sign that the small states would salvage something from the compromise.
chapter 6 the republican experiment compromising on slavery read the document the new jersey plan 1787 william paterson 1745 1806 was a distinguished lawyer statesman and associate justice of the u s supreme court from new jersey.
while serving as a delegate to the constitutional convention in philadelphia in 1787 paterson proposed the new jersey plan for a unicameral legislative body with equal representation from each state.
patersons legislative proposal was rejected in favor of the great compromise which provided for two legislative bodies a senate with equal representation for each state and a house of representatives with representation based on population.
the committee recommended that the states be equally represented in the upper house of congress while representation was to be proportionate in the lower house.
only the lower house could initiate money bills.
franklins committee also decided that one member of the lower house should be selected for every thirty thousand inhabitants of a state.
southern delegates insisted that this number include slaves.
in the so called three fifths rule the committee agreed that for the purpose of determining representation in the lower house slaves would be counted but not as much as free persons.
for every five slaves a congressional district received credit for three free voters a deal that gave the south much greater power in the new government than it would have otherwise received.
as with most compromise solutions the one negotiated by franklins committee fully satisfied no one.
it did however overcome a major impasse and after the small states gained an assured voice in the upper house the senate they cooperated enthusiastically in creating a strong central government.
during the final days of august a deeply disturbing issue came before the convention.
it was a harbinger of the great sectional crisis of the nineteenth century.
many northern representatives detested the slave trade and wanted it to end immediately.
they despised the three fifths ruling that seemed to award slaveholders extra power in government simply because they owned slaves.
it seemed now to be pretty well understood madison jotted in his private notes that the real difference of interest lay not between the large and small but between the n and southn.
the institution of slavery and its consequences formed a line of discrimination whenever northern delegates and on this point they were by no means united pushed too aggressively southerners threatened to bolt the convention thereby destroying any hope of establishing a strong national government.
curiously even recalcitrant southerners avoided using the word slavery.
they seemed embarrassed to call the institution by its true name and in the constitution itself slaves were described as other persons such persons persons held to service or labour in other words as everything but slaves.
a few northern delegates such as roger sherman of connecticut sought at every turn to mollify the southerners especially the south carolinians who spoke so passionately about preserving slavery.
gouverneur morris a pennsylvania representative would have none of it.
he regularly reminded the convention that the inhabitant of georgia and s c who goes to the coast of africa and in defiance of the most sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connections and damns them to the most cruel bondage shall have more votes in a government instituted for the protection of the rights of mankind than the citizen of pa or n jersey largely ignoring morriss stinging attacks the delegates reached an uneasy compromise on the continuation of the slave trade.
southerners feared that the new congress would pass commercial regulations adversely affecting the planters taxes on the watch the video slavery and the constitution many scholars consider the original u s constitution to be a pro slavery document since its articles protected the international slave trade and through the 3 5s clause awarded states extra representation based on the number of slaves that they held.
have we fought for this revolution or reform.
the articles of confederation and the constitution compared political challenge mode of ratification or amendment number of houses in legislature mode of representation articles of confederation require confirmation by every state legislature one two to seven delegates represent each state each state holds only one vote in congress mode of election and term of office delegates appointed annually by state legislatures executive no separate executive delegates annually elect one of their number as president who possesses no veto no power to appoint officers or to conduct policy.
administrative functions of government theoretically carried out by committee of states practically by various single headed departments most adjudication left to state and local courts congress is final court of appeal in disputes between states states alone can levy taxes congress funds the common treasury by making requisitions for state contributions congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty but holds no check on conflicting state regulations judiciary taxation regulation of commerce export of rice and tobacco for example.
they demanded therefore that no trade laws be passed without a two thirds majority of the federal legislature.
they backed down on this point however in exchange for guarantees that congress would not interfere with the slave trade until 1808 see chapter 8.
the south even came away with a clause assuring the return of fugitive slaves.
we have obtained charles cotesworth pinckney told the planters of south carolina a right to recover our slaves in whatever part of america they may take refuge which is a right we had not before although these deals disappointed many northerners they conceded that establishing a strong national government was of greater immediate importance than ending the slave trade.
great as the evil is madison wrote a dismemberment of the union would be worse the last details on july 26 the convention formed a committee of detail a group that prepared a rough draft of the constitution.
after the committee completed its work writing a document that still after so constitution requires confirmation by three fourths of state conventions or legislatures two two senators represent each state in upper house each senator holds one vote.
one representative to lower house represents every thirty thousand people in 1788 in a state each representative holds one vote senators chosen by state legislatures for six year term direct election after 1913 representatives chosen by vote of citizens for two year term separate executive branch president elected by electoral college to four year term granted veto power to conduct policy and to appoint ambassadors judges and officers of executive departments established by legislation separate branch consisting of supreme court and inferior courts established by congress to enforce federal law federal government granted powers of taxation congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty all state regulations must obtain congressional consent many hours of debate preserved the fundamental points of the virginia plan the delegates reconsidered each article.
the task required the better part of a month.
during these sessions the members of the convention concluded that the president as they now called the executive should be selected by an electoral college a body of prominent men in each state chosen by local voters.
the number of electoral votes held by each state equaled its number of representatives and senators.
this awkward device guaranteed that the president would not be indebted to the congress for his office.
whoever received the second largest number of votes in the electoral college automatically became vice president.
in the event that no person received a majority of the votes the election would be decided by the lower house the house of representatives with each state casting a single vote.
delegates also armed the chief executive with veto power over legislation as well as the right to nominate judges.
both privileges of course would have been unthinkable a decade earlier but the state experiments revealed the importance of having an independent executive to maintain a balanced system of republican government.
complete the assignment the elusive constitution search for original intent on myhistorylab feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent this nineteenth century engraving shows how the pennsylvania state house would have looked in 1776.
after the revolution and the drafting of the constitution the building became known as independence hall.
during the hot summer of 1787 delegates kept the windows closed so that no one on the street could hear the debates.
m any prominent national leaders alarmed at a perceived judicial imperialism in recent activist courts have urged that judges interpret the constitution strictly according to the intent of the framers arguing that a jurisprudence of original intent is the only legitimate basis for constitutional decision making intentionalists demand that judges measure decisions against a demonstrable consensus among the framers and ratifiers as to principles stated or implied in the constitution yet when one considers circumstances surrounding the constitutions framing demonstration of the founders intent proves elusive indeed.
delegates to the constitutional convention in philadelphia in 1787 deliberately veiled the purpose of the convention in secrecy to avoid pressure by local constituencies who harbored deep suspicions concerning strong central government.
newspapers barred from access to the convention printed only occasional rumors.
delegates refused to speak or correspond with outsiders concerning the proceedings.
the strictness with which delegates observed the rule of secrecy not only restricted contemporary knowledge of what transpired but has also limited the number of sources in which subsequent generations may search for original intent.
only three members preserved complete accounts of convention debates.
these records remained unpublished for more than thirty years forcing the first generation of lawyers and federal judges to rely on the words of the constitution alone for clues to the framers intent.
the publication of the three accounts did not necessarily make the delegates intent more accessible.
the journal acts and proceedings of the convention assemblies in philadelphia recorded by the convention secretary william jackson provided only a chronological listing of motions resolutions and vote tallies.
his unpublished manuscript of convention debates which could have fleshed out the published journals mere skeleton of the proceedings was lost.
the notes of new york delegate robert yates appeared in 1821 as secret proceedings and debates of the convention assembled at philadelphia but the circumstances of their publication rendered them thoroughly unreliable.
their editor the former french minister citizen edmond gent attained notoriety in the 1790s when he violated american neutrality in the anglo french war by commissioning american privateers against british shipping.
gent supported states rights and popular government and manipulated yatess notes to support his views.
a comparison of secret proceedings with the two surviving pages of yatess manuscript reveals that gent altered or deleted more than half the original text.
if the intent of the delegates survives anywhere madisons notes of debates in the federal convention of 1787 provides its likeliest repository.
the father of the constitution as contemporaries called him carefully preserved notes on convention proceedings and took every measure to ensure their accuracy.
recognizing his own limitations as a stenographer madison did not try to record everything said but sought manuscript copies of delegates speeches that he incorporated into his notes at the end of each day.
madison also waited until the end of each day to record his own speeches every one of which was extemporaneous from memory.
at the conventions end he obtained a manuscript copy of secretary jacksons notes which he used to supplement and correct his own.
though madison tinkered at times with his notes over the next thirty years recent analysis has demonstrated that none of these minor corrections impaired the faithfulness of the text.
yet in spite of the meticulous care that madison lavished on his notes they remain at best incomplete repositories of the framers original intent.
each days notes contain only a few minutes of oral discourse whereas actual delivery occupied between five and seven hours.
furthermore written manuscripts of speeches may have approximated only roughly what the debaters actually said.
madisons speech on the benefits of a large republic for example occupies two closely reasoned pages in his notes.
yet others who took notes seem to have recorded a much shorter and far less impressive oral version.
such discrepancies raise important questions.
how did the framers understand the actual speeches on the convention floor.
how did their understanding shape their intentions.
how much of their intent is lost in the vast omissions.
these questions take on even greater significance when one considers that the constitution was forged through a series of compromises among representatives whose interests and intentions differed widely.
no delegate was completely satisfied and the finished document permitted some functions none had intended.
madison himself complained for example that the principle of judicial review was never intended and can never be proper moreover he thought it would be a mistake to search for the original intent of convention delegates.
the delegates intent could never possibly determine constitutional interpretation he argued for the only authoritative intentions were those of the people of the states as expressed thro the conventions which ratified the constitution yet the works most commonly cited from the time of state ratification raise problems with the application of this principle as well.
stenographers who recorded the debates of the several state conventions on the adoption of the federal constitution did not possess skills adequate to their task and federalist partisans edited the speeches with abandon in order to promote their own views.
evidence also suggests that jonathan eliot the journalist who published the debates in 1836 altered them further.
given the limitations of sources most often cited by modern judges and lawyers the original intent of most framers remains as elusive today as it was for the first generation who had no access to those documents.
the constitutions often ambiguous wording which furnished the sole guide to the framers intent in their day remains the best recourse in our own.
questions for discussion 1.
why do some lawyers and politicians still emphasize the constitutions original meaning despite how the country has changed since 1787.
how could one try to determine the original meaning of the constitutions framers.
why did james madison believe that it would be a mistake to try to search for the original intent of the delegates to the constitutional convention.
chapter 6 the republican experiment as the meeting was concluding some delegates expressed concern about the absence in the constitution of a bill of rights.
such declarations had been included in most state constitutions and virginians such as george mason insisted that the states and their citizens needed explicit protection from possible excesses by the federal government.
while many delegates sympathized with masons appeal they noted that the hour was late and in any case that the proposed constitution provided sufficient security for individual rights.
during the hard battles over ratification the delegates to the convention may have regretted passing over the issue so lightly.
we the people the delegates adopted an ingenious procedure for ratification.
instead of submitting the constitution to the various state legislatures all of which had a vested interest in maintaining the status quo and most of which had two houses either of which could block approval they called for the election of thirteen state conventions especially chosen to review the new federal government.
the delegates may have picked up this idea from the massachusetts experiment of 1780.
moreover the constitution would take effect after the assent of only nine states.
there was no danger therefore that the proposed system would fail simply because a single state like rhode island withheld approval.
the convention asked gouverneur morris of pennsylvania a delegate noted for his urbanity to make final stylistic changes in the wording of the constitution.
when morris examined the working draft he discovered that it spoke of the collection of states forming a new government.
this wording presented problems.
ratification required only nine states.
no one knew whether all the states would accept the constitution and if not which nine would.
a strong possibility existed that several new england states would reject the document.
morriss brilliant phrase we the people of the united states eliminated this difficulty.
the new nation was a republic of the people not of the states.
on september 17 thirty nine men signed the constitution.
a few members of the convention like mason could not support the document.
others had already gone home.
for more than three months madison had served as the conventions driving intellectual force.
he now generously summarized the experience there never was an assembly of men charged with a great and arduous trust who were more pure in their motives or more exclusively or anxiously devoted to the object committed to them whose constitution.
struggle for ratification what issues separated federalists from antifederalists during debates over ratification.
supporters of the constitution recognized that ratification would not be easy.
after all the convention had been authorized only to revise the articles but instead it produced a new plan that fundamentally altered relations between the states and the central government.
the delegates dutifully dispatched copies of the constitution to the congress of confederation then meeting in new york city and that powerless body referred the document to the separate states without any specific recommendation.
the fight for ratification had begun.
federalists and antifederalists proponents of the constitution enjoyed great advantages over the unorganized opposition.
in the contest for ratification they took no chances.
their most astute move was the adoption of the label federalist.
the term cleverly suggested that they stood for a confederation of states rather than for the creation of a supreme national authority.
in fact they envisioned the creation of a strong centralized national government capable of fielding a formidable army.
critics of the constitution who tended to be somewhat poorer less urban and less well educated than their opponents cried foul but there was little they could do.
they were stuck with the name antifederalist a misleading term that made their cause seem a rejection of the very notion of a federation of the states.
the federalists recruited the most prominent public figures of the day.
in every state convention speakers favoring the constitution were more polished and more fully prepared than were their opponents.
in new york the campaign to win ratification sparked publication of the federalist a brilliant series of essays written by madison hamilton and jay during the fall and winter of 1787 and 1788.
the nations newspapers threw themselves overwhelmingly behind the new government.
in fact few journals even bothered to carry antifederalist writings.
in some states the federalists adopted tactics of questionable propriety in order to gain ratification.
in pennsylvania for example they achieved a legal quorum for a crucial vote by dragging several opposition delegates into the meeting from the streets.
in new york hamilton intimidated upstate antifederalists with threats that new york city would secede from the state unless the state ratified the constitution.
in these battles the antifederalists articulated a political philosophy that had broad popular appeal.
they spoke the language of the commonwealthmen see chapter 4.
like the extreme republicans who drafted the first state constitutions the antifederalists were deeply suspicious of political power.
during the debates over ratification they warned that public officials however selected would be constantly scheming to expand their authority.
the preservation of individual liberty required constant vigilance.
it seemed obvious that the larger the republic the greater the opportunity for political corruption.
local voters could not possibly know what their representatives in a distant national capital were doing.
the government outlined in the constitution invited precisely the kinds of problems that montesquieu had described in his famous essay the spirit of the laws.
in so extensive a republic one antifederalist declared the great officers of government would soon become above the control of the people and abuse their power antifederalists demanded direct personal contact with their representatives.
they argued that elected officials should reflect the character of their constituents as closely as possible.
it seemed unlikely that in large congressional districts the people would be able to preserve such close ties with their representatives.
according to the antifederalists the constitution favored persons wealthy enough to have forged a reputation that extended beyond a single community.
samuel chase told the members of the maryland whose constitution.
struggle for ratification read the document federalist paper no.
51 feb 6 1788 new hampshire 9th british north america canada lake superior june 21 1788 maine part of mass.
h ke la massachusetts lake michigan n uro new york r io e onta lak feb 16 1788 11th rhode island july 26 1788 ee l ak 13th may 29 1790 r ie connecticut pennsylvania 5th 2nd jan 9 1788 dec 12 1787 new jersey 3rd atlantic ocean dec 18 1787 delaware i oh 1st virginia.
or dec 8 1787 10th june 25 1788 maryland north carolina apr.
26 1788 7th spanish louisiana r 12th iss ipp i nov 21 1789 mi ss south carolina 300 miles 300 kilometers 8th may 23 1788 georgia majority for ratification 4th majority against ratification jan 2 1788 disputed with spain divided spani no returns sh f lor 1st ida order in which the states ratified ratification of the constitution advocates of the new constitution called themselves federalists and those who opposed its ratification were known as antifederalists.
ratifying convention that under the new system the distance between the people and their representatives will be so great that there is no probability of a farmer or planter being chosen.
only the gentry the rich and the well born will be elected federalist speakers mocked their opponents localist perspective.
the constitution deserved general support precisely because it ensured that future americans would be represented by natural aristocrats individuals possessing greater insights skills and training than did the ordinary citizen.
these talented leaders the federalists insisted could discern the interests of the entire population.
historians have generally accepted the federalist critique.
it would be a mistake however to see the antifederalists as losers or as persons who could not comprehend social and economic change.
although their rhetoric echoed an older moral view of political culture they accepted more easily than did many federalists a liberal marketplace in which ordinary citizens competed as equals with the rich and well born.
they believed the public good was best served by allowing individuals like themselves to pursue their own private interests.
that is what they had been doing on the local level during the 1780s and they resented the imposition of elite controls over their affairs.
although the antifederalists lost the battle over ratification their ideas about political economy later found many champions in the age of andrew jackson.
the constitution drew support from many different types of people.
in fact historians have been unable to discover sharp correlations between wealth and occupation on the one hand and attitudes toward the proposed system of central government on the other.
in general federalists lived in more commercialized areas than did their opponents.
in the cities artisans as well as chapter 6 the republican experiment merchants called for ratification while those farmers who were only marginally involved in commercial agriculture frequently voted antifederalist.
despite passionate pleas from patrick henry and other antifederalists most state conventions quickly adopted the constitution.
delaware acted first december 7 1787 and within eight months of the philadelphia meeting eight of the nine states required to launch the government had ratified the document.
the contests in virginia june 1788 and new york july 1788 generated bitter debate but they too joined the union leaving only north carolina and rhode island outside the united states.
eventually november 21 1789 and may 29 1790 even these states ratified the constitution.
still the vote had been very close.
the constitution was ratified in new york by a tally of 30 to 27 in massachusetts by 187 to 168 and in virginia by 89 to 79.
a swing of a few votes in several key states could have defeated the new government.
while the state conventions sparked angry rhetoric americans soon closed ranks behind the constitution.
an antifederalist who represented one massachusetts village explained that he had opposed the adoption of this constitution but that he had been overruled.
by a majority of wise and understanding men and that now he should endeavor to sow the seeds of union and peace among the people he represented read the document the bill of rights 1789 adding the bill of rights the first ten amendments to the constitution are the major legacy of the antifederalist argument.
in almost every state convention opponents of the constitution pointed to the need for greater protection n of individual liberties rights that people presumably had possessed in a state of nature.
it is necessary wrote one antifederalist that the sober and industrious part of the community should be defended from the rapacity and violence of the vicious and idle.
a bill of rights therefore ought to set forth the purposes for which the compact is made and serves to secure the minority against the usurpation and tyranny of the majority the list of fundamental rights varied from state to state but most antifederalists demanded specific guarantees for jury trial and freedom of religion.
they wanted prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishments.
there was also considerable though not universal support for freedom of speech and freedom of the press.
madison and others regarded the proposals with little enthusiasm.
in the federalist no.
84 hamilton bluntly reminded the american people that the constitution is itself.
a bill of rights but after the adoption of the constitution had been assured madison moderated his stand.
if nothing else passage of a bill of rights would appease able men such as george mason and edmund randolph who might otherwise remain alienated from the new federal system.
we have in this way something to gain madison concluded and if we proceed with caution nothing to lose the crucial consideration was caution.
a number of people throughout the nation advocated calling a second constitutional convention one that would take antifederalist criticism into account.
madison wanted to avoid such a meeting and he feared that some members of the first congress might use a bill of rights as an excuse to revise the entire constitution or to promote a second convention.
the first ten amendments of the u s constitution are known as the bill of rights.
proposed by james madison in 1789 the rights guaranteed in these amendments helped calm the fears of antifederalists who believed that the new constitution gave the central government too much power.
madison carefully reviewed these recommendations as well as the various declarations of rights that had appeared in the early state constitutions and on june 8 1789 he placed before the house of representatives a set of amendments designed to protect individual rights from government interference.
madison told the members of congress that the greatest dangers to popular liberties came from the majority operating against the minority a committee compressed and revised his original ideas into ten amendments that were ratified and became known collectively as the bill of rights.
for many modern americans these amendments are the most important section of the constitution.
madison had hoped that additions would be inserted into the text of the constitution at the appropriate places not tacked onto the end but he was overruled.
the bill of rights protected the freedoms of assembly speech religion and the press guaranteed speedy trial by an impartial jury preserved the peoples right to bear arms and prohibited unreasonable searches.
other amendments dealt with legal procedure.
some opponents of the constitution urged congress to provide greater safeguards for states rights but madison had no intention of backing away from a strong central government.
only the tenth amendment addressed the states relation to the federal system.
this crucial article designed to calm antifederalist fears specified that those powers not delegated to the united states by the study resources constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people on september 25 1789 the bill of rights passed both houses of congress and by december 15 1791 the amendments had been ratified by three fourths of the states.
madison was justly proud of his achievement.
he had effectively secured individual rights without undermining the constitution.
when he asked his friend jefferson for his opinion of the bill of rights jefferson responded with typical republican candor i like it.
as far as it goes but i should have been for going further conclusion success depends on the people by 1789 one phase of american political experimentation had come to an end.
during these years the people gradually often haltingly learned that in a republican society they themselves were sovereign.
they could no longer blame the failure of government on inept monarchs or greedy aristocrats.
they bore a great responsibility.
americans had demanded a government of the people only to discover during the 1780s that in some situations the people could not be trusted with power majorities could tyrannize minorities and the best of governments could abuse individual rights.
contemporaries had difficulty deciding just what had been accomplished.
a writer in the pennsylvania packet thought the american people had preserved order.
the year 1776 is celebrated the newspaper observed for a revolution in favor of liberty.
the year 1787.
will be celebrated with equal joy for a revolution in favor of government but some aging patriots grumbled that perhaps order had been achieved at too high a price.
in 1788 richard henry lee remarked tis really astonishing that the same people who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty should now agree to fix an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity but most americans probably would have accepted franklins optimistic assessment.
as he watched the delegates to the philadelphia convention come forward to sign the constitution he noted that there was a sun carved on the back of george washingtons chair.
i have the aged philosopher noted often in the course of the session.
looked at the sun behind the president without being able to tell whether it was rising or setting but now at length i have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting sun study resources take the study plan for chapter 6 the republican experiment on myhistorylab time line 1776 second continental congress authorizes colonies to create republican governments may eight states draft new constitutions two others already enjoy republican government by virtue of former colonial charters congress accepts articles of confederation after long debate november massachusetts finally ratifies state constitution 1781 states ratify articles of confederation following settlement of virginias western land claims british army surrenders at yorktown october states fail to ratify proposed impost tax 1783 newburgh conspiracy thwarted march society of the cincinnati raises a storm of criticism treaty of peace signed with great britain september 1785 land ordinance for northwest territory passed by congress jay gardoqui negotiations over mississippi navigation anger southern states annapolis convention suggests second meeting to revise the articles of confederation september shayss rebellion frightens american leaders 1787 1788 the federal constitution is ratified by all states except north carolina and rhode island bill of rights first ten amendments to the constitution ratified by states chapter 6 chapter review chapter review living in the shadow of revolution during the 1780s why were americans so sensitive to the dangers of aristocratic display.
although some families had become newly wealthy during the revolutionary war most americans had also become fervent republicans who associated any traces of aristocratic display by the rich with the privileges that british noblemen had claimed during the colonial period.
they believed that a revolution waged against monarchy should not produce a new aristocracy that was legally or even visibly distinguished from its fellow citizens.
p 132 the states experiments in republicanism gre following independence why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions.
at strengthening federal authority pennsylvania 17 82 ceded by conn 1800 ceded by new york i oh y ork some americans worried that the scramble for material wealth would undermine republican values in the new nation.
disparities in wealth made some worry that a hereditary aristocracy might grow up to dominate government.
elites worried that democratic excesses would lead to men without property and the personal independence and stability that came with it rising to power.
enslaved african americans and most women were denied the rights to property and the independence required to become full citizens of a republican society.
or ew what were the limits of equality in the republican society of the new united states.
western lands.
only after virginia ceded its claims could congress draft the northwest ordinance which provided an orderly plan for settling the ohio valley.
the weak congress was not even able to force the british to live up to their obligations under the treaty of paris of 1783.
p 137 ed by n d c virginia what did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives.
territory of virginia d cumberland until 1792 gap kentucky ce defining republican culture north carolina in the early 1780s nationalists wanted to persuade the states to amend the articles of confederation to create a centralized fiscal system that would allow congress to levy import taxes and use the revenue to reduce the national debt.
extreme nationalists may even have contemplated using the army to force the states to amend the articles if necessary.
p 141 ceded by north carolina tennessee state of franklin south carolina d by georgia db s georgia i have we fought for this why did constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery.
james madisons virginia plan for the constitution called for representation in both houses of congress to be proportional to a states population.
small states objected that this would put them at the mercy of larger states.
southern states feared that more populous northern states might vote to outlaw slavery.
to prevent a breakdown the delegates compromised.
each state would have an equal number of representatives in the senate and slaves would be counted as three fifths of a person when determining representation for the federal government.
p 143 l americans believed that britains unwritten constitution had not protected the colonies against oppression.
after independence therefore they demanded that their state constitutions explicitly define the rights of the people and the power of their rulers.
p 136 wisconsin whose constitution.
struggle for ratification michigan stumbling toward a new national government why did many americans regard the articles of confederation as inadequate.
during the revolution americans showed little interest in establishing a strong national government.
under the articles of confederation 1777 an underfunded congress limped along without direction while the states competed over what issues separated federalists from antifederalists during debates over ratification.
during the debates of 1787 1788 federalists who favored stronger national government defended the constitution against antifederalists who opposed centralized authority.
by the end of 1791 enough state conventions had endorsed the constitution for ratification.
to appease the antifederalists congress in 1789 added a bill of rights to protect the freedoms of citizens against the power of the national government.
p 150 key terms and definitions republicanism concept that ultimate political authority is vested in the citizens of the nation.
p 132 african methodist episcopal church richard allen founded the african methodist episcopal church in 1816 as the first independent blackrun protestant church in the united states.
the ame church was active in the abolition movement and founded educational institutions for free blacks.
p 134 natural rights fundamental rights over which the government should exercise no control.
p 136 articles of confederation ratified in 1781 this document was the united states first constitution providing a framework for national government.
the articles limited central authority by denying the national government any taxation or coercive power.
p 138 northwest ordinance legislation in 1787 that established governments in americas northwest territories defined a procedure for their admission to the union as states and prohibited slavery north of the ohio river.
p 141 study resources shayss rebellion armed insurrection of farmers in western massachusetts led by daniel shays.
intended to prevent state courts from foreclosing on debtors unable to pay their taxes the rebellion was put down by the state militia.
nationalists used the event to call a constitutional convention to strengthen the national government.
p 144 virginia plan offered by james madison and the virginia delegation at the constitutional convention this proposal called for a strong executive office and two houses of congress each with representation proportional to a states population.
p 144 federalist p 150 supporter of the constitution who advocated its ratification.
antifederalists critics of the constitution who were concerned that it included no specific provisions to protect natural and civil rights.
p 150 bill of rights the first ten amendments to the constitution adopted in 1791 to preserve the rights and liberties of individuals.
p 152 three fifths rule constitutional provision that for every five slaves a state would receive credit for three free voters indetermining seats for the house of representatives.
p 146 critical thinking questions 1.
what factors kept african americans and women from achieving full political equality in the united states following the revolution.
during the revolution and immediately afterward why would so many americans have opposed the establishment of a strong national government.
why did thomas jefferson fear that the new constitution compromised the republican ideal of government by the people.
since the federalists and antifederalists both believed in a republican form of government why could they not agree on the new constitution.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 6 on myhistorylab living in the shadow of revolution read the document read the document the new jersey plan 1787 p 146 watch the video slavery and the constitution p 146 phillis wheatley religious and moral poems p 135 stumbling toward a new national government read the document the articles of confederation complete the assignment the elusive constitution search for original intent p 148 1777 p 138 whose constitution.
struggle for ratification read the document northwest ordinance july 3 1787 p 139 read the document view the map western land claims ceded by the states p 140 federalist paper no.
51 feb 6 1788 p 151 read the document the bill of rights 1789 p 152 have we fought for this indicates study plan media assignment read the document rebellion p 145 military reports of shayss democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 contents and learning objectives force of public opinion pg.
156 popular political culture pg.
169 how did the ideas of jeffersonians differ from that of the federalists.
why was it hard for americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity.
principle and pragmatism establishing a new government pg.
158 the adams presidency pg.
171 why was george washington unable to overcome division within the new government.
conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton pg.
159 why did alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of washingtons cabinet.
hamiltons plan for prosperity and security pg.
161 why did many americans oppose alexander hamiltons blueprint for national prosperity.
why were some federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage.
the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 pg.
174 what did jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that we are all republicans we are all federalists.
feature essay defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs pg.
163 how did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 4 experience of empire constructing an anglo american identity the journal of william byrd william byrd ii 1674 1744 was a type of british american one would not have encountered during the earliest years of settlement.
this successful tidewater planter was a product of a new more cosmopolitan environment and as an adult byrd seemed as much at home in london as in his native virginia.
in 1728 at the height of his political influence in williamsburg the capital of colonial virginia byrd accepted a commission to help survey a disputed boundary between north carolina and virginia.
during his long journey into the distant backcountry byrd kept a detailed journal a satiric often bawdy chronicle of daily events that is now regarded as a classic of early american literature.
on his trip into the wilderness byrd met many different people.
no sooner had he departed a familiar world of tobacco plantations than he came across a selfstyled hermit an englishman who apparently preferred the freedom of the woods to the constraints of society.
he has no other habitation but a green bower or harbour byrd reported with a female domestick as wild as dirty as himself as the boundary commissioners pushed farther into the backcountry they encountered highly independent men and women of european descent small frontier families that byrd regarded as living no better than savages.
he attributed their uncivilized behavior to a diet of too much pork.
the truth of it is these people live so much upon swines flesh.
that it makes them.
extremely hoggish in their temper many of them seem to grunt rather than speak in their ordinary conversation the wilderness journey also brought byrds party of surveyors into regular contact with native americans whom he properly distinguished as catawba tuscarora usheree and sapponi indians.
yrds journal invites us to view the rapidly developing eighteenth century backcountry from a fresh perspective.
it was not a vast empty territory awaiting the arrival of european settlers.
maps often sustain this erroneous impression depicting cities and towns farms and plantations clustered along the atlantic coast they suggest a line of settlement steadily pushing outward into a huge blank area with no mark of civilization.
the people byrd met on his journey into the backcountry would not have understood b read the document william byrd ii diary an american gentleman william byrd ii.
byrds history of the dividing line run in the year 1728 contains a marvelously satirical account of the culture of poor country farmers in north carolina.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america such maps.
after all the empty space on the maps was their home.
they experienced the frontier as populous zones of many cultures stretching from the english and french settlements in the north all the way to the spanish borderlands in the far southwest.
the point is not to discount the significance of the older atlantic settlements.
during the eighteenth century britains thirteen mainland colonies underwent a profound transformation.
the population in the colonies grew at unprecedented rates.
german and scots irish immigrants arrived in huge numbers.
so too did african slaves.
wherever they lived colonial americans of this period were less isolated from one another than colonists had been during most of the seventeenth century.
indeed after 1690 men and women expanded their cultural horizons becoming part of a larger angloamerican empire.
the change was striking.
colonists whose parents or grandparents had come to the new world to confront a howling wilderness now purchased imported european manufactures read english journals participated in imperial wars and sought favors from a growing number of resident royal officials.
no one not even the inhabitants of the distant frontiers could escape the influence of britain.
the cultural economic and political links connecting the colonists to the imperial center in london grew stronger with time.
this surprising development raises a difficult question for the modern historian.
if the eighteenth century colonists were so powerfully attracted to great britain then why did they ever declare independence.
the answer may well be that as the colonists became more british they inevitably became more american as well.
this was a development of major significance for it helps to explain the appearance after midcentury of genuine nationalist sentiment.
political commercial and military links that brought the colonists into more frequent contact with great britain also made them more aware of other colonists.
it was within an expanding prosperous empire that they first began seriously to consider what it meant to be american.
growth and diversity what difficulties did native americans face in maintaining their cultural independence on the frontier.
the phenomenal growth of british america during the eighteenth century amazed benjamin franklin one of the first persons to bring mathematical rigor to the study of demography.
the population of the english colonies doubled approximately every twenty five years and according to calculations franklin made in 1751 if the expansion continued at such an extraordinary rate for another century or so the greatest number of englishmen will be on this side of the water accurate population data from the colonial period are extremely difficult to find.
the first national census did not occur until 1790.
still various sources surviving from prerevolutionary times indicate that the total white population of britains thirteen mainland colonies rose from about 250 000 in 1700 to 2 150 000 in 1770 an annual growth rate of 3 percent.
few societies in recorded history have expanded so rapidly and if the growth rate had not dropped substantially during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the current population of the united states would stand at well more than one billion people.
natural reproduction was responsible for most of the growth.
more families bore children who in turn lived long enough to have children of their own.
because of this sudden expansion the population of the late colonial period was strikingly young approximately one half of the populace at any given time was under age 16.
not only was the total population increasing at a very rapid rate it also was becoming more dispersed and heterogeneous.
each year witnessed the arrival of thousands of non english europeans.
unlike those seventeenth century english settlers in search of religious sanctuary or instant wealth see chapter 2 the newcomers generally transferred in the hope of obtaining their own land and setting up as independent farmers.
these people often traveled to the backcountry a region stretching approximately eight hundred miles from western pennsylvania to georgia.
although they planned to follow customs they had known in europe they found the challenge of surviving on the british frontier far more demanding than they had anticipated.
they plunged into a complex fluid often violent society that included large numbers of native americans and african americans as well as other europeans.
scots irish flee english oppression non english colonists poured into american ports throughout the eighteenth century creating rich ethnic diversity in areas originally settled by anglo saxons.
the largest group of newcomers consisted of scots irish.
the experiences of these people in great britain influenced not only their decision to move to the new world but also their behavior once they arrived.
during the seventeenth century english rulers thought they could thoroughly dominate catholic ireland by transporting thousands of lowland scottish presbyterians to the northern region of that war torn country.
the plan failed.
english officials who were members of the anglican church discriminated against the presbyterians.
they passed laws that placed the scots irish at a severe disadvantage when they traded in england they taxed them at exorbitant rates.
after several poor harvests many of the scots irish elected to emigrate to america where they hoped to find the freedom and prosperity that had been denied them in ireland.
i have seen some of their letters to their friends here ireland one british agent reported in 1729.
in which after they set forth and recommend the fruitfulness and commodities of the country america they tell them that if they will but carry over a little money with them they may for a small sum purchase considerable tracts of land often entire presbyterian congregations followed charismatic ministers to the new world intent on replicating a distinctive fiercely independent culture on the frontier.
it is estimated that one hundred fifty thousand scots irish migrated to the colonies before the revolution.
most scots irish immigrants landed initially in philadelphia but instead of remaining in that city they carved out farms on pennsylvanias western frontier.
the colonys proprietors welcomed the influx of new settlers for it seemed they would form an ideal barrier between the indians and the older coastal communities.
the penn family soon had second thoughts however.
the scotsirish squatted on whatever land looked best and when colony officials pointed out that large tracts had already been reserved the immigrants retorted that it was against the laws of god and nature that so much land should be idle when so many christians wanted it to labour on and to raise their bread wherever they located the scots irish challenged established authority.
growth and diversity read the document benjamin franklin observations concerning the increase of mankind african german dutch scots irish english scottish micmac e u r abenaki algonquin chippewa n h portsmouth boston providence iroquois newport hartford new haven r i susquehannock perth conn amboy new york n j philadelphia burlington miami penn.
new castle md.
annapolis shawnee va williamsburg shenandoah r james r mass.
n y io oh en an do ah r va ll ey great lakes maine part of mass.
st l aw re nc e b q e c chickasaw new bern s c sa va nn mis siss n c r ippi r ee ed pe sh cherokee charles town.
ah r ga atlantic ocean choctaw savannah creek proclamation line of 1763 seminole distribution of european and african immigrants in the thirteen colonies a flood of non english immigrants swept the british colonies between 1700 and 1775.
germans search for a better life a second large body of non english settlers more than one hundred thousand people came from the upper rhine valley the german palatinate.
some of the migrants especially those who relocated to america around the turn of the century belonged to small pietistic protestant sects whose religious views were somewhat similar to those of the quakers.
these germans moved to the new world primarily in the hope of finding religious toleration.
under the guidance of francis daniel pastorius 1651 1720 a group of mennonites established in pennsylvania a prosperous community known as germantown.
by midcentury however the characteristics of the german migration had begun to change.
large numbers of lutherans transferred to the middle colonies.
unlike members of the pietistic sects these men and women were not in search of religious freedom.
rather they traveled to the new world looking to better their material lives.
the lutheran church in germany initially tried to maintain control over the distant congregations but even though the migrants themselves fiercely preserved many aspects of traditional german culture they were eventually forced to accommodate to new social conditions.
henry melchior mhlenberg 1711 1787 a tireless leader helped german lutherans through a difficult cultural adjustment and in 1748 mhlenberg organized a meeting of local pastors and lay delegates that ordained ministers of their own choosing an act of spiritual independence that has been called the most important single event in american lutheran history the german migrants mistakenly called pennsylvania dutch because the english confused deutsch meaning german with dutch a person from holland began reaching philadelphia in large numbers after 1717 and by 1766 persons of german stock accounted for more than one third of pennsylvanias total population.
even their most vocal detractors admitted the germans were the best farmers in the colony.
ethnic differences in pennsylvania bred disputes.
the scots irish as well as the germans preferred to live with people of their own background and they sometimes fought to keep members of the other nationality out of their neighborhoods.
the english were suspicious of both groups.
they could not comprehend why the germans insisted on speaking german in america.
in 1753 for example franklin described these settlers as the most stupid of their nation he warned that unless the stream of german importation could be turned from this to other colonies.
they will soon outnumber us.
and all the advantages we have will in my opinion be not able to preserve our language and even our government will become precarious as franklins remarks suggest the pressure on non english colonists to accommodate to the dominant culture in other words to anglicize their manners and behavior was very great.
in comparison to some of his contemporaries franklin seemed a moderate critic of the german and scots irish settlers.
others threatened violence against the newcomers who refused to conform to english ways.
such prejudice may have persuaded members of both groups to search for new homes.
after 1730 germans and scots irish pushed south from western pennsylvania into the shenandoah valley thousands of them settling in the backcountry of virginia and the carolinas.
the germans usually remained wherever they found unclaimed fertile land.
by contrast the scots irish often moved two or three times acquiring a reputation as a rootless people.
wherever the newcomers settled they often found themselves living beyond the effective authority of the various colonial governments.
to be sure backcountry residents petitioned for assistance during wars against the indians but most of the time they preferred to be left alone.
these conditions heightened the importance of religious institutions within the small ethnic communities.
although the original stimulus for coming to america may have been a desire for economic independence and prosperity backcountry families especially the scots irish flocked to evangelical protestant preachers to presbyterian and later baptist and methodist ministers who not only fulfilled the settlers spiritual needs but also gave scattered backcountry communities a pronounced moral character that survived long after the colonial period.
convict settlers since the story of european migration tends to be upbeat men and women engaged in a largely successful quest for a better material life it often is forgotten that british courts compelled many chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america people to come to america.
indeed the african slaves were not the only large group of people coerced into moving to the new world.
in 1718 parliament passed the transportation act allowing judges in england scotland and ireland to send convicted felons to the american colonies.
between 1718 and 1775 the courts shipped approximately fifty thousand convicts across the atlantic.
some of these men and women may actually have been dangerous criminals but the majority seem to have committed minor crimes against property.
although transported convicts almost 75 percent of whom were young males escaped the hangman they found life difficult in the colonies.
eighty percent of them were sold in the chesapeake colonies as indentured servants.
at best they faced an uncertain future and it is probably not surprising that few former convicts prospered in america.
british authorities lavished praise on this system.
according to one writer transportation drained the nation of its offensive rubbish without taking away their lives although americans purchased the convict servants they expressed fear that these men and women would create a dangerous criminal class.
in one irate essay benjamin franklin asked his readers to consider just how the colonists might repay the leaders of great britain for shipping so many felons to america.
he suggested that rattlesnakes might be the appropriate gift.
i would propose to have them carefully distributed.
franklin wrote in the gardens of all the nobility and gentry throughout the nation but particularly in the gardens of the prime ministers the lords of trade and members of parliament the revolution forced the british courts to redirect the flow of convicts to another part of the world an indirect result of american independence was the founding of australia by transported felons.
native americans stake out a middle ground in some histories of the colonial period native americans make only a brief appearance usually during the earliest years of conquest and settlement.
after initial contact with the first european invaders the indians seem mysteriously to disappear from the central narrative of colonization and it is not until the nineteenth century that they turn up again this time to wage a last desperate battle against the encroachment of white society.
this obviously inadequate account slights one of the richer chapters of native american history.
during much of the seventeenth century various indian groups who contested the english settlers for control of coastal lands suffered terribly sometimes from war but more often from the spread of contagious diseases such as smallpox.
the two races found it very difficult to live in close proximity.
as one indian informed the members of the maryland assembly in 1666 your hogs cattle injure us you come too near us to live drive us from place to place.
we can fly no farther let us know where to live how to be secured for the future from the hogs cattle against such odds the indians managed to survive.
by the eighteenth century the site of the most intense and creative contact between the races had shifted to the cis mississippian west that is to the huge territory between the appalachian mountains and the mississippi river where several hundred thousand native americans made their homes.
tishcohan chief of the delaware tribe that lost much of its land in thomas penns walking purchase of 1737 is shown here in a 1735 portrait by gustavus hesselius.
although treaties and agreements with european settlers were often detrimental to native americans some alliances in the middle ground allowed the tribes to play the french against the british.
alliances were often signified by tokens such as certificates calumets ceremonial pipes wampum belts and medals.
many indians had only recently migrated to the area.
the delaware for example retreated to far western pennsylvania and the ohio valley to escape almost continuous confrontation with advancing european invaders.
other indians drifted west in less happy circumstances.
they were refugees the remnants of native american groups who had lost so many people that they could no longer sustain an independent cultural identity.
these survivors joined with other indians to establish new multiethnic communities.
in this respect the native american villages may not have seemed all that different from the mixed european settlements of the backcountry.
see the feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase pp.
stronger groups of indians such as the creek choctaw chickasaw cherokee and shawnee generally welcomed the refugees.
strangers were formally adopted to take the places of family members killed in battle or overcome by sickness and it should be appreciated that many seemingly traditional indian villages of the eighteenth century actually represented innovative responses to rapidly shifting external conditions.
as historian peter wood explained physically and linguistically diverse groups spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century moved to form loosely organized confederacies unions of mutual convenience that effectively restrained interethnic hostilities the concept of a middle ground a term that has only recently entered the interpretive vocabulary helps us more fully to comprehend how eighteenth century indians held their own in the backcountry beyond the appalachian mountains.
the native americans never intended to isolate themselves completely from european contact.
they relied on white traders french as well as english to provide essential metal goods and weapons.
the goal of the indian confederacies was rather to maintain a strong independent voice in these commercial exchanges whenever possible playing the french against the british and so long as they had sufficient military strength that is large numbers of healthy armed warriors they compelled everyone who came to negotiate in the middle ground to give them proper respect.
it would be incorrect therefore to characterize their relations with the europeans as a stark choice between resistance or accommodation between total war or abject surrender.
native americans took advantage of rivals when possible they compromised when necessary.
it is best to imagine the indians middle ground as an open dynamic process of creative interaction.
however desirable they may have appeared european goods subtly eroded traditional structures of native american authority.
during the period of earliest encounter with white men indian leaders reinforced their own power by controlling the character and flow of commercial exchange.
if a trader wanted a rich supply of animal skins for example he soon learned that he had better negotiate directly with a chief or tribal elder.
but as the number of european traders operating within the middle ground expanded ordinary indians began to bargain on their own account obtaining colorful and durable manufactured items without first consulting a native american leader.
independent commercial dealings of this sort tended further to weaken the indians ability to resist organized white aggression.
as john stuart a superintendent of indian affairs explained in 1761 a modern indian cannot subsist without europeans and would handle a flint ax or any other rude utensil used by his ancestors very awkwardly so that what was only convenience at first is now become necessity the survival of the middle ground depended ultimately on factors over which the native americans had little control.
imperial competition between france and great britain enhanced the indians bargaining position but after the british defeated the french in 1763 the indians no longer received the same solicitous attention as they had in earlier times.
keeping old allies happy seemed to the british a needless expense.
moreover contagious disease continued to take a fearful toll.
in the southern backcountry between 1685 and 1790 the indian population dropped an astounding 72 percent.
in the ohio valley the numbers suggest similar rates of decline.
in fact there is some evidence that british military officers practiced germ warfare against the native americans giving them blankets contaminated by smallpox.
based on experience the officers knew that personal belongings such as blankets taken from the sick were contaminated and thus that giving these items to the indians would put them at risk.
by the time the united states took control of this region the middle ground itself had become a casualty of history.
spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
in many traditional histories of north america the spanish make only a brief appearance usually as fifteenth century conquistadors.
but as soon as they have conquered mexico they are dropped from the story as if they had no serious part to play in the ongoing development of the continent.
this is of course a skewed perspective that masks the roots of ethnic diversity in the united states.
as anyone who visits the modern american southwest quickly discovers spanish administrators and priests not to mention ordinary settlers left a lasting imprint on the cultural landscape of this country.
until 1821 when mexico declared independence from madrid spanish authorities struggled to control a vast northern frontier.
during the eighteenth century the spanish empire in north america included widely dispersed settlements such as san francisco san diego santa fe san antonio and st augustine.
in these borderland communities european colonists mixed with peoples of other races and backgrounds forming multicultural societies.
according to historian ramn a gutirrez the spanish provinces present a story of the baroque style eighteenth century spanish mission at san xavier del bac in present day arizona.
spanish missions dotted the frontier of northern new spain from florida to california.
complete the assignment conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase on myhistorylab feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase william penns treaty with the indians painted by benjamin west in 1771 presents an idealized picture of relations between the pennsylvania government and its indian neighbors.
here the pious william penn offers the indians trade goods for their lands.
source courtesy of the pennsylvania academy of the fine arts philadelphia.
gift of mrs sarah harrison the joseph harrison jr collection.
e uropean conquest of native americans represents a black mark on the history of the new world.
violent dispossession murder and near genocide of americas native inhabitants has always fit uneasily into a history of national progress.
colonial writers sought to cover up these disturbing histories by creating myths of good settlers who allegedly respected native american rights and chose to buy indian lands rather than seize them through force.
but such reworkings of history overlook the threats of violence that often surrounded these supposedly fair negotiations.
pennsylvanias infamous walking purchase of 1737 offers a dramatic example of how the myth of a fair deal could cover english self interest and intimidation.
when he died in 1718 william penn the quaker founder of pennsylvania left his sons a legacy of peaceful co existence between english and indian.
he also burdened them with an imposing debt.
during the 1720s anxious to restore their finances the penn heirs began to sell off lands between pennsylvania and new jersey in a region known as the forks.
settlers coveted the abundant lumber iron ore and fertile soil found along the delaware river and were willing to pay good prices.
only one obstacle stood in the way of their plan to trade frontier lands for english currency.
the penns did not actually own the lands that they were selling.
these lands belonged to the regions native american nation the delawares who referred to themselves as the lenapes and they refused to sell.
the penns next move surprised the delawares.
thomas penn william penns eldest son produced what he claimed to be an old deed for lands in the forks purchased by his father in 1686.
the document granted to pennsylvania a tract of land extending along the delaware river and containing as much land as a man could walk in a day and half a very imprecise measure of distance.
since the original deed was incomplete it had not been signed and did not even list all of the terms of the purchase penn had a new copy drawn up.
he presented this document to the delawares as proof of a legally binding contract transferring the indian lands in the forks to pennsylvania.
the delawares were not fooled.
nutimus leader of the delawares who lived in the forks region challenged the penns version of history.
the elders among his people remembered that although a land transfer had been discussed no contract had ever been signed and william penn and his agents had never delivered payment.
the new deed was a clumsy forgery.
cries of fraud did not discourage thomas penn.
he struck up an understanding with the powerful iroquois confederacy an alliance of six native american nations centered around the great lakes.
the government of pennsylvania promised to support the iroquois in pressing land claims against native tribes to the south and west.
the iroquois in turn pledged to support pennsylvania in its dealings with the delawares.
as one historian has put it the delawares found themselves caught between an iroquois hammer and a pennsylvania anvil not powerful enough to challenge both the pennsylvanians and their iroquois allies nutimus and three other delaware leaders put their marks on the fraudulent deed.
the walking of the boundary occurred on september 19 1737.
the whole episode was a farce.
thomas penn had taken the initiative to have a path cleared through the trees for his walkers.
previously when william penn had purchased lands from the delawares the parties that walked off the boundaries had traveled at a normal travelers pace winding through the forest and stopping along the way to take meals.
now the three walkers who took off into the pennsylvania woods set an exhausting pace each promised a handsome reward if he should be the one that walked the farthest in the allotted day and a half.
one dropped out by days end.
a second collapsed the next morning and died from exhaustion a week later.
the final walker covered more than 60 miles of wilderness in the 18 hours of daylight allotted for his task.
the delawares protested this injustice grumbling about what they named the hurry walk but could do little about it.
in 1740 they filed a complaint with the pennsylvania superior court warning that if this practice must hold why we are no more brothers and friends but much more like open enemies the governor of pennsylvania dismissed the delawares complaint.
when the delawares refused to concede their claims in the forks the pennsylvania government turned to its iroquois allies.
at a council held in 1742 the iroquois headman canasatego told nutimus and the delawares you ought to be taken by the hair of the head and skakd severely till you recover your senses.
we conquered you we made women of you.
this land that you claim is gone canastego ordered the delawares to remove north to the wyoming or susquehanna valleys.
swindled by the pennsylvanians betrayed by the iroquois who they had once called their cousins and pressed on every side by encroaching white settlers nutimus and his delawares abandoned the delaware valley and withdrew to the west.
peaceful complaints had proven ineffectual.
all the delawares could do now was nurse their grievances and wait.
the waiting ended in 1755 with the beginning of the french and indian war.
the war began in catastrophe for the british and their iroquois allies in north america providing what one delaware described as a favourable opportunity for taking revenge still seething over the injustice of the walking purchase delaware warriors and their shawnee allies fell upon the pennsylvania settlements along the outskirts of the walking purchase lands.
led by nutimus nephew teedyuscung these warriors burned homes and fields and took over one hundred english lives.
the war soon turned in britains favor.
as british and iroquois troops routed their french and indian enemies in canada and the ohio territory the delawares realized that they would have to sue for peace.
in 1766 the delawares signed a treaty that relinquished the remainder of their pennsylvania lands and removed permanently towards the west.
in 1771 thomas penn commissioned the great early american artist benjamin west to create a painting commemorating his fathers compassion and fair treatment of pennsylvanias indian peoples.
the image shows william penn meeting with indian leaders bargaining with them to purchase land where english settlers might farm and raise families.
wests painting presents a highly flattering image of pennsylvania history and of the penn family.
it looks past the violence of 1755 and the underhanded dealings of 1737.
it takes as its subject the much revered elder penn who had once admonished his children to let justice have its impartial course.
fly to no deceits to support or cover injustice in the end thomas penn betrayed his fathers advice.
in allowing his greed for land to overpower his sense of propriety and respect for the rights of the delaware indians thomas penn set an example emulated far too often throughout american history.
questions for discussion 1.
why did thomas penn invent a phony deed for delaware lands.
why did the delawares side with the french during the french and indian war.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america complex web of interactions between men and women young and old rich and poor slave and free spaniard and indian all of whom fundamentally depended on the other for their own self definition with which florida is painted the governor of cuba complained in 1673.
only hoodlums and the mischievous go there from cuba california never figured prominently in spains plans for the new world.
early explorers reported finding only impoverished indians living along the pacific coast.
adventurers saw no natural resources worth mentioning and since the area proved extremely difficult to reach from mexico city the overland trip could take months california received little attention.
fear that the russians might seize the entire region belatedly sparked spanish activity however and after 1769 two indomitable servants of empire fra junpero serra and don gaspar de portol organized permanent missions and presidios forts at san diego monterey san francisco and santa barbara.
conquering the northern frontier not until late in the sixteenth century did spanish settlers led by juan de oate establish european communities north of the rio grande.
the pueblo indians resisted the invasion of colonists soldiers and missionaries and in a major rebellion in 1680 led by el pop the native peoples drove the whites completely out of new mexico.
the heathen have conceived a mortal hatred for our holy faith and enmity for the spanish nation concluded one imperial bureaucrat.
not until 1692 were the spanish able to reconquer this fiercely contested area.
by then native american hostility coupled with the settlers failure to find precious metal had cooled spains enthusiasm for the northern frontier.
concern over french encroachment in the southeast led spain to colonize st augustine florida in 1565.
although the enterprise never flourished it claims attention as the first permanent european settlement established in what would become the united states predating the founding of jamestown and plymouth by several decades.
pedro menndez de avils brought some fifteen hundred soldiers and settlers to st augustine where they constructed an impressive fort but the colony failed to attract additional spanish migrants.
it is hard to get anyone to go to st augustine because of the horror read the document peoples of the spanish borderlands in sharp contrast to the english frontier settlements of the eighteenth century the spanish outposts in north america grew very slowly.
a few catholic priests and imperial administrators traveled to the northern provinces but the danger of indian attack as well as a harsh physical environment discouraged ordinary colonists.
the european migrants were overwhelmingly male most of them soldiers in the pay of the empire.
although some colonists came directly from spain most had been born in other spanish colonies such as minorca the canaries or new spain and because european women rarely appeared on the frontier spanish males formed relationships with indian women fathering large numbers of mestizos children of mixed race.
testimony by pedro naranjo to spanish authorities spain s north american empire m iss is si p pi 500 miles 500 kilometers r california san francisco 1776 miwok monterey 1770 san jos 1777 alta st louis san antonio de padua 1771 ute san luis obispo 1772 chumash santa barbara 1782 los angeles 1781 san gabriel 1771 san juan capistrano 1776 ipai r io oh navajo pueblo new mexico san diego 1769 atlantic ocean wichita santa fe quapaw louisiana comanche lipn apache pima coahuiltecan monterrey choctaw lower creek tonkawa hasinai texas san antonio pacific ocean creek chickasaw st augustine new orleans florida gulf of mexico the spanish borderlands ca.
1770 in the late eighteenth century spains north american empire extended across what is now the southern united states from florida through texas and new mexico to california.
the impact of european ideas on american culture as in other european frontiers of the eighteenth century encounters with spanish soldiers priests and traders altered native american cultures.
the experience here was quite different from that of the whites and indians in the british backcountry.
the spanish exploited native american labor reducing entire indian villages to servitude.
many indians moved to the spanish towns and although they lived in close proximity to the europeans something rare in british america they were consigned to the lowest social class objects of european contempt.
however much their material conditions changed the indians of the southwest resisted strenuous efforts to convert them to catholicism.
the pueblo maintained their own religious forms often at great personal risk and they sometimes murdered priests who became too intrusive.
angry pueblo indians at taos reportedly fed the hated spanish friars corn tortillas containing urine and mouse meat.
the spanish empire never had the resources necessary to secure the northern frontier fully.
the small military posts were intended primarily to discourage other european powers such as france great britain and russia from taking possession of territory claimed by spain.
it would be misleading however to overemphasize the fragility of spanish colonization.
the urban design and public architecture of many southwestern cities still reflect the vision of the early spanish settlers and to a large extent the old borderlands remain spanish speaking to this day.
the impact of european ideas on american culture of the mother country.
they sponsored concerts and plays they learned to dance.
women as well as men picked up the new fashions quickly and even though most of them had never been outside the colony of their birth they sometimes appeared to be the products of londons best families.
it was in the cities also that wealthy merchants transformed commercial profits into architectural splendor for in their desire to outdo one another they built grand homes of enduring beauty.
most of these buildings are described as georgian because they were constructed during the reign of britains early hanoverian kings who all happened to be named george.
actually these homes were provincial copies of grand country houses of great britain.
they drew their inspiration from the great italian renaissance architect andrea palladio 1508 1580 who had incorporated classical themes into a rigidly symmetrical form.
palladios ideas were popularized in the colonies by james gibbs an englishman whose book of architecture 1728 provided blueprints for the most spectacular homes of mid eighteenth century america.
their owners filled the houses with fine furniture.
each city patronized certain skilled craftsmen but the artisans of philadelphia were known for producing magnificent copies of the works of thomas chippendale great britains most famous furniture designer.
these developments gave american cities an elegance they had not possessed in the previous century.
one foreign visitor noted of philadelphia in 1748 that its natural advantages trade riches and power are by no means inferior to any even of the most ancient towns of europe as this traveler understood the cultural impact of the cities went far beyond the number of people who actually lived there.
how did european ideas affect eighteenth century american life.
ben franklin and american enlightenment the character of the older more established british colonies changed almost as rapidly as that of the backcountry.
the rapid growth of an urban cosmopolitan culture impressed eighteenth century commentators and even though most americans still lived on scattered farms they had begun to participate aggressively in an exciting consumer marketplace that expanded their imaginative horizons.
european historians often refer to the eighteenth century as an age of reason.
during this period a body of new often radical ideas swept through the salons and universities altering the way that educated europeans thought about god nature and society.
this intellectual revolution called the enlightenment involved the work of europes greatest minds men such as newton and locke voltaire and hume.
enlightenment thinkers shared basic assumptions.
philosophers of the enlightenment replaced the concept of original sin with a much more optimistic view of human nature.
a benevolent god having set the universe in motion gave human beings the power of reason to enable them to comprehend the orderly workings of his creation.
everything even human society operated according to these mechanical rules.
the responsibility of right thinking men and women therefore was to make certain that institutions such as church and state conformed to self evident natural laws.
it was possible or so some philosophers claimed to achieve perfection in this world.
in fact human suffering had come about only because people had lost touch with the fundamental insights of reason.
the writings of these thinkers eventually reached the colonies where they received a mixed reception.
on the whole the american enlightenment was a rather tame affair compared to its european counterpart for while the colonists welcomed experimental science they defended the tenets of traditional christianity.
for many americans the appeal of the enlightenment was its focus on a search for useful knowledge ideas and inventions provincial cities considering the rate of population growth it is surprising to discover how few eighteenth century americans lived in cities.
boston newport new york philadelphia and charles town the five largest cities contained only about 5 percent of the colonial population.
in 1775 none had more than forty thousand persons.
the explanation for the relatively slow development of colonial american cities lies in their highly specialized commercial character.
colonial port towns served as entrepts intermediary trade and shipping centers where bulk cargoes were broken up for inland distribution and where agricultural products were gathered for export.
they did not support large scale manufacturing.
indeed the pool of free urban laborers was quite small since the type of person who was forced to work for wages in europe usually became a farmer in america.
yet despite the limited urban population cities profoundly influenced colonial culture.
it was in the cities that americans were exposed to and welcomed the latest english ideas.
wealthy colonists merchants and lawyers tried to emulate the culture chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america minister described as full freighted with nonesense unmannerliness railery prophaneness immorality a r ro g an c e c a lu m n i e s lyes contradictions and what not all tending to quarrels and divisions and to debauch and corrupt the minds and manners of new england franklin got the point he left massachusetts in 1723 in search of a less hostile intellectual environment.
after he had moved to philadelphia leaving behind an irritable brother as well as new england puritanism franklin devoted himself to the pursuit of useful knowledge ideas that would increase the happiness of his fellow americans.
franklin never denied the existence of god.
rather he pushed the lord aside making room for the this 1743 map of boston depicts the port city as an active commercial and cultural center with many wharves buildings free exercise of human reachurches and meeting halls.
franklin tinkered experimented and reformed.
almost that would improve the quality of human life.
what mattered was everything he encountered in his daily life aroused his curiosity.
his practical experimentation.
a speech delivered in 1767 before the investigation of electricity brought him world fame but franklin members of the american society in philadelphia reflected the was never satisfied with his work in this field until it yielded practical new utilitarian spirit knowledge is of little use when confined application.
in 1756 he invented the lightning rod.
he also designed to mere speculation the colonist explained but when specua marvelously efficient stove that is still used today.
in modern lative truths are reduced to practice when theories grounded america franklin has become exactly what he would have wanted upon experiments.
and the arts of living made more easy and to be a symbol of material progress through human ingenuity.
comfortable.
knowledge then becomes really useful franklin energetically promoted the spread of reason.
in the enlightenment spawned scores of earnest scientific philadelphia he organized groups that discussed the latest european tinkerers people who dutifully recorded changes in temperaliterature philosophy and science.
in 1727 for example he formd ture the appearance of strange plants and animals and the details most of my ingenious acquaintances into a club for mutual of astronomic phenomena.
while these eighteenth century improvement which we calld the junto four years later franklin americans made few earth shattering discoveries they did encourtook a leading part in the formation of the library company a volage their countrymen especially those who attended college to untary association that for the first time allowed people like him to apply reason to the solution of social and political problems.
pursue useful knowledge the members of these societies combenjamin franklin 1706 1790 absorbed the new cosmopolitan municated with americans living in other colonies providing them culture.
european thinkers regarded him as a genuine philosophe a not only with new information but also with models for their own person of reason and science a role that he self consciously cultivated clubs and associations.
such efforts broadened the intellectual horiwhen he visited england and france in later life.
franklin had little zons of many colonists especially those who lived in cities.
formal education but as a young man working in his brothers print shop he managed to keep up with the latest intellectual currents.
economic transformation in 1721 franklin and his brother founded the new england courant a weekly newspaper that satirized bostons political the colonial economy kept pace with the stunning growth in and religious leaders in the manner of the contemporary british population.
during the first three quarters of the eighteenth cenpress.
writing under the name silence dogood young franklin tury the population increased at least tenfold and yet even with so asked his readers whether a commonwealth suffers more by many additional people to feed and clothe the per capita income hypocritical pretenders to religion or by the openly profane did not decline.
indeed with the exception of poor urban dwellers proper bostonians were not prepared for a journal that one such as sailors whose employment varied with the season white the impact of european ideas on american culture americans did quite well.
an abundance of land and the extensive growth of agriculture accounted for their economic success.
new farmers were able not only to provide for their families well being but also to sell their crops in european and west indian markets.
each year more americans produced more tobacco wheat or rice to cite just the major export crops and by this means they maintained a high level of individual prosperity without developing an industrial base.
at midcentury colonial exports flowed along well established routes.
more than half of american goods produced for export went to great britain.
the navigation acts see chapter 3 were still in effect and enumerated items such as tobacco had to be landed first at a british port.
furs were added to the restricted list in 1722.
the white pines acts passed in 1711 1722 and 1729 forbade americans from cutting white pine trees without a license.
the purpose of this legislation was to reserve the best trees for the use of the royal navy.
the molasses act of 1733 also called the sugar act placed a heavy duty on molasses imported from foreign ports the hat and felt act of 1732 and the iron act of 1750 attempted to limit the production of colonial goods that competed with british exports.
these statutes might have created tensions between the colonists and the mother country had they been rigorously enforced.
crown officials however generally ignored the new laws.
new england merchants imported molasses from french caribbean islands without paying the full customs ironmasters in the middle colonies continued to produce iron.
even without the navigation acts however a majority of colonial exports would have been sold on the english market.
the emerging consumer society in great britain was beginning to create a new generation of buyers who possessed enough income to purchase american goods especially sugar and tobacco.
this rising demand was the major market force shaping the colonial economy.
colonial merchants operating out of boston newport and philadelphia also carried substantial tonnage to the west indies.
in 1768 this market accounted for 27 percent of all american exports.
if there was a triangular trade that included the west coast of africa it does not seem to have been economically significant.
colonial ships carrying food sailed for the caribbean and returned immediately to the middle colonies or new england with cargoes of molasses sugar and rum.
in fact recent research indicates that during the eighteenth century trade with africa involved less than 1 percent of all american exports.
slaves were transported directly to colonial ports where they were sold for cash or credit.
the west indies played a vital role in preserving american credit in europe.
without this source of income colonists would not have been able to pay for the manufactured items they purchased in the mother country.
to be sure they exported american products in great quantity to great britain but the value of the exports seldom equaled the cost of british goods shipped back to the colonists.
to cover this small but recurrent deficit colonial merchants relied on profits made in the west indies.
birth of a consumer society after midcentury however the balance of trade turned dramatically against the colonists.
the reasons for this change were complex but in simplest terms americans began buying more english goods than their parents or grandparents had done.
between 1740 and 1770 english exports to the american colonies increased by an astounding 360 percent a veritable consumer revolution in the colonies.
in part this shift reflected a fundamental transformation in the british economy.
although the industrial revolution was still far in the future the pace of the british economy picked up dramatically after 1690.
small factories produced certain goods more efficiently and more cheaply than the colonists could.
the availability of these products altered the lives of most americans even those with modest incomes.
staffordshire china replaced crude earthenware imported cloth replaced homespun.
franklin noted in his autobiography how changing consumer habits affected his life.
for years he had eaten his breakfast in an earthenware bowl with a pewter spoon but one morning it was served in a china bowl with a spoon of silver franklin observed that this was the first appearance of plate and china in our house which afterwards in the course of years as our wealth increased augmented gradually to several hundred pounds in value in this manner british industrialization undercut american handicraft and folk art.
to help americans purchase manufactured goods british merchants offered generous credit.
colonists deferred settlement by agreeing to pay interest on their debts.
the temptation to acquire english finery blinded many people to hard economic realities.
they gambled on the future hoping bumper farm crops would reduce their dependence on the large merchant houses of london and glasgow.
obviously some persons lived within their means but the aggregate american debt continued to grow.
colonial leaders tried various expedients to remain solvent issuing paper money for example and while these efforts delayed a crisis the balance of payments problem was clearly very serious.
the eighteenth century also saw a substantial increase in intercoastal trade.
southern planters sent tobacco and rice to new england and the middle colonies where these staples were exchanged for meat and wheat as well as goods imported from great britain.
by 1760 approximately 30 percent of the colonists total tonnage capacity was involved in this extensive coastwise commerce.
in addition backcountry farmers in western pennsylvania and the shenandoah valley carried their grain to market along an old iroquois trail that became known as the great wagon road a rough hilly highway that by the time of the revolution stretched 735 miles along the blue ridge mountains to camden south carolina.
most of their produce was carried in long gracefully designed conestoga wagons.
these vehicles sometimes called the wagons of empire had been invented by german immigrants living in the conestoga river valley in lancaster county pennsylvania.
the shifting patterns of trade had immense effects on the development of an american culture.
first the flood of british imports eroded local and regional identities.
commerce helped to anglicize american culture by exposing colonial consumers to a common range of british manufactured goods.
deep sectional differences remained of course but americans from new hampshire to georgia were increasingly drawn into a sophisticated economic network centered in london.
second the expanding coastal and overland trade brought colonists of chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america susquehanna r the great awakening new jersey pennsylvania lancaster philadelphia io r.
york po to m ac oh delaware r winchester s mo bl hen un ue an ta do ins ah va lle ri y dg e maryland staunton james r ap pa la ch i an virginia salem salisbury roa no ke r.
north carolina great wagon road atlantic ocean camden south carolina s av an n ah r 200 miles 200 kilometers the great wagon road by the mid eighteenth century the great wagon road had become the major highway for the settlers in the virginia and carolina backcountry.
different backgrounds into more frequent contact.
ships that sailed between new england and south carolina and between virginia and pennsylvania provided dispersed americans with a means to exchange ideas and experiences on a more regular basis.
mid eighteenth century printers for example established several dozen new journals these were weekly newspapers that carried information not only about the mother country and world commerce but also about events in other colonies.
religious revivals in provincial societies how did the great awakening transform the religious culture of colonial america.
a sudden spontaneous series of protestant revivals known as the great awakening had a profound impact on the lives of ordinary people.
this unprecedented evangelical outpouring altered the course of american history.
in our own time of course the force of religious revival has been witnessed in different regions throughout the world.
it is no exaggeration to claim that a similar populist movement took place in mid eighteenth century america and the new highly personal appeal to a new birth in christ caused men and women of all backgrounds to rethink basic assumptions about church and state institutions and society.
only with hindsight does the great awakening seem a unified religious movement.
revivals occurred in different places at different times the intensity of the events varied from region to region.
the first signs of a spiritual awakening appeared in new england during the 1730s but within a decade the revivals in this area had burned themselves out.
it was not until the 1750s and 1760s that the awakening made more than a superficial impact on the people of virginia.
the revivals were most important in massachusetts connecticut rhode island pennsylvania new jersey and virginia.
their effect on religion in new york delaware and the carolinas was marginal.
no single religious denomination or sect monopolized the awakening.
in new england revivals shattered congregational churches and in the south especially in virginia they had an impact on presbyterians methodists and baptists.
moreover there was nothing peculiarly american about the great awakening.
mid eighteenth century europe experienced a similar burst of religious emotionalism.
whatever their origins the seeds of revival were generally sown on fertile ground.
in the early decades of the century many americans but especially new englanders complained that organized religion had lost vitality.
they looked back at winthrops generation with nostalgia assuming that common people at that time must have possessed greater piety than did later more worldly colonists.
congregational ministers seemed obsessed with dull scholastic matters they no longer touched the heart.
and in the southern colonies there were simply not enough ordained ministers to tend to the religious needs of the population.
the great awakening arrived unexpectedly in northampton a small farm community in western massachusetts sparked by jonathan edwards the local congregational minister.
edwards accepted the traditional teachings of calvinism see chapter 1 reminding his parishioners that their eternal fate had been determined by an omnipotent god there was nothing they could do to save themselves and they were totally dependent on the lords will.
he thought his fellow ministers had grown soft.
they left men and women with the mistaken impression that sinners might somehow avoid eternal damnation simply by performing good works.
how dismal will it be edwards told his complacent congregation when you are under these racking torments to know assuredly that you never never shall be delivered from them why this uncompromising message set off several religious revivals during the mid 1730s is not known.
whatever the explanation for the popular response to edwardss preaching young people began flocking to the church.
they experienced a searing conversion a sense of new birth and utter dependence on god.
surely edwards pronounced this is the lords doing and it is marvelous in our eyes the excitement spread and evangelical ministers concluded that god must be preparing americans his chosen people for the millennium.
what is now seen in america and especially in new england edwards explained may prove the dawn of that glorious day the voice of evangelical religion edwards was an outstanding theologian but he did not possess the dynamic personality required to sustain the revival.
that responsibility fell to george whitefield a young inspiring preacher religious revivals in provincial societies read the document jonathan edwards sinners in the hands of an angry god the reverend jonathan edwards 1703 1858 was an influential author and theologian whose preaching contributed to the great awakening.
from england who toured the colonies from new hampshire to georgia.
while whitefield was not an original thinker he was an extraordinarily effective public speaker.
and like his friend benjamin franklin he came to symbolize the powerful cultural forces that were transforming the atlantic world.
according to edwardss wife sarah it was wonderful to witness what a spell whitefield casts over an audience.
i have seen upwards of a thousand people hang on his words with breathless silence broken only by an occasional half suppressed sob whitefields audiences came from all groups of american society rich and poor young and old rural and urban.
while whitefield described himself as a calvinist he welcomed all protestants.
he spoke from any pulpit that was available.
dont tell me you are a baptist an independent a presbyterian a dissenter he thundered tell me you are a christian that is all i want whitefield was a brilliant entrepreneur.
like franklin with whom he published many popular volumes the itinerant minister possessed an almost intuitive sense of how this burgeoning consumer society could be turned to his own advantage and he embraced the latest merchandising techniques.
he appreciated for example the power of the press in selling the revival and he regularly promoted his own work in advertisements placed in british and american newspapers.
the crowds flocked to hear whitefield while his critics grumbled about the commercialization of religion.
one anonymous writer in massachusetts noted that there was a very wholesome law of the province to discourage pedlars in trade and it seemed high time to enact something for the discouragement of pedlars in divinity also other american born itinerant preachers followed whitefields example.
the most famous was gilbert tennent a presbyterian of scots irish background who had been educated in the middle colonies.
his sermon on the danger of an unconverted ministry printed in 1741 set off a storm of protest from established ministers who were understandably insulted.
lesser known revivalists traveled from town to town colony to colony challenging local clergymen who seemed hostile to evangelical religion.
men and women who thronged to hear the itinerants were called new lights and during the 1740s and 1750s many congregations split between defenders of the new emotional preaching and those who regarded the entire movement as dangerous nonsense.
despite whitefields successes many ministers remained suspicious of the itinerants and their methods.
some complaints may have amounted to little more than sour grapes.
one old light spokesman labeled tennent a monster.
impudent and noisy he claimed tennent told anxious christians that they were damned.
this charmed them and in the most dreadful winter i ever saw people wallowed in snow night and day for the benefit of his beastly brayings and many ended their days under these fatigues charles chauncy minister of the prestigious first church of boston raised much more troubling issues.
how could the revivalists be certain god had sparked the great awakening.
perhaps the itinerants had relied too much on emotion.
let us esteem those as friends of religion chauncy advised.
who warn us of the danger of enthusiasm and would put us on our guard that we may not be led aside by it despite occasional anti intellectual outbursts the new lights founded several important centers of higher learning.
they wanted to train young men who would carry on the good works of edwards whitefield and tennent.
in 1746 new light presbyterians established the college of new jersey which later became princeton university.
just before his death edwards was appointed its president.
the evangelical minister eleazar wheelock launched dartmouth 1769 other revivalists founded brown 1764 and rutgers 1766.
the great awakening also encouraged men and women who had been taught to remain silent before traditional figures of authority to speak up to take an active role in their salvation.
they could no longer rely on ministers or institutions.
the individual alone stood before god.
knowing this new lights made religious choices that shattered the old harmony among protestant sects and in its place they introduced a noisy often bitterly fought competition.
as one new jersey presbyterian explained there are so many particular sects and parties among professed christians.
that we know not.
in which of these different paths to steer our course for heaven expressive evangelicalism struck a particularly responsive chord among african americans.
itinerant ministers frequently chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america read the document benjamin franklin on george whitefield 1771 course the new lights did not sound much different than the mildly rationalist american spokesmen of the enlightenment.
both groups prepared the way for the development of a revolutionary mentality in colonial america.
clash of political cultures why were eighteenth century colonial assemblies not fully democratic.
the political history of this period illuminates a growing tension within the empire.
americans of all regions repeatedly stated their desire to replicate british political institutions.
parliament they claimed provided a model for the american assemblies.
they revered the english constitution.
however the more the colonists studied british political theory and practice in other words the more they attempted to become british the more aware they became of major differences.
by trying to copy great britain they unwittingly discovered something about being american.
the english constitution the fervor of the great awakening was intensified by the eloquence of itinerant preachers such as george whitefield the most popular evangelical of the mid eighteenth century.
preached to large sympathetic audiences of slaves.
richard allen 1760 1831 founder of the african methodist episcopal church reported he owed his freedom in part to a traveling methodist minister who persuaded allens master of the sinfulness of slavery.
allen himself was converted as were thousands of other black colonists.
according to one historian evangelical preaching shared enough with traditional african styles and beliefs such as spirit possession and ecstatic expression.
to allow for an interpenetration of african and christian religious beliefs with religious contention came an awareness of a larger community a union of fellow believers that extended beyond the boundaries of town and colony.
in fact evangelical religion was one of several forces at work during the mid eighteenth century that brought scattered colonists into contact with one another for the first time.
in this sense the great awakening was a national event long before a nation actually existed.
people who had been touched by the great awakening shared an optimism about the future of america.
with gods help social and political progress was possible and from this perspective of during the eighteenth century political discussion began with the british constitution.
it was the object of universal admiration.
unlike the u s constitution of 1788 the british constitution was not a formal written document.
it was something much more elusive.
the english constitution found expression in a growing body of law court decisions and statutes a sense of traditional political arrangements that people of all classes believed had evolved from the past preserving life liberty and property.
in theory the english constitution contained three distinct parts.
the monarch was at the top advised by handpicked court favorites.
next came the house of lords a body of 180 aristocrats who served with 26 anglican bishops as the upper house of parliament.
and third was the house of commons composed of 558 members elected by various constituencies scattered throughout the realm.
political theorists waxed eloquent on workings of the british constitution.
each of the three parts of government it seemed represented a separate socioeconomic interest king nobility and common people.
acting alone each body would run to excess even tyranny but operating within a mixed system they automatically checked each others ambitions for the common good.
herein consists the excellence of the english government explained the famed eighteenth century jurist sir william blackstone that all parts of it form a mutual check upon each other unlike the delegates who wrote the constitution of the united states eighteenthcentury englishmen did not perceive their constitution as a balance of executive legislative and judicial branches.
the reality of british politics the reality of daily political life in great britain however bore little relation to theory.
the three elements of the constitution did not in fact represent distinct socioeconomic groups.
men elected to the house of commons often came from the same social background as clash of political cultures read the document english bill of rights 1689 this political cartoon published in london in 1727 denounces corruption in the british electoral system.
it warns that if politicians gave into the temptation to use their offices for their own self interest one of the chief concerns of whig ideology then men will be corrupted and liberty sold those who served in the house of lords.
all represented the interests of britains landed elite.
moreover there was no attempt to maintain strict constitutional separation.
the king for example organized parliamentary associations loose groups of political followers who sat in the house of commons and who openly supported the monarchs policies in exchange for patronage or pension.
the claim that the members of the house of commons represented all the people of england also seemed far fetched.
as of 1715 no more than 20 percent of britains adult males had the right to vote.
property qualifications or other restrictions often greatly reduced the number of eligible voters.
in addition the size of the electoral districts varied throughout the kingdom.
in some boroughs representatives to parliament were chosen by several thousand voters.
in many districts however a handful of electors controlled the result.
these tiny or rotten boroughs were an embarrassment.
the methodist leader john wesley complained that old sarum an almost uninhabited borough in spite of common sense without house or inhabitant still sends two members to the parliament since these districts were so small a wealthy lord or ambitious politician could easily bribe or otherwise influence the entire constituency something done regularly throughout the century.
before 1760 few people spoke out against these constitutional abuses.
the main exception was a group of radical publicists whom historians have labeled the commonwealthmen.
these writers decried the corruption of political life noting that a nation that compromised civic virtue that failed to stand vigilant against fawning courtiers and would be despots deserved to lose its liberty and property.
the most famous commonwealthmen were john trenchard and thomas gordon who penned a series of essays titled catos letters between 1720 and 1723.
if englands rulers were corrupt they warned then the people could not expect the balanced constitution to save them from tyranny.
in one typical article trenchard and gordon observed the appitites.
of men especially of great men are carefully to be observed and stayed or else they will never stay themselves.
the experience of every age convinces us that we must not judge of men by what they ought to do but by what they will do but however shrilly these writers protested they won little support for political reforms.
most eighteenthcentury englishmen admitted there was more than a grain of truth in the commonwealth critique but they were not willing to tamper with a system of government that had so recently survived a civil war and a glorious revolution.
americans however took trenchard and gordon to heart.
governing the colonies the american experience the colonists assumed perhaps naively that their own governments were modeled on the balanced constitution of great britain.
they argued that within their political systems the governor corresponded to the king and the governors council to the house of lords.
the colonial assemblies were perceived as american reproductions of the house of commons and were expected to preserve the interests of the people against those of the monarch and aristocracy.
as the colonists discovered however general theories about a mixed constitution were even less relevant in america than they were in britain.
by midcentury a majority of the mainland colonies had royal governors appointed by the crown.
many were career army officers who through luck charm or family connection had gained the ear of someone close to the king.
these patronage posts did not generate income sufficient to interest the most powerful or talented personalities of the period but they did draw middle level bureaucrats who were ambitious desperate or both.
it is perhaps not surprising that most governors decided simply not to consider any thing further than how to sit easy chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america george clinton who served as new yorks governor from 1743 to 1753 was probably typical of the men who hoped to sit easy before coming to the colonies clinton had compiled an extraordinary record of ineptitude as a naval officer.
he gained the governorship more as a means to get him out of england than as a sign of respect.
when he arrived in new york city clinton ignored the colonists.
in a province given to hospitality wrote one critic he clinton erred by immuring himself in the fort or retiring to a grotto in the country where his time was spent with his bottle and a little trifling circle whatever their demerits royal governors in america possessed enormous powers.
in fact royal governors could do certain things in america that a king could not do in eighteenth century britain.
among these were the right to veto legislation and dismiss judges.
the governors also served as military commanders in each province.
political practice in america differed from the british model in another crucial respect.
royal governors were advised by a council usually a body of about twelve wealthy colonists selected by the board of trade in london upon the recommendation of the governor.
during the seventeenth century the council had played an important role in colonial government but its ability to exercise independent authority declined steadily over the course of the eighteenth century.
its members certainly did not represent a distinct aristocracy within american society.
if royal governors did not look like kings nor american councils like the house of lords colonial assemblies bore little resemblance to the eighteenth century house of commons.
the major difference was the size of the american franchise.
in most colonies adult white males who owned a small amount of land could vote in colonywide elections.
one historian estimates that 95 percent of this group in massachusetts were eligible to participate in elections.
the number in virginia was about 85 percent.
these figures much higher than those in contemporary england have led some scholars to view the colonies as middle class democracies societies run by moderately prosperous yeomen farmers who in politics at least exercised independent judgment.
there were too many of them to bribe no rotten boroughs and when these people moved west colonial assemblies usually created new electoral districts.
colonial governments were not democracies in the modern sense of that term.
possessing the right to vote was one thing exercising it quite another.
americans participated in elections when major issues were at stake the formation of banks in mideighteenth century massachusetts for example but most of the time they were content to let members of the rural and urban gentry represent them in the assemblies.
to be sure unlike modern democracies these colonial politics excluded women and nonwhites from voting.
the point to remember however is that the power to expel legislative rascals was always present in america and it was this political reality that kept autocratic gentlemen from straying too far from the will of the people.
colonial assemblies elected members of the colonial assemblies believed that they had a special obligation to preserve colonial liberties.
they perceived any attack on the legislature as an assault on the rights of americans.
the elected representatives brooked no criticism and several colonial printers landed in jail because they criticized actions taken by a lower house.
so aggressive were these bodies in seizing privileges determining procedures and controlling money bills that some historians have described the political development of eighteenth century america as the rise of the assemblies no doubt this is exaggerated but the long series of imperial wars against the french demanding large public expenditures transformed the small amateurish assemblies of the seventeenth century into the more professional vigilant legislatures of the eighteenth.
this political system seemed designed to generate hostility.
there was simply no reason for the colonial legislators to cooperate with appointed royal governors.
alexander spotswood virginias governor from 1710 to 1722 for example attempted to institute a bold new land program backed by the crown.
he tried persuasion and gifts and when these failed chicanery.
but the members of the house of burgesses refused to support a plan that did not suit their own interests.
before leaving office spotswood gave up trying to carry out royal policy in america.
instead he allied himself with the local virginia gentry who controlled the house as well as the council and because they awarded their new friend with large tracts of land he became a wealthy man.
a major source of shared political information was the weekly journal a new and vigorous institution in american life.
in new york and massachusetts especially weekly newspapers urged readers to preserve civic virtue to exercise extreme vigilance against the spread of privileged power.
in the first issue of the independent reflector published in new york november 30 1752 the editor announced defiantly that no discouragement shall deter me from vindicating the civil and religious rights of my fellow creatures from exposing the peculiar deformity of publick vice and corruption and displaying the amiable charms of liberty with the detestable nature of slavery and oppression through such journals a pattern of political rhetoric that in britain had gained only marginal respectability became after 1765 americas normal form of political discourse.
the rise of the assemblies shaped american culture in other subtler ways.
over the course of the century the language of the law became increasingly anglicized.
the board of trade the privy council and parliament scrutinized court decisions and legislative actions from all thirteen mainland colonies.
as a result varying local legal practices that had been widespread during the seventeenth century became standardized.
indeed according to one historian the colonial legal system by 1750 was substantially that of the mother country not surprisingly many men who served in colonial assemblies were either lawyers or persons who had received legal training.
when americans from different regions met as they frequently did in the years before the revolution they discovered that they shared a commitment to the preservation of the english common law.
as eighteenth century political developments drew the colonists closer to the mother country they also brought americans a greater awareness of each other.
as their horizons widened they learned they operated within the same general imperial system and the problems confronting the massachusetts house of century of imperial war representatives were not too different from those facing virginias house of burgesses or south carolinas commons house.
like the revivalists and merchants people who crossed old boundaries colonial legislators laid the foundation for a larger cultural identity.
century of imperial war why did colonial americans support great britains wars against france.
on paper at least the british colonies enjoyed military superiority over the settlements of new france.
louis xiv r 1643 1715 possessed an impressive army of 100 000 well armed troops but he dispatched few of them to the new world.
he left the defense of canada and the mississippi valley to the companies engaged in the fur trade.
meeting this challenge seemed almost impossible for the french outposts strung out along the st lawrence river and the great lakes.
in 1754 new france contained only 75 000 inhabitants as compared to 1 2 million people living in britains mainland colonies.
for most of the century the theoretical advantages enjoyed by the english colonists did them little good.
while the british settlements possessed a larger and more prosperous population they were divided into separate governments that sometimes seemed more suspicious of each other than of the french.
when war came french officers and indian allies exploited these jealousies with considerable skill.
moreover although the population of new france was comparatively small it was concentrated along the st lawrence so that while the french found it difficult to mount effective offensive operations against the english they could easily mass the forces needed to defend montreal and quebec.
king williams and queen annes wars colonial involvement in imperial war began in 1689 when englands new king william iii declared war on louis xiv.
europeans called this struggle the war of the league of augsburg but to the americans it was simply king williams war.
canadians commanded by the comte de frontenac raided the northern frontiers of new york and new england and while they made no territorial gains they caused considerable suffering among the civilian populations of massachusetts and new york.
the war ended with the treaty of ryswick 1697 but the colonists were drawn almost immediately into a new conflict.
queen annes war known in europe as the war of the spanish succession 1702 1713 was fought across a large geographic area.
the bloody combat along the american frontier ended in 1713 when great britain and france signed the treaty of utrecht.
european negotiators showed little interest in the military situation in the new world.
their major concern was preserving a balance of power among the european states.
more than two decades of intense fighting had taken a heavy toll in north america but neither french nor english colonists had much to show for their sacrifice.
both sides viewed this great contest in conspiratorial terms.
from south carolina to massachusetts bay colonists believed the french planned to encircle the english settlements to confine the english to a narrow strip of land along the atlantic coast.
the english noted that in 1682 la salle had claimed for the king of france a territory louisiana that included all the people and resources located on streams and rivers flowing into the mississippi river.
to make good on their claim the french constructed forts on the chicago and illinois rivers.
in 1717 they established a military post two hundred miles up the alabama river well within striking distance of the carolina frontier and in 1718 they settled new orleans.
one new yorker declared in 1715 that it is impossible that we and the french can both inhabit this continent in peace but that one nation must at last give way to the other on their part the french suspected their rivals intended to seize all of north america.
land speculators and frontier traders pushed aggressively into territory claimed by the french and owned by the native americans.
in 1716 one frenchman urged his government to hasten the development of louisiana since it is not difficult to guess that their the british purpose is to drive us entirely out.
of north america to their great sorrow and eventual destruction the original inhabitants of the frontier the native americans were swept up in this undeclared war.
the indians maneuvered to hold their own in the middle ground the iroquois favored the british the algonquian peoples generally supported the french.
but regardless of the groups to which they belonged indian warriors acting independently and for their own strategic reasons found themselves enmeshed in imperial policies set by distant european kings.
king georges war and its aftermath in 1743 the americans were dragged once again into the imperial conflict.
during king georges war 1743 1748 known in europe as the war of the austrian succession the colonists scored a magnificent victory over the french.
louisbourg a gigantic fortress on cape breton island the easternmost promontory of canada guarded the approaches to the gulf of st lawrence and quebec.
it was described as the gibraltar of the new world.
an army of new england troops under the command of william pepperrell captured louisbourg in june 1745 a feat that demonstrated the british colonists were able to fight and to mount effective joint operations.
the americans however were in for a shock.
when the war ended with the signing of the treaty of aix la chapelle in 1748 the british government handed louisbourg back to the french in exchange for concessions elsewhere.
such decisions exposed the deep and continuing ambivalence the colonists felt about participation in imperial wars.
they were proud to support great britain of course but the americans seldom fully understood why the wars were being fought why certain tactics had been adopted and why the british accepted treaty terms that so blatantly ignored colonial interests.
the french were not prepared to surrender an inch.
but as they recognized time was running against them.
not only were the english colonies growing more populous but they also possessed a seemingly inexhaustible supply of manufactured goods to trade with the indians.
the french decided in the early 1750s therefore to seize the ohio valley before the virginians could do so.
they established forts throughout the region the most formidable being fort duquesne located at the strategic fork in the ohio river and later renamed pittsburgh.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america this mid eighteenth century lithograph portrays colonial assault troops under the command of william pepperrell establishing a beachhead at freshwater cove near louisbourg.
pepperrells troops went on to capture the french fortress at louisbourg.
although france and england had not officially declared war british officials advised the governor of virginia to repell force by force the virginians needed little encouragement.
they were eager to make good their claim to the ohio valley and in 1754 militia companies under the command of a promising young officer george washington constructed fort necessity not far from fort duquesne.
the plan failed.
french and indian troops overran the badly exposed outpost july 3 1754.
among other things the humiliating setback revealed that a single colony could not defeat the french.
albany congress and braddocks defeat benjamin franklin for one appreciated the need for intercolonial cooperation.
when british officials invited representatives from virginia and maryland as well as the northern colonies to albany june 1754 to discuss relations with the iroquois franklin used the occasion to present a bold blueprint for colonial union.
his socalled albany plan envisioned the formation of a grand council made up of elected delegates from the various colonies to oversee matters of common defense western expansion and indian affairs.
a president general appointed by the king would preside.
franklins most daring suggestion involved taxation.
he insisted the council be authorized to collect taxes to cover military expenditures.
first reaction to the albany plan was enthusiastic.
to take effect however it required the support of the separate colonial assemblies as well as parliament.
it received neither.
the assemblies were jealous of their fiscal authority and the english thought the scheme undermined the crowns power over american affairs.
in 1755 the ohio valley again became the scene of fierce fighting.
even though there was still no formal declaration of war the british resolved to destroy fort duquesne and to that end they dispatched units of the regular army to america.
in command was major general edward braddock an obese humorless veteran who inspired neither fear nor respect.
one colonist described braddock as very indolent slave to his passions women wine as great an epicure as could be in his eating tho a brave man on july 9 braddock led a joint force of twenty five hundred british redcoats and colonists to humiliating defeat.
the french and indians opened fire as braddocks army waded across the monongahela river about eight miles from fort duquesne.
along a narrow road already congested with heavy wagons and confused men braddock ordered a counterattack described by one of his officers as without any form or order but that of a parcell of school boys coming out of s c hool nearly 70 percent of braddocks troops were killed or wounded in western pennsylvania.
the general himself died in battle.
the french who suffered only light casualties remained in firm control of the ohio valley.
century of imperial war view the map european claims in america c 1750 russian america hudson bay ur misso st louisiana oh st pierre miquelon fr.
e quebec montreal louisbourg.
io r british colonies new orleans new ai sp gulf of mexico n pa c i f i c ocean french fishing rights.
mississ ippi r di sp ute d ir e nc rar.
l ne aw w ren f c grant to hudson s bay company cuba jamaica at l a n t i c ocean st domingue fr.
puerto rico guadeloupe sp.
martinique fr.
caribbean sea guiana dutch british claims new granada french claims spanish claims russian claims 1000 miles brazil port.
500 1000 kilometers north america 1750 by 1750 the french had established a chain of settlements southward through the heart of the continent from quebec to new orleans.
the british saw this development as a threat to their own seaboard colonies which were expanding westward.
the entire affair profoundly angered washington who fumed we have been most scandalously beaten by a trifling body of men the british thought their allies the iroquois might desert them after the embarrassing defeat.
the indians however took the news in stride observing that they were not at all surprised to hear it as they braddocks redcoats were men who had crossed the great water and were unacquainted with the arts of war among the americans seven years war britains imperial war effort had hit bottom.
no one in england or america seemed to possess the leadership necessary to drive the french from the mississippi valley.
the cabinet of george ii r 1727 1760 lacked the will to organize and finance a sustained military campaign in the new world and colonial assemblies balked every time britain asked them to raise men and money.
on may 18 1756 the british officially declared war on the french a conflict called the french and indian war in america and the seven years war in europe.
had it not been for william pitt the most powerful minister in georges cabinet the military stalemate might have continued.
this supremely self confident englishman believed he was the only person capable of saving the british empire an opinion he publicly expressed.
when he became effective head of the ministry in december 1756 pitt had an opportunity to demonstrate his talents.
in the past warfare on the european continent had worked mainly to frances advantage.
pitt saw no point in continuing to concentrate on europe and in 1757 he advanced a bold new imperial policy one based on commercial assumptions.
in pitts judgment the critical confrontation would take place in north america where britain and france were struggling to control colonial markets and raw materials.
indeed according to pitt america was where england and europe are to be fought for he was determined therefore to expel the french from the continent however great the cost.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america read the document albany plan of union 1754 the first political cartoon to appear in an american newspaper was created by benjamin franklin in 1754 to emphasize the importance of the albany plan.
to effect this ambitious scheme pitt took personal command of the army and navy.
he mapped strategy.
he even promoted young promising officers over the heads of their superiors.
he also recognized that the success of the war effort could not depend on the generosity of the colonial assemblies.
great britain would have to foot most of the bill.
pitts military expenditures of course created an enormous national debt that would soon haunt both britain and its colonies but at the time no one foresaw the fiscal consequences of victory in america.
to direct the grand campaign pitt selected two relatively obscure officers jeffrey amherst and james wolfe.
it was a masterful choice one that a less self assured man than pitt would never have risked.
both officers were young talented and ambitious and on july 26 1758 forces under their direction captured louisbourg the same fortress the colonists had taken a decade earlier.
this victory cut the canadians main supply line with france.
the small population of new france could no longer meet the military demands placed on it.
as the situation became increasingly desperate the french forts of the ohio valley and the great lakes began to fall.
duquesne was simply abandoned late in 1758 as french and indian troops under the marquis a century of conflict major wars 1689 1763 european name war of the league of augsburg american name king williams war 1702 1713 war of the spanish succession queen annes war 1743 1748 war of the austrian succession war of jenkins ear king georges war 1756 1763 seven years war french and indian war dates 1689 1697 major allies britain holland spain their colonies and native american allies against france its colonies and native american allies britain holland their colonies and native american allies against france spain their colonies and native american allies britain its colonies and native american allies and austria against france spain their native american allies and prussia britain its colonies and native american allies against france its colonies and native american allies issues opposition to french bid for control of europe austria and france hold rival claims to spanish throne struggle among britain spain and france for control of new world territory among france prussia and austria for control of central europe struggle among britain spain and france for worldwide control of colonial markets and raw materials major american battle new england troops assault quebec under sir william phips 1690 attack on deerfield 1704 treaty treaty of ryswick 1697 treaty of utrecht 1713 new england treaty of forces capture of aix la chapelle louisbourg under 1748 william pepperrell 1745 british and peace of paris continental forces 1763 capture quebec under major general james wolfe 1759 w o century of imperial war lfe grant to hudson s bay company louisbourg besieged june 8 july 26 1758 halifax a m h ce en wr ft st frederic crown point abandoned july 31 1759 ocean n h british colonies hudson r albany n y ke at l a n t i c ft carillon ticonderoga abandoned july 26 1759 ft niagara besieged july 6 25 1759 la e l champlain st er lake ontario ie er amh maine part of mass.
st l a montreal surrendered sept 8 1760 rs t disputed r new france wolfe fr o g re a t b m r i tai n acadia plains of abraham quebec sept 13 1759 ft frontenac surrendered aug 27 1758 n j boston french claims mass.
british claims british troop movements conn r i british victories french victories new york pa ft duquesne abandoned nov 25 1758 great meadows may 28 1754 braddock s defeat july 9 1755 philadelphia md.
necessity july 3 4 1754 del.
the seven years war 1756 1763 200 miles 200 kilometers major battle sites.
the conflict ended with great britain driving the french from mainland north america.
de montcalm retreated toward quebec and montreal.
during the summer of 1759 the french surrendered key forts at ticonderoga crown point and niagara.
the climax to a century of war came dramatically in september 1759.
wolfe now a major general assaulted quebec with nine thousand men.
but it was not simply force of arms that brought victory.
wolfe proceeded as if he were preparing to attack the city directly but under cover of darkness his troops scaled a cliff to dominate a less well defended position.
at dawn on september 13 1759 they took the french from the rear by surprise.
the decisive action occurred on the plains of abraham a bluff high above the st lawrence river.
both wolfe and montcalm were mortally wounded.
when an aide informed wolfe the french had been routed he sighed now god be praised i will die in peace on september 8 1760 amherst accepted the final surrender of the french army at montreal.
the peace of paris of 1763 signed on february 10 almost fulfilled pitts grandiose dreams.
great britain took possession of an empire that stretched around the globe.
only guadeloupe and martinique the caribbean sugar islands were given back to the french.
after a century long struggle the french had been driven from the mainland of north america.
even louisiana passed out of frances control into spanish hands.
the treaty gave britain title to canada florida and all the land east of the mississippi river.
moreover with the stroke of a diplomats pen eighty thousand french speaking canadians most of them catholics became the subjects of george iii.
the americans were overjoyed.
it was a time of good feelings and national pride.
together the english and their colonial allies had thwarted the gallic peril samuel davies a presbyterian who had brought the great awakening to virginia announced confidently that the long awaited victory would inaugurate a new heaven and a new earth perceptions of war the seven years war made a deep impression on american society.
even though franklins albany plan had failed the military struggle had forced the colonists to cooperate on an unprecedented scale.
it also drew them into closer contact with britain.
they became aware of being part of a great empire military and commercial but in the very process of waging war they acquired a more intimate sense of an america that lay beyond the plantation and the village.
confl ict had carried thousands of young men across colonial boundaries exposing them to a vast territory full of opportunities for a booming population.
moreover the war trained a corps of american officers people like george washington who learned from firsthand experience that the british were not invincible.
chapter 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america view the closer look european claims in north america 1750 and 1763 russian america hudson bay french fishing rights hudson s bay company ce.
ec r eb u q spanish a louisiana ne w pa c i f i c ocean mississip pi r r st pierre miquelon fr.
t la wr en la ke s s ind ian re se rv e ri missou grea t.
io r oh proclamation line of 1763 british colonies at l a n t i c ocean st domingue fr.
ai sp g lf off gulf mexico puerto rico sp.
n cuba guadeloupe fr.
martinique fr.
jamaica st lucia fr.
caribbean sea guiana dutch new granada british claims french claims spanish claims russian claims 1000 miles brazil port.
1000 kilometers north america after 1763 the peace of paris 1763 redrew the map of north america.
great britain received all the french holdings except a few islands in the atlantic and some sugar producing islands in the caribbean.
british officials later accused the americans of ingratitude.
england they claimed had sent troops and provided funds to liberate the colonists from the threat of french attack.
the americans appreciative of the aid from england cheered on the british but dragged their feet at every stage refusing to pay the bills.
these charges were later incorporated into a general argument justifying parliamentary taxation in america.
the british had a point.
the colonists were in fact slow in providing the men and materials needed to fight the french.
nevertheless they did make a significant contribution to the war effort and it was perfectly reasonable for americans to regard themselves at the very least as junior partners in the empire.
after all they had supplied almost twenty thousand soldiers and spent well over 2 million.
in a single year in fact massachusetts enlisted five thousand men out of an adult male population of about fifty thousand a commitment that in the words of one military historian meant the war was being waged on a scale comparable to the great wars of modern times after making such a sacrifice indeed after demonstrating their loyalty to the mother country the colonists would surely have been disturbed to learn that general james conclusion rule britannia.
wolfe the hero of quebec had stated the americans are in general the dirtiest the most contemptible cowardly dogs that you can conceive.
there is no depending upon them in action.
they fall down in their own dirt and desert in battalions officers and all conclusion rule britannia.
james thomson an englishman understood the hold of empire on the popular imagination of the eighteenth century.
in 1740 he composed words that british patriots have proudly sung for more than two centuries rule britannia rule the waves britons never will be slaves.
colonial americans at least those of british background joined the chorus.
by midcentury they took their political and cultural cues from great britain.
they fought its wars purchased its consumer goods flocked to hear its evangelical preachers and read its many publications.
without question the empire provided the colonists with a compelling source of identity.
an editor justified the establishment of new hampshires first newspaper in precisely these terms.
by this means the publisher observed the spirited englishman the mountainous welshman the brave scotchman and irishman and the loyal american may be firmly united and mutually resolved to guard the glorious throne of britannia.
as british brothers in defending the common cause even new immigrants the germans scots irish and africans who felt no political loyalty to great britain and no affinity to english culture had to assimilate to some degree to the dominant english culture of the colonies.
americans hailed britannia.
in 1763 they were the victors the conquerors of the backcountry.
in their moment of glory the colonists assumed that britains rulers saw the americans as brothers as equal partners in the business of empire.
only slowly would they learn the british had a different perception.
for them american was a way of saying not quite english chapter 4 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 4 experience of empire on myhistorylab time line 1680 el pop leads pueblo revolt against the spanish in new mexico 1689 william and mary accede to the english throne 1706 birth of benjamin franklin 1714 george i of hanover becomes monarch of great britain 1732 colony of georgia is established birth of george washington 1734 1736 first expression of the great awakening at northampton massachusetts 1740 george whitefield electrifies listeners at boston 1745 colonial troops capture louisbourg 1748 american lutheran ministers ordained in philadelphia albany congress meets braddock is defeated by the french and indians in western pennsylvania seven years war is formally declared british are victorious at quebec wolfe and montcalm are killed in battle george iii becomes king of great britain peace of paris ending french and indian war is signed junpero serra begins to build missions in california mexico declares independence from spain chapter review growth and diversity what difficulties did native americans face in maintaining their cultural independence on the frontier.
religious revivals in provincial societies how did the great awakening transform the religious culture of colonial america.
britains american colonies experienced extraordinary growth during the eighteenth century.
german and scots irish migrants poured into the backcountry where they clashed with native americans.
the indians played off french and british imperial ambitions in the middle ground but disease and encroachment by european settlers undermined the indians ability to resist.
p 80 the great awakening brought a new form of evangelical religion to ordinary americans.
it emphasized personal salvation through a new birth and membership in a large community of believers.
itinerant preachers such as george whitefield drew huge crowds throughout the colonies.
other ministers followed whitefield inviting ordinary americans to question traditional religious authorities.
p 90 spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century clash of political cultures why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
why were eighteenth century colonial assemblies not fully democratic.
during the late 1600s and early 1700s the spanish empire expanded its authority north of mexico.
new settlements were established in the southwest and california.
although the spanish constructed missions and forts a lack of settlers and troops made it impossible for them to impose effective imperial authority.
much of the territory they claimed remained under the control of indian peoples.
p 83 most eighteenth century colonial governments were comprised of a royal governor an appointed governors council and an elected assembly.
although these representative assemblies did not allow women blacks or the poor to vote they did enfranchise most of the white adult male population.
assemblies guarded their privileges and powers often conflicting with royal governors who tried to expand their authority.
p 92 the impact of european ideas on american culture century of imperial war how did european ideas affect eighteenthcentury american life.
during the enlightenment educated europeans and american colonists like benjamin franklin brought scientific reason to the study of religion nature and society.
by midcentury economic growth sparked a consumer revolution that introduced colonists to an unprecedented array of imported manufactured items.
new ideas and goods helped integrate the american colonies into mainstream british culture.
p 87 why did colonial americans support great britains wars against france.
france and britain waged almost constant war in north america.
by 1750 britains american colonists believed the french in canada planned to encircle their settlements cutting them off from the rich lands of the ohio valley.
the seven years war drove the french from canada a victory that generated unprecedented enthusiasm for the british empire in the colonies.
p 95 study resources key terms and definitions backcountry in the eighteenth century the edge of settlement extending from western pennsylvania to georgia.
this region formed the second frontier as settlers moved west from the atlantic coast into the interior.
p 80 middle ground a geographical area where two distinct cultures meet and merge with neither holding a clear upper hand.
p 83 enlightenment philosophical and intellectual movement that began in europe during the eighteenth century.
it stressed the use of reason to solve social and scientific problems.
p 87 consumer revolution period between 1740 and 1770 when english exports to the american colonies increased by 360 percent to satisfy americans demand for consumer goods.
p 89 great awakening a sudden spontaneous and fervent series of protestant evangelical revivals beginning in the 1730s and through the 1740s and 1750s that occurred throughout the colonies.
the great awakening encouraged men and women to take an active role in their salvation and helped connect scattered colonists together with a unifying belief that with gods assistance social and political progress was possible in colonial america.
p 90 itinerant preachers these charismatic preachers spread revivalism throughout america during the great awakening.
p 91 albany plan plan of intercolonial cooperation proposed by prominent colonists including benjamin franklin at a conference in albany new york in 1754.
the plan called for a grand council of elected delegates from the colonies that would have powers to tax and provide for the common defense.
although rejected by the colonial and british governments it was a prototype for colonial union.
p 96 seven years war worldwide conflict 1756 1763 that pitted britain against france.
with help from the american colonists the british won the war and eliminated france as a power on the north american continent.
also known as the french and indian war.
p 97 peace of paris of 1763 treaty ending the french and indian war by which france ceded canada to britain.
p 99 critical thinking questions 1.
what factors ultimately served to undermine the middle ground.
what are the similarities and differences between the impact of the enlightenment and the great awakening on colonial society.
what impact did the spanish empire have on the culture of 5.
why did colonists place greater political trust in their elected the borderlands.
assemblies than in their royally appointed governors.
what impact did enlightenment ideas and commercial goods have on american politics.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 4 on myhistorylab growth and diversity read the document gentleman p 79 clash of political cultures william byrd ii diary an american read the document benjamin franklin observations concerning the increase of mankind p 81 read the document english bill of rights 1689 p 93 century of imperial war view the map european claims in america c 1750 p 97 spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase p 84 read the document testimony by pedro naranjo to spanish authorities p 86 religious revivals in provincial societies read the document complete the assignment read the document jonathan edwards sinners in the hands of an angry god p 91 read the document whitfield 1771 p 92 benjamin franklin on george albany plan of union 1754 p 98 view the closer look european claims in north america 1750 and 1763 p 100 indicates study plan media assignment the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 contents and learning objectives structure of colonial society pg.
106 the loyalist dilemma pg.
126 why did americans resist parliamentary taxation.
why did so many loyalists decide to leave the united states during the revolution.
eroding the bonds of empire pg.
108 what events eroded the bonds of empire during the 1760s.
winning the peace pg.
127 steps toward independence pg.
116 how did benjamin franklin john adams and john jay secure a better peace treaty than congress could have expected.
what events in 1775 and 1776 led to the colonists decision to declare independence.
fighting for independence pg.
119 why did it take eight years of warfare for the americans to gain independence.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab feature essay spains contribution to american independence.
chapter 5 the american revolution moment of decision commitment and sacrifice even as the british army poured into boston in 1774 demanding complete obedience to king and parliament few americans welcomed the possibility of revolutionary violence.
for many colonial families it would have been easier certainly safer to accede to imperial demands for taxes enacted without their representation.
but they did not do so.
for the patten family the time of reckoning arrived in the spring of 1775.
matthew patten had been born in ulster a protestant irishman and with scots irish friends and relatives he migrated to new hampshire where they founded a settlement of fifty six families known as bedford.
matthew farmed the unpromising rocky soil that he his wife elizabeth and their children called home.
in time distant decisions about taxes and representation shattered the peace of bedford and the patterns found themselves drawn into a war not of their own making but which nevertheless compelled them to sacrifice the security of everyday life for liberty.
on april 20 1775 accounts of lexington and concord reached bedford.
matthew noted in his diary i received the melancholy news in the morning that general gages troops had fired on our countrymen at concord yesterday his son john marched with neighbors in support of the massachusetts soldiers.
the departure was tense.
the entire family helped john prepare.
our girls sit up all night baking bread and fitting things for him matthew wrote.
the demands of war had only just begun.
in late 1775 john volunteered for an american march on british canada.
on the long trek over impossible terrain the boy died.
the father recorded his emotions in the diary.
john was shot through his left arm at bunker hill fight and now was lead after suffering much fategue to the place where he now lyes in defending the just rights of america to whose end he came in the prime of life by means of that wicked tyrannical brute nea worse than brute of great britain george iii.
he was twenty four years and 31 days old the initial stimulus for rebellion came from the gentry from the rich and wellborn who resented parliaments efforts to curtail their rights within the british empire.
patten family farmstead in bedford new hampshire.
but as these influential planters wealthy merchants and prominent clergymen discovered the revolutionary movement generated a momentum that they could not control.
as relations with britain deteriorated particularly after 1765 the traditional leaders of colonial society encouraged the ordinary folk to join the protest as rioters as petitioners and finally as soldiers.
newspapers sermons and pamphlets helped transform what had begun as a squabble among the gentry into a mass movement and once the people had become involved in shaping the nations destiny they could never again be excluded.
had it not been for ordinary militiamen like john patten in the various colonies the british would have easily crushed american resistance.
although some accounts of the revolution downplay the military side of the story leaving the impression that a few famous founding fathers effortlessly carried the nation to independence a more persuasive explanation must recognize the centrality of armed violence in achieving nationhood.
the american revolution involved a massive military commitment.
if common american soldiers had not been willing to stand up to seasoned british troops to face chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 the terror of the bayonet charge independence would have remained a dream of intellectuals.
proportionate to the population a greater percentage of americans died in military service during the revolution than in any war in american history with the exception of the civil war.
he concept of liberty so magnificently expressed in revolutionary pamphlets was not therefore simply an abstraction an exclusive concern of political theorists such as thomas jefferson and john adams.
it also motivated ordinary folk the patten family for example to take up weapons and risk death.
those who survived the ordeal were never quite the same for the very experience of fighting of assuming responsibility in battle and perhaps even of taking the lives of british officers gave dramatic new meaning to the idea of social equality.
t structure of colonial society why did americans resist parliamentary taxation.
colonists who were alive during the 1760s did not anticipate the coming of national independence.
it is only from a modern perspective that we see how the events of this period would lead to the formation of the united states.
the colonists of course did not know what the future would bring.
they would probably have characterized these years as postwar as a time of heightened economic and political expectation following the successful conclusion of the seven years war see chapter 4.
for many americans the period generated optimism.
the population continued to grow.
indeed in 1776 approximately 2 5 million people black and white were living in great britains thirteen mainland colonies.
the striking ethnic and racial diversity of these men and women amazed european visitors who apparently rated homogeneity more highly than did the americans.
in 1775 for example a traveler corrected the impression in london that the colonists are the offspring of englishmen to be sure many families traced their roots to great britain but one also encountered french dutch germans innumerable indians africans and a multitude of felons he then asked rhetorically is it possible to tell which are the most turbulent amongst such a mixture of people the american population on the eve of independence was also extraordinarily young a fact of great importance in understanding the development of effective political resistance.
nearly 60 percent of the american people were under age 21.
this is a fact of considerable significance.
at any given time most people in this society were small children and many of the young men who fought the british during the revolution either had not been born or had been infants during the stamp act crisis.
any explanation for the coming of independence therefore must take into account the continuing political mobilization of so many young people.
postwar americans also experienced a high level of prosperity.
to be sure some major port cities went through a difficult period as colonists who had been employed during the fighting were thrown out of work.
sailors and ship workers for example were especially vulnerable to layoffs of this sort.
in general however white americans did very well.
the quality of their material lives was not substantially lower than that of the english.
in 1774 the per capita wealth of the americans this figure includes blacks as well as whites was 37 4.
this sum exceeds the per capita wealth of many developing countries today.
on the eve of revolution 37 4 would have purchased about 310 bushels of wheat 1 600 pounds of rice 11 cows or 6 horses.
a typical white family of five a father mother and three dependent children not only would have been able to afford decent food clothing and housing but also would have had money left over with which to purchase consumer goods.
even the poorest colonists seem to have benefited from a rising standard of living and although they may not have done as well as their wealthier neighbors they too wanted to preserve gains they had made.
wealth however was not evenly distributed in this society.
regional variations were striking.
the southern colonies enjoyed the highest levels of personal wealth in america which can be explained in part by the ownership of slaves.
more than 90 percent of americas unfree workers lived in the south and they represented a huge capital investment.
even without including the slaves in these wealth estimates the south did quite well.
in terms of aggregate wealth the middle colonies also scored impressively.
in fact only new england lagged noticeably behind a reflection of its relative inability to produce large amounts of exports for a growing world market.
breakdown of political trust ultimate responsibility for preserving the empire fell to george iii.
when he became king of england in 1760 he was only 22 years of age.
the new monarch was determined to play an aggressive role in government.
this decision caused considerable dismay among englands political leaders.
for decades a powerful though loosely associated group of men who called themselves whigs had set policy and controlled patronage.
george ii had accepted this situation and so long as the whigs in parliament did not meddle with his beloved army the king had let them rule the nation.
in one stroke george iii destroyed this cozy relationship.
he selected as his chief minister the earl of bute a scot whose chief qualification for office appeared to be his friendship with the young king.
the whigs who dominated parliament were outraged.
bute had no ties with the members of the house of commons he owed them no favors.
it seemed to the whigs that with the appointment of bute george was trying to turn back the clock to the time before the glorious revolution in other words attempting to reestablish a personal stuart monarchy free from traditional constitutional restraints.
the whigs blamed bute for every wrong real or imagined.
george did not in fact harbor such arbitrary ambitions but his actions threw customary political practices into doubt.
by 1763 bute despairing of public life left office.
his departure however neither restored the whigs to preeminence nor dampened the kings enthusiasm for domestic politics.
everyone agreed george had the right to select whomever he desired for cabinet posts but until 1770 no one seemed able to please the monarch.
ministers came and went often for no other reason than georges personal distaste.
because of this chronic instability subministers minor bureaucrats who directed routine structure of colonial society colonial affairs did not know what was expected of them.
in the absence of clear long range policy some ministers made narrowly based decisions others did nothing.
most devoted their energies to finding a political patron capable of satisfying the fickle king.
talent played little part in the scramble for office and incompetent hacks were advanced as frequently as were men of vision.
with such turbulence surrounding him the king showed little interest in the american colonies.
the king however does not bear the sole responsibility for englands loss of empire.
the members of parliament who actually drafted the statutes that gradually drove a wedge between the colonies and britain must share the blame for they failed to provide innovative answers to the explosive constitutional issues of the day.
the problem was not stupidity or even obstinacy qualities found in equal measure among all peoples.
in part the impasse resulted from sheer ignorance.
few englishmen active in government had ever visited america.
for those who attempted to follow colonial affairs accurate information proved extremely difficult to obtain.
packet boats carrying passengers and mail sailed regularly between london and the various colonial ports but the voyage across the atlantic required at least four weeks.
furthermore all correspondence was laboriously copied in longhand by overworked clerks serving in understaffed offices.
one could not expect to receive from america an answer to a specific question in less than three months.
as a result of the lag in communication between england and america rumors sometimes passed for true accounts and misunderstanding influenced the formulation of colonial policy.
but failure of communication alone was not to blame for the widening gap between the colonies and england.
even when complete information was available the two sides were often unable to understand each others positions.
the central element in this anglo american debate was a concept known as parliamentary sovereignty.
the english ruling classes viewed the role of parliament from a historical perspective that most colonists never shared.
they insisted that parliament was the dominant element within the constitution.
indeed this elective body protected rights and property from an arbitrary monarch.
during the reign of the stuarts especially under charles i r 1625 1649 the authority of parliament had been challenged and it was not until the glorious revolution of 1688 that the english crown formally recognized parliaments supreme authority in matters such as taxation.
almost no one including george iii would have dissented from a speech made in 1766 before the house of commons in which a representative declared the parliament hath and must have from the nature and essence of the constitution has had and ever will have a sovereign supreme power and jurisdiction over every part of the dominions of the state to make laws in all cases whatsoever the logic of this argument seemed self evident to the british.
in fact parliamentary leaders could never quite understand why the colonists were so difficult to persuade.
in frustration lord hillsborough the british secretary of state admonished the colonial agent for connecticut it is essential to the constitution to preserve the supremacy of parliament inviolate and tell your friends in america.
that it is as much their interest to support the constitution and preserve the supremacy of parliament as it is ours cartoons became a popular means of criticizing government during this period.
here king george iii watches as the kilted lord bute slaughters the goose america.
a cabinet member holds a basket of golden eggs at rear.
at front left a dog relieves itself on a map of north america.
no taxation without representation the american perspective americans most emphatically did not see it in their interest to maintain the supremacy of parliament the crisis in imperial relations forced the colonists fi rst to defi ne and then to defend principles deeply rooted in their own political culture.
for more than a century their ideas about the colonies role within the british empire had remained a vague untested bundle of assumptions about personal liberties property rights and representative institutions.
by 1763 however certain fundamental american beliefs had become clear.
from massachusetts to georgia colonists aggressively defended the powers of the provincial assemblies.
they drew on a rich legislative history of their own.
over the course of the century the american assemblies had steadily expanded their authority over taxation and expenditure.
since no one in britain bothered to clip their legislative wings these provincial bodies assumed a major role in policy making and routine administration.
in other words by midcentury the assemblies looked like american copies of parliament.
it seemed unreasonable therefore for the british suddenly to insist on the supremacy of parliament for as the legislators of massachusetts observed in 1770 this house has the same inherent rights in this province as the house of commons in great britain the constitutional debate turned ultimately on the meaning of representation itself.
in 1764 a british official informed the colonists that even though they had not elected members to parliament indeed even though they had had no direct contact chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 with the current members they were nevertheless virtually represented by that august body.
the members of parliament he declared represented the political interests of everyone who lived in the british empire.
it did not really matter whether everyone had cast a vote.
the colonists ridiculed this notion of virtual representation.
the only representatives the americans recognized as legitimate were those actually chosen by the people for whom they spoke.
on this crucial point they would not compromise.
as john adams insisted a representative assembly should actually mirror its constituents it should think feel reason and act like them since the members of parliament could not possibly think like americans it followed logically they could not represent them.
and if they were not genuine representatives the members of parliament pretensions to sovereignty notwithstanding had no business taxing the american people.
thus in 1764 the connecticut assembly declared in bold letters no law can be made or abrogated without the consent of the people by their representatives ideas about power and virtue americans expressed their political beliefs in a language they had borrowed from english writers.
the person most frequently cited was john locke the influential seventeenth century philosopher whose two treatises of government first published in 1690 seemed to colonial readers at least a brilliant description of what was in fact american political practice.
locke claimed that all people possessed natural and inalienable rights.
to preserve these god given rights of life liberty and property for example free men the status of women in lockes work was less clear formed contracts.
these agreements were the foundation of human society as well as civil government and they required the consent of the people who were actually governed.
there could be no coercion.
locke justified rebellion against arbitrary forms of government that were by their very nature unreasonable.
americans delighted in lockes ability to unite traditional religious values with a spirited defense of popular government and even when they did not fully understand his technical writings they seldom missed a chance to quote from the works of the great mr locke colonial americans also enthusiastically subscribed to the so called commonwealthman tradition a body of political assumptions generally identified with two eighteenth century english publicists john trenchard and thomas gordon see chapter 4.
the writings of such figures most of whom spent their lives in political opposition helped persuade the colonists that power was extremely dangerous a force that would surely destroy liberty unless it was countered by virtue.
persons who shared this highly charged moral outlook regarded bad policy as not simply the result of human error.
rather it was an indication of sin and corruption.
insistence on public virtue sacrifice of self interest to the public good became the dominant theme of revolutionary political writing.
american pamphleteers seldom took a dispassionate legalistic approach to their analysis of power and liberty.
more commonly they exposed plots hatched by corrupt courtiers such as the earl of bute.
none of them or their readers had any doubt that americans were more virtuous than were the people of england.
during the 1760s however popular writers were not certain how long the colonists could hold out against arbitrary taxation standing armies anglican bishops in other words against a host of external threats designed to crush american liberty.
in 1774 for example the people of farmington connecticut declared that the present ministry being instigated by the devil and led by their wicked and corrupt hearts have a design to take away our liberties and properties and to enslave us forever indeed these connecticut farmers described britains leaders as pimps and parasites this highly emotional conspiratorial rhetoric sometimes shocks modern readers who assume that americas revolutionary leaders were products of the enlightenment persons who relied solely on reason to solve social and political problems.
whatever the origins of their ideas may have been the colonial pamphleteers successfully roused ordinary men and women to resist britain with force of arms.
colonial newspapers spread these ideas through a large dispersed population.
a majority of adult white males especially those in the northern colonies were literate and it is not surprising that the number of journals published in this country increased dramatically during the revolutionary period.
for the first time in american history persons living in various parts of the continent could closely follow events that occurred in distant american cities.
because of the availability of newspapers the details of bostonians confrontations with british authorities were known throughout the colonies and these shared political experiences drew americans more closely together making it possible in the words of john adams for thirteen clocks.
to strike together a perfection of mechanism which no artist had ever before effected eroding the bonds of empire what events eroded the bonds of empire during the 1760s.
the seven years war saddled great britain with a national debt so huge that more than half the annual national budget went to pay the interest on it.
almost everyone in government assumed that with the cessation of hostilities the troops would be disbanded thus saving a lot of money.
george iii had other plans.
he insisted on keeping the largest peacetime army in british history on active duty supposedly to protect indians from predatory frontiersmen and to preserve order in the newly conquered territories of florida and quebec.
maintaining such a force so far distant from the mother country fueled the budgetary crisis.
the growing financial burden weighed heavily on restive english taxpayers and sent government leaders scurrying in search of new sources of revenue.
for their part colonists doubted the value of this expensive army.
britain did not leave enough troops in america to maintain peace on the frontier effectively.
the weakness of the army was dramatically demonstrated during the spring of 1763.
the native peoples of the backcountry the seneca ottawa miami creek and cherokee had begun discussing how they might turn back the tide of white settlement.
the powerful spiritual leader neolin known as the delaware prophet and claiming vision from the master of life helped these indians articulate their fear and anger.
he urged them to restore their cultures to the original state that eroding the bonds of empire they were in before the white people found out their country if moral regeneration required violence so be it.
neolin converted pontiac an ottawa warrior to the cause and he in turn coordinated an uprising among the western indians who had been french allies and who hated all british people even those sent to protect them from land grabbing colonists.
the formidable native american resistance was known as pontiacs rebellion.
in may pontiac attacked detroit other indians harassed the pennsylvania and virginia frontiers.
at the end of the year after his followers began deserting pontiac sued for peace.
during even this brief outbreak the british army proved unable to defend exposed colonial settlements and several thousand people lost their lives.
from the perspective of the native americans who inhabited the ohio valley this was a period of almost unmitigated disaster.
in fact more than any other group the indians suffered as a direct result of imperial reorganization.
the defeat of the french made it impossible for native peoples to play off one imperial power against european rivals see chapter 4 and the victorious british made it clear that they regarded their former indian allies as little more than a nuisance.
diplomatic gifts stopped humiliating restrictions were placed on trade.
but even worse pontiacs rising unloosed vicious racism along the colonial frontier and american colonists often used any excuse to attack local indians peaceful or not.
late in 1763 a group of vigilantes known as the paxton boys murdered a score of christian indians women and children living near lancaster pennsylvania.
white neighbors treated the killers as heroes and the atrocity ended only after the paxton boys threatened to march on philadelphia in search of administrators who dared to criticize such cold blooded crimes.
one of the administrators benjamin franklin observed sadly it grieves me to hear that our frontier people are yet greater barbarians than the indians and continue to murder them in time of peace whatever happened to the indians the colonists fully intended to settle the fertile region west of the appalachian mountains.
after the british government issued the proclamation of 1763 which prohibited governors from granting land beyond the headwaters of rivers flowing into the atlantic disappointed americans viewed the army as an obstruction to legitimate economic development a domestic police force that cost too much money.
paying off the national debt the task of reducing englands debt fell to george grenville the rigid somewhat unimaginative chancellor of the exchequer who replaced bute in 1763 as the kings first minister.
after carefully reviewing the state of britains finances grenville concluded that the colonists would have to contribute to the maintenance of the army.
the first bill he steered through parliament was the revenue act of 1764 known as the sugar act.
this legislation placed a new burden on the navigation acts that had governed the flow of colonial commerce for almost a century see chapter 3.
those acts had forced americans to trade almost exclusively with britain.
the statutes were not however primarily intended as a means to raise money for the british government.
the sugar act and the acts that soon followed redefined the relationship between america and great britain.
parliament now expected the colonies to generate revenue.
the preamble of the sugar act proclaimed explicitly it is just and necessary that read the document james otis the rights of the british colonies asserted and proved james otis jr 1725 1783 of massachusetts was a brilliant lawyer a prolific writer and a strong supporter of colonial rights.
he is credited with being one of the first patriots to declare that taxation without representation is tyranny a revenue be raised.
in america for defraying the expenses of defending protecting and securing the same the purpose of the sugar act was to discourage smuggling bribery and other illegalities that prevented the navigation acts from being profitable.
parliament reduced the duty on molasses set originally by the molasses act of 1733 from 6 to 3 pence per gallon.
at so low a rate grenville reasoned colonial merchants would have little incentive to bribe customs collectors.
much needed revenue would be diverted from the pockets of corrupt officials into the treasury so that it might be used to maintain the army.
grenville had been too clever by half.
the americans immediately saw through his unconstitutional scheme.
according to the members of the rhode island assembly the sugar act taxed the colonists in a manner inconsistent with their rights and privileges as british subjects james otis a fiery orator from massachusetts exclaimed the legislation deprived americans of the right of assessing their own taxes chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 the act generated no violence.
in fact ordinary men and women were only marginally involved in the drafting of formal petitions.
the protest was still confined to the members of the colonial assemblies to the merchants and to the well to do americans who had personal interests in commerce.
word of the stamp act reached america in may and it was soon clear that barr had gauged the colonists response correctly.
the most dramatic incident occurred in virginias house of burgesses.
patrick henry young and eloquent whom contemporaries compared in fervor to evangelical preachers introduced five resolutions protesting the stamp act on the floor of the assembly.
he timed his move carefully.
it was late in the session many of the more conservative burgesses had already departed for their plantations.
even then henrys resolves declaring that virginians had the right to tax themselves as they alone saw fit passed by narrow margins.
the fifth resolution stricken almost immediately from the legislative records announced that any attempt to collect stamp revenues in america was illegal unconstitutional and unjust and has a manifest tendency to destroy british as well as american liberty henry was carried away by the force of his own rhetoric.
he reminded his fellow virginians that caesar had had his brutus charles i his cromwell and he hoped that some good american would stand up for his country but an astonished speaker of the house cut henry off in mid sentence accusing him of treason.
the virginia resolves might have remained a local matter had it not been for the colonial press.
newspapers throughout america printed henrys resolutions but perhaps because editors did not really know what had happened in williamsburg they reported that all five resolutions had received the burgesses full support.
several journals even carried two resolves that henry had not dared to introduce.
a result of this misunderstanding of course was that the virginians appeared to have taken an extremely radical popular protest passage of the stamp act of 1765 transformed a debate among gentlemen into a mass political movement.
the imperial crisis might have been avoided.
colonial agents had presented grenville with alternative schemes for raising money in america.
but grenville was a stubborn man and he had little fear of parliamentary opposition.
the majority of the house of commons assumed that parliament possessed the right to tax the colonists and when the chancellor of the exchequer announced a plan to squeeze 60 000 annually out of the americans by requiring them to purchase special seals or stamps to validate legal documents the members responded with enthusiasm.
the stamp act was scheduled to go into effect on november 1 1765 and in anticipation of brisk sales grenville appointed stamp distributors for every colony.
during discussion in parliament several members warned that the act would raise a storm of protest in the colonies.
colonel isaac barr a veteran of the seven years war reminded his colleagues that the americans were sons of liberty and would not surrender their rights without a fight.
but barrs appeal fell on deaf ears.
maine part of mass.
great britain lake huron lumber france skins lake o n h ntario beef cattle n y sheep hogs skins line of l am ati on va hemp corn cuba hogs wheat norfolk beef cattle naval stores beef cattle lumber hogs caribbean sea slav es rice and indigo fishing gol d pep per tobacco ironworks ru m hispaniola jamaica west indies wheat and corn charles town savannah corn spain portugal at l a n t i c ocean n c.
naval lumber stores beef cattle naval s c stores beef cattle ga atlantic ocean a ol m r ar ha g su ruit f eat lumber ur m wheat charles town europe in um gra rice meat r manufactures wine flo skins philadelphia sugar molasses slaves oc pr lumber del.
skins cod res sto res actu manuf pa md.
boston l ava o n dig n i kins ctures co s ufa tobac man boston mass.
newport whales new york conn newport beef cattle philadelphia r i norfolk n j new york rie ee lak beef cattle north america s dw ses oo d 200 miles 200 kilometers south america shipbuilding rum distilleries colonial products and trade although the american colonists produced many agricultural staples that were valuable to britain they were dependent on british manufactures such as cloth metal goods and ceramics.
africa eroding the bonds of empire by november 1 1765 stamp distributors in almost every american port had publicly read the document benjamin franklin testimony against resigned and without distributors the hated revthe stamp act 1766 enue stamps could not be sold.
the courts soon reopened most newspapers were published.
daily life in the colonies was undisturbed with one exception the sons of liberty persuaded some said coerced colonial merchants to boycott british goods until parliament repealed the stamp act.
the merchants showed little enthusiasm for such tactics but the threat of tar and feathers stimulated cooperation.
the boycott movement was in itself a masterful political innovation.
never before had a resistance movement organized itself so centrally around the market decisions of ordinary consumers.
the colonists depended on british imports the stamp act placed a tax on documents and printed matter newspapers marriage licenses wills cloth metal goods and ceramics and each year deeds even playing cards and dice.
the stamps like those shown here varied in denomination.
a tax they imported more consumer goods than they stamp affixed to a legal document or bill of sale signified that the required tax had been paid.
could possibly afford.
in this highly charged moral atmosphere one in which ordinary people position on the issue of the supremacy of parliament one that other talked constantly of conspiracy and corruption it is not surprising americans now trumpeted before their own assemblies.
no wonthat americans of different classes and backgrounds advocated a der francis bernard royal governor of massachusetts called the radical change in buying habits.
private acts suddenly became part virginia resolves an alarm bell of the public sphere.
personal excess threatened to contaminate not to be outdone by virginia massachusetts called a general the entire political community.
this logic explains the power of an meeting to protest grenvilles policy.
nine colonies sent representaappeal made in a boston newspaper save your money and you can tives to the stamp act congress that convened in new york city save your country in october 1765.
it was the first intercolonial gathering held since the boycotts mobilized colonial women.
they were excluded the abortive albany congress of 1754 if nothing else the new confrom voting and civil office but such legal discrimination did not gress provided leaders from different regions with an opportunity mean that women were not part of the broader political culture.
to discuss common problems.
the delegates drafted petitions to the since wives and mothers spent their days involved with household king and parliament that restated the colonists belief that no taxes chores they assumed special responsibility to reform consumption should be imposed on them but with their own consent given perto root out luxury and to promote frugality.
indeed in this realm sonally or by their representatives the tone of the meeting was they possessed real power they monitored the ideological commitrestrained even conciliatory.
the congress studiously avoided any ment of the entire family.
throughout the colonies women altered mention of independence or disloyalty to the crown.
styles of dress made homespun cloth and shunned imported items resistance to the stamp act soon spread from the assemblies to on which parliament had placed a tax.
the streets.
by taxing deeds marriage licenses and playing cards the stamp act touched the lives of ordinary women and men.
anonymous failed attempts to save the empire artisans and seamen angered by parliaments apparent insensitivity and fearful that the statute would increase unemployment and povwhat most americans did not yet know after all communicaerty organized mass protests in the major colonial ports.
tion with britain required months was that in july grenville imperial politics played out on the streets of american cities had fallen from power.
this unexpected shift came about not as traditional rivalries between neighborhood youths and antibecause the king thought grenvilles policies inept but rather catholic sentiment suddenly was redirected against alleged parbecause george did not like the man.
his replacement as first lord liamentary oppression.
in boston the sons of liberty burned of the treasury lord rockingham was young inexperienced in effigy the local stamp distributor andrew oliver and when and terrified of public speaking a serious handicap to launchthat action failed to bring about his resignation they tore down ing a brilliant parliamentary career.
the rockinghamites as his one of his office buildings.
even after he resigned the mob nearly followers were called envisioned a prosperous empire founded demolished the elegant home of olivers close associate lieutenant on an expanding commerce and local government under the governor thomas hutchinson.
the violence frightened colonial gentle guidance of parliament.
rockingham wanted to repeal leaders yet evidence suggests that they encouraged the lower the stamp act but because of the shakiness of his own politiclasses to intimidate royal officials.
popular participation in these cal coalition he could not announce such a decision until it protests was an exciting experience for people who had traditionenjoyed broad national support.
he therefore urged merchants ally deferred to their social betters.
after 1765 it was impossible and manufacturers throughout england to petition parliament for either royal governors or patriot leaders to take for granted the for repeal of the act claiming that the american boycott support of ordinary men and women.
would soon drive them into bankruptcy and spark urban riots.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 on march 18 1766 the house of commons voted 275 to 167 to rescind the stamp act.
lest its retreat on the stamp act be interpreted as weakness the house of commons passed the declaratory act march 1766 a shrill defense of parliamentary supremacy over the americans in all cases whatsoever the colonists insistence on no taxation without representation failed to impress british rulers.
englands merchants supposedly americas allies claimed sole responsibility for the stamp act repeal.
the colonists had only complicated the task the merchants lectured and if the americans knew what was good for them they would keep quiet.
to george mason a leading political figure in virginia such advice sounded patronizing.
the british merchants seemed to be saying we have with infinite difficulty and fatigue got you excused this one time pray be a good boy for the future do what your papa and mama bid you and hasten to return them your most grateful acknowledgements for condescending to let you keep what is your own this mason snapped was ridiculous the stamp act crisis also eroded the colonists respect for imperial officeholders in america.
suddenly these men royal governors customs collectors military personnel appeared alien as if their interests were not those of the people over whom they exercised authority.
one person who had been forced to resign the post of stamp distributor for south carolina noted several years later the stamp act had introducd so much party rage faction and debate that the ancient harmony generosity and urbanity for which these people were celebrated is destroyed and at an end similar reports came from other colonies and it is testimony to the americans lingering loyalty to the british crown and constitution that rebellion did not occur in 1765.
listen to the audio file the liberty song fueling the crisis rockinghams ministry soon gave way to a government headed once again by william pitt who was now the earl of chatham.
the aging pitt suffered horribly from gout and during his long absences from london charles townshend his chancellor of the exchequer made important policy decisions.
townshend was an impetuous man whose mouth often outran his mind.
during a parliamentary debate in january 1767 he surprised everyone by blithely announcing that he knew a way to obtain revenue from the americans.
the members of the house of commons were so pleased with the news that they promptly voted to lower english land taxes an action that threatened fiscal chaos.
a budgetary crisis forced townshend to make good on his extraordinary boast.
his scheme turned out to be a grab bag of duties on american imports of paper glass paint lead and tea which collectively were known as the townshend revenue acts june july 1767.
he hoped to generate sufficient funds to pay the salaries of royal governors and other imperial officers thus freeing them from dependence on the colonial assemblies.
the chancellor recognized that without tough instruments of enforcement his duties would not produce the promised revenues.
therefore he created an american board of customs commissioners a body based in boston and supported by reorganized vice admiralty courts located in boston philadelphia the boycott movement drew many colonial women into popular politics.
in this 1774 woodcut a daughter of liberty stands ready to resist british oppression.
and charles town.
and for good measure townshend induced parliament to order the governor of new york to veto all bills passed by that colonys assembly until it supplied resident british troops in accordance with the quartering act may 1765 that required the colonies to house soldiers in barracks taverns and vacant buildings and to provide the army with firewood candles and beer among other items.
many americans regarded this as more taxation without representation and in new york at least colonists refused to pay.
colonists showed no more willingness to pay townshends duties than they had to buy grenvilles stamps.
no congress was called none was necessary.
recent events had taught people how to coordinate protest and they moved to resist the unconstitutional revenue acts.
in major ports the sons of liberty organized boycotts of british goods.
protest often involved what one historian has termed rituals of nonconsumption in some large towns these were moments of public moral reaffirmation.
men and women took oaths before neighbors promising not to purchase certain goods until parliament repealed unconstitutional eroding the bonds of empire taxation.
in boston ordinary people were encouraged to sign and artisans.
work was already in short supply and the streets subscription rolls the selectmen strongly recommend this crackled with tension.
measure to persons of all ranks announced the boston gazette when colonists questioned why the army had been sent to a as the most honorable and effectual way of giving public peaceful city pamphleteers responded that it was there to further testimony of their love to their country and of endeavouring a conspiracy originally conceived by bute to oppress americans to to save it from ruin take away their liberties and to collect illegal revenues.
grenville on february 11 1768 the massachusetts house of hillsborough townshend they were all supposedly part of the representatives drafted a circular letter a provocative appeal plot.
today such rhetoric may sound excessive but to americans which it sent directly to the other colonial assemblies.
the letwho had absorbed the political theories of the commonwealthmen ter requested suggestions on how best to thwart the townshend a pattern of tyranny seemed obvious.
acts not surprisingly legislators in other parts of america busy colonists had no difficulty interpreting the violence that with local matters simply ignored this general appeal.
but not erupted in boston on march 5 1770.
in the gathering dusk of that lord hillsborough englands secretary for american affairs.
this afternoon young boys and street toughs threw rocks and snowballs rather mild attempt to create a united colonial front struck him as at soldiers in a small isolated patrol outside the offices of the hated gross treason and he ordered the massachusetts representatives customs commissioners in king street.
the details of this incident to rescind their seditious paper after considering hillsboroughs are obscure but it appears that as the mob grew and became more demand the legislators voted 92 to 17 to defy him.
threatening the soldiers panicked.
in the confusion the troops suddenly the circular letter became a cause clbre.
the fired leaving five americans dead.
royal governor of massachusetts hastily dissolved the house pamphleteers promptly labeled the incident a massacre.
of representatives.
that decision compelled the other colothe victims of this boston massacre were seen as martyrs and nies to demonstrate their support for massachusetts.
assembly were memorialized in extravagant terms.
in one eulogy joseph after assembly now felt obligated to take up the circular letter warren addressed the dead mens widows and children dramatan action hillsborough had specifically forbidden.
assemblies ically re creating the gruesome scene in king street.
behold in other colonies were dissolved creating a much broader crisis of representative government.
throughout america the number 92 read the document boston gazette description of the the number of legislators who voted against boston massacre hillsborough immediately became a symbol of patriotism.
in fact parliaments challenge had brought about the very results it most wanted to avoid a foundation for intercolonial communication and a strengthening of conviction among the colonists of the righteousness of their position.
fatal show of force in october 1768 british rulers made another mistake one that raised tensions almost to the pitch they had reached during the stamp act riots.
the issue at the heart of the trouble was the army.
in part to save money and in part to intimidate colonial trouble makers the ministry transferred four thousand regular troops from nova scotia and ireland to boston.
most of the army had already been withdrawn from the frontier to the seacoast to save revenue thereby raising more acutely than ever the issue of why troops were in america at all.
the armed strangers camped on the boston common and when citizens passed the site redcoats shouted obscenities.
sometimes in accordance with martial law an errant soldier was whipped within an inch of his life a bloody sight that sickened boston civilians.
to make relations worse redcoats men who were ill treated and underpaid competed in their spare time for jobs with local dockworkers outrage over the boston massacre was fanned by propaganda such as this etching by paul revere which showed british redcoats firing on ordinary citizens.
in subsequent editions the blood spurting from the dying americans became more conspicuous.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 thy murdered husband gasping on the ground warren cried.
take heed ye orphan babes lest whilst your streaming eyes are fixed upon the ghastly corpse your feet slide on the stones bespattered with your fathers brains apparently to propagandists like warren it mattered little that the five civilians had been bachelors.
paul reveres engraving of the massacre appropriately splattered with blood became an instant best seller.
confronted with such intense reaction and with the possibility of massive armed resistance crown officials wisely moved the army to an island in boston harbor.
at this critical moment the kings new first minister restored a measure of tranquility.
lord north congenial well meaning but not very talented became chancellor of the exchequer following townshends death in 1767.
north was appointed the first minister in 1770 and for the next twelve years indeed throughout most of the american crisis he managed to retain his office.
his secret formula seems to have been an ability to get along with george iii and to build an effective majority in parliament.
one of norths first recommendations to parliament was the repeal of the townshend duties.
not only had these ill conceived duties unnecessarily angered the colonists but they also hurt english manufacturers.
by taxing british exports such as glass and paint parliament had only encouraged the americans to develop their own industries thus without much prodding the house of commons dropped all the townshend duties with the notable exception of tea.
the tax on tea was retained not for revenue purposes north insisted but as a reminder that englands rulers still subscribed to the principles of the declaratory act.
they would not compromise the supremacy of parliament.
in mid 1770 however the matter of tea seemed trivial to most americans.
the colonists had drawn back from the precipice a little frightened by the events of the past two years and desperately hoped to head off future confrontation with the british.
last days of imperial rule 1770 1773 for a short while american colonists and british officials put aside their recent animosities.
like englands rulers some colonial gentry were beginning to pull back from protest especially violent confrontation with established authority in fear that the lower orders were becoming too assertive.
it was probably in this period that loyalist americans emerged as an identifiable group.
colonial merchants returned to familiar patterns of trade pleased no doubt to end the local boycotts that had depressed the american economy.
british goods flooded into colonial ports the level of american indebtedness soared to new highs.
in this period of apparent reconciliation the people of massachusetts even of boston decided they could accept their new governor thomas hutchinson.
after all he was one of their own an american.
but appearances were deceiving.
the bonds of imperial loyalty remained fragile and even as lord north attempted to win the colonists trust crown officials in america created new strains.
customs commissioners whom townshend had appointed to collect his duties remained in the colonies long after his revenue acts had been repealed.
if they had been honest unobtrusive administrators perhaps no one would have taken notice of their behavior.
but the customs commissioners regularly abused their powers of search and seizure and in the process lined their own pockets.
in massachusetts rhode island and south carolina to cite the most notorious cases these officials drove local citizens to distraction by enforcing the navigation acts with such rigor that a small boat could not cross narragansett bay with a load of firewood without first obtaining a sheaf of legal documents.
one slip no matter how minor could bring confiscation of ship and cargo.
the commissioners were not only corrupt they were also shortsighted.
if they had restricted their extortion to the common folk they might have avoided becoming a major american grievance.
but they could not control their greed.
some customs officers harassed the wealthiest most powerful men around men such as john hancock of boston and henry laurens of charles town.
the commissioners actions drove some members of the colonial ruling class into opposition to the kings government.
when in the summer of 1772 a group of disguised rhode islanders burned a customs vessel the gaspee americans cheered.
a special royal commission sent to arrest the culprits discovered that not a single rhode islander had the slightest idea how the ship could have come to such an end.
samuel adams 1722 1803 refused to accept the notion that the repeal of the townshend duties had secured american liberty.
during the early 1770s while colonial leaders turned to other matters adams kept the cause alive with a drumfire of publicity.
he reminded the people of boston that the tax on tea remained in force.
he organized public anniversaries commemorating the repeal of the stamp act and the boston massacre.
adams was a genuine revolutionary an ideologue filled with a burning sense of indignation at the real and alleged wrongs suffered by his countrymen.
to his contemporaries this man resembled a figure out of new englands puritan past.
he seemed obsessed with the preservation of public virtue.
the american goal he declared was the creation of a christian sparta an ideal commonwealth in which vigilant citizens would constantly guard against the spread of corruption degeneracy and luxury.
with each new attempt by parliament to assert its supremacy over the colonists more and more bostonians listened to what adams had to say.
he observed ominously that the british intended to use the tea revenue to pay judicial salaries thus freeing the judges from dependence on the assembly.
when in november 1772 adams suggested the formation of a committee of correspondence to communicate grievances to villagers throughout massachusetts he received broad support.
americans living in other colonies soon copied his idea.
it was a brilliant stroke.
adams developed a structure of political cooperation completely independent of royal government.
the final provocation the boston tea party in may 1773 parliament passed the tea act legislation the americans might have welcomed.
after all it lowered the price for their favorite beverage.
parliament wanted to save one of britains largest businesses the east india company from possible bankruptcy.
this commercial giant imported asian tea into england where it was resold to wholesalers.
the tea was also eroding the bonds of empire read the document george r t hewes a retrospect on the boston tea party colonists toss chests of tea overboard while disguised as mohawk indians in a historic depiction of the boston tea party of december 16 1773.
at right a bottle of tea leaves preserved from the protest suggests that one participant or onlooker was mindful of the historical importance of the event.
subject to heavy duties.
the company tried to pass these charges on to the consumers but american tea drinkers preferred the cheaper leaves that were smuggled in from holland.
the tea act changed the rules.
parliament not only allowed the company to sell directly to american retailers thus cutting out intermediaries but also eliminated the duties paid in england.
if all had gone according to plan the agents of the east india company in america would have undersold their competitors including the dutch smugglers and with the new profits would have saved the business.
but parliaments logic was flawed.
first since the tax on tea collected in american ports remained in effect this new act seemed a devious scheme to win popular support for parliaments right to tax the colonists without representation.
second the act threatened to undercut powerful colonial merchants who did a good business trading in smuggled dutch tea.
considering the american reaction the british government might have been well advised to devise another plan to rescue the ailing company.
at philadelphia and then at new york city colonists turned back the tea ships before they could unload.
in boston however the issue was not so easily resolved.
governor hutchinson a strong willed man would not permit the vessels to return to england.
local patriots would not let them unload.
and so crammed with the east india companys tea the ships sat in boston harbor waiting for the colonists to make up their minds.
on the night of december 16 1773 they did so in dramatic style.
a group of men disguised as mohawk indians boarded the ships and pitched 340 chests of tea worth 10 000 over the side.
whether samuel adams organized the famed boston tea party is not known.
no doubt he and his allies were not taken by surprise.
even at the time john adams samuels distant cousin sensed the event would have far reaching significance.
this destruction of the tea he scribbled in his diary is so bold so daring so firm intrepid and inflexible and it must have so important consequences and so lasting that i cant but consider it as an epocha in history when news of the tea party reached london in january 1774 the north ministry was stunned.
the people of boston had treated parliamentary supremacy with utter contempt and british rulers saw no humor whatsoever in the destruction of private property by subjects of the crown dressed in costume.
to quell such rebelliousness parliament passed a series of laws called the coercive acts.
in america they were referred to as the intolerable acts.
the legislation 1 closed the port of boston until the city fully compensated the east india company for the lost tea 2 restructured the massachusetts government by transforming the upper house from an elective to an appointed body and restricting the number of legal town meetings to one a year 3 allowed the royal governor to transfer british officials arrested for offenses committed in the line of duty to england where there was little likelihood they would be convicted and 4 authorized the army to quarter troops wherever they were needed even if this required the compulsory requisition of uninhabited private buildings.
george iii enthusiastically supported this tough policy he appointed chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 chronicle of colonial british tension legislation sugar act date april 5 1764 stamp act march 22 1765 repealed march 18 1766 quartering act may 1765 declaratory act march 18 1766 townshend revenue acts june 26 29 july 2 1767 all repealed except duty on tea march 1770 may 10 1773 tea act coercive acts intolerable acts march june 1774 prohibitory act december 22 1775 provisions revised duties on sugar coffee tea wine other imports expanded jurisdiction of vice admiralty courts printed documents deeds newspapers marriage licenses etc.
issued only on special stamped paper purchased from stamp distributors colonists must supply british troops with housing other items candles firewood etc.
parliament declares its sovereignty over the colonies in all cases whatsoever new duties on glass lead paper paints tea customs collections tightened in america parliament gives east india company right to sell tea directly to americans some duties on tea reduced closes port of boston restructures massachusetts government restricts town meetings troops quartered in boston british officials accused of crimes sent to england or canada for trial declares british intention to coerce americans into submission embargo on american goods american ships seized general thomas gage to serve as the colonys new royal governor.
gage apparently won the kings favor by announcing that in america nothing can be done but by forcible means the sweeping denial of constitutional liberties confirmed the colonists worst fears.
to men like samuel adams it seemed as if britain really intended to enslave the american people.
colonial moderates found their position shaken by the vindictiveness of the coercive acts.
edmund burke one of americas last friends in parliament noted sadly on the floor of commons that this is the day then that you wish to go to war with all america in order to conciliate that country to this if in 1774 the house of commons thought it could isolate boston from the rest of america it was in for a rude surprise.
colonists living in other parts of the continent recognized immediately that the principles at stake in boston affected all americans.
as one virginian explained there were no heats and troubles in virginia till the blockade of boston few persons advocated independence but they could not remain passive while boston was destroyed.
they sent food and money and during the fall of 1774 reflected more deeply than ever on what it meant to be a colonist in the british empire.
colonial reaction several assemblies protest taxation for revenue riots in cities collectors forced to resign stamp act congress october 1765 protest in assemblies new york assembly punished for failure to comply 1767 ignored in celebration over repeal of the stamp act nonimportation of british goods assemblies protest newspapers attack british policy protests against favoritism shown to monopolistic company tea destroyed in boston december 16 1773 boycott of british goods first continental congress convenes september 1774 drives continental congress closer to decision for independence the sticking point remained as it had been in 1765 the sovereignty of parliament.
no one in britain could think of a way around this constitutional impasse.
in 1773 benjamin franklin had offered a suggestion.
the parliament he observed has no right to make any law whatever binding on the colonies.
the king and not the king lords and commons collectively is their sovereign but so long as it still seemed possible to coerce the americans into obedience to punish these errant children britains rulers had little incentive to accept such a humiliating compromise.
steps toward independence what events in 1775 and 1776 led to the colonists decision to declare independence.
during the summer of 1774 committees of correspondence analyzed the perilous situation in whic h the colonists found themselves.
something of course had to be done.
would the southern colonies support resistance in new england.
would pennsylvanians stand up to parliament.
not surprisingly the committees endorsed a steps toward independence call for a continental congress a gathering of fifty five elected delegates from twelve colonies georgia sent none but agreed to support the action taken.
this first continental congress convened in philadelphia on september 5.
it included some of americas most articulate respected leaders among them were john adams samuel adams patrick henry richard henry lee christopher gadsden and george washington.
the delegates were strangers to one another.
they knew little about the customs and values the geography and economy of britains other provinces.
as john adams explained on september 18 it has taken us much time to get acquainted with the tempers views characters and designs of persons and to let them into the circumstances of our province during the early sessions of the congress the delegates eyed each other closely trying to gain a sense of the strength and integrity of the men with whom they might commit treason.
differences of opinion soon surfaced.
delegates from the middle colonies joseph galloway of pennsylvania for example wanted to proceed with caution but samuel adams and other more radical members pushed the moderates toward confrontation.
bostons master politician engineered congressional commendation of the suffolk resolves a bold statement drawn up in suffolk county massachusetts that encouraged forcible resistance of the coercive acts.
after this decision the tone of the meeting was established.
moderate spokesmen introduced conciliatory measures which received polite discussion but failed to win a majority vote.
just before returning to their homes september 1774 the delegates created the association an intercolonial agreement to halt all commerce with britain until parliament repealed the intolerable acts.
this was a totally revolutionary decision.
the association authorized a vast network of local committees to enforce nonimportation.
violators were exposed shamed forced either to apologize publicly for their actions or to be shunned by all their patriot neighbors.
in many of the communities the committees were the government distinguishing in the words of james madison friends from foes george iii sneered at these activities.
i am not sorry he confided that the line of conduct seems now chalked out.
the new england governments are in a state of rebellion blows must decide whether they are to be subject to this country or independent shots heard around the world the king was correct.
before congress reconvened blows fell at lexington and concord two small farm villages in eastern massachusetts.
on the evening of april 18 1775 general gage dispatched troops from boston to seize rebel supplies.
paul revere a renowned silversmith and active patriot warned the colonists that the redcoats were coming.
the militia of lexington a collection of ill trained farmers boys as well as old men decided to stand on the village green on the following morning april 19 as the british soldiers passed on the road to concord.
no one planned to fight but in a moment of confusion someone probably a colonist fired the redcoats discharged a volley and eight americans lay dead.
word of the incident spread rapidly and by the time the british force reached its destination the countryside swarmed with minutemen special companies of massachusetts militia prepared to respond instantly to military emergencies.
the redcoats found nothing of significance in concord and so returned.
the long march back to boston turned into a rout.
lord percy a british officer who brought up reinforcements remarked more in surprise than bitterness that whoever looks upon them the american soldiers as an irregular mob will find himself much mistaken on june 17 colonial militiamen again held their own against seasoned troops at the battle of bunker hill actually breeds hill.
the british finally took the hill but after this costly victory in which he suffered 40 percent casualties gage complained that the americans had displayed a conduct and spirit against us they never showed against the french beginning the world over again members of the second continental congress gathered in philadelphia in may 1775.
they faced an awesome responsibility.
british government in the mainland colonies had almost ceased to function and with americans fighting redcoats the country desperately needed strong central leadership.
slowly often reluctantly congress took control of the war.
the delegates formed a continental army and appointed george washington its commander in part because he seemed to have greater military experience than anyone else available and in part because he looked like he should be commander in chief.
the delegates were also eager to select someone who did not come from massachusetts a colony that seemed already to possess too much power in national councils.
the members of congress purchased military supplies and to pay for them issued paper money.
but while they were assuming the powers of a sovereign government the congressmen refused to declare independence.
they debated and fretted listened to the appeals of moderates who played on the colonists remaining loyalty to britain and then did nothing.
the british government appeared intent on transforming colonial moderates into angry rebels.
in december 1775 parliament passed the prohibitory act declaring war on american commerce.
until the colonists begged for pardon they could not trade with the rest of the world.
the british navy blockaded their ports and seized american ships on the high seas.
lord north also hired german mercenaries the russians drove too hard a bargain to put down the rebellion.
and in america virginias royal governor lord dunmore further undermined the possibility of reconciliation by urging the colonys slaves to take up arms against their masters.
few did so but the effort to stir up black rebellion infuriated the virginia gentry.
thomas paine 1737 1809 pushed the colonists even closer to independence.
nothing in this mans background suggested he would write the most important pamphlet in american history.
in england paine had tried and failed in a number of jobs and exactly why he elected to move to america in 1774 is not clear.
while still in england paine had the good fortune to meet benjamin franklin who presented him with letters of introduction to the leading patriots of pennsylvania.
at the urging of his new american friends paine produced common sense an essay that became an instant best seller.
in only three months it sold more than 120 000 copies.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 common sense systematically stripped kingship of historical and theological justification.
for centuries the english had maintained the fiction that the monarch could do no wrong.
when the government oppressed the people the royal counselors received the blame.
the crown was above suspicion.
to this paine cried nonsense.
monarchs ruled by force.
george iii was simply a royal brute who by his arbitrary behavior had surrendered his claim to the colonists obedience.
the pamphlet also attacked the whole idea of a mixed and balanced constitution.
indeed common sense was a powerful democratic manifesto.
paines greatest contribution to the revolutionary cause was persuading ordinary folk to sever their ties with great britain.
it was not reasonable he argued to regard england as the mother country.
europe and not england he explained is the parent country of america.
this new world hath been the asylum for the persecuted lovers of civil and religious liberty from every part of europe no doubt that message made a deep impression on pennsylvanias german population.
the time had come for the colonists to form an independent republic.
we have it in our power paine wrote in one of his most moving statements to begin the world over again.
the birthday of a new world is at hand read the document on july 2 1776 after a long and tedious debate congress finally voted for independence.
the motion passed twelve states for none against with new york abstaining.
thomas jefferson a young virginia lawyer and planter who enjoyed a reputation as a graceful writer drafted a formal declaration that was accepted with alterations two days later.
much of the declaration of independence consisted of a list of specific grievances against george iii and his government.
like the skilled lawyer he was jefferson presented the evidence for independence.
the document did not become famous for those passages.
long after the establishment of the new republic the declaration challenged americans to make good on the principle that all men are created equal john adams nicely expressed the patriots fervor when he wrote on july 3 yesterday the greatest question was decided which ever was debated in america and a greater perhaps never was or will be decided among men many revolutionary leaders throughout the modern world in europe as in asia have echoed adamss assessment.
of all the documents written during this period including the constitution the declaration of independence remains the most powerful and radical invitation to americans of all backgrounds to demand their equality and full rights as human beings.
thomas paine a freelance writer urges his readers to use common sense the message of thomas paines pamphlet common sense title page shown was clear and direct.
paines powerful argument called for the free and independent states of america he assured ordinary americans not only that they could live without a king but also that they would win the war.
fighting for independence watch the video the american revolution as different americans saw it congress voting independence oil painting by robert edge pine and edward savage 1785.
the committee appointed by congress to draft a declaration of independence included center standing john adams roger sherman robert livingston thomas jefferson and center foreground seated benjamin franklin.
the committee members are shown submitting jeffersons draft to the speaker.
fighting for independence why did it take eight years of warfare for the americans to gain independence.
only fools and visionaries expressed optimism about americas prospects of winning independence in 1776.
the americans had taken on a formidable military power.
the population of britain was perhaps four times that of its former colonies.
england also possessed a strong manufacturing base a well trained regular army supplemented by thousands of hired german troops hessians and a navy that dominated the worlds oceans.
many british officers had battlefield experience.
they already knew what the americans would slowly learn waging war requires discipline money and sacrifice.
as later events demonstrated however britain had become involved in an impossible military situation in some ways analogous to that in which the united states would find itself in vietnam some two hundred years later.
three separate elements neutralized advantages held by the larger power over its adversary.
first the british had to transport men and supplies across the atlantic a logistic challenge of unprecedented complexity.
unreliable lines of communication broke down under the strain of war.
second america was too vast to be conquered by conventional military methods.
redcoats might gain control over the major port cities but as long as the continental army remained intact the rebellion continued.
as washington explained the possession of our towns while we have an army in the field will avail them little.
it is our arms not defenceless towns they have to subdue even if england had recruited enough soldiers to occupy the entire country it would still have lost the war.
as one loyalist instructed the king if all america becomes a garrison she is not worth your attention britain could only win by crushing the american will to resist.
and third british strategists never appreciated the depth of the americans commitment to a political ideology.
in the wars of eighteenth century europe such beliefs had seldom mattered.
european troops before the french revolution served because they were paid or because the military was a vocation but most certainly not because they hoped to advance a set of constitutional principles.
americans were different.
to be sure some young men were drawn to the military by bounty money or by the desire to escape unhappy families.
a few were drafted.
but taking such people into account one still encounters among the american troops a remarkable commitment to republican ideals.
one french officer reported from the united chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 states it is incredible that soldiers composed of men of every age even of children of fifteen of whites and blacks almost naked unpaid and rather poorly fed can march so well and withstand fire so steadfastly building a professional army during the earliest months of rebellion american soldiers especially those of new england suffered no lack of confidence.
indeed they interpreted their courageous stands at concord and bunker hill as evidence that brave yeomen farmers could lick british regulars on any battlefield.
george washington spent the first years of the war disabusing the colonists of this foolishness for as he had learned during the french and indian war military success depended on endless drill careful planning and tough discipline rigorous preparation that did not characterize the minutemens methods.
washington insisted on organizing a regular well trained field army.
some advisers urged the commander in chief to wage a guerrilla war one in which small partisan bands would sap britains will to rule americans.
but washington rejected that course.
he recognized that the continental army served not only as a fighting force but also as a symbol of the republican cause.
its very existence would sustain american hopes and so long as the army survived american agents could plausibly solicit foreign aid.
this thinking shaped washingtons wartime strategy he studiously avoided general actions in which the continental army might be destroyed.
critics complained about washingtons caution but as they soon discovered he understood better than they what independence required.
if the commander in chief was correct about the army however he failed to comprehend the political importance of the militia.
these scattered almost amateur military units seldom altered the outcome of battle but they did maintain control over large areas of the country not directly affected by the british army.
throughout the war they compelled men and women who would rather have remained neutral to actively support the american effort.
in 1777 for example the militia of farmington connecticut visited a group of suspected tories as loyalists people who sided with the king and parliament during the revolution were called and after educating these people in the fundamentals of republican ideology a militia spokesman announced they were indeed grossly ignorant of the true grounds of the present war with great britain.
but they appeared to be penitent of their former conduct and professed themselves convinced.
that there was no such thing as remaining neuters without local political coercion washingtons task would have been considerably more difficult.
for the half million african american colonists most of them slaves the fight for independence took on special poignancy.
after all they wanted to achieve personal as well as political freedom and many african americans supported those who seemed most likely to deliver them from bondage.
as one historian explained the black soldier was likely to join the side that made him the quickest and best offer in terms of those unalienable rights of which mr jefferson had spoken it is estimated that some five thousand african americans took up arms to fight against the british.
the continental army included two all black units one from massachusetts and the other from rhode island.
in 1778 the legislature of rhode island voted to free any slave who volunteered to serve since according to the lawmakers history taught that the wisest the freest and bravest nations.
liberated their slaves and enlisted them as soldiers to fight in defence of their country in the south especially in georgia and south carolina more than ten thousand african americans supported the british and after the patriots had won the war these men and women left the united states relocating to nova scotia florida and jamaica with some eventually resettling in africa.
testing the american will after the embarrassing defeats in massachusetts the king appointed general sir william howe to replace the ill fated gage.
british rulers now understood that a simple police action would not be sufficient to crush the american rebellion.
parliament authorized sending more than fifty thousand troops to the mainland colonies and after evacuating boston an untenable strategic position the british forces stormed ashore at staten island in new york harbor on july 3 1776.
from this more central location howe believed he could cut the new englanders off from the rest of america.
he enjoyed the powerful support of the british navy under the command of his brother admiral lord richard howe.
when washington learned the british were planning to occupy new york city he transferred many of his inexperienced soldiers to long island where they suffered a major defeat august 27 1776.
in a series of engagements disastrous for the americans howe drove the continental army across the hudson river into new jersey.
because of his failure to take full advantage of the situation however general howe lost what seemed in retrospect an excellent opportunity to annihilate washingtons entire army.
nevertheless the americans were on the run and in the fall of 1776 contemporaries predicted the rebels would soon capitulate.
times that try mens souls swift victories in new york and new jersey persuaded general howe that few americans enthusiastically supported independence.
he issued a general pardon therefore to anyone who would swear allegiance to george iii.
the results were encouraging.
more than three thousand men and women who lived in areas occupied by the british army took the oath.
this group included one intimidated signer of the declaration of independence.
howe perceived that a lasting peace in america would require his troops to treat our enemies as if they might one day become our friends a member of lord norths cabinet grumbled that this was a sentimental manner of making war a shortsighted view considering englands experience in attempting to pacify the irish.
the pardon plan eventually failed not because howe lacked toughness but because his soldiers and officers regarded loyal americans as inferior provincials an attitude that did little to promote good relations.
in any case as soon as the redcoats left a pardoned region the rebel militia retaliated against those who had deserted the patriot cause.
in december 1776 washingtons bedraggled army retreated across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
american prospects appeared bleaker than at any other time during the war.
the continental army lacked basic supplies and many men who had signed up for short term enlistments prepared to go home.
these are the times that try mens souls paine wrote in a pamphlet titled american crisis.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of their fighting for independence view the map the american revolution quebec dec 31 1775 retreat of montgomery and arnold may 7 1776 carleton three rivers june 7 1776 montgomery r io arnold oriskany aug 6 1777 gates n h bennington aug 16 1777 newburyport mass.
concord siege of boston british retreat to nova scotia july 1775 march 1776 march 17 1776 we 1 ho h 17 am rc washington s illi ma white plains retreat ir w lifax oct 28 1776 s ha is.
m ng morristown fro brooklyn heights new york lo winter quarters 1777 aug 27 1776 o we germantown admiral h oct 4 1777 aug 17 from england valley forge monmouth winter quarters court house 1777 1778 june 28 1778 penn.
brandywine n j princeton sept 11 1777 jan 3 1777 trenton dec 26 1776 md.
philadelphia washington and captured rochambeau sept 26 1777 r i conn ie m fro e how ves lin cla m at io n te et virginia pr o yorktown aug 30 oct.
19 1781 g ra ss camden aug 16 1780 wilmington co d an om n fr nto 80 cli h1 c r ma co r n wallis eutaw springs sept 8 1781 rn n wa ew ll yo i s rk gree n e e mo rg co an rn wa llis de cornwallis allis e georgia north carolina cor nw green s c ninety six abandoned by british june 1781 at l a n t i c ocean battles of the virginia capes sept 5 9 1781 americans hoped to defeat british by forcing cornwallis to divide his troops cowpens jan 17 1781 clinton town july 1776 y lafa howe guilford courthouse mar.
15 1781 kings mountain oct 7 1780 rles cha ho od and gra er e of 763 ke lexington apr.
19 1775 bunker hill june 17 1775 howe albany new york la saratoga burgoyne surrenders oct 17 1777 bemis heights oct 7 1777 ar no ld st er eg l burgoyne lake hu ron ft halifax british north america canada o n ta british launch invasions to detach new england lake arnold montreal nov 13 1775 charles town may 12 1780 savannah fell to british 1778 100 miles 100 kilometers american troop movements british troop movements french troop movements british attempt to push through carolinas and virginia the american revolution 1775 1781 american victories british victories mixed results the war for independence ranged over a huge area.
battles were fought in the colonies on the western frontier and along the gulf of mexico.
the major engagements of the first years of the war from the spontaneous rising at concord in 1775 to washingtons well coordinated attack on trenton in december 1776 were fought in the northern colonies.
in the middle theater of war burgoynes attempt in 1777 to cut off new england from the rest of the colonies failed when his army was defeated at saratoga.
action in the final years of the war from the battles at camden kings mountain cowpens and guilford courthouse to the fina l victory at yorktown occurred in the southern theater of war.
complete the assignment spains contribution to american independence on myhistorylab feature essay spains contribution to american independence s pain made a significant although much underappreciated contribution to the winning of american independence.
the decision to support american resistance against great britain came in 1779.
after an american army had won a stunning victory at the battle of saratoga in 1778 spain joined its ally france in a global contest against britain that stretched from the banks of the mississippi river to the islands of the caribbean and the straits of gibraltar.
spain had little interest in advancing the revolutionary principles of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness after all as a traditional monarchy it was not enthusiastic about championing a radical cause associated with popular rights.
rather the declaration of war against britain reflected spains desire for revenge against a long standing enemy that had seized gibraltar in 1713 and florida in 1763.
sensing that british military forces around the world were stretched too thin spain and france prepared for a conflict designed to regain lost possessions and restore imperial glory.
british leaders appreciated immediately the seriousness of the danger.
they knew that it was one thing to fight the insurgent armies of george washington quite another to take on two major european powers.
confronting the new threat lord george germain the british secretary of state assured the british people that his government would pursue the war in north america with the utmost vigor he faced a very difficult challenge.
war with france and spain forced britain to reallocate key military resources in ways that took pressure off the struggling american army.
germain ordered half of the 16 000 troops then occupying philadelphia diverted to other vulnerable regions.
approximately 5 000 were transferred to the west indies where they guarded against the possibility of french and spanish attacks against britains lucrative sugar trade.
another 3 000 were posted in florida spains former colony.
in fact worried that french and spanish warships might attack vital supply lines british leaders finally abandoned philadelphia altogether a move that allowed washington to retake the city without having to fire a shot.
anxious to recapture florida the spanish launched a bold campaign against british forts located along the coast of the gulf of mexico.
their success owed a lot to the energy and courage of bernardo de glvez the spanish governor of louisiana.
before taking this post he had compiled an impressive military record having fought against spains enemies in africa and the borderlands of northern mexico.
in fact he received the governorship of louisiana as a reward for his extraordinary service.
glvez was determined to restore spains honor in north america.
as he announced the king of spain has determined that the principal object of his arms in america during the present war will be to drive the british from the mexican gulf and the neighborhood of louisiana even before spain had officially entered the war glvez began sending vital military supplies from st louis then governed by spain to american forces operating in the west.
these materials helped george rogers clark win a string of strategic victories against british forces in the illinois territory in 1778.
if clark had failed the united states could not have creditably claimed all the land east of the mississippi river during the peace negotiations with great britain that ended the revolution.
in 1779 glvez moved decisively to drive the british from the region north of new orleans and in quick succession he captured manchac natchez and baton rouge.
glvez then turned his attention to regaining florida.
the first obstacle was mobile.
in march 1780 after a two week siege the british garrison surrendered to glvezs troops.
pensacola presented a much greater military challenge.
it served as britains administrative and commercial center for west florida.
moreover it was well defended.
glvezs courage and amazing luck allowed the spanish to carry the day.
a spanish fleet sailing out of cuba joined ships transporting glvezs soldiers in the waters off pensacola.
the admiral of the cuban fleet was reluctant to enter the port.
he feared that his vessels might run aground on sandbars.
glvez would have none of it.
he sailed his own ship boldly into the harbor and inspired by his example the captains of the other ships followed his lead.
in march 1781 they landed over 7 000 soldiers.
the battle of pensacola was hard fought.
the spanish siege lasted for over two months and just as their ammunition was running out a lucky shot hit the british powder magazine setting off a huge explosion that destroyed much of the fort.
the british force an army made up of british regulars native americans and american loyalists surrendered on may 10.
glvezs successful campaign had a major impact on the final year of the american revolution.
the growing military presence of spain and france in the west indies compelled the british to station troops in the area that could have been employed against the continental army in yorktown and new york.
moreover the fall of west florida made it harder for the british to supply their soldiers and indian allies operating in the southern mainland colonies.
although spain was unable to retake gibraltar glvez realized his goal of reclaiming florida.
he had overcome the humiliation of spains previous defeats.
in 1783 the spanish crown invited him to serve on the committee that would draw up the peace of paris ending the american revolution.
even at this moment of triumph though spain refused to recognize the sovereignty of the united states.
it was not long before spain had second thoughts about its victory over great britain.
an aggressive new enemy appeared.
every year brought a flood of american settlers into florida and the mississippi valley.
they showed not the slightest respect for spanish authority.
in 1787 the spanish governor of florida reported that the american backwoodsmen were distinguished from savages only in their color language and the superiority of their depraved cunning and untrustworthiness he believed the frontiersmen migrated to florida to escape all legal authority another spanish official warned a new and independent power has arisen on our continent he was correct.
in 1819 spain was forced to transfer florida to the united states.
questions for discussion 1.
why did spain decide to enter the revolutionary war.
why did the spanish government have misgivings about american independence.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 country but he that stands it now deserves.
love and thanks.
before winter washington determined to attempt one last desperate stroke.
howe played into washingtons hands.
the british forces were dispersed in small garrisons across the state of new jersey and while the americans could not possibly have defeated the combined british army they did possess the capacity with luck to capture an exposed post.
on the night of december 25 continental soldiers slipped over the ice filled delaware river and at trenton took nine hundred sleeping hessian mercenaries by complete surprise.
cheered by success washington returned a second time to trenton but on this occasion the continental army was not so fortunate.
a large british force under lord cornwallis trapped the americans.
instead of standing and fighting really an impossible challenge washington secretly by night marched his little army around cornwalliss left flank.
on january 3 1777 the americans surprised a british garrison at princeton.
washington then went into winter quarters.
the british fearful of losing more outposts consolidated their troops thus leaving much of the state in the hands of the patriot militia.
victory in a year of defeat in 1777 englands chief military strategist lord george germain still perceived the war in conventional european terms.
a large field army would somehow maneuver washingtons continental troops into a decisive battle in which the british would enjoy a clear advantage.
complete victory over the americans certainly seemed within englands grasp.
unfortunately for the men who advocated this plan the continental forces proved extremely elusive and while one british army vainly tried to corner washington in pennsylvania another was forced to surrender in the forests of upstate new york.
in the summer of 1777 general john burgoyne a dashing though overbearing officer descended from canada with a force of more than seven thousand troops.
they intended to clear the hudson valley of rebel resistance join howes army which was to come up to albany and thereby cut new england off from the other states.
burgoyne fought in a grand style.
accompanied by a german band thirty carts filled with the generals liquor and belongings and two thousand dependents and camp followers the british set out to thrash the americans.
the campaign was a disaster.
military units mostly from new england cut the enemy force apart in the deep woods north of albany.
at the battle of bennington august 16 the new hampshire militia under brigadier general john stark overwhelmed a thousand german mercenaries.
after this setback burgoynes forces struggled forward desperately hoping that howe would rush to their rescue but when it became clear that their situation at saratoga was hopeless the haughty burgoyne was forced to surrender fifty eight hundred men to the american general horatio gates october 17.
soon after burgoyne left canada general howe unexpectedly decided to move his main army from new york city to philadelphia.
exactly what he hoped to achieve was not clear even to britains rulers and of course when burgoyne called for assistance howe was sitting in the new nations capital still trying to devise a way to destroy the continental army.
howes campaign began in late july.
the british forces sailed to the head of the chesapeake bay and then marched north to philadelphia.
washingtons troops obstructed the enemys progress first at brandywine creek september 11 and then at paoli september 20 but the outnumbered americans could not stop the british from entering philadelphia.
anxious lest these defeats discourage congress and the american people washington attempted one last battle before the onset of winter.
in an engagement at germantown october 4 the americans launched a major counterattack on a fog covered battlefield but just at the moment when success seemed assured they broke off the fight.
when every thing gave the most flattering hopes of victory washington complained the troops began suddenly to retreat bad luck confusion and incompetence contributed to the failure.
a discouraged continental army dug in at valley forge twenty miles outside of philadelphia where camp diseases took twenty five hundred american lives.
in their misery few american soldiers realized their situation was not nearly as desperate as it had been in 1776.
the french alliance even before the americans declared their independence agents of the government of louis xvi began to explore ways to aid the colonists not so much because the french monarchy favored the republican cause but because it hoped to embarrass the english.
the french deeply resented the defeat they had sustained during the seven years war.
during the early months of the revolution the french covertly sent tons of essential military supplies to the americans.
the negotiations for these arms involved secret agents and fictitious trading companies the type of clandestine operation more typical of modern times than of the eighteenth century.
but when american representatives benjamin franklin for one pleaded for official recognition of american independence or for outright military alliance the french advised patience.
the international stakes were too great for the king to openly back a cause that had little chance of success.
the american victory at saratoga convinced the french that the rebels had formidable forces and were serious in their resolve.
indeed lord north drew the same conclusion.
when news of saratoga reached london north muttered this damned war in private conversation he expressed doubts about englands ability to win the contest knowing the french would soon enter the fray.
in paris franklin performed brilliantly.
in meetings with french officials he hinted that the americans might accept a british peace initiative.
if the french wanted the war to continue if they really wanted to embarrass their old rival then they had to do what the english refused formally recognize the independence of the united states.
the stratagem paid off handsomely.
on february 6 1778 the french presented american representatives with two separate treaties.
the first called the treaty of amity and commerce established commercial relations between france and the united states.
it tacitly accepted the existence of a new independent republic.
the treaty of alliance was even more generous considering americas obvious military and economic weaknesses.
in the event that france and england went to war they did so on june 14 as everyone expected the french agreed to reject either truce or peace with great britain.
until the independence of the united states fighting for independence shall have been formally or tacitly assured by the treaty or treaties that shall terminate the war even more amazing france surrendered its claim to all territories formerly owned by great britain east of the mississippi river.
the americans pledged they would not sign a separate peace with britain without first informing their new ally.
and in return france made no claim to canada asking only for the right to take possession of certain british islands in the caribbean.
never had franklin worked his magic to greater effect.
french intervention instantly transformed british military strategy.
what had been a colonial rebellion suddenly became a world conflict a continuation of the great wars for empire of the late seventeenth century see chapter 4.
scarce military resources especially newer fighting ships had to be diverted from the american theater to guard the english channel.
in fact there was talk in london of a possible french invasion.
although the threat of such an assault was not very great until 1779 the british did have cause for concern.
the french navy posed a serious challenge to the overextended british fleet.
by concentrating their warships in a specific area the french could hold off or even defeat british squadrons an advantage that would figure significantly in the american victory at yorktown.
the final campaign british general henry clinton replaced howe who resigned after the battle of saratoga.
clinton was a strangely complex individual.
as a subordinate officer he had impressed his superiors as imaginative but easily provoked to anger.
when he took command of the british army his resolute self confidence suddenly dissolved.
perhaps he feared failure.
whatever the explanation for his vacillation clintons record in america was little better than howes or gages.
military strategists calculated that britains last chance of winning the war lay in the southern colonies a region largely untouched in the early years of fighting.
intelligence reports reaching london indicated that georgia and south carolina contained a sizable body of loyalists men who would take up arms for the crown if only they received support and encouragement from the regular army.
the southern strategy devised by germain and clinton in 1779 turned the war into a bitter guerrilla conflict and during the last months of battle british officers worried that their search for an easy victory had inadvertently opened a pandoras box of uncontrollable partisan furies.
the southern campaign opened in the spring of 1780.
savannah had already fallen and clinton reckoned that if the british could take charles town they would be able to control the entire south.
a large fleet carrying nearly eight thousand redcoats reached south carolina in february.
complacent americans had allowed the citys fortifications to decay and in a desperate last minute effort to preserve charles town general benjamin lincolns forces dug trenches and reinforced walls but to no avail.
clinton and his second in command general cornwallis gradually encircled the city and on may 12 lincoln surrendered an american army of almost six thousand men.
the defeat took congress by surprise and without making proper preparations it dispatched a second army to south carolina under horatio gates the hero of saratoga.
he too failed.
at camden cornwallis outmaneuvered the raw american recruits capturing or killing 750 during the course of battle august 16.
poor gates galloped from the scene and did not stop until he reached hillsboro north carolina two hundred miles away.
major battles of the american revolution battle lexington concord bunker hill montreal quebec brooklyn heights white plains trenton princeton bennington brandywine saratoga first battle freemans farm philadelphia captured germantown saratoga second battle bemis heights charles town camden kings mountain cowpens guilford courthouse yorktown date apr.
19 1775 apr.
19 1775 jun.
17 1775 nov 13 1775 dec 31 1775 aug 27 1776 oct 28 1776 dec 26 1776 jan 3 1777 aug 16 1777 sept 11 1777 sept 19 1777 victor british americans mixed results americans british british british americans americans americans british mixed results sept 26 1777 oct 4 1777 oct 7 1777 british british americans may 12 1780 aug 16 1780 oct 7 1780 jan 17 1781 mar.
15 1781 aug 30 oct 18 british british americans americans british americans and french even at this early stage of the southern campaign the dangers of partisan warfare had become evident.
tory raiders showed little interest in serving as regular soldiers in cornwalliss army.
they preferred night riding indiscriminate plundering or murdering of neighbors against whom they harbored ancient grudges.
the british had unleashed a horde of banditti across south carolina.
men who genuinely supported independence or who had merely fallen victim to loyalist guerrillas bided their time.
they retreated westward waiting for their enemies to make a mistake.
their chance came on october 7 at kings mountain north carolina.
in the most vicious fighting of the revolution the backwoodsmen decimated a force of british regulars and tory raiders who had strayed too far from base.
one witness reported that when a british officer tried to surrender he was summarily shot down by at least seven american soldiers.
cornwallis badly confused and poorly supplied squandered his strength chasing american forces across the carolinas.
congress sent general nathanael greene to the south with a new army.
this young rhode islander was the most capable general on washingtons staff.
greene joined daniel morgan leader of the famed virginia riflemen and in a series of tactically brilliant engagements they sapped the strength of cornwalliss army first at cowpens south carolina january 17 1781 and later at guilford courthouse north carolina march 15.
clinton fumed in new york city.
in his estimation the inept cornwallis had left two valuable colonies chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 bri ti sh no rth am eri ca no va ia ot c s halifax the loyalist dilemma why did so many loyalists decide to leave the united states during the revolution.
no one knows for certain how many americans actually supported the crown n h during the revolution.
some loyalists boston undoubtedly kept silent and avoided making ario t n new mass.
l o york a public commitment that might have led to newport conn 1776 1778 banishment or loss of property.
but for many persons neutrality proved impossible.
almost e r i i er new york one hundred thousand men and women l philadelphia permanently left america.
while a number 1777 1778 n j of these exiles had served as imperial office pa at l a n t i c ocean holders thomas hutchinson for example md.
in the main they came from all ranks and backgrounds.
a large number of humble farmers more than thirty thousand resettled virginia in canada.
others relocated to england the norfolk west indies or africa.
the political ideology of the loyalists north was not substantially different from that of carolina their opponents.
like other americans they believed that men and women were entitled wilmington to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
south the loyalists were also convinced that indecarolina pendence would destroy those values by proloyalist strongholds charleston moting disorder.
by turning their backs on indians loyalist or neutral britain a source of tradition and stability savannah 200 miles strongly contested areas georgia the rebels seemed to have encouraged licen0 200 kilometers patriot strongholds tiousness even anarchy in the streets.
the loyalists suspected that patriot demands for loyalist strongholds the highest concentrations of loyalists were in the colonies of freedom were self serving even hypocritinew york north carolina south carolina and georgia especially in the areas around port cities such cal for as perserved smith a loyalist from as new york city wilmington charleston and savannah.
ashfield massachusetts observed sons of liberty.
did not deserve the name for it was evident all they wanted was liberty from oppression that they might have liberty behind him to be overrun and conquered by the very army which he to oppress boasts to have completely routed but a week or two before the loyalists were caught in a difficult squeeze.
the british cornwallis pushed north into virginia planning apparently to never quite trusted them.
after all they were americans.
during the establish a base of operations on the coast.
he selected yorktown early stages of the war loyalists organized militia companies and a sleepy tobacco market located on a peninsula bounded by the hoped to pacify large areas of the countryside with the support of the york and james rivers.
washington watched these maneuvers regular army.
the british generals were unreliable partners however closely.
the canny virginia planter knew this territory intimately for no sooner had they called on loyal americans to come forward and he sensed that cornwallis had made a serious blunder.
when than the redcoats marched away leaving the tories exposed to rebel washington learned the french fleet could gain temporary domiretaliation.
and in england the exiles found themselves treated as nance in the chesapeake bay he rushed south from new jersey.
second class citizens.
while many of them received monetary comwith him marched thousands of well trained french troops pensation for their sacrifice they were never regarded as the equals of under the comte de rochambeau.
all the pieces fell into place.
native born english citizens.
not surprisingly the loyalist commuthe french admiral the comte de grasse cut cornwallis off from nity in london was gradually transformed into a collection of bitter the sea while washington and his lieutenants encircled the british men and women who felt unwelcome on both sides of the atlantic.
on october 19 1781 cornwallis surrendered his entire americans who actively supported independence saw these army of six thousand men.
when lord north heard of the defeat people as traitors who deserved their fate of constant often vioat yorktown he moaned oh god.
it is all over the british still lent harassment.
in many states but especially in new york controlled new york city and charles town but except for a few revolutionary governments confiscated loyalist property.
other skirmishes the fighting ended.
the task of securing the indepenfriends of the king received beatings or as the rebels called them dence of the united states was now in the hands of the diplomats.
l vt hu ro a p pa la c hi an mo un ta in s n study resources grand toory sic rides a few were even executed.
according to one patriot a tory is a thing whose head is in england and its body in america and its neck ought to be stretched long after the victorious americans turned their attentions to the business of building a new republic loyalists remembered a receding colonial past a comfortable ordered world that had been lost forever at yorktown.
although many loyalists eventually returned to their homes a sizable number could not do so.
for them the sense of loss remained a heavy emotional burden.
perhaps the most poignant testimony came from a young mother living in exile in nova scotia.
i climbed to the top of chipmans hill and watched the sails disappear in the distance she recounted and such a feeling of loneliness came over me that though i had not shed a tear through all the war i sat down on the damp moss with my baby on my lap and cried bitterly winning the peace how did benjamin franklin john adams and john jay secure a better peace treaty than congress could have expected.
congress appointed a skilled delegation to negotiate a peace treaty benjamin franklin john adams and john jay.
according to their official instructions they were to insist only on the recognition of the independence of the united states.
on other issues congress ordered its delegates to defer to the counsel of the french government.
but the political environment in paris was much different from what the diplomats had been led to expect.
the french had formed a military alliance with spain and french officials announced that they could not consider the details of an american settlement until after the spanish had recaptured gibraltar from the british.
the prospects for a spanish victory were not good and in any case it was well known that spain coveted the lands lying between the appalachian mountains and the mississippi river.
indeed there were even rumors afloat in paris that the great european powers might intrigue to deny the united states its independence.
while the three american delegates publicly paid their respects to french officials they secretly entered into negotiations with an english agent.
the peacemakers drove a remarkable bargain a much better one than congress could have expected.
the preliminary agreement the treaty of paris of 1783 signed on september 3 not only guaranteed the independence of the united states it also transferred all the territory east of the mississippi river except spanish florida to the new republic.
the treaty established generous boundaries on the north and south and gave the americans important fishing rights in the north atlantic.
in exchange congress promised to help british merchants collect debts contracted before the revolution and compensate loyalists whose lands had been confiscated by the various state governments.
even though the americans negotiated separately with the british they did not sign a separate peace.
the preliminary treaty did not become effective until france reached its own agreement with great britain.
thus did the americans honor the french alliance.
it is difficult to imagine how franklin adams and jay could have negotiated a more favorable conclusion to the war.
in the fall of 1783 the last redcoats sailed from new york city ending 176 years of colonial rule.
conclusion preserving independence the american people had waged war against the most powerful nation in europe and emerged victorious.
the treaty marked the conclusion of a colonial rebellion but it remained for the men and women who had resisted taxation without representation to work out the full implications of republicanism.
what would be the shape of the new government.
what powers would be delegated to the people the states the federal authorities.
how far would the wealthy well born leaders of the rebellion be willing to extend political social and economic rights.
for many americans the challenge of nation building appeared even more formidable than waging war against great britain.
as philadelphia physician dr benjamin rush explained there is nothing more common than to confound the terms of american revolution with those of the late american war.
the american war is over but this is far from being the case with the american revolution.
on the contrary nothing but the first act of the great drama is closed study resources take the study plan for chapter 5 the american revolution on myhistorylab time line 1763 peace of paris ends the seven years war 1764 parliament passes sugar act to collect american revenue stamp act receives support of house of commons march stamp act congress meets in new york city october 1766 stamp act repealed the same day that declaratory act becomes law march 18 1767 townshend revenue acts stir american anger june july 1768 massachusetts assembly refuses to rescind circular letter february chapter 5 chapter review 1770 parliament repeals all townshend duties except one on tea march british troops massacre boston civilians march samuel adams forms committee of correspondence lord norths government passes tea act may bostonians hold tea party december parliament punishes boston with coercive acts march june first continental congress convenes september patriots take stand at lexington and concord april second continental congress gathers may americans hold their own at bunker hill june 1776 congress votes for independence declaration of independence is signed british defeat washington at long island august americans score victory at trenton december general burgoyne surrenders at saratoga october french treaties recognize independence of the united states february british take charles town may washington forces cornwallis to surrender at yorktown october peace treaty signed september british evacuate new york city november chapter review e graves how the loyalist dilemma l e ri e n philadelphia 1777 1778 n j md.
why did so many loyalists decide to leave the united states during the revolution.
un ta in s pa virginia mo almost 100 000 loyalists permanently left america during the revolution.
while some loyalists had held office under the crown before the revolution many others believed that independence from britain would destroy traditional values and lead to anarchy and new forms of oppression.
p 126 la c hi an norfolk north carolina pa wars in america were expensive.
parliament established the proclamation line of 1763 to reduce the costs of protecting the frontier but this angered colonists seeking new lands in the west.
parliament also concluded that the colonists should help reduce the national debt but when it passed the stamp act 1765 americans protested.
colonists boycotted british manufactured goods.
taken aback parliament repealed the hated statute while maintaining in the declaratory act 1766 its complete legislative authority over the americans.
p 108 howe clinto tow what events eroded the bonds of empire during the 1760s.
to win their independence the colonies first had to overcome the formidable military power of great britain.
britain had four times the population of the colonies was the worlds leading manufacturer had a well trained and experienced army and the worlds best navy.
the outgunned colonists had to rely on a war of attrition.
it was only after the victory at saratoga in 1777 convinced the french to enter into an alliance that the colonists were able to win conclusive battles and successfully end the war.
p 119 rles cha eroding the bonds of empire why did it take eight years of warfare for the americans to gain independence.
m fro during the 1760s british rulers claimed that parliament could make laws for the colonists in all cases whatsoever americans challenged this parliamentary sovereignty drawing on the work of john locke the english philosopher they insisted that god had given them certain natural and inalienable rights.
by attempting to tax them without representation parliament threatened those rights.
p 106 r i conn washington s white plains retreat oct 28 1776 s is.
ng morristown fro new york lo winter quarters 1777 germantown ad oct 4 1777 from e ey forge monmouth quarters court house 77 1778 june 28 1778 andywine n j princeton t 11 1777 jan 3 1777 trenton dec 26 1776 md.
philadelphia d captured u sept 26 1777 wilmington p why did americans resist parliamentary taxation.
fighting for independence a structure of colonial society south winning the peace steps toward independence what events in 1775 and 1776 led to the colonists decision to declare independence.
how did benjamin franklin john adams and john jay secure a better peace treaty than congress could have expected.
in 1775 following battles at lexington and concord militiamen from throughout new england descended upon boston besieging the british troops encamped there.
in response the continental congress formed the continental army and appointed george washington commander.
in 1776 thomas paines common sense convinced colonists that a republic was a better form of government than monarchy and congress declared independence.
p 116 apart from insisting that britain recognize the independence of the united states congress instructed franklin adams and jay to defer to the counsels of the french government during the peace conference.
but by conducting secret and separate negotiations with the british the american delegates were also able to secure all the territory east of the mississippi river except spanish florida for the new republic and to gain important fishing rights for americans in the north atlantic.
p 127 study resources key terms and definitions whigs in mid eighteenth century britain the whigs were a political faction that dominated parliament.
generally they opposed royal influence in government and wanted to increase the power of parliament.
in america a whig party coalesced in the 1830s in opposition to president andrew jackson.
the american whigs supported federal power and internal improvements but not territorial expansion.
the whig party collapsed in the 1850s.
p 106 parliamentary sovereignty principle that emphasized parliaments power to govern colonial affairs.
p 107 stamp act of 1765 placed a tax on newspapers and printed matter produced in the colonies causing mass opposition by colonists.
p 110 stamp act congress meeting of colonial delegates in new york city in october 1765 to protest the stamp act a law passed by parliament to raise revenue in america.
p 111 boston massacre a violent clash between british troops and a boston mob on march 5 1770.
five citizens were killed when the troops fired into the crowd.
the incident inflamed anti british sentiment in massachusetts.
p 113 coercive acts also known as the intolerable acts the four pieces of legislation passed by parliament in response to the boston tea party to punish massachusetts.
p 115 first continental congress a meeting of delegates from 12 colonies in philadelphia in 1774 the congress denied parliaments authority to legislate for the colonies condemned british actions toward the colonies created the continental association and endorsed a call to take up arms.
p 117 second continental congress a gathering of colonial representatives in philadelphia in 1775 that organized the continental army and began requisitioning men and supplies for the war effort.
p 117 common sense revolutionary tract written by thomas paine in 1776.
it called for independence and a republican government in america.
p 117 loyalists colonists sided with britain during the american revolution.
p 120 committee of correspondence communication network formed in massachusetts and other colonies to communicate grievances and provide colonists with evidence of british oppression.
p 114 yorktown virginia market town on a peninsula bounded by the york and james rivers where lord cornwalliss army was trapped by the americans and french in 1781 p 125 boston tea party raid on british ships in which patriots disguised as mohawks threw hundreds of chests of tea owned by the east india company into boston harbor to protest british taxes.
p 115 treaty of paris of 1783 agreement establishing american independence after the revolutionary war.
it also transferred territory east of the mississippi river except for spanish florida to the new republic.
p 127 critical thinking questions 1.
were british political leaders or american agitators more to blame for the imperial crisis.
did lexington and concord make national independence inevitable.
given the logistical problems facing the british could they have 2.
with more enlightened leadership could the king and parliament have possibly won the revolutionary war.
preserved britains american empire.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 5 on myhistorylab eroding the bonds of empire steps toward independence read the document james otis the rights of the british colonies asserted and proved p 109 read the document benjamin franklin testimony against the stamp act 1766 p 111 listen to the audio file read the document thomas paine a freelance writer urges his readers to use common sense p 118 watch the video the american revolution as different americans saw it p 119 the liberty song p 112 fighting for independence read the document read the document boston gazette description of the boston massacre p 113 george r t hewes a retrospect on the boston tea party p 115 view the map the american revolution p 121 complete the assignment spains contribution to american independence p 122 indicates study plan media assignment the republican experiment contents and learning objectives defining republican culture pg.
131 strengthening federal authority pg.
141 what were the limits of equality in the republican society of the new united states.
what did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives.
living in the shadow of revolution pg.
132 we fought for this pg.
143 during the 1780s why were americans so sensitive to the dangers of aristocratic display.
why did constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery.
the states experiments in republicanism pg.
136 whose constitution.
struggle for ratification pg.
150 following independence why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions.
what issues separated federalists from antifederalists during debates over ratification.
stumbling toward a new national government pg.
137 feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent why did many americans regard the articles of confederation as inadequate.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
