covered in chapter 7 history 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including the revolution and drafting of the declaration of independence and describe their causes and effects.
history 1c explain the significance of the following dates 1776 adoption of the declaration of independence.
history 4a analyze the causes of the american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism la representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war.
history 4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
history 4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
geography 10a locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 18th century.
geography ioc analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the united states.
government 15c identify colonial grievances listed in the declaration of independence citizenship 19a define and give examples of unalienable rights.
citizenship.
the student understands the importance of voluntary individual participation in the democratic process.
the student is expected to citizenship 2oa explain the role of significant individuals such as john locke and william blackstone in the development of self government in colonial america.
citizenship 20c analyze reasons for and the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in u s history such as the boston tea party citizenship 21a identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
citizenship 22b describe the contributions of significant political social and military leaders of the united states such as john paul jones culture 23e identify the political social and economic contributions of women to american society.
in this chapter you will study one of the most important events in american history the american revolution.
you will learn how british colonists in north america objected to new taxes imposed by the british.
this dispute along with other issues such as the proclamation line of 1763 eventually brought the colonists into armed conflict with great britain.
actual fighting between the british army and the colonists broke out in massachusetts at lexington and concord in 1775.
open warfare finally pushed colonial leaders to declare their independence from england a year later.
87 name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 89 french and indian war proclamation line 176pj king george iii samuel adams sugar act stamp act poston massacre 1770 john adams u abigail adams patrick henry wentworth cheswell mary otis warren crispus attucks poston tea party lexington concord george washington valley forge intolerable acts marquis de lafayette haym solomon pernardo de galvez penjamin franklin thomas jefferson thomas paine peel of independence unalienable rights pattle of saratoga pattle of yorktown john paul jones james armistead by the 1750s the british claimed control of the ohio river valley just across the appalachians from the british colonies.
meanwhile the french had built forts along the great lakes.
they also claimed control of the ohio river valley southwest of their settlements.
war between britain and france broke out in 1754.
because many indian tribes sided with the french the conflict became known in north america as the french and indian war.
french military bases were located in quebec and montreal while the british had bases along the hudson river.
the area between them became the main battleground.
in 1756 the war spread from north america to europe.
the french and indian war was fought for control of north america.
a british force captured the french city of quebec in 1759.
this victory gave the british control of the st lawrence river.
under the terms of the peace treaty 1763 france lost most of its colonial empire in north america including canada and all lands east of the mississippi river.
these lands became british.
what was the main cause of the french and indian war.
what were the main effects of the british victory in the french and indian war.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 91 the issue of taxation disagreements quickly arose over the right of the british parliament to tax the colonists.
after the french and indian war britain faced a huge national debt.
it also cost money to station british troops in the 13 colonies and the west indies.
in britain people already paid higher taxes than the colonists.
the british government therefore proposed a series of new taxes on the colonists.
however these taxes were passed by the british parliament without first consulting the colonists.
british leaders thought this was only right because the colonists were not paying their fair share towards their own defense.
since the colonists lived so far away from london it seemed impossible for them to participate effectively in the british parliament.
taxation without representation.
wealthy colonial merchants and landowners used to acting in their colonial assemblies with little british interference resented these new policies.
colonial leaders were also influenced by enlightenment writers like john locke and william blackstone.
locke had written that government was a social contract he said the purpose of government was to protect individual freedom and property.
if a government failed to do this locke argued its citizens had the right to overthrow it.
blackstone defined the rights of individuals in english law as well as property rights that could not be violated even by the king.
following both locke and english traditions samuel adams and other colonists argued that the british government should not tax the colonists w nists believed that taxation without representation wa the stamp act.
the next new british tax was the stamp act 1765.
parliament ordered that every newspaper pamphlet and other public or legal document had to be printed or written on paper with an official stamp or seal on it.
this was a form of tax because the british government was to be paid for the official stamp.
the stamp act created a firestorm of protests in the colonies.
colonists objected that the british government had imposed this new tax without their consent.
colonists held meetings boycotted refused to buy british goods and even attacked british officials in protest.
in virginia patrick henry 1736 1799 denounced the stamp act and the house of burgesses passed resolutions against it.
samuel adams organized a series of protests in boston.
a stamp act congress against the act was held in new york city.
colonists produced petitions to the king and parliament stating their position on these new taxes.
these petitions argued that the colonists could only be taxed by their own consent.
john locke liout their consent.
these colo tyranny a british tax collector is tied to a pole by an unruly crowd.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 93 crispus attucks a man of mixed african and native american indian ancestry was the first colonist killed.
the soldiers were put on trial but were ably defended by a young attorney john adams 1735 1826.
adams argued that the soldiers acted in self defense and they were found to be innocent.
nevertheless his cousin samuel adams and other opponents of british rule called this incident the boston massacre they circulated pictures and used this tragedy to win public support against the british.
acting as an amateur historian the following statement was given by captain thomas preston of the 29th british regiment concerning events on march 5 1770 the boston massacre.
i was soon informed of a mob of colonists intention to carry off a soldier and murder him.
i sent an officer and 12 men to protect the sentry and followed myself.
the mob became more outrageous raising their bludgeons and calling out come on you scoundrels fire if you dare i used all my power to persuade them to retire peaceably.
they continued to advance.
someone asked if i intended to order the men to fire.
i answered no.
while speaking a soldier received a severe blow and instantly fired his gun.
turning to ask him why he fired without orders i was struck with a club on my arm which had it been on my head would have destroyed me how do you think samuel adams description of this event might have differed.
in 1772 samuel adams formed the first committee of correspondence with james warren and his wife mercy otis warren 1728 1874.
mary wrote a series of pamphlets and satires against the british.
the new committees of correspondence organized opponents of british polices throughout the colonies.
with her husband off fighting mercy wrote the first history of the american revolutionary war using her notes from meetings and conversations.
her ideas and writings convinced many people in the colonies to take up the patriot cause.
mercy otis warren the tea duty and the boston tea party.
in response to colonial protests the british again canceled all of the new taxes except the duty on tea.
in the evening of december 1773 a group of colonists dressed as mohawk indians boarded three british ships in boston harbor and seized 45 tons of tea.
they protested against the tea tax by dumping the tea into boston harbor.
boston tea party name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 95 learning with graphic organizers describe each of the milestones along the road to the american revolution.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence the struggle spreads in may 1775 colonial representatives met again in philadelphia for the second continental congress.
all of the colonies sent delegates to philadelphia.
delegates included john and samuel adams from massachusetts benjamin franklin from pennsylvania and thomas jefferson from virginia.
the delegates quickly voted to join massachusetts in its fight.
in williamsburg virginia patrick henry 1736 1799 considered the finest orator in america convinced the house of burgesses to support the war with his stirring speech 97 patrick henry the voice of the american revolution give me liberty or give me death although the second continental congress lacked the legal authority to govern it boldly assumed that responsibility.
the continental congress appointed george washington a virginian who had fought in the french and indian war to lead the continental army.
the selection of a virginian helped to unify the colonies.
washington proceeded directly to boston.
in march 1776 using cannons captured by ethan allen at fort ticonderoga in upstate new york washington drove the british out of boston.
the british retreated to new york city.
imagine that you and your classmates are representatives meeting in the continental congress.
hold an imaginary session in which you discuss 1 complaints of the colonists against great britain and 2 possible solutions to the crisis.
thomas paine s common sense a variety of colonial viewpoints developed in response to the outbreak of war.
loyalists still wanted to remain under british rule.
in the provinces of canada colonists stayed loyal to the crown.
there were also many loyalists in the thirteen colonies.
some wanted to stay a part of the british empire but with more rights for the colonists.
the iroquois sided with the british as did many black slaves who were promised their freedom for helping the british in the war.
thomas paine an englishman living in the colonies published a pamphlet common sense early in 1776.
paine believed it was ridiculous for america to be governed by a small distant island across the vast ocean.
he said the colonists derived no benefit from british rule.
in fact the british had dragged the colonists into european wars.
many patriots supporters of the revolution began to demand complete independence.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 99 this philosophy teaches that each individual is endowed at birth with rights that are unalienable because they were given to us by our creator.
this idea of unalienable rights became a basic belief of american government that some rights are derived from nature and may not be taken or violated by the government.
a acting as an amateur.
historian jefferson argued that citizens had the right to overthrow an oppressive government to protect these unalienable rights.
this argument is found in the most important paragraph of the declaration we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government briefly summarize this paragraph in your own words.
fc what justification did this paragraph give for the revolution against king george hi.
a the declaration of independence went on to list the grievances of the colonists against king george iii and his ministers.
most of these grievances related to the belief that the british crown was threatening the colonists rights in favor of tyrannical rule.
the king imposed taxes on the colonists without their consent.
he made the military superior to the civil government.
he refused to answer colonial petitions for the redress of grievances.
grievances against the king in the declaration of independence he asked citizens to give up their rights of representation.
he quartered large numbers of soldiers among the colonists.
he deprived the colonists of j trial by jury.
1 z z he dissolved the colonists rep he protected his soldiers against he waged war against the i resentative assemblies.
trial for murders of colonists.
american colonists.
1 the road to victory in the first years of the war the colonial army barely managed to escape disaster.
washington and the continental army occupied new york city in 1776.
however the british drove washington and his army out of new york after the battle of long island.
british troops then occupied new york city.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence the plan then failed entirely when the largest army commanded by general john burgoyne was defeated at saratoga in 1777 by general horatio gates.
general burgoyne was unprepared because like many british generals he held the erroneous belief that the rebels were ignorant farmers who could easily be swept away by highly trained british regulars.
one of those fighting in saratoga was church leader historian and judge wentworth cheswesl 1746 1817.
cheswell is considered the first african american elected to public office in america.
the battle of saratoga marked a turning point in the war.
the victory at saratoga helped ben franklin and john adams who had been sent overseas to persuade the french government to supply military assistance to the americans.
101 the winter of at valley forge despite the victory at saratoga the war was far from over.
the continental congress had to leave philadelphia which was occupied by british troops.
washington and his battle weary army spent the winter at valley forge in pennsylvania.
here washington faced the problem of feeding his 12 000 troops and even faced threats to his leadership from some of his officers.
long marches had destroyed the soldiers shoes and warm blankets were scarce.
there were desertions and many suffered from diseases such as typhus typhoid and pneumo nia.
although no battle was fought at valley forge it represented a major test for the new continental army.
washington used his time at valley forge to train and discipline his troops.
foreign volunteers like baron von steuben from germany and the marquis de lafayette 1757 1834 from france helped train the soldiers of the continental army.
although the french king forbid him from going to america because france was not at war with england lafayette purchased a ship and gathered a group of french officers to help in the struggle.
his volunteer service was seen as a major triumph for the american cause.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 103 cornwallis surrenders to washington.
the battle of yorktown 1781 after several more years of fighting general washington managed with french help to force general charles cornwallis and the main british army into a comer at yorktown virginia.
the french fleet blocked their escape by sea.
after a few days of combat cornwallis and his 8 000 british soldiers were forced to surrender in october 1781.
the battle of yorktown turned out to be the last major battle of the war.
occasional fighting contin ued after the surrender at yorktown and washington feared the war might still drag on for another year.
however when word reached england of the defeat at yorktown the prime minister was forced to resign and the new government decided to give up the fight.
independence recognized the treaty of paris of 1783 formally ended the american revolutionary war.
under its terms the british recognized the independence of the colonies.
the british promised to remove all of their troops from the country.
in addition they gave all the land between the mississippi river and the atlantic from the great lakes to the border with florida to the new united states.
this move gave the new nation twice the area of the former colonies.
a variety of factors were responsible for the american victory over great britain then the worlds richest and most powerful empire i the american victory was due to many factors hi fighting for their homeland.
the colonists were defending their own soil.
the british were fighting a war thousands of miles from their homeland.
methods of warfare.
colonial forces used unconventional methods to fight the british.
they took advantage of hiding behind trees and other tactics.
the british fought in a more traditional manner with soldiers aligned in a straight formation out in the open.
local support.
the continental army received support from the local population including women.
the british were fighting a war on a hostile terrain.
nevertheless the british did receive support from loyalists and used canada as a refuge and as a staging ground for attacks against the colonists.
leadership.
washington was a very capable general.
he received help from experienced foreign military leaders such as baron von steuben kasimir pulaski and marquis de lafayette.
these european volunteers helped turn the continental army into a more disciplined fighting force.
the french alliance.
volunteers money troops and naval support from france were essential to the american victory.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 105 benjamin franklin j.
here bernardo de galvez i put your picture i here 1 i 1.
patrick henry.
put your picture here thomas jefferson put your picture 5 here marquis de lafayette put your picture here thomas paine put your picture here haym solomon put your picture here name lexington and concord winter at valley forge treaty of paris justified overthrow of oppressive government j emergence of colonial self government yorktown j key developments thomas jefferson main author key battles second continental congress declares independence thomas paine common sense traditions of english liberty declaration of independence causes jr listed grievances stamp act against k j of the jr king george iii vocation without representation z unalienable rights townshend duties french and indian war tea tax proclamation line of 1763 colonial protests x important people boycotts boston massacre sons of liberty boston tea party ame revolution abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mary otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin blrnardo di.
galvf7 crispus attucks king george iii haym solomon patrick henry thomas jefferson marquis de lafayette thomas paine george washington chapter study cards american revolution declaration of independence 1776 fa causes of revolution.
british wanted to tax colonies to repay debts from the french and indian war colonists felt they were not being represented in british parliament.
proclamation line of 1763 stamp act 1765 townshend acts 1767 tea act 1773 boston tea party 1773 intolerable acts 1774 effects of revolution.
declaration of independence 1776 british recognized american independence.
issued by the second continental congress 1 on july 4 1776.
written primarily by thomas jefferson.
j stated to the world the reasons why the i colonies were declaring their independence.
announced the purpose of government was to protect the people s unalienable rights i life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
j a it declared the right of people to overthrow a government that oppresses its people.
i included a list of grievances by the colonists against the british king george iii.
i 107 name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 109 first examine the question.
this question tests your ability to identity what is common among a group of events along a timeline.
recall what you know.
each of these events are tied together by being related in some way to the american revolutionary war.
apply what you know to the choices.
choices a b and d are ail related to the american revolution but they are too narrowly defined to include all of the events on the timeline.
you should realize that only choice c would be an appropriate title that ties all of these events together under one title.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 the economic system illustrated by this cartoon was opposed by later american colonists because it f supported colonial manufacturing hist 4 a g took gold and silver from american mines h required colonists to sell their raw materials to and buy their finished goods from england j prohibited colonists from fishing or trading in furs use the two newspaper articles and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
lite jbnatmt baxvttc site i mthmt fettle april 1775 april 1775 the british redcoats came in sight just before sunrise.
the british commanding officer spoke to our militia disperse you rebels throw down vour arms and disperse.
upon w hich american troops gave a yell and immediately one or two british officers discharged their pistols followed by gun fire from four or five british soldiers.
six companies ol light infantry at lexington found a body of the country people under arms.
the king s troops marched up to them to ask the reason of their being so assembled.
several guns were fired on the king s troops from behind a stone wall and from other houses.
as a result the troops returned fire and killed several of them.
glisilglsm 3 these two accounts relate to the firing of the first shots of the american revolution at lexington massachusetts.
based on these accounts what conclusion can be drawn.
a american militia men fired the first shots at lexington.
citi 21 apj b the british fired the first shots of the american revolution.
c secondary sources are more accurate than primary sources.
d the point of view of the writer may lead to some bias in the account.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 111 10 the american colonists used the slogan no taxation without representation to express their belief in the need for f economic interdependence h mercantilism c hist 4 a j g the consent of the governed j parliamentary supremacy use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
i challenge the warmest advocate for reconciliation to show a single advantage that this continent can reap by being connected with great britain.
i repeat not a single advantage is derived.
our com will fetch its price in any market in europe and our imported goods must be paid buy them where we will thomas paine 1776 11 in this statement paine suggested that the american colonies should a negotiate an end to the conflict with england b form an alliance with england c declare independence from england d boycott goods from england 12 which document included the idea first suggested by john locke that people have a right to overthrow a government that oppresses them.
f mayflower compact g declaration of independence h fundamental orders of connecticut j proclamation of 1763 use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
13 based on the chart what was a major effect of the stamp act.
a the colonists no longer needed british goods.
ttist 4 a b the british refused to sell certain products to the colonists.
c the law led to a decline in the value of colonial currency.
d many colonists participated in actions in opposition to the act.
chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 113 19 which statement is most consistent with the views of samuel adams.
a taxation without representation is tyranny.
f hisy4 jq j b colonists should be grateful to be part of the british empire.
c citizens under british rule should support king george iii.
d the english king deserves respect and loyalty from his subjects.
20 which action by the colonists could be categorized as an act of civil disobedience.
f colonists throwing british tea into boston harbor f citi 20 c j g placing restrictions on trade with spain and france h paying the stamp tax to british tax collectors j firing guns at british soldiers at lexington and concord massachusetts use the diagram and your knowledge of social studies to answer following question.
21 which title best completes this web diagram.
a signers of the declaration of independence hist 4 b b participants in the boston massacre c heroes of the american revolution d artists of the colonial period use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
i long to hear that you have declared an independency and by the way in the new code of laws which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands.
remember men would be tyrants if they could.
if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion 22 whose views are represented in this passage.
f benjamin franklin h bernardo de galvez chist4 b j g haym solomon j abigail adams 23 why were the colonists angered by issuance of the proclamation of 1763.
a it took too much land from canada.
6 hist 4 a j b it gave territory in florida to france.
c it limited their freedom to move west.
d it promoted raids by native american indians.
chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 115 a.
after declaring independence from great britain each colony became an independent state and adopted its own state constitution.
the second continental congress enacted the articles of confederation.
this created a loose confederation of states.
each state had one vote in the confederation congress and nine states were needed to pass a law.
the confederation congress controlled foreign affairs but was unable to raise its own army or collect taxes.
it depended on the state governments for support.
c the confederation congress passed the northwest ordinance in 1787 establishing principles for the orderly future expansion of the united states.
slavery was prohibited in the northwest territory.
d during the critical period 1781 1787 the new nation faced many problems under the articles of confederation.
states taxed goods from other states and each state printed its own money making trade difficult.
e in 1786 farmers in massachusetts rose up in shays rebellion.
although it was put down by state militia there was no national army if it had spread.
f american leaders decided a stronger government was needed.
at annapolis they decided to invite delegates to philadelphia to revise the articles.
g the constitutional convention was held in philadelphia in 1787.
the delegates soon decided to abandon the articles and write a new constitution.
h the delegates agreed that the new government should be based on the principles of republicanism popular sovereignty and limited government.
they also agreed on the need for a stronger national government.
several important issues divided members of the convention.
delegates from larger states wanted representation in congress by size while smaller states wanted each state to be equal.
the great compromise settled the dispute.
a second issue divided the delegates over the issue of how slaves would be counted towards a states representation in congress.
the issue was settled with the three fifths compromise k the new constitution established the principles of federalism popular sovereignty limited government separation of powers and checks and balances to make sure the new central government would not become too strong.
l the preamble of the constitution stated the purposes of the new government.
the delegates also created a process to amend the constitution.
m after the constitution was completed the country debated whether to ratify approve it.
anti federalists believed the new government would be too strong and tyrannical.
federalists believed a stronger government was needed and that the principles of federalism and separation of powers were sufficient safeguards to protect individual liberties.
n the constitution was ratified after its supporters promised a bill of rights.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 117 the first governments of the new united states were actually established at the state not the national level.
after declaring independence each former colony became an independent state.
colonial charters were rewritten as state constitutions.
americans also recognized the need for some form of central or national government.
the continental congress itself was inadequate to serve as a permanent form of national government.
but because of their recent experiences with british rule the former colonists were afraid of creating a central government that would be too powerful.
the constitutional congress drafted the articles of confederation in 1776 and 1777 to solve this problem.
after the articles of confederation were written the document had to be approved by each state before it could become official.
although the articles were sent to the states in november 1777 it took almost four years until march of 1781 for each state to approve them in full.
acting as an amateur historian the thirteen new states finally adopted the articles of confederation in 1781.
here are some of its major provisions ii.
each state retains its sovereignty supreme power freedom and every power jurisdiction and right which is not expressly delegated to the united states.
article iii.
the states hereby enter into a firm league of friendship with each other for their common defense the security of their liberties and their general welfare binding themselves to assist each other against all attacks upon them.
article v in determining questions in the united states in congress assembled each state shall have one vote.
article vi.
no state without the consent of the congress shall enter into any conference alliance or treaty with any king prince or state what were the goals of the new confederation.
identify one advantage and one disadvantage of one of the articles above.
structure 01 members of the continental congress feared that individual freedom might be threatened by the national government if it had too much power.
therefore the articles of confederation deliberately placed more power in the hands of the individual states making the new national government very weak.
it was only a loose association a league of friendship with only one branch of government the congress.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 119 achievements despite its shortcomings the articles of confederation created a national government that had some important achievements.
it successfully concluded the peace treaty with britain ending the american revolution.
it helped develop the concept of limited government a system in which government has only certain powers and cannot act beyond the powers it was specifically given.
the articles of confederation also developed the idea that american citizenship included both privileges and immunities rights to take certain actions without penalty.
state governments could not deny these privileges and immunities to citizens who came from other states.
the confederation congress also passed the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787.
these acts prohibited slavery in the northwest territory encouraged free public education and guaranteed both religious freedom and trial by jury.
procedures were also established for governing the northwest territory which was divided into smaller territories.
the northwest ordinance introduced a method for admitting these territories into the union as new states once a population of60 000 people was achieved within each territory.
the new states were admitted on terms of complete equality with the original thirteen states.
acting as an amateur historian the northwest ordinance of 1787 spurred the westward expansion of the united states.
here is one of the most important provisions of this document article 5.
there shall be formed in the territory not less than three nor more than five states and when any of the said states shall have sixty thousand free inhabitants such state shall be admitted into the congress of the united states on an equal footing with the original states in all respects and shall be at liberty to form a constitution and state government provided the constitution and government shall be republican and in conformity to the principles contained in these articles what requirements did the northwest ordinance have for the admission of a territory into the union as a new state.
fc why was this ordinance such a significant achievement.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 121 the rebels wanted to stop state courts from seizing their property and imprisoning them for unpaid debts.
they also wanted the state to issue paper money.
there was no national army to put down the uprising if it had spread to other states.
although the state militia was able to put it down many property owners across the country now felt the need for a stronger national government.
a meeting of representatives at annapolis in 1786 called for a convention of delegates to revise the articles of confederation.
since only five of the 13 states were represented at annapolis they agreed to assemble again a few months later in philadelphia.
in may 1787 representatives from the states met in philadelphia to revise the articles of confederation.
george washington benjamin franklin and the signing of the u s constitution at independence hall alexander hamilton were among the delegates.
the representatives quickly agreed on discarding the articles of confederation.
instead they decided that a new national constitution was needed.
acting as an amateur historian jims although it was agreed that the discussions of the constitutional convention were to be kept secret james madison wrote down every speech.
madison is known as the father of the u s constitution if not for his notes little of what took place at the constitutional convention would be known.
below is a speech that madison gave at the convention in time of war great powers are given to the executive.
constant fear of war has the same tendency to make the head too large for the body.
a standing military force with an overgrown executive will not be a safe protector of liberty.
the defense against foreign threats has been the instrument of tyranny at home.
among the romans it was a standing truth to stir fear of a war whenever a revolt was threatened.
the armies were kept on under the excuse of defending the people but they enslaved them what did madison mean when he said the head is too large for the body.
what danger was madison warning against in this speech.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 123 these two disagreements were eventually settled by the following compromises ill util ib 181.
saisasia 111 major constitutional compromises issue how should states be represented in the national legislature.
issue how should slaves be counted.
the great compromise larger states felt they should have a greater say in the national government.
smaller states felt each state should have an equal voice.
in this compromise a two house bicameral legislature was created congress.
in the house of representatives states were represented according to their population size.
this allowed states with a larger population to have a greater number of representatives.
in the senate each state no matter what its size would be represented by two senators.
senators were elected indirectly.
all laws needed the approval of both houses of congress.
the three fifths compromise southern states wanted slaves counted as part of their population to have more members in the house of representatives.
the states compromised by agreeing to count every five slaves as three free persons for both taxation and representation.
tti ffttf free persons slaves taxation and representation 5 the commerce compromise.
another dispute involved the taxing of trade.
southern landowners who sold cash crops to england feared taxes on exports of their tobacco and other crops.
in the commerce compromise the delegates agreed to prohibit all taxes on exports goods sold to foreign countries.
only imported goods could be taxed.
the delegates also agreed that congress could not regulate or limit the slave trade for at least the next twenty years until 1808.
fa the delegates to the constitutional convention probably agreed on more aspects of the new government than they disagreed on.
list several of the questions on which the delegates agreed.
create a poster about the constitutional convention.
show what the delegates agreed on where they disagreed and what compromises they made.
hold a mock constitutional convention in your classroom.
have your teacher assign different roles to members of your class.
as a result of the agreements and compromises reached at the constitutional convention the delegates created a new system of government.
the chart on the next page shows the organization of the constitution itself name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 125 because the delegates to the convention did not entirely trust the common people they arranged for the president to be chosen by an indirect election.
voters would first choose members of the electoral college.
once selected these electors would then vote to choose the president.
each state is free to choose its electors as it wishes.
in the late 1700s america was largely rural.
most people were farmers who knew little about politics.
in this environment a direct election of the president would probably have been difficult.
the legislative branch the new national legislature was called congress.
based on the great compromise it consisted of two houses the house of representatives and the senate.
congress had the power to make laws declare war borrow and issue money pay for military forces and regulate commerce trade between different states or with foreign countries.
people vote for ha electors who vote for president s the judicial branch anew national judiciary was created consisting of the supreme court and any lower courts later created by congress.
the supreme court could rule on cases involving either the new constitution or laws passed by congress.
its justices judges were to be appointed for life by the president with the approval of the senate.
life tenure meant that the justices would not have to run for election and could be completely independent.
il isibsiiiiii iihibiihiimi.
branches of the federal government t iggjgj iiollilii bill hill iiilbhii select one of the goals listed in the preamble and explain its importance.
make a chart summarizing the powers and duties of the president congress and the supreme court.
look in the school library or online for more information about each branch of government.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 127 the basic challenge faced by the authors of the constitution was to create a national government that would be strong but not so strong that it might undermine individual liberties identified in the declaration of independence.
to achieve this goal the new constitution adopted a number of important principles limited government one of the most important principles of the u s constitution is the belief that the powers of government should be limited.
a self governing people gives their government leaders only certain specific powers.
these are the just powers of government mentioned in the declaration of independence.
under our system of limited government our national government has no duties or powers other than those powers specifically granted to it in the constitution.
republicanism americans created a republican form of government a democratic government chosen by the people.
a republic describes a government in which decisions are made by elected representatives not handed down by a king.
popular sovereignty another key principle of the u s constitution is that the people are sovereign they hold supreme power.
the just powers of the government come from the consent of the governed.
the people exercise their sovereignty by electing representatives to congress and by indirectly electing the president.
federalism the authors of the u s constitution created a federal republic government powers were divided between the national government and the states.
to accomplish this the writers of the constitution created a system in which power was shared between the national or federal and state governments.
the federal government treats issues facing the entire nation while state governments handle local affairs.
because power was divided between the national and state governments the authors of the constitution believed the national government would not become too strong.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 129 individual rights you will leam about the issues surrounding the protection of individual rights in the next chapter.
provisions for change the amendment process the constitution included provisions for change.
the way the u s constitution keeps pace is through the amendment process which allows changes and additions to the text of the constitution.
to prevent changes for unimportant reasons the amending process was made more difficult than passing an ordinary law.
although over 200 years old our constitution has thus kept up with the changing needs of our nation.
a special elastic clause in the u s constitution further provided congress with the power to enact any laws they deemed necessary to carry out its other powers.
these provisions have made our constitution into a living document the elastic clause has allowed the powers of congress to increase dramatically since the early 1800s due in large part to the decisions of the supreme court.
the amendment process the most common method amendment is proposed by to the states jbs33l ibm 213 vote of both houses of congress many of the principles found in the u s constitution were designed to prevent abuses of power.
select two of the principles discussed in this section and describe how they were attempts to prevent an abuse of power.
acting as an amateur historian the original u s constitution has undergone numerous changes since it was first approved almost 230 years ago.
look online or in your school library for a copy of the main part of the constitution.
use a copy that identifies those parts of the original document that have been crossed out and revised.
explain how one of those revisions brought about a change to the original u s constitution.
then prepare a two minute oral presentation to your class stating whether you agree or disagree with that particular revision to the u s constitution.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 131 the declaration of independence 1776 had listed a series of grievances committed by king george iii of england against the colonists.
a number of those grievances addressed violations by the king of his duties under the english bill of rights.
many of the provisions of the u s constitution were included to prevent a repetition of such abuses impact of colonial grievances on the constitution ucudldiiuii u.
11 lut uciiudluc r the king imposed taxes without the consent of the colonists.
u s constitution provides that all taxes must be approved by the house of representatives.
the king made the military superior to the civil government.
u s constitution provides that the com mander in chief is a civilian the president.
the king kept a large standing army among the colonists.
congress has the right to raise and support an army.
it determines its size through its control of funds.
the king made judges dependent on his will.
all federal judges are appointed for life.
members of the constitutional convention knew they could not adopt their new plan on their own authority.
they decided that before the constitution could become law nine states should ratify approve it.
special conventions were held in each state for this purpose.
federalists and anti federalists opponents of the new constitution were known as anti federalists.
they included such patriots as patrick henry and george mason.
acting as an amateur historian in this address to the virginia legislature in june 1788 patrick henry objects to scrapping the articles of confederation the confederation this same despised government merits in my opinion the highest praise it carried us through a long and dangerous war it rendered us victorious in that bloody conflict with a powerful nation it has secured us a territory greater than any european monarch possesses and should a government which has been that strong and vigorous be accused of imbecility and abandoned for want of energy.
consider what you are about to do before you part with this government before you abandon the present system i hope you will consider not only its defects but likewise those that of which you are about to substitute for it what arguments does henry raise against abandoning the articles of confederation.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 the federalist papers helped to persuade americans to approve the new constitution.
thomas jefferson called them the best explanation ever written about the principles of government.
some have even called these essays the most significant public relations campaign in history.
to obtain the necessary votes for ratification supporters promised to add a bill of rights.
with this assurance by the end of 1788 eleven states had voted to ratify approve the u s constitution.
133 alexander hamilton james madison and john jay authors of the federalist papers.
acting as an amateur historian many americans believed as baron de montesquieu had written that liberty was only safe in small societies governed either by direct democracy or by legislatures with small districts.
james madison in federalist no.
51 argued the opposite.
in a large republic different interests would have to come together to form a coalition alliance in order to govern the nation.
government was created to prevent politicians or small groups from using government for their own unjust purposes in republican government the legislative authority dominates.
the remedy for this is to divide the legislature into different branches and to make them by different methods of election and different principles of action as little connected with each other as their common functions will allow.
in a single republic all the power surrendered by the people is submitted to a single government and misuse of that power is guarded against by dividing the government into separate departments.
in america the power surrendered by the people is first divided between two distinct governments and then the power of each is subdivided among separate departments.
hence a double security arises to protect the rights of the people.
different governments will control each other at the same time that each will be controlled by itself.
if a majority is united by a common interest the rights of the minority might be threatened.
there are two ways of providing against this evil by creating a will in the community independent of the majority of the society the other by comprehending in the society so many separate descriptions of citizens as will render an unjust combination of a majority of the whole improbable if not impractical what arguments does madison make to calm fears of some that the new government could threaten peoples liberties.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 135 government under the articles constitutional convention 1787 articles of confederation.
1777 1778 set up a weak central government.
each state had only one vote in congress.
weaknesses lacked power to regulate trade no national court system lacked power to tax lacked a national army.
strengths passed northwest ordinance creating procedures to admit new states.
critical period.
1781 1787 shays rebellion.
massachusetts farmers rebelled against courts foreclosing their farms.
showed the weakness of the articles of confederation in putting down rebellions.
t convention met in 1787 in philadelphia.
scrapped articles of confederation and agreed to draft a new constitution.
james madison kept notes and is known as the father of us constitution.
t delegates agree to create three government branches.
executive branch president chosen by the electoral college.
legislature branch two house congress.
judicial branch supreme court.
new national government can raise an army collect taxes coin money regulate commerce between states and declare war or peace.
the bundle of compromises ratification of the constitution great compromise.
dealt with the issue of representation in congress large states wanted representation based on population.
small states wanted states to be equal in congress.
compromise established two houses states were equal in the senate the house of representatives was based on population.
three fifths compromise.
issue of how slaves should be counted for purposes of representation.
five slaves would count as three persons for both representation and taxation.
fc anti federalists.
were opposed to approval of the new constitution.
george mason patrick henry feared central government would be too powerful and threaten individual liberties.
fc federalists.
supported approval.
favored a strong central government.
james madison john jay alexander hamilton wrote the federalist papers.
they argued that the constitution had protections to prevent the rise of tyranny.
these included the division of powers between the federal government and the states and the separation of powers between the branches.
principles of the u s constitution u s constitution 1787 fc limited government jit republicanism jit popular sovereignty jit federalism j separation of powers legislative power executive power judicial power checks and balances j amending process u s constitution.
was a written plan of government that spelled out the powers and organization of the new national government.
it is important because it established the institutions of the national government separation of powers.
defined the powers of the national government federalism.
provided a legal basis for the protection of the rights of its citizens.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 examine the question.
this question tests your ability to understand a political cartoon.
recall what you know.
the cartoonist has drawn a large ship representing the articles of confederation.
it is sailing through rough waters.
the waves are high threatening to sink the ship.
these waves symbolize different shortcomings of the arti cles no national army no power to enforce treaties and no power to raise an army.
the caption raises the question whether the government under the articles is in danger of sinking.
apply what you know.
you should realize that choices a c and d do not really define the main idea of the cartoon.
the best answer is choice s5 since the cartoonist implies the articles of confederation had many shortcomings.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
why did some of the founders of the american republic consider the lack of a national executive and judiciary under the articles of confederation as one of the documents great strengths.
f they feared a strong central government.
qiist istbp g they feared the threat of a foreign invasion.
h they were willing to risk tyranny for an effective national government.
j they desired to copy the british monarchy.
the three fifths compromise was included in the u s constitution in order to resolve a conflict over the a number of votes needed to approve a treaty in the senate number of states needed to ratify a proposed amendment reimbursement of plantation owners for runaway slaves b c d counting of enslaved persons for purposes of taxation and representation 4 one accomplishment of the national government under the articles of confederation was the passage of a law establishing f a central banking system hist 6ja 2 g a process for admitting new states into the union h the presidents right to put down rebellions j the ability of congress to tax the states effectively 5 which question at the constitutional convention was resolved by the great compromise.
a how should the president be elected.
hist 4 d b who should control commerce and trade.
c what should be the structure of the federal court system.
d what formula should be used for congressional representation.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 139 use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
he the president shall have power with the advice and consent of the senate to make treaties provided two thirds of the senators present concur and he shall nominate with the advice and consent of the senate ambassadors and other public ministers article ii section 2 clause 2 u s constitution 11 12 13 which principle of the u s constitution is reflected in this passage.
a checks and balances c popular sovereignty b amendment process d federalism hist 15 6 what was a key argument used by the federalists for ratification of the u s constitution.
f it prohibited the power of the federal government to wage war.
g it provided for construction of a new capital in the south.
h it allowed the slave trade to continue for at least twenty more years.
j it had features that prevented the abuse of government power.
which historic document was written in support of ratification of the u s constitution.
a magna carta b mayflower compact c declaration of independence d the federalist papers use the passage below and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the nation deserves and i will select a supreme court justice that americans can be proud of.
the nation also deserves a dignified process of confirmation in the united states senate characterized by fair treatment a fair hearing and a fair vote.
i will choose a nominee in a timely manner so that the hearing and the vote can be completed before the new supreme court term begins president george w bush 2005 14 which constitutional principle is discussed in this quotation.
f federalism h statesrights govt 15 d g checks and balances j due process 15 why did the framers of the constitution create three separate branches of the national government.
a to insure that the legislative branch was bicameral govt 15 d b to make sure all laws were approved by the supreme court c to make sure that the president was superior to the legislature d to prevent any one branch of government from gaining too much power name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 141 19 what is the purpose of the checks and balances system in the u s constitution.
a to expand the presidents treaty making powers govt i b to divide power between the federal and state governments c to prevent any one branch of the government from becoming too powerful d to allow each branch of the government to veto those laws it objects to use the diagram and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the king is forbidden to introduce most new taxes without the permission of the council of his nobles.
magna carta english bill of rights 1689.
the king is forbidden from imposing taxes on his subjects without the approval of parliament.
20 which statement best replaces the question mark in the diagram.
f the u s congress must pass all taxes.
i govt 15 a i g each year the president must submit a budget to congress.
h elections in the house of representatives occur every two years.
j the congress cannot spend more than is provided in its budget.
use the newspaper headlines and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
21 which best describes the purpose of the amending process shown in these two newspaper headlines.
a the nations needs change requiring revisions to the constitution.
i govt 16 a b the national governments power must be limited or it will become tyrannical.
c the states are the rightful enforcers of the provisions of the constitution.
d the constitution was created by the states to serve the states.
22 between 1787 and 1789 a major controversy between the federalists and the anti federalists focused primarily on f expansion of slavery into the territories govt 17 a g the wisdom of creating a two house legislature h division of power among different levels of government j the issue of ratification of the new u s constitution name lisbiiisiiisaiaiaiibi.
chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 143 a anti federalists criticized the constitution for the absence of a bill of rights the first congress proposed ten amendments.
these amendments were added to the constitution in 1791 as the bill of rights.
the first amendment guarantees freedom of religion free speech freedom of the press the right to assemble and the right to petition the government.
it also states that the congress shall not establish any religion.
c these first amendment rights are crucial to our democracy.
they allow us to criticize government officials and debate issues without fear of government reprisals.
few of these rights however are absolute.
government can place reasonable limits on these freedoms.
for example we cannot scream fire in a crowded theatre as a joke.
d the second amendment guarantees our right to bear arms this allows citizens to own guns.
the third amendment prohibits government from quartering troops in our homes without consent.
these rights arose out of circumstances that developed during the american revolutionary war.
e the fourth fifth sixth and eighth amendments protect individuals accused of a crime from unjust accusations and government abuse.
f the fourth amendment prevents the police from conducting unreasonable searches and seizures unless a specific exception applies the police need a search warrant before they can conduct a search.
g the fifth amendment states that individuals cannot be tried twice for the same crime or be forced to incriminate themselves.
h the sixth amendment guarantees those accused of a crime a fair and public trial by a jury and the assistance of a lawyer.
the eighth amendment prevents judges from setting bail that is too high or inflicting cruel and unusual punishments.
k the tenth amendment reserves powers not granted to the federal government to the state governments and the people.
l the bill of rights protected individuals from abuse by the federal government.
the fourteenth amendment protects individuals from actions carried out by state governments.
it grants citizens due process and equal protection of the law.
m anyone bom in the united states or with u s citizens as parents is a citizen of the united states.
a foreigner can become a naturalized citizen.
to become naturalized a person must be 18 years old live in the united states for 5 years be of good moral character pass a test on u s history and government and take an oath of allegiance to the u s constitution.
n u s citizens had additional rights and responsibilities beyond those specified in the bill of rights.
they are able to vote to serve on juries and to hold public office.
they should try to remain informed on public issues and to participate actively in public life.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 145 one of the most important amendments in the bill of rights was the first amendment the first amendment actually covers several rights at the same time lets look at each of these rights more closely.
freedom of religion it is no mistake that a guarantee of religious freedom is stated at the start of the first amendment.
from the very beginning many people had migrated to the american colonies for the freedom to practice their own religious beliefs.
the first amendment guarantees individuals the right to freely engage in any religious practices that do not directly harm other individuals.
in many countries in europe at that time there was an established religion supported by the government.
the first amendment states that congress will not establish a religion this is sometimes called the establishment clause.
while the ban on government involvement in religion seems clear there have been instances in which the proper role of government has been debated.
for example it is clear that congress cannot pass a law saying that a particular religion is the established religion of the united states.
nor can congress vote to give money to a particular church or religious group.
but can public schools have prayers in school.
the supreme court which has the role of interpreting these amendments has said no.
some limited government activity concerned with religion has been declared constitutional by the supreme court.
for example the supreme court has said that a state can pay for bus transportation to students who choose to go to a full time religious school.
this is to support the expenses of these students general education.
however because government cannot establish a religion there can be no religious activities such as prayers in public schools.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 147 the right of assembly in some countries people cannot peacefully gather to protest against government policies without fear of punishment.
if they gather or demonstrate they fear they might be beaten arrested imprisoned or even killed.
the first amendment states that congress cannot deny individuals the right to peacefully assemble this means that people have a right to gather peaceably with others without fear that the government will use force against them.
in a democracy many groups and organizations often use the right to peacefully assemble as a way to get the word out.
they gather in parades and demonstrations to show their support for certain ideas and beliefs.
the right to petition congress also cannot deny individuals the right to write to government representatives or officials seeking a change in the law.
this is known as the right to petition.
this right is based on the belief that citizens have a right to complain to their representatives about things that they do not like and would like to see changed.
if there is a law or policy that citizens dislike they gather peoples signatures on petitions.
these petitions are then sent to government officials.
the right to gather signatures on a petition is protected by the first amendment.
rewrite the first amendment in your own words.
which rights in the first amendment do you think are the most important.
explain your reasons.
the second amendment americans recognized the important role played by the militia in winning the revolutionary war.
a militia is a citizens army a force made up of ordinary citizens who take up arms.
the second amendment states that a well regulated militia is necessary for the security of a free state.
for this reason it says people should have the right to keep and bear arms carry weapons.
because of the second amendment americans have the right to own guns.
in other countries citizens do not have this right.
some americans question whether this right is still necessary today and whether it encourages violence.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 149 the fifth amendment a citizen cannot be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law.
this means that certain legal procedures must be carried out according to established rules before a person can be punished.
eminent domain refers to the power of the government over property in its territory.
sometimes the government needs to take over property such as to build a public highway or construct a school.
a persons property cannot be taken away for public use without payment reasonable compensation.
a person cannot be tried for a serious federal crime that could lead to imprisonment or execution without an indictment by a grand jury.
an indictment is a formal accusation by a court before a person is arrested.
a grand jury is a group of citizens that meet to review if there is enough evidence available to hold a trial.
no person can be subject to double jeopardy being tried twice for the same crime.
the government with all its power and resources should not be allowed to make repeated attempts to convict an individual for a suspected offense subjecting him or her to embarrassment and great expense.
it an accused person cannot be forced to say things that will be used against him or herself seif incrimination.
a persons confession of a crime is not valid if he or she was not first informed of the right to have a lawyer.
this amendment guarantees a fair and impartial trial to all persons accused of a crime.
they must be told of the charges against them they have the right to a trial by jury and they have the right to be represented by a lawyer.
the eighth amendment federal courts cannot require unusually high bail.
bail is the money an accused pays to a court as security so that he or she need not remain in jail while awaiting trial.
this amendment also states that no one can be punished in a cruel or unusual way.
on this basis the supreme court has ruled that a state cannot pass a law with a mandatory death sentence.
some critics say that capital punishment itself should be prohibited by the eighth amendment but the supreme court has yet to agree.
the freedoms our citizens enjoy because of the bill of rights are important to the fabric of life in america.
design and create a poster that showcases these freedoms.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 151 other amendments i the seventh amendment this amendment guarantees the right to a trial by a jury in many civil disputes cases where one person sues another for injury or for breaking a contract.
the ninth amendmen this amendment says that just because the constitution lists some specific individual rights this does not mean that citizens do not also hold other rights.
he tenth amendmen the powers not delegated to the united.
stales by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people.
the system of federalism divides power between the states and federal government.
this amendment states that all powers not specifically given to the federal government are reserved left for the states or the people.
the federal government has powers only over things specifically given to it in the constitution.
all other powers are given to the states or the people.
declaration of independence and the bill of rights some of the rights in the bill of rights like some provisions in the original constitution were responses to the grievances in the declaration of independence impact of colonial grievances on the constitution grievances listed in the declaration of independence where each was addressed in the bill of rights the king refused colonists permission to petition for a redress of their grievances.
the first amendment guarantees citizens the right to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
the king quartered his troops in the colonists homes without their permission.
the third amendment prohibits the quartering of soldiers in people s homes.
the king deprived some colonists of a trial by jury.
the sixth amendment guarantees a trial by jury to all persons accused of a crime.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 153 the fourteenth amendment after the civil war another series of important amendments was added to the constitution.
these abolished slavery and guaranteed the freed slaves and other citizens certain rights against the actions of state governments.
the fourteenth amendment was especially important.
the original bill of rights had only protected citizens against the actions of the federal government.
the fourteen amendment now applied to actions by state governments.
this amendment was mainly intended to help the freed slaves but actually applied to all citizens.
the supreme court later reached the conclusion that the fourteenth amendment guaranteed all the rights in the bill of rights against the actions of state governments as well as by the federal government.
the fourteenth amendment protects individual citizens from abuses by state governments in two ways due process rights.
according to the fourteenth amendment state governments must follow the same procedures as the federal government when arresting searching or convicting persons suspected of a crime.
everyone is guaranteed rights of due process equal protection rights.
the fourteenth amendment also guarantees each of us the equal protection of the laws.
neither the federal government nor a state government can treat members of different groups unequally unless there is some compelling reason to do so such as to protect national security.
on the basis of this provision the supreme court held in 1954 that states cannot send people to different public schools based on their racial or ethnic backgrounds.
fa using the internet or your school or public library locate a copy of the fourteenth amendment.
in your own words briefly describe what each of the five sections of the amendment are about.
fa the southern state legislatures refused to ratify the fourteenth amendment with the exception of tennessee.
what parts of the amendment do you think the southern state legislatures most objected to.
explain your answer.
fa the fourteenth amendment continues to be the center of a controversy in the debate over the citizenship of children bom in the united states by those who are considered undocumented aliens.
what is your opinion on this issue.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 155 what is a citizen.
a citizen is a participating member of a community.
it is not an accident that the term citizen sounds like city the first citizens were participating members of the city states of greece with rights and responsibilities.
later the roman empire expanded the notion of citizenship.
the empire allowed people in conquered states to become full citizens.
surprisingly the term citizenship was not defined in the original u s constitution.
it was not until 1868 with the passage of the fourteenth amendment that the requirements for american citizenship were stated in the constitution.
there are two paths to american citizenship by birth or naturalization.
the bill of rights and the fourteenth amendment apply to all people living in the united states.
they apply to permanent residents in this country and visitors as well as american citizens.
however there are some special rights that only u s citizens enjoy.
these include the right to vote in elections and to participate in government by holding public office.
birthright citizenship according to the fourteenth amendment persons bom in the united states or who have u s citizens as parents are citizens.
naturalization the second way for individuals to become american citizens is through the process of naturalization.
this is a legal process by which someone from another country is made into a u s citizen.
to become a u s citizen today an individual must meet the following requirements individuals being sworn in to become u s citizens.
requirements for becoming a u s citizen at least 18 years old and be a permanent resident of the united states.
be able to read write speak and understand simple words in english.
have lived lawfully in the united states for 5 years before filing an application.
i be a person of good moral character and have no serious criminal convictions.
understand the fundamentals of u s history and government.
be willing to swear allegiance to the principles of the u s constitution.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 157 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing the requirements for u s citizenship and some of the most important rights and responsibilities of an american citizen.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 159 celebrating freedom week during freedom week students in texas study and celebrate the three founding documents of our system of democracy.
you have learned about these three charters of freedom in the last three chapters the declaration of independence the united states constitution and the bill of rights.
the declaration of independence 1776 you learned that this document was shaped by english traditions and by new traditions established by colonial representative assemblies.
in the opening lines of the declaration thomas jefferson restated john locke s political philosophy that all people have certain unalienable rights that cannot rightfully be taken from them life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
you should memorize the following lines and practice them with a classmate e holdthese truths to he self evident that a men are created equal that they are endowed hy their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
lhat to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers y from the consent of the governed your teacher may want to quiz you on these words.
you should also try to write down what the paragraph means in your own words.
you can check back on pages 95 96 to review the meaning of this passage.
you should recall that the rest of the declaration went on to explain why the colonists felt they had the right to rebel and to establish their own country.
the colonists also listed their many grievances against the british king.
the u s constitution 1787 this document established the basic structure of our government.
it established a i government based on popular sovereignty we the people in which power i rests with the people who elect their representatives.
the authors of the constitution sought to create a national government strong enough to defend the nation s interests and to promote its general welfare.
they gave the new national government many important powers and made federal law supreme over state law.
to ensure that j the new national government was not too strong they divided its powers between.
the federal and state governments.
power was further divided at the national level through a separation of powers.
the idea was to create an effective government but.
one that would respect the rights of its citizens.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 161 k chapter stupy carps first amendment 1791 bill of rights 1791 protections of individual freedoms congress cannot make laws establishing a state religion.
congress cannot stop you from practicing your religion.
congress cannot make laws limiting your right to freedom of speech.
congress cannot make laws limiting freedom of the press.
congress cannot make laws prohibiting people from assembling.
people have a right to petition the government in order to correct wrongs.
other amendments in the bill of rights.
protections of individual freedoms second amend gives citizens the right to bear arms.
third amend no quartering of soldiers in people s homes.
protections of the rights of the accused fourth amend no unreasonable searches.
fifth amend due process protections.
sixth amend fair and impartial trial right to a trial by jury right to a lawyer.
eighth amend no cruel or unusual punishments no excessive bail.
citizenship responsibilities of u s citizens 1 citizen.
a participating member of a com i munity.
j js although not defined in the original consti tution the fourteenth amendment stated.
the requirements for citizenship.
paths to american citizenship i birthright citizenship.
persons who have j been born in the united states or who i have parents that are u s citizens i naturalization.
the legal process by which a person from a foreign country is i made into a u s citizen.
t 9 active responsibilities of u s citizens i fa take an interest in government by learning j about its various activities.
1 stay informed on key public issues i respect other people s point of view.
jk inform your representatives about issues i that are of concern to you.
vote in local state and national elections.
participate in government by joining a polit i ical party or working in a campaign.
1 serve in government if elected or appointed s to a position.
1 responsibilities are those things a good citizen.
i obey the laws of your community state and national government i fc pay taxes to help support the government.
rik serve on a jury if called upon to do so.
rik attend school to receive an education i accept responsibility for your behavior.
j jk testify in court if called upon to give evidence.
1 jk defend the nation by serving in the armed i forces if called upon g 4 our national identity s describes what makes a nation what it is.
it is the character of the nation.
it consists of the 1 various characteristics we share that make us i americans.
our national identity is shaped by i the mixing of people from different lands.
k exercising our religious freedoms.
8 k freedom to enter any field or occupation.
jk traditions of individual rights.
jk having a common culture and history.
i k a lack of an hereditary noble class.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens examine the question.
this question tests your ability to draw a conclusion from three different amendments.
you should read each carefully.
then think about what they all have in common.
recall what you know.
you should realize that each of these amendments establishes rights and protections for individuals accused of a crime.
these rights protect us from false accusations or unfair treatment by government officials.
apply whatyou know.
the best answer is choice a.
all three of these amendments deal with rights for someone accused of a crime.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 the bill of rights was added to the u s constitution primarily to f provide the president with power in times of emergency g establish fair and impartial elections h protect individual liberties against government abuse j guarantee voting privileges to minorities 163 which guarantees freedom of the press freedom of speech and freedom of religion to individuals in the united states.
a the treaty of paris of 1783 b the articles of confederation c the first amendment to the u s constitution d the fifth amendment to the u s constitution 4 which has been an important application of the due process of law clause of the fifth amendment.
f freedoms of speech and the press have been limited.
fcfti 19 b j g the reciting of prayers in public schools has been prohibited.
h individuals accused of committing crimes have been protected from abusive behavior by the police.
j the power of the supreme court in criminal cases has been limited.
5 the adoption of the bill of rights 1791 addressed anti federalist criticism of the new constitution by a allowing the national government to coin money titi 21 q j b establishing a process for impeaching federal officials c providing for an indirect method of electing the president d protecting citizens from abuses of power by the national government name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 165 12 in order to win ratification of the u s constitution federalists like alexander hamilton and james madison promised to f add a later bill of rights govt i7 a j g establish an electoral college h admit new states to the union on equal footing with established states j give the senate the power to ratify treaties use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
it is the right of the subjects to petition the king and all commitments imprisonments and prosecutions for such petitioning are illegal.
that excessive bail ought not to be required nor excessive fines imposed no cruel and unusual punishments inflicted the english bill of rights 1689 13 which historical document later gave similar guarantees to americans.
a declaration of independence fcni i9 b j b articles of confederation c the federalist papers d bill of rights 14 in what way did the magna carta and the english bill of rights have a similar impact on the american system of government.
f both called for the creation of colonial assemblies.
fcovt 15 a g both gave settlers the power to establish colonies.
h both guaranteed specific rights to individuals.
j both granted executive authority to colonial governors.
15 an issue first raised in the declaration of independence that was addressed in the bill of rights was that there needs to be a a federal system of government b limitations on governmental power c a strong chief executive d a system of checks and balances 16 the responsibilities of a u s citizen include all of the following except f serving on a jury h voting cit i9 d j g serving in the military j marrying 17 what has been the impact of the first amendments separation of church and state on the american way of life.
a it has brought about an end to religious differences.
cutt 25 c b it has helped to promote religious freedom.
c it has increased american interest in religion.
d it has fostered inequality between religious groups.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 167 use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people united states constitution 10th amendment 24 this amendment in the bill of rights was intended to f give the people the right to vote on important issues citi i9 b j g reduce the rights of citizens h limit the powers of the federal government j assure federal control over the states 25 the expression due process of law refers to the a procedure followed in congress for a bill to become a law md b power of the police to arrest anyone who looks suspicious c right of the supreme court to examine the constitutionality of laws d protections given to citizens against unfair actions by the government 26 which of the following words are part of the declaration of independence.
f they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights citi 19 a that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness g all persons bom or naturalized in the united states are citizens of the united states h no solider shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner j congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof based on the following excerpt and your knowledge of social studies answer the following question.
he has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution and unacknowledged by our laws giving his assent to their acts of pretended legislation for quartering large bodies of armed troops among us 27 this excerpt from the declaration of independence listed a specific grievance that led the writers of the bill of rights to include the following language a a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed b no soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner nor in time of war but in a manner to be prescribed by law c the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohib ited by it to the states are reserved to the states or to the people d excessive bail shall not be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted name.
