chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 the french statesman anne robert jacques turgot 1727 1781 had high expectations for a united america this people is the hope of the human race.
the americans should be an example of political religious commercial and industrial liberty.
but to obtain these ends for us america.
must not become.
a mass of divided powers contending for territory and trade.
americas population was still about 90 percent rural despite the ourishing cities.
all but 5 percent of the people lived east of the appalachian mountains.
the trans appalachian overow was concentrated chiey in kentucky tennessee and ohio all of which were welcomed as states within fourteen years.
vermont preceded them becoming the fourteenth state in 1791.
foreign visitors to america looked down their noses at the roughness and crudity resulting from axand rie pioneering life.
people of the western waters in the stumpstudded clearings of kentucky tennessee and ohio were particularly restive and dubiously loyal.
the mouth of the mississippi their life giving outlet lay in the hands of unfriendly spaniards.
smooth talking spanish and british agents jingling gold moved freely among the settlers and held out seductive promises of independence.
many observers wondered whether the emerging united states would ever grow to maturity.
washington for president george washington the esteemed war hero was unanimously drafted as president by the electoral college in 1789 the only presidential nominee ever to be honored by unanimity.
his presence was imposing 6 feet 2 inches 175 pounds broad and sloping shoulders strongly pointed chin and pockmarks from smallpox on nose and cheeks.
much preferring the quiet of mount vernon to the turmoil of politics he was perhaps the only president who did not in some way angle for this exalted ofce.
balanced rather than brilliant he commanded his followers by strength of character rather than by the arts of the politician.
washington honored this idealized portrait symbolizes the reverential awe in which americans held the father of his country washingtons long journey from mount vernon to new york city the temporary capital was a triumphal procession.
he was greeted by roaring cannon pealing bells ower carpeted roads and singing and shouting citizens.
with appropriate ceremony he solemnly and somewhat ner vously took the oath of ofce on april 30 1789 on a crowded balcony overlooking wall street which some have regarded as a bad omen.
washington soon put his stamp on the new government especially by establishing the cabinet.
the constitution does not mention a cabinet see table 10 1 it merely provides that the president may require written opinions of the heads of the executive branch departments see art.
1 in the appendix.
but this system proved so cumbersome and involved so much homework that cabinet meetings gradually evolved in the washington administration.
at rst only three full edged department heads served under the president secretary of state thomas the bill of rights jefferson secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton and secretary of war henry knox.
the bill of rights the new nation faced some un nished business.
many antifederalists had sharply criticized the constitution drafted at philadelphia for its failure to provide guarantees of individual rights such as freedom of religion and trial by jury.
many states had ratied the federal constitution on the understanding that it would soon be amended to include such guarantees.
drawing up a bill of rights headed the list of imperatives facing the new government.
amendments to the constitution could be proposed in either of two ways by a new constitutional convention requested by two thirds of the states or by a two thirds vote of both houses of congress.
fearing that a new convention might unravel the narrow federalist victory in the ratication struggle james madison determined to draft the amendments himself.
he then guided them through congress where his intellectual and political skills were quickly making him the leading gure.
adopted by the necessary number of states in 1791 the rst ten amendments to the constitution popularly known as the bill of rights safeguard some of the most precious american principles.
among these are protections for freedom of religion speech and the press the right to bear arms and to be tried by a jury and the right to assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances.
the bill of rights also prohibits cruel and unusual punishments and arbitrary government seizure of private property.
to guard against the danger that enumerating such rights might lead to the conclusion that they were the only ones protected madison inserted the crucial ninth amendment.
it declares that specifying certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people in a gesture of reassurance to the states righters he included the equally signicant tenth amendment which reserves all rights not explicitly delegated or prohibited by the federal constitution to the states respectively or to the people by preserving a strong central government table 10 1 evolution of the cabinet position date established comments secretary of state secretary of treasury secretary of war attorney general secretary of navy postmaster general secretary of interior secretary of agriculture secretary of commerce and labor secretary of commerce secretary of labor loses cabinet status 1947 loses cabinet status 1970 secretary of defense secretary of health education and welfare secretary of housing and urban development secretary of transportation secretary of energy secretary of health and human ser vices secretary of education secretary of veterans affairs secretary of homeland security subordinate to this secretary without cabinet rank are secretaries of army navy and air force ofce divided 1979 loses cabinet status 1947 not head of justice dept.
until 1870 ofce divided 1913 chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 while specifying protections for minority and individual liberties madisons amendments partially swung the federalist pendulum back in an antifederalist direction.
see amendments i x.
the rst congress also nailed other newly sawed government planks into place.
it created effective federal courts under the judiciary act of 1789.
the act orga nized the supreme court with a chief justice and ve associates as well as federal district and circuit courts and established the ofce of attorney general.
new yorker john jay madisons collaborator on the federalist papers and one of the young republics most seasoned diplomats became the rst chief justice of the united states.
hamilton revives the corpse of public credit the key gure in the new government was still smoothfaced treasury secretary alexander hamilton a native of the british west indies.
hamiltons genius was unquestioned but critics claimed he loved his adopted country more than he loved his countrymen.
doubts about his character and his loyalty to the republican experiment always swirled about his head.
hamilton regarded himself as a kind of prime minister in washingtons cabinet and on occasion thrust his hands into the affairs of other departments including that of his archrival thomas jefferson who served as secretary of state.
a nancial wizard hamilton set out immediately to correct the economic vexations that had crippled the articles of confederation.
his plan was to shape the scal policies of the administration in such a way as to favor the wealthier groups.
they in turn would gratefully lend the government monetary and political support.
the new federal regime would thrive the propertied classes would fatten and prosperity would trickle down to the masses.
the youthful nanciers rst objective was to bolster the national credit.
without public condence in the government hamilton could not secure the funds with which to oat his risky schemes.
he therefore boldly urged congress to fund the entire national debt at par and to assume completely the debts incurred by the states during the recent war.
funding at par meant that the federal government would pay off its debts at face value plus accumulated interest a then enormous total of more than 54 million.
so many people believed the infant treasury in alexander hamilton 1755 1804 by john trumbull 1792 he was one of the youngest and most brilliant of the founding fathers who might have been president but for his ultraconservatism a scandalous adultery and a duelists bullet.
hamilton favored a strong central government with a weak legislature to unify the infant nation and encourage industry.
his chief rival thomas jefferson who extolled states rights as a bulwark of liberty and thought the united states should remain an agricultural society regarded hamilton as a monarchist plotter and never forgave him for insisting that the british govt.
was the best in the world and that he doubted much whether any thing short of it would do in america capable of meeting those obligations that government bonds had depreciated to ten or fteen cents on the dollar.
yet speculators held stfuls of them and when congress passed hamiltons mea sure in 1790 they grabbed for more.
some of them galloped into rural areas ahead of the news buying for a song the depreciated paper holdings of farmers war veterans and widows.
hamilton was willing even eager to have the new government shoulder additional obligations.
while hamilton s financial politics push ing the funding scheme he urged congress to assume the debts of the states totaling some 21 5 million.
the secretary made a convincing case for assumption.
the state debts could be regarded as a proper national obligation for they had been incurred in the war for independence.
but foremost in hamiltons thinking was the belief that assumption would chain the states more tightly to the federal chariot thus the secretarys maneuver would shift the attachment of wealthy creditors from the states to the federal government.
the support of the rich for the national administration was a crucial link in hamiltons political strategy of strengthening the central government.
states burdened with heavy debts like massachusetts were delighted by hamiltons proposal.
states with small debts like virginia were less charmed.
the stage was set for some old fashioned horse trading.
virginia did not want the state debts assumed but it did want the forthcoming federal district now the district of columbia to be located on the potomac river.
it would thus gain in commerce and prestige.
hamilton persuaded a reluctant jefferson who had recently come home from france to line up enough votes in congress for assumption.
in return virginia would have the federal district on the potomac.
the bargain was carried through in 1790.
customs duties and excise taxes the new ship of state thus set sail dangerously overloaded.
the national debt had swelled to 75 million owing to hamiltons insistence on honoring the outstanding federal and state obligations alike.
anyone less determined to establish such a healthy public credit could have sidestepped 13 million in back interest and could have avoided the state debts entirely.
but hamilton father of the national debt was not greatly worried.
his objectives were as much political as economic.
he believed that within limits a national debt was a national blessing a kind of union adhesive.
the more creditors to whom the government owed money the more people there would be with a personal stake in the success of his ambitious enterprise.
his unique contribution was to make a debt ordinarily a liability an asset for vitalizing the authorized by the constitution art.
debt owed foreigners 11 710 000 federal domestic debt 42 414 000 state debt 21 500 000 miscellaneous revenue excise revenue on whiskey etc.
customs duties tariffs figure 10 1 hamiltons financial structure supported by revenues nancial system as well as the government itself see figure 10 1.
where was the money to come from to pay interest on this huge debt and run the government.
hamiltons rst answer was customs duties derived from a tariff.
tariff revenues in turn depended on a vigorous foreign trade another crucial link in hamiltons overall economic strategy for the new republic.
the rst tariff law imposing a low tariff of about 8 percent on the value of dutiable imports was speedily passed by the rst congress in 1789 even before hamilton was sworn in.
revenue was by far the main goal but the mea sure was also designed to erect a low protective wall around infant industries which bawled noisily for more shelter than they received.
hamilton had the vision to see that the industrial revolution would soon reach america and he argued strongly in favor of more protection for the well to do manufacturing groups another vital element in his economic program.
but congress was still dominated by the agricultural and commercial interests and it voted only two slight increases in the tariff during washingtons presidency.
hamilton with characteristic vigor sought additional internal revenue and in 1791 secured from congress an excise tax on a few domestic items notably whiskey.
the new levy of seven cents a gallon was borne chiey by the distillers who lived in the backcountry where the wretched roads forced the farmer to reduce and liquefy bulky bushels of grain to horseback proportions.
whiskey owed so freely on the frontier in the form of distilled liquor that it was used for money.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 one of the most eloquent tributes to hamiltons apparent miracle working came from daniel webster 1782 1852 in the senate 1831 he smote the rock of the national resources and abundant streams of revenue gushed forth.
he touched the dead corpse of public credit and it sprung upon its feet.
hamilton battles jefferson for a bank as the capstone for his nancial system hamilton proposed a bank of the united states.
an enthusiastic admirer of most things eng lish he took as his model the bank of eng land.
specically he proposed a powerful private institution of which the government would be the major stockholder and in which the federal treasury would deposit its surplus monies.
the central government not only would have a convenient strongbox but federal funds would stimulate business by remaining in circulation.
the bank would also print urgently needed paper money and thus provide a sound and stable national currency badly needed since the days when the continental dollar was not worth a continental the proposed bank would indeed be useful.
but was it constitutional.
jefferson whose written opinion on this question washington requested argued vehemently against the bank.
there was he insisted no specic authorization in the constitution for such a nancial octopus.
he was convinced that all powers not specically granted to the central government were reserved to the states as provided in the about to be ratied bill of rights see amendment x.
he therefore concluded that the states not congress had the power to charter banks.
believing that the constitution should be interpreted literally or strictly jefferson and his states rights disciples zealously embraced the theory of strict construction hamilton also at washingtons request prepared a brilliantly reasoned reply to jeffersons arguments.
hamilton in general believed that what the constitution did not forbid it permitted jefferson in contrast generally believed that what it did not permit it forbade.
hamilton boldly invoked the clause of the constitution that stipulates that congress may pass any laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers vested in the various government agencies see art.
the government was explicitly empowered to collect taxes and regulate trade.
in carrying out these basic functions hamilton argued a national bank would be not only proper but necessary by inference or implication that is by virtue of implied powers congress would be fully justied in establishing the bank of the united states.
in short hamilton contended for a loose or broad interpretation of the constitution.
he and his federalist followers thus evolved the theory of loose construction by invoking the elastic clause of the constitution a precedent for enormous federal powers.
hamiltons nancial views prevailed.
his eloquent and realistic arguments were accepted by washington who reluctantly signed the bank mea sure into law.
this explosive issue had been debated with much heat in congress where the old north south cleavage still lurked ominously.
the most enthusiastic support for the bank naturally came from the commercial and nancial centers of the north whereas the strongest opposition arose from the agricultural south.
the bank of the united states as created by congress in 1791 was chartered for twenty years.
located in philadelphia it was to have a capital of 10 million one fth of it owned by the federal government.
stock was thrown open to public sale.
to the agreeable surprise of hamilton a milling crowd oversubscribed in less than two hours pushing aside many would be purchasers.
mutinous moonshiners in pennsylvania the whiskey rebellion which ared up in southwestern pennsylvania in 1794 sharply challenged the new national government.
hamiltons high excise tax bore harshly on these homespun pioneer folk.
they regarded it not as a tax on a frivolous luxury but as a burden on an economic necessity and a medium of exchange.
even preachers of the gospel were paid in old monongahela rye rye and corn crops distilled into alcohol were more cheaply transported to eastern markets than bales of grain.
deant distillers nally erected whiskey poles similar to the liberty poles of anti stamp tax days in 1765 and raised the cry liberty and no excise boldly tarring and feathering revenue ofcers they brought collections to a halt.
president washington once a revolutionary was alarmed by what he called these self created societ the whiskey rebellion the whiskey boys the cartoonist clearly favored the pennsylvania rebels who resisted hamiltons imposition of an excise tax on whiskey.
ies with the hearty encouragement of hamilton he summoned the militias of several states.
anxious moments followed the call for there was much doubt as to whether men in other states would muster to crush a rebellion in a fellow state.
despite some opposition an army of about thirteen thousand rallied to the colors and two widely separated columns marched briskly forth in a gorgeous leaf tinted indian summer until knee deep mud slowed their progress.
attorney hugh henry brackenridge 1748 1816 mediated between the whiskey rebels and the town of pittsburgh.
he later wrote of the hated excise tax i saw the operation to be unequal in this country.
it is true that the excise paid by the country would be that only on spirits consumed in it.
but even in the case of exports the excise must be advanced in the rst instance by the distiller and this would prevent effectually all the poorer part from carrying on the business.
would have preferred a direct tax with a view to reach unsettled lands which all around us have been purchased by speculating men.
when the troops reached the hills of western pennsylvania they found no insurrection.
the whiskey boys were overawed dispersed or captured.
washington with an eye to healing old sores pardoned the two small fry convicted culprits.
the whiskey rebellion was minuscule some three rebels were killed but its consequences were mighty.
george washingtons government now substantially strengthened commanded a new respect.
yet the foes of the administration condemned its brutal display of force for having used a sledgehammer to crush a gnat.
the emergence of political parties almost overnight hamiltons scal feats had established the governments sound credit rating.
the treasury could now borrow needed funds in the netherlands on favorable terms.
but hamiltons nancial successes funding assumption the excise tax the bank the suppression of the whiskey rebellion created some political liabilities.
all these schemes encroached sharply upon states rights.
many americans dubious about the new constitution in the rst place might never have approved it if they had foreseen how the states were going to be chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 overshadowed by the federal colossus.
now out of resentment against hamiltons revenue raising and centralizing policies an orga nized opposition began to build.
what once was a personal feud between hamilton and jefferson developed into a full blown and frequently bitter political rivalry.
national political parties in the modern sense were unknown in america when george washington took his inaugural oath.
there had been whigs and tories federalists and antifederalists but these groups were factions rather than parties.
they had sprung into existence over hotly contested special issues they had faded away when their cause had triumphed or zzled.
the founders at philadelphia had not envisioned the existence of permanent political parties.
organized opposition to the government especially a democratic government based on popular consent seemed tainted by disloyalty.
opposition to the government affronted the spirit of national unity that the glorious cause of the revolution had inspired.
the notion of a formal party apparatus was thus a novelty in the 1790s and when jefferson and madison rst orga nized their opposition to the hamiltonian program they con ned their activities to congress and did not anticipate creating a long lived and popular party.
but as their antagonism to hamilton stiffened and as the amazingly boisterous and widely read newspapers of the day spread their political message and hamiltons among the people primitive semblances of political parties began to emerge.
the two party system has existed in the united states since that time see table 10 2.
ironically in light of early suspicions about the very legitimacy of parties their competition for power has actually proved to be among the indispensable ingredients of a sound democracy.
the party out of power the loyal opposition traditionally plays the invaluable role of the balance wheel on the machinery of government ensuring that politics never drifts too far out of kilter with the wishes of the people.
the impact of the french revolution when washingtons rst administration ended in early 1793 hamiltons domestic policies had already stimulated the formation of two political camps jeffersonian democratic republicans and hamiltonian federalists.
as washingtons second term began foreign policy issues brought the differences between them to a fever pitch.
only a few weeks after washingtons inauguration in 1789 the curtain had risen on the rst act of the french revolution.
see thinking globally two revolutions pp.
twenty six years were to pass before the seething continent of europe collapsed into table 10 2 evolution of major parties year hamiltonians jeffersonians ca.
1792 federalists ca.
1816 death of federalists ca.
1820 democratic republicans republicans one party era of good feelings ca.
1825 national republicans whigs republicans to present see the appendix presidential elections for third parties.
democratic republicans jacksonian democrats democrats to present the french revolution a peace of exhaustion.
few non american events have left a deeper scar on american political and social life.
in a sense the french revolution was misnamed it was a historic global revolution that sent tremors through much of the western world and beyond.
in its early stages the upheaval was surprisingly peaceful involving as it did a successful attempt to impose constitutional shackles on louis xvi.
the american people loving liberty and deploring despotism cheered.
they were attered to think that the outburst in france was but the second chapter of their own glorious revolution as to some extent it was.
only a few ultraconser vative federalists fearing change reform and leveling principles were from the outset dubious or outspokenly hostile to the despicable mobocracy the more ardent jeffersonians were overjoyed.
the french revolution entered a more ominous phase in 1792 when france declared war on hostile austria.
powerful ideals and powerful armies alike were on the march.
late in that year the electrifying news reached america that french citizen armies had hurled back the invading foreigners and that france had proclaimed itself a republic.
americans enthusiastically sang the marseillaise and other rousing french revolutionary songs and they renamed thor british political observer william cobbett 1763 1835 wrote of the frenzied reaction in america to the death of louis xvi never was the memory of a man so cruelly insulted as that of this mild and humane monarch.
he was guillotined in efgy in the capital of the union philadelphia twenty or thirty times every day during one whole winter and part of the summer.
men women and children ocked to the tragical exhibition and not a single paragraph appeared in the papers to shame them from it.
oughfares with democratic are.
king street in new york for example became liberty street and in boston royal exchange alley became equality lane.
but centuries of pent up poison could not be purged without baleful results.
the guillotine was set up the king was beheaded in 1793 the church was attacked and the head rolling reign of terror was begun.
back in america god fearing federalist aristocrats ner vously the execution of queen marie antoinette 1793 the bloody excesses of the notorious guillotine disgusted many americans and soured them on the promises of the french revolution.
thinking globally two revolutions o n july 14 1789 a howling mob stormed the bastille a dank parisian prison described by the marquis de lafayette as frances fortress of despotism killed half a dozen soldiers and paraded the severed heads of its commanding ofcer and the mayor of paris throughout the city.
the french revolution was thus bloodily launched.
bastille day is still celebrated as frances national birthday just as americans celebrate the fourth of july.
the roots of the two revolutions were thickly intertwined.
to defray the cost of the war that had ousted france from north america in 1763 britain had levied new taxes on its colonists provoking them to revolt in 1776.
in turn aiding the rebellious americans forced the french government to seek new revenues lighting the fuse that led to the political explosion in paris in 1789.
even more notable was the intellectual commonality between the two upheavals.
the ideas that inspired the american and french revolutionaries grew from the common heritage of radical eighteenth century enlightenment thinking about equality freedom and the sovereignty of the people.
the french declaration of the rights of man 1789 deliberately echoed thomas jeffersons declaration of independence 1776 when it said that men are born and remain free and equal in rights among which were liberty property security and resistance to oppression many french thinkers openly credited the american revolution as the inspiration for their own.
as the american revolutionary thomas paine remarked to george washington the principles of america opened the bastille indeed in many ways the french were even more radical than the americans their revolution abolished slavery temporarily something the americans failed to do for almost one hundred years more.
and yet the two revolutions unfolded in dramatically different ways and left vastly different legacies.
the americans largely disarmed after winning their independence allowed some eighty thousand hard core loyalists to depart without suffering grievous retribution see makers of america the loyalists pp.
154 155 peacefully resumed their habits of worship toil and governance and pro storming the bastille 1789 this event signaled the outbreak of the french revolution.
ceeded to draft the u s constitution under which they have lived with amendments for more than two centuries.
the american revolutionaries in short secured the fruits of their revolution fairly easily while the french struggled through ghastly bloodshed to ultimate failure an outcome that haunted european politics for at least a century thereafter.
revolutionaries in france had to grapple with the constant threats of counterrevolution at home and armed intervention from abroad.
as a result they soon descended into grisly violence including the execution of some forty thousand frenchmen in the notorious reign of terror of 1793 1794 the guillotining of the king and queen and preemptive attacks on neighboring countries.
they stripped the catholic church of its property and privileges briey experimented with a new state religion called the cult of reason and eventually conceded supreme power to a brash young general napoleon bonaparte who convulsed all of europe in the name of liberty equality and fraternity napoleon was nally defeated at the battle of waterloo in 1815 after which the bourbon monarchy was restored to the throne.
why did these two great eruptions sprung from a shared chain of events and espousing almost identical political philosophies fare so differently.
many scholars have found the answer in the two countries markedly different pre revolutionary histories.
frances revolution confronted implacably entrenched adversaries in the landed nobility and the clergy.
those two estates as they were called clung tenaciously to their ancient privileges as did the princes and potentates who ruled in all the countries on frances borders.
to succeed the french revolution had to concentrate power in the hands of a state powerful enough to extinguish its internal enemies and to forestall foreign intervention as well.
those stark necessities help account for the fact that down to the present day central governments are stronger in almost all european societies than in the united states.
the americans faced no such obstacles.
they had no aristocracy worthy of the name no church with the kind of inuence that the catholic church commanded in france and no menacing neighbors to fear.
they had the luxury of being able to focus on limiting the power of the state not enlarging it.
theirs was largely a colonial conict whereas france had to endure a class conict.
not until reconstruction following the civil war would americans confront a comparable task of mustering sufcient power to uproot and permanently extinguish an entire social order.
it has been said that to mount a revolution is to murder and create what was exceptional about the american revolutionaries was that they were spared the necessity to murder.
the american revolution grew not from abstract ideas but from the preceding two centuries of american experience.
it was less a revolution in the usual sense than a consolidation of already well established norms values and behaviors.
alexander hamilton understood that crucial point when he wrote to the marquis de lafayette in 1789 i dread the reveries of your philosophic politicians the key to the bastille mount vernon virginia the marquis de lafayette instructed thomas paine his american revolutionary war comrade to deliver the key to the liberated bastille to george washington.
it hangs to this day in the entry hall of washingtons home at mount vernon virginia a lasting symbol of the deep afnity between the french and american revolutions.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 ngered their tender white necks and eyed the jeffersonian masses apprehensively.
lukewarm federalist approval of the early revolution turned almost overnight to heated talk of blood drinking cannibals sober minded jeffersonians regretted the bloodshed.
but they felt with jefferson that one could not expect to be carried from despotism to liberty in a feather bed and that a few thousand aristocratic heads were a cheap price to pay for human freedom.
such approbation was shortsighted for dire peril loomed ahead.
the earlier battles of the french revolution had not hurt america directly but now britain was sucked into the contagious con ict.
the conagration speedily spread to the new world where it vividly affected the expanding young american republic.
thus was repeated the familiar story of every major european war beginning with 1688 that involved a watery duel for control of the atlantic ocean.
see table 6 2 on p.
washingtons neutrality proclamation ominously the franco american alliance of 1778 was still on the books.
by its own terms it was to last forever it bound the united states to help the french defend their west indies against future foes and the booming british eets were certain to attack these strategic islands.
many jeffersonian democratic republicans favored honoring the alliance.
aame with the liberal ideals of the french revolution red blooded jeffersonians were eager to enter the con ict against britain the recent foe at the side of france the recent friend.
america owed france its freedom they argued and now was the time to pay the debt of gratitude.
but president george washington levelheaded as usual was not swayed by the clamor of the crowd.
backed by hamilton he believed that war had to be avoided at all costs.
washington was coolly playing for enormous stakes.
the nation in 1793 was militarily feeble economically wobbly and politically disunited.
but solid foundations were being laid and american cradles were continuing to rock a bumper crop of babies.
washington wisely reasoned that if america could avoid the broils of europe for a generation or so it would then be populous enough and powerful enough to assert its maritime rights with strength and success.
otherwise it might invite catastrophe.
the strategy of delay of playing for time while the birthrate fought americas battles was a cardinal policy of the founding fathers.
it was based on a shrewd assessment of american strengths and weaknesses at this critical moment in the young republics history.
hamilton and jefferson often poles apart on other issues were in agreement here.
accordingly washington boldly issued his neutrality proclamation in 1793 shortly after the outbreak of war between britain and france.
this epochal document not only proclaimed the governments ofcial neutrality in the widening con ict but sternly warned american citizens to be impartial toward both armed camps.
as americas rst formal declaration of aloofness from old world quarrels washingtons neutrality proclamation proved to be a major prop of the spreading isolationist tradition.
it also proved to be enormously controversial.
the pro french jeffersonians were enraged by the neutrality proclamation especially by washingtons method of announcing it unilaterally without consulting congress.
the pro british federalists were heartened.
debate soon intensied.
an impetuous thirtyyear old representative of the french republic citizen edmond gent had landed at charleston south carolina.
with unrestrained zeal he undertook to t out privateers and otherwise take advantage of the existing franco american alliance.
the giddy headed envoy all sail and no anchor was soon swept away by his enthusiastic reception by the jeffersonian republicans.
he foolishly came to believe that the neutrality proclamation did not reect the true wishes of the american people and he consequently embarked upon unneutral activity not authorized by the french alliance including the recruitment of armies to invade spanish florida and louisiana as well as british canada.
even madison and jefferson were soon disillusioned by his conduct.
after he threatened to appeal over the head of old washington to the sovereign voters the president demanded gents withdrawal and the frenchman was replaced by a less impulsive emissary.
washingtons neutrality proclamation clearly illustrates the truism that self interest is the basic cement of alliances.
in 1778 both france and america stood to gain in 1793 only france.
technically the americans did not out their obligation because france never ofcially called upon them to honor it.
american neutrality in fact favored france.
the french west indies urgently needed yankee foodstuffs.
if the americans had entered the war at frances side the british eets would have blockaded the american coast and cut off those essential supplies.
america was thus much the french revolution la k supere ior 100 km.
80w er w da lo na ca british north america 100 mi.
n hu l m ke ich la ron p up fort point au fer er n ca lak ad a a e ont rio fort dutchmans point fort oswegatchie vt fort oswego new york original 13 states fort detroit waynes victory fallen timbers la ke e territory ceded to the united states 1783 rie treaty line indian battle british fort on american soil fort miami 40n pennsylvania md.
io r of line treaty 1795 le il v green oh st clairs defeat r fort niagara northwest territory harmars defeat 1790 ce l aw re ft michilimackinac st n ig a n del.
virginia map 10 1 american posts held by the british and british american clashes after 1783 interactive map more useful to france as a reliable neutral provider than as a blockaded partner in arms.
embroilments with britain president washingtons far visioned policy of neutrality was sorely tried by the british.
for ten long years they had been retaining the chain of northern frontier posts on u s soil all in deance of the peace treaty of 1783 see map 10 1.
the london government was reluctant to abandon the lucrative fur trade in the great lakes region and also hoped to build up an indian buffer state to contain the ambitious americans.
british agents openly sold rearms and rewater to the indians of the miami confederacy an alliance of eight indian nations who terrorized americans invading their lands.
little turtle war chief of the miamis gave notice that the confederacy regarded the ohio river as the united states northwestern and their own southeastern border.
in 1790 and 1791 little turtles braves defeated armies led by generals josiah harmar and arthur st clair kill ing hundreds of soldiers and handing the united states what remains one of its worst defeats in the history of the frontier.
but in 1794 when a new army under general mad anthony wayne routed the miamis at the battle of fallen timbers the british refused to shelter indians eeing from the battle.
abandoned when it counted by their red coated friends the indians soon offered wayne the peace pipe.
in the treaty of greenville signed in august 1795 the confederacy gave up vast tracts of the old northwest including most of presentday indiana and ohio.
in exchange the indians received a lump sum payment of 20 000 an annual annuity of 9 000 the right to hunt the lands they had ceded and chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 signing the treaty of greenville 1795 following general waynes victory at the battle of fallen timbers in 1794 the miami indians surrendered their claims to much of the old northwest.
most important what they hoped was recognition of their sovereign status.
although the treaty codied an unequal relationship the indians felt that it put some limits on the ability of the united states to decide the fate of indian peoples.
thomas paine 1737 1809 then in france and resenting george washingtons anti french policies addressed the president in an open letter 1796 that reveals his bitterness and as to you sir treacherous in private friendship for so you have been to me and that in the day of danger and a hypocrite in public life the world will be puzzled to decide whether you are an apostate or an imposter whether you have abandoned good principles or whether you ever had any.
on the sea frontier the british were eager to starve out the french west indies and naturally expected the united states to defend them under the francoamerican alliance.
hard boiled commanders of the royal navy ignoring americas rights as a neutral struck savagely.
they seized about three hundred american merchant ships in the west indies impressed scores of seamen into ser vice on british vessels and threw hundreds of others into foul dungeons.
these actions especially impressment incensed patriotic americans.
a mighty outcry arose chiey from jeffersonians that america should once again ght george iii in defense of its liberties.
at the very least it should cut off all supplies to its oppressor through a nationwide embargo.
but the federalists stoutly resisted all demands for drastic action.
hamiltons high hopes for economic development depended on trade with britain.
war with the worlds mightiest commercial empire would pierce the heart of the hamiltonian nancial system.
washington s farewell jays treaty and washingtons farewell president washington in a last desperate gamble to avert war decided to send chief justice john jay to london in 1794.
the jeffersonians were acutely unhappy over the choice partly because they feared that so notorious a federalist and anglophile would sell out his country.
arriving in london jay gave the jeffersonians further cause for alarm when at the presentation ceremony he routinely kissed the queens hand.
unhappily jay entered the negotiations with weak cards which were further sabotaged by hamilton.
the latter fearful of war with britain secretly supplied the british with the details of americas bargaining strategy.
not surprisingly jay won few concessions.
the british did promise to evacuate the chain of posts on u s soil a pledge that inspired little condence since it had been made before in paris to the same john jay.
in addition britain consented to pay damages for the recent seizures of american ships.
but the british stopped short of pledging anything about future maritime seizures and impressments or about supplying arms to indians.
and they forced jay to give ground by binding the united states to pay the debts still owed to british merchants on pre revolutionary accounts.
jays unpopular pact more than any other issue vitalized the newborn democratic republican party of thomas jefferson.
when the jeffersonians learned of jays concessions their rage was fearful to behold.
the treaty seemed like an abject surrender to britain as well as a betrayal of the jeffersonian south.
southern planters would have to pay the major share of the prerevolutionary debts while rich federalist shippers were collecting damages for recent british seizures.
jeffersonian mobs hanged burned and guillotined in efgy that damnd archtraitor sir john jay even george washingtons huge popularity was compromised by the controversy over the treaty.
jays treaty had other unforeseen consequences.
fearing that the treaty foreshadowed an angloamerican alliance spain moved hastily to strike a deal with the united states.
pinckneys treaty of 1795 with spain granted the americans virtually every thing they demanded including free navigation of the mississippi the right of deposit warehouse rights at new orleans and the large disputed territory of western florida.
see map 9 3 on p.
exhausted after the diplomatic and partisan battles of his second term president washington decided to retire.
his choice contributed powerfully to establishing a two term tradition for american presidents.
in his farewell address to the nation in 1796 never delivered orally but printed in the newspapers washington strongly advised the avoidance of permanent alliances like the still vexatious franco american treaty of 1778.
contrary to general misunderstanding washington did not oppose all alliances but favored only temporary alliances for extraordinary emergencies this was admirable advice for a weak and divided nation in 1796.
but what is sound counsel for a young stripling may not apply later to a mature and muscular giant.
washingtons contributions as president were enormous even though the sparkling hamilton at times seemed to outshine him.
the central government its scal feet now under it was solidly established.
the west was expanding.
the merchant marine was plowing the seas.
above all washington had kept the nation out of both overseas entanglements and foreign wars.
the experimental stage had passed and the presidential chair could now be turned over to a less impressive gure.
but republics are notoriously ungrateful.
when washington left ofce in 1797 he was showered with the brickbats of partisan abuse quite in contrast with the bouquets that had greeted his arrival.
john adams becomes president who should succeed the exalted father of his country.
alexander hamilton was the best known member of the federalist party now that washington had bowed out.
but his nancial policies some of which had fattened the speculators had made him so unpopular that he could not hope to be elected president.
the federalists were forced to turn to washingtons vice president the experienced but ungracious john adams a rugged chip off old plymouth rock.
the democraticrepublicans naturally rallied behind their master organizer and leader thomas jefferson.
political passions ran feverishly high in the presidential campaign of 1796.
the lofty presence of not broken until 1940 by franklin d roosevelt and made a part of the constitution in 1951 by the twenty second amendment.
see the appendix.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 although thomas jefferson 1743 1826 and john adams hardly saw eye to eye jefferson displayed grudging respect for adams in a piece of private correspondence in 1787 he is vain irritable and a bad calculator of the force and probable effect of the motives which govern men.
this is all the ill which can possibly be said of him.
he is as disinterested as the being who made him.
john adams by john singleton copley 1783 when he entered harvard college in 1751 adams intended to prepare for the ministry but four absorbing years of study excited him about other intellectual and career possibilities i was a mighty metaphysician at least i thought myself such adams also tried his hand at being a mighty scientist doctor and orator.
upon graduation he became a schoolmaster but soon decided to take up the law.
washington had hitherto imposed some restraints now the lid was off.
cultured federalists like fisher ames referred to the jeffersonians as re eating salamanders poison sucking toads federalists and democratic republicans even drank their ale in separate taverns.
the issues of the campaign as it turned out focused heavily on personalities.
but the jeffersonians again assailed the too forceful crushing of the whiskey rebellion and above all the negotiation of jays hated treaty.
john adams with most of his support in new england squeezed through by the narrow margin of 71 votes to 68 in the electoral college.
jefferson as runnerup became vice president.
one of the ablest statesmen of his day adams at sixty two was a stuffy gure.
sharp featured bald relatively short ve feet seven inches and thickset his rotundity he impressed observers as a man of stern principles who did his duty with stubborn devotion.
although learned and upright he was a tactless and prickly intellectual aristocrat with no appeal to the masses and with no desire to cultivate any.
many citizens regarded him with respectful irritation the crusty new eng lander suffered from other handicaps.
he had stepped into washingtons shoes which no successor could hope to ll.
in addition adams was hated by hamilton who had resigned from the treasury in 1795 and who now headed the war faction of the federalist party known as the high federalists the famed nancier even secretly plotted with cer tain members of the cabinet against the president who had a conspiracy rather than a cabinet on his hands.
adams regarded hamilton as the most ruthless impatient artful indefatigable and unprincipled intriguer in the united states if not in the world most ominous of all adams inherited a violent quarrel with france a quarrel whose gunpowder lacked only a spark.
the possibility of such an inharmonious two party combination in the future was removed by the twelfth amendment to the constitution in 1804.
see the appendix.
the french crisis the xyz affair when president adamss envoys to paris were asked to pay a huge bribe as the price of doing diplomatic business humiliated americans rose up in wrath against france.
here an innocent young america is being plundered by frenchmen as john bull looks on in amusement from across the english channel.
unofcial fighting with france the french were infuriated by jays treaty.
they condemned it as the initial step toward an alliance with britain their perpetual foe.
they further assailed the pact as a agrant violation of the franco american treaty of 1778.
french warships in retaliation began to seize defenseless american merchant vessels altogether about three hundred by mid 1797.
adding insult to outrage the paris regime haughtily refused to receive americas newly appointed envoy and even threatened him with arrest.
president adams kept his head temporarily even though the nation was mightily aroused.
true to washingtons policy of steering clear of war at all costs he tried again to reach an agreement with the french and appointed a diplomatic commission of three men including john marshall the future chief justice.
adamss envoys reaching paris in 1797 hoped to meet with charles maurice de talleyrand the crafty french foreign minister.
they were secretly approached by three go betweens later referred to as x y and z in the published dispatches.
the french spokesmen among other concessions demanded an unneutral loan of 32 million orins plus what amounted to a bribe of 250 000 for the privilege of merely talking with talleyrand.
these terms were intolerable.
the american trio knew that bribes were standard diplomatic devices in europe but they gagged at paying a quarter of a million dollars for mere talk without any assurances of a settlement.
negotiations quickly broke down and john marshall on reaching new york in 1798 was hailed as a conquering hero for his steadfastness.
the xyz affair sent a wave of war hysteria sweeping through the united states catching up even president adams.
the slogan of the hour became millions for defense but not one cent for tribute the federalists were delighted at this unexpected turn of affairs whereas all except the most rabid jeffersonians hung their heads in shame over the misbehavior of their french friends.
war preparations in the united states were pushed along at a feverish pace despite considerable jeffersonian opposition in congress.
the navy department chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 preparation for war to defend commerce the building of the frigate philadelphia in 1803 this frigate ran onto the rocks near tripoli harbor and about three hundred ofcers and men were imprisoned by the tripolitans see map 11 2 on p 233.
the ship was reoated for service against the americans but stephen decatur led a party of men that set it are.
was created the three ship navy was expanded the united states marine corps was reestablished originally created in 1775 the marine corps had been disbanded at the end of the revolutionary war.
a new army of ten thousand men was authorized but not fully raised.
bloodshed was con ned to the sea and principally to the west indies.
in two and a half years of undeclared hostilities 1798 1800 american privateers and menof war of the new navy captured over eighty armed vessels ying the french colors though several hundred yankee merchant ships were lost to the enemy.
only a slight push it seemed might plunge both nations into a full dress war.
americans would send a new minister he would be received with proper respect.
this french furor brought to adams a degree of personal acclaim that he had never known before and was never to know again.
he doubtless perceived that a full edged war crowned by the conquest of the floridas and louisiana would bring new plaudits to the federalist party and perhaps a second term to himself.
but the heady wine of popularity did not sway his nal judgment.
he like other founding fathers realized full well that war must be avoided while the country was relatively weak.
adams unexpectedly exploded a bombshell when early in 1799 he submitted to the senate the name of a new minister to france.
hamilton and his war hawk adams puts patriotism above party embattled france its hands full in europe wanted no war.
an outwitted talleyrand realized that to ght the united states would merely add one more foe to his enemy roster.
the british who were lending the americans cannon and other war supplies were actually driven closer to their wayward cousins than they were to be again for many years.
talleyrand therefore let it be known through roundabout channels that if the the rmness of president john adams 1735 1826 was revealed in his message to congress june 1798 i will never send another minister to france without assurances that he will be received respected and honored as the representative of a great free powerful and independent nation.
the alien and sedition hysteria faction were enraged.
but public opinion jeffersonian and reasonable federalist alike was favorable to one last try for peace.
americas envoys now three found the political skies brightening when they reached paris early in 1800.
the ambitious little corporal the corsican napoleon bonaparte had recently seized dictatorial power.
he was eager to free his hands of the american squabble so that he might continue to redraw the map of europe and perhaps create a new world empire in louisiana.
the af ictions and ambitions of the old world were again working to americas advantage.
after a great deal of haggling a memorable treaty known as the convention of 1800 was signed in paris.
france agreed to annul the twenty two year old marriage of in convenience but as a kind of alimony the united states agreed to pay the damage claims of american shippers.
so ended the nations only peacetime military alliance for a century and a half.
its troubled history does much to explain the traditional antipathy of the american people to foreign entanglements.
john adams inty to the end deserves immense credit for his belated push for peace even though he was moved in part by jealousy of hamilton.
adams not only avoided the hazards of war but also unwittingly smoothed the path for the peaceful purchase of louisiana three years later.
he should indeed rank high among the forgotten purchasers of this vast domain.
if america had drifted into a full blown war with france in 1800 napoleon would not have sold louisiana to jefferson on any terms in 1803.
president adams the bubble of his popularity pricked by peace was aware of his signal contribution to the nation.
he later suggested as the epitaph for his tombstone not used here lies john adams who took upon himself the responsibility of peace with france in the year 1800 the federalist witch hunt exulting federalists had meanwhile capitalized on the anti french frenzy to drive through congress in 1798 a sheaf of laws designed to mufe or minimize their jeffersonian foes.
the rst of these oppressive laws was aimed at supposedly pro jeffersonian aliens most european immigrants lacking wealth were scorned by the aristocratic federalist party.
but they were welcomed as voters by the less prosperous and more democratic jeffersonians.
the federalist congress hoping to dis courage the dregs of europe erected a disheartening barrier.
they raised the residence requirements for aliens who desired to become citizens from a tolerable ve years to an intolerable fourteen.
this drastic new law violated the traditional american policy of opendoor hospitality and speedy assimilation.
two additional alien laws struck heavily at undesirable immigrants.
the president was empowered to deport dangerous foreigners in time of peace and to deport or imprison them in time of hostilities.
though defensible as a war mea sure and an ofcially declared war with france seemed imminent this was an arbitrary grant of executive power contrary to american tradition and to the spirit of the constitution even though the stringent alien laws were never enforced.
the lockjaw sedition act the last mea sure of the federalist clampdown was a direct slap at two priceless freedoms guaranteed in the constitution by the bill of rights freedom of speech and freedom of the press first amendment.
this law provided that anyone who impeded the policies of the government or falsely defamed its ofcials including the president would be liable to a heavy ne and imprisonment.
severe though the mea sure was the federalists believed that it was justied.
the verbal violence of the day was unrestrained and foul penned editors some of them exiled aliens vilied adamss anti french policy in vicious terms.
many outspoken jeffersonian editors were indicted under the sedition act and ten were brought to trial.
all of them were convicted often by packed juries swayed by prejudiced federalist judges.
some of the victims were harmless partisans who should have been spared the notoriety of martyrdom.
among them was congressman matthew lyon the spitting lion who had earlier gained fame by spitting in the face of a federalist.
he was sentenced to four months in jail for writing of president adamss unbounded thirst for ridiculous pomp foolish adulation and selsh avarice another culprit was lucky to get off with a ne of 100 after he had expressed the wish that the wad of a cannon red in honor of adams had landed in the seat of the presidents breeches.
the sedition act seemed to be in direct con ict with the constitution.
but the supreme court dominated by federalists was of no mind to declare this federalist law unconstitutional.
the federalists intentionally wrote the law to expire in 1801 so that it could not be used against them if they lost the next election.
this attempt by the federalists to crush free speech and silence the opposition party high handed chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 congressional pugilists satirical representation of matthew lyons ght in congress with the federalist representative roger griswold.
as it was undoubtedly made many converts for the jeffersonians.
yet the alien and sedition acts despite pained outcries from the jeffersonians they muzzled commanded widespread popular support.
anti french hysteria played directly into the hands of witch hunting conser in 1800 james callender 1758 1803 published a pamphlet that assailed the president in strong language.
for blasts like the following tirade callender was prosecuted under the sedition act ned 250 and sentenced to prison for nine months the reign of mr adams has hitherto been one continued tempest of malignant passions.
as president he has never opened his lips or lifted his pen without threatening and scolding.
the grand object of his administration has been to exasperate the rage of contending parties to calumniate and destroy every man who differs from his opinions.
every person holding an ofce must either quit it or think and vote exactly with mr adams.
in the congressional elections of 1798 1799 the federalists riding a wave of popularity scored the most sweeping victory of their entire history.
the virginia madison and kentucky jefferson resolutions resentful jeffersonians naturally refused to take the alien and sedition acts lying down.
jefferson himself feared that if the federalists managed to choke free speech and free press they would then wipe out other precious constitutional guarantees.
his own edgling political party might even be stamped out of existence.
if this had happened the country might have slid into a dangerous one party dictatorship.
fearing prosecution for sedition jefferson secretly penned a series of resolutions which the kentucky legislature approved in 1798 and 1799.
his friend and fellow virginian james madison drafted a similar but less extreme statement which was adopted by the legislature of virginia in 1798.
both jefferson and madison stressed the compact theory a theory popular among eng lish political philosophers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
as applied to america by the jeffersonians this concept meant that the thirteen sovereign states in creat federalists versus republicans ing the federal government had entered into a compact or contract regarding its jurisdiction.
the national government was consequently the agent or creation of the states.
since water can rise no higher than its source the individual states were the nal judges of whether their agent had broken the compact by overstepping the authority originally granted.
invoking this logic jeffersons kentucky resolutions concluded that the federal regime had exceeded its constitutional powers and that with regard to the alien and sedition acts nullication a refusal to accept them was the rightful remedy no other state legislatures despite jeffersons hopes fell into line.
some of them atly refused to endorse the virginia and kentucky resolutions.
others chiey in federalist states added ringing condemnations.
many federalists argued that the people not the states had made the original compact and that it was up to the supreme court not the states to nullify unconstitutional legislation passed by congress.
this practice though not specically authorized by the constitution was nally adopted by the supreme court in 1803 see pp.
the virginia and kentucky resolutions were a brilliant formulation of the extreme states rights view regarding the union indeed more sweeping in their implications than their authors had intended.
they were later used by southerners to support nullication and ultimately secession.
yet neither jefferson nor madison as founding fathers of the union had any intention of breaking it up they were groping for ways to preserve it.
their resolutions were basically campaign documents designed to crystallize opposition to the federalist party and to unseat it in the upcoming presidential election of 1800.
the only real nullication that jefferson had in view was the nullication of federalist abuses.
federalists versus democratic republicans as the presidential contest of 1800 approached the differences between federalists and democraticrepublicans were sharply etched see table 10 3.
as might be expected most federalists of the preconstitution period 1787 1789 became federalists in the 1790s.
largely welded by hamilton into an effective group by 1793 they openly advocated rule by the best people those who own the country remarked federalist john jay ought to govern it with their intellectual arrogance and tory tastes hamiltonians distrusted full blown democracy as the fountain of all mischiefs and feared the swayability of the untutored common folk.
hamiltonian federalists also advocated a strong central government with the power to crush democratic excesses like shayss rebellion protect the lives and estates of the wealthy subordinate the sovereigntyloving states and promote foreign trade.
they believed table 10 3 the two political parties 1793 1800 federalist features democratic republican jeffersonian features rule by the best people hostility to extension of democracy a powerful central government at the expense of states rights loose interpretation of constitution government to foster business concentration of wealth in interests of capitalistic enterprise a protective tariff pro british conser vative tory tradition national debt a blessing if properly funded an expanding bureaucracy a powerful central bank restrictions on free speech and press concentration in seacoast area rule by the informed masses friendliness toward extension of democracy a weak central government so as to preserve states rights strict interpretation of constitution no special favors for business agriculture preferred no special favors for manufacturers pro french radical revolutionary tradition national debt a bane rigid economy reduction of federal ofceholders encouragement to state banks relatively free speech and press concentration in south and southwest in agricultural areas and backcountry a minimal navy for coastal defense a strong navy to protect shippers chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 thomas jefferson at natural bridge by caleb boyle ca.
1801 a great statesman jefferson wrote his own epitaph here was buried thomas jefferson author of the declaration of independence of the statute of virginia for religious freedom and father of the university of virginia that government should support private enterprise but not interfere with it.
this attitude came naturally to the merchants manufacturers and shippers along the atlantic seaboard who made up the majority of federalist support.
farther inland few hamiltonians dwelled.
the hinterland was largely anti federalist territory.
leading the anti federalists who came eventually to be known as democratic republicans or sometimes simply republicans was thomas jefferson.
his rivalry with hamilton de ned the archetypal con ict in american political history.
the two leaders appealed to dif ferent constituencies and expressed different theories of society politics and diplomacy.
lanky and relaxed in appearance lacking personal aggressiveness weak voiced and unable to deliver a rabble rousing speech jefferson became a master political organizer through his ability to lead people rather than drive them.
his strongest appeal was to the middle class and to the underprivileged the dirt farmers the laborers the artisans and the small shopkeepers.
liberal thinking jefferson with his aristocratic head set on a farmers frame was a bundle of inconsistencies.
by one set of tests he should have been a federalist for he was a virginia aristocrat and slaveowner who lived in an imposing hilltop mansion at monticello.
a so called traitor to his own upper class jefferson cherished uncommon sympathy for the common people especially the downtrodden the oppressed and the persecuted.
as he wrote in 1800 i have sworn upon the altar of god eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man jeffersonian republicans demanded a weak central regime.
they believed that the best government was the one that governed least.
the bulk of the power jefferson argued should be retained by the states.
there the people in intimate contact with local affairs could keep a more vigilant eye on their public servants.
otherwise a dictatorship might develop.
central authority a kind of necessary evil was to be kept at a minimum through a strict interpretation of the constitution.
the national debt which he saw as a curse illegitimately bequeathed to later generations was to be paid off.
jeffersonian republicans themselves primarily agrarians insisted that there should be no special privileges for special classes particularly manufacturers.
agriculture to jefferson was the favored branch of the economy and formed the foundation of his political thought.
those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of god he said.
most of his followers naturally came from the agricultural south and southwest.
above all jefferson advocated the rule of the people.
but he did not propose thrusting the ballot into the hands of every adult white male.
he favored government for the people but not by all the people only by those white men who were literate enough to inform themselves and wear the mantle of american citizenship worthily.
universal education would have to precede universal suffrage.
the ignorant he argued were incapable of self government.
but he had profound jefferson s republic thomas jeffersons vision of a republican america was peopled with virtuous farmers not factory hands.
as early as 1784 he wrote while we have land to labor then let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a work bench or twirling a distaff.
for the general operations of manufacture let our workshops remain in europe.
the mobs of great cities add just so much to the support of pure government as sores do to the strength of the human body.
faith in the reasonableness and teachableness of the masses and in their collective wisdom when taught.
landlessness among american citizens threatened popular democracy as much as illiteracy in jeffersons eyes.
he feared that propertyless dependents would be political pawns in the hands of their landowning superiors.
how could the emergence of a landless class of voters be avoided.
the answer in part was by slavery.
a system of black slave labor in the south ensured that white yeoman farmers could remain independent landowners.
without slavery poor whites would have to provide the cheap labor so necessary for the cultivation of tobacco and rice and their low wages would preclude their ever owning property.
jefferson thus tortuously reconciled slaveholding his own included with his more democratic impulses.
yet for his time jeffersons condence that white free men could become responsible and knowledgeable citizens was open minded.
he championed their freedom of speech for without free speech the misdeeds of tyranny could not be exposed.
jefferson even dared to say that given the choice of a government without newspapers and newspapers without a gov ernment he would opt for the latter.
yet no other american leader except perhaps abraham lincoln ever suffered more foul abuse from editorial pens jefferson might well have prayed for freedom from the federalist press.
differences over foreign policy dened another sharp distinction between hamilton and jefferson.
hamilton looked outward and eastward.
he sought to build a strong national state that would assert and expand americas commercial interests.
no government could give us tranquility and happiness at home he declared which did not possess sufcient stability and strength to make us respectable abroad foreign trade especially with britain was a key cog in hamiltons scal machinery and friendship with britain was thus indispensable.
jeffersonian republicans unlike the federalist british boot lickers were basically profrench.
they earnestly believed that it was to americas advantage to support the liberal ideals of the french revolution rather than applaud the reaction of the british tories.
jefferson in effect faced inward and westward.
his priorities were to protect and strengthen democracy at home especially in the frontier regions beyond the appalachians rather than ex americas muscles abroad.
so as the young republics rst full decade of nationhood came to a close the founders hopes seemed already imperiled.
con icts over domestic politics and foreign policy undermined the unity of the revolutionary era and called into question the very viability of the american experiment in democracy.
as the presidential election of 1800 approached the danger loomed that the fragile and battered american ship of state like many another before it and after it would founder on the rocks of controversy.
the shores of history are littered with the wreckage of nascent nations torn asunder before they could grow to a stable maturity.
why should the united states expect to enjoy a happier fate.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 chronology constitution formally put into effect judiciary act of 1789 washington elected president french revolution begins declaration of the rights of man france first ofcial census bill of rights adopted vermont becomes fourteenth state bank of the united states created excise tax passed washington reelected president 1792 federalist and democratic republican parties formed louis xvi beheaded radical phase of french revolution france declares war on britain and spain washingtons neutrality proclamation citizen gent affair key terms bill of rights 201 judiciary act of 1789 202 funding at par 202 assumption 203 tariff 203 excise tax 203 bank of the united states 204 whiskey rebellion 204 reign of terror 207 neutrality proclamation 210 whiskey rebellion battle of fallen timbers jays treaty with britain treaty of greenville indians cede ohio pinckneys treaty with spain washingtons farewell address adams becomes president xyz affair alien and sedition acts 1798 virginia and kentucky resolutions 1798 undeclared war with france convention of 1800 peace with france people to know fallen timbers battle of 211 greenville treaty of 211 jays treaty 213 pinckneys treaty 213 farewell address 213 xyz affair 215 convention of 1800 217 alien laws 217 sedition act 217 virginia and kentucky resolutions 219 george washington alexander hamilton louis xvi edmond gent little turtle mad anthony wayne john jay john adams charles maurice de talleyrand to learn more to learn more joanne freeman affairs of honor national politics in the new republic 2001 frank lambert the barbary wars american independence in the atlantic world 2005 michael merrill and sean wilentz eds the key of liberty the life and democratic writings of william manning a laborer 1747 1814 1992 jeffrey l pasley the tyranny of printers newspaper politics in the early american republic 2001 jeffrey l pasley andrew w robertson and david waldstreicher eds beyond the founders new approaches to the political history of the early american republic 2004 bernard schwartz the great rights of mankind a history of the american bill of rights 1991 james roger sharp american politics in the early republic the new nation in crisis 1993 thomas p slaughter the whiskey rebellion frontier epilogue to the american revolution 1986 robert w smith keeping the republic ideology and early american diplomacy 2004 alan taylor william coopers town power and persuasion on the frontier of the early american republic 1995 robert e wright hamilton unbound finance and the creation of the american republic 2002 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 timid men.
prefer the calm of despotism to the boisterous sea of liberty.
i n the critical presidential contest of 1800 the rst in which federalists and democratic republicans functioned as two national political parties john adams and thomas jefferson again squared off against each other.
the choice seemed clear and dramatic adamss federalists waged a defensive struggle for strong central government and public order.
their jeffersonian opponents presented themselves as the guardians of agrarian purity liberty and states rights.
the next dozen years however would turn what seemed like a clear cut choice in 1800 into a messier reality as the jeffersonians in power were confronted with a series of opportunities and crises requiring the assertion of federal authority.
as the rst challengers to rout a reigning party the republicans were the rst to learn that it is far easier to condemn from the stump than to govern consistently.
federalist and republican mudslingers in ghting for survival the federalists labored under heavy handicaps.
their alien and sedition acts had aroused a host of enemies although most of these critics were dyed in the wool jeffersonians anyhow.
the hamiltonian wing of the federalist party robbed of its glorious war with france split openly with president adams.
hamilton a victim of arrogance was so indiscreet as to attack the president in a privately printed pamphlet.
jeffersonians soon got hold of the pamphlet and gleefully published it.
the most damaging blow to the federalists was the refusal of adams to give them a rousing ght with france.
their feverish war preparations had swelled this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website federalists versus republicans the reverend timothy dwight 1752 1817 president of yale college predicted that in the event of jeffersons election the bible would be cast into a bonre our holy worship changed into a dance of french jacobin phrensy our wives and daughters dishonored and our sons converted into the disciples of voltaire and the dragoons of marat.
the public debt and had required disagreeable new taxes including a stamp tax.
after all these unpopular mea sures the war scare had petered out and the country was left with an all dressed up but no place to go feeling.
the military preparations now seemed not only unnecessary but extravagant as seamen for the new navy were called john adamss jackasses adams himself was known somewhat ironically as the father of the american navy thrown on the defensive the federalists concentrated their re on jefferson himself who became the victim of one of americas earliest whispering campaigns he was accused of having robbed a widow and her children of a trust fund and of having fathered numerous mulatto children by his own slave women.
jeffersons long rumored intimacy with one of his slaves sally hemings has been con rmed through dna testing.
see examining the evidence p.
as a liberal in religion jefferson had earlier incurred the wrath of the orthodox clergy largely through his successful struggle to separate church and state in his native virginia.
although jefferson did believe in god preachers throughout new eng land stronghold of federalism and congregationalism thundered against his alleged atheism.
old ladies of federalist families fearing jeffersons election even buried their bibles or hung them in wells.
washington and jefferson compared 1807 this pro federalist anti jefferson cartoon accuses jefferson of sympathizing with french revolutionary despotism.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 trying to elbow their way into the american carrying trade.
thereafter all commerce owing to and from the colonies could be transported only in british including colonial vessels.
subsequent laws required that european goods destined for america rst had to be landed in britain where tariff duties could be collected and british middlemen could take a slice of the prots.
other laws stipulated that american merchants must ship certain enumerated products notably tobacco exclusively to britain even though prices might be better elsewhere.
british policy also in icted a currency shortage on the colonies.
since the colonists regularly bought more from britain than they sold there the difference had to be made up in hard cash.
every year gold and silver coins mostly earned in illicit trade with the spanish and french west indies drained out of the colonies creating an acute money shortage.
to facilitate everyday purchases the colonists resorted to butter nails pitch and feathers for purposes of exchange.
currency issues came to a boil when dire nancial need forced many of the colonies to issue paper money which swiftly depreciated.
british merchants and creditors squawked so loudly that parliament prohibited the colonial legislatures from printing paper currency and from passing indulgent bankruptcy laws practices that might harm british merchants.
the americans grumbled that their welfare was being sacriced for the well being of british commercial interests.
the british crown also reserved the right to nullify any legislation passed by the colonial assemblies if such laws worked mischief with the mercantilist system.
this royal veto was used rather sparingly just 469 times in connection with 8 563 laws.
but the colonists ercely resented its very existence another example of how principle could weigh more heavily than practice in fueling colonial grievances.
the merits and menace of mercantilism in theory the british mercantile system seemed thoroughly selsh and deliberately oppressive.
but the truth is that until 1763 the various navigation laws imposed no intolerable burden mainly because they were only loosely enforced.
enterprising colonial merchants learned early to disregard or evade troublesome restrictions.
some of the rst american fortunes like that of john hancock were amassed by wholesale smuggling.
paul revere by john singleton copley ca.
1768 this painting of the famed silversmith horseman challenged convention but reected the new democratic spirit of the age by portraying an artisan in working clothes.
note how copley depicted the serene condence of the master craftsman and reveres quiet pride in his work.
americans also reaped direct benets from the mercantile system.
if the colonies existed for the benet of the mother country it was hardly less true that britain existed for the benet of the colonies.
london paid liberal bounties to colonial producers of ship parts over the protests of british competitors.
virginia tobacco planters enjoyed a monopoly in the british market snuf ng out the tiny british tobacco industry.
the colonists also beneted from the protection of the worlds mightiest navy and a strong seasoned army of redcoats all without a penny of cost.
but even when painted in its rosiest colors the mercantile system burdened the colonists with annoying liabilities.
mercantilism stied economic initiative and imposed a rankling dependency on british agents and creditors.
most grievously many americans simply found the mercantilist system debasing.
they felt used kept in a state of perpetual economic adolescence and the stamp act adam smith 1723 1790 the scottish father of modern economics frontally attacked mercantilism in 1776 to prohibit a great people however from making all that they can of every part of their own produce or from employing their stock and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous to themselves is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights of mankind.
never allowed to come of age.
as benjamin franklin wrote in 1775 we have an old mother that peevish is grown she snubs us like children that scarce walk alone she forgets were grown up and have sense of our own.
revolution broke out as theodore roosevelt later remarked because britain failed to recognize an emerging nation when it saw one.
the stamp tax uproar victory ushed britain emerged from the seven years war holding one of the biggest empires in the world and also less happily the biggest debt some 140 million about half of which had been incurred defending the american colonies.
to justify and ser vice that debt british ofcials now moved to rede ne their relationship with their north american colonies.
prime minister george grenville rst aroused the resentment of the colonists in 1763 by ordering the british navy to begin strictly enforcing the navigation laws.
he also secured from parliament the so called sugar act of 1764 the rst law ever passed by that body for raising tax revenue in the colonies for the crown.
among various provisions it increased the duty on foreign sugar imported from the west indies.
after bitter protests from the colonists the duties were lowered substantially and the agitation died down.
but resentment was kept burning by the quartering act of 1765.
this mea sure required certain colonies to provide food and quarters for british troops.
then in the same year 1765 grenville imposed the most odious mea sure of all a stamp tax to raise revenues to support the new military force.
the stamp act mandated the use of stamped paper or the af xing of stamps certifying payment of tax.
stamps were required on bills of sale for about fty trade items as well as on certain types of commercial and legal documents including playing cards pamphlets newspapers diplomas bills of lading and marriage licenses.
grenville regarded all of these mea sures as reasonable and just.
he was simply asking the americans to pay a fair share of the costs for their own defense through taxes that were already familiar in britain.
in fact the british people for two generations had endured a stamp tax far heavier than that passed for the colonies.
yet the americans were angrily aroused at what they regarded as grenvilles scal aggression.
the new laws did not merely pinch their pocketbooks.
far more ominously grenville also seemed to be striking at the local liberties they had come to assume as a matter of right.
thus some colonial assemblies deantly refused to comply with the quartering act or voted only a fraction of the supplies that it called for.
worst of all grenvilles noxious legislation seemed to jeopardize the basic rights of the colonists as englishmen.
both the sugar act and the stamp act provided for trying offenders in the hated admiralty courts where juries were not allowed.
the burden of proof was on the defendants who were assumed to be guilty unless they could prove themselves innocent.
trial by jury and the precept of innocent until proved guilty were ancient privileges that british people every where including the american colonists held most dear.
and why was a british army needed at all in the colonies now that the french were expelled from the continent and pontiacs warriors crushed.
could its real purpose be to whip rebellious colonists into line.
the boston gazette declared in 1765 a colonist cannot make a button a horseshoe nor a hobnail but some snooty ironmonger or respectable buttonmaker of britain shall bawl and squall that his honors worship is most egregiously maltreated injured cheated and robbed by the rascally american republicans.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 a royal stamp the hated stamp act of 1765 required stamps certifying payment of tax on all sorts of legal and commercial documents.
this stamp was to be afxed to insurance policies and probated wills.
many americans weaned on radical whig suspicion of all authority began to sniff the strong scent of a conspiracy to strip them of their historic liberties.
they lashed back violently and the stamp act became the target that drew their most ferocious re.
angry throats raised the cry no taxation without representation there was some irony in the slogan because the seaports and tidewater towns that were most wrathful against the stamp act had long denied full representation to their own backcountry pioneers.
but now the aggravated colonists took the high ground of principle.
the americans made a distinction between legislation and taxation they conceded the right of english statesman edmund burke 1729 1797 warned in 1775 young man there is america which at this day serves for little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men and uncouth manners yet shall before you taste of death show itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world.
parliament to legislate about matters that affected the entire empire including the regulation of trade.
but they steadfastly denied the right of parliament in which no americans were seated to impose taxes on americans.
only their own elected colonial legislatures the americans insisted could legally tax them.
taxes levied by the distant british parliament amounted to robbery a piratical assault on the sacred rights of property.
grenville dismissed these american protests as hairsplitting absurdities.
the power of parliament was supreme and undivided he asserted and in any case the americans were represented in parliament.
elaborating the theory of virtual representation grenville claimed that every member of parliament represented all british subjects even those americans in boston or charleston who had never voted for a member of parliament.
the americans scoffed at the notion of virtual representation.
and truthfully they did not really want direct representation in parliament which might have seemed like a sensible compromise.
if they had obtained it any gouty member of the house of commons could have proposed an oppressive tax bill for the colonies and the outvoted american representatives few in number would have stood bereft of a principle with which to resist.
thus the principle of no taxation without representation was supremely important and the colonists clung to it with tenacious consistency.
when the british replied that the sovereign power of government could not be divided between legislative authority in london and taxing authority in the colonies they forced the americans to deny the authority of parliament altogether and to begin to consider their own political independence.
this chain of logic eventually led link by link to revolutionary consequences.
forced repeal of the stamp act colonial outcries against the hated stamp tax took various forms.
the most conspicuous assemblage was the stamp act congress of 1765 which brought together in new york city twenty seven distinguished delegates from nine colonies.
after dignied debate the members drew up a statement of their rights and grievances and beseeched the king and parliament to repeal the repugnant legislation.
conict over taxes the stamp act congress which was largely ignored in eng land made little splash at the time in america.
its ripples however began to erode sectional suspicions for it brought together around the same table leaders from the different and rival colonies.
it was one more halting but signicant step toward intercolonial unity.
more effective than the congress was the widespread adoption of nonimportation agreements against british goods.
woolen garments of homespun became fashionable and the eating of lamb chops was discouraged so that the wool bearing sheep would be allowed to mature.
nonimportation agreements were in fact a promising stride toward union they spontaneously united the american people for the rst time in common action.
mobilizing in support of nonimportation gave ordinary american men and women new opportunities to participate in colonial protests.
many people who had previously stood on the sidelines now signed petitions swearing to uphold the terms of the consumer boycotts.
groups of women assembled in public to hold spinning bees and make homespun cloth as a replacement for shunned british textiles.
such public deance helped spread angry resistance throughout american colonial society.
sometimes violence accompanied colonial protests.
groups of ardent spirits known as sons of liberty and daughters of liberty took the law into their own hands.
crying liberty property and no stamps they enforced the nonimportation agreements against john dickinson 1732 1808 a lawyer and popular essayist advocated a middle of the road response to the new british revenue acts of the 1760s that appealed to most colonists at the time the constitutional modes of obtaining relief are those which i wish to see pursued on the present occasion.
we have an excellent prince in whose good disposition we may conde.
let us behave like dutiful children who have received unmerited blows from a beloved parent.
let us complain to our parent but let our complaint speak at the same time the language of afiction and veneration.
protesting the stamp act even common household wares in the 1760s testied to the colonists mounting rage against the stamp act.
many people in britain sympathized with the americans and sought to prot from their anger as this english made teapot demonstrates.
violators often with a generous coat of tar and feathers.
patriotic mobs ransacked the houses of unpopular ofcials conscated their money and hanged efgies of stamp agents on liberty poles.
shaken by colonial commotion the machinery for collecting the tax broke down.
on that dismal day in 1765 when the new act was to go into effect the stamp agents had all been forced to resign and there was no one to sell the stamps.
while ags apped at half mast the law was openly and agrantly deed or rather nullied.
eng land was hard hit.
america then bought about one quarter of all british exports and about one half of british shipping was devoted to the american trade.
merchants manufacturers and shippers suffered from the colonial nonimportation agreements and hundreds of laborers were thrown out of work.
loud demands converged on parliament for repeal of the stamp act.
but many of the members could not understand why 7 5 million britons had to pay heavy taxes to protect the colonies whereas some 2 million colonists refused to pay for only one third of the cost of their own defense.
after a stormy debate parliament in 1766 grudgingly repealed the stamp act.
grateful residents of new york erected a leaden statue to king george iii.
but american rejoicing was premature.
having withdrawn chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 the townshend tea tax and the boston massacre public punishment for the excise man 1774 this popular rendering of the punishment of commissioner of customs john malcomb shows him tarred and feathered and forcibly paid with great quantities of tea.
from the liberty tree in the background dangles the threat of hanging all for attempting to collect duties in boston.
the stamp act parliament in virtually the same breath provocatively passed the declaratory act reaf rming parliaments right to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever the british government thereby drew its line in the sand.
it de ned the constitutional principle it would not yield absolute and unqualied sovereignty over its north american colonies.
the colonists had already drawn their own battle line by making it clear that they wanted a mea sure of sovereignty of their own and would undertake drastic action to secure it.
the stage was set for a continuing confrontation.
within a few years that statue of king george would be melted into thousands of bullets to be red at his troops.
control of the british ministry was now seized by the gifted but erratic charles champagne charley townshend a man who could deliver brilliant speeches in parliament even while drunk.
rashly promising to pluck feathers from the colonial goose with a minimum of squawking he persuaded parliament in 1767 to pass the townshend acts.
the most important of these new regulations was a light import duty on glass white lead paper paint and tea.
townshend seizing on a dubious distinction between internal and external taxes made this tax unlike the stamp tax an indirect customs duty payable at american ports.
but to the increasingly restless colonists this was a phantom distinction.
for them the real difculty remained taxes in any form without representation.
flushed with their recent victory over the stamp tax the colonists were in a rebellious mood.
the impost on tea was especially irksome for an estimated 1 million people drank the refreshing brew twice a day.
the new townshend revenues worse yet were to be earmarked to pay the salaries of the royal governors and judges in america.
from the standpoint of efcient administration by london this was a reform long overdue.
but the ultrasuspicious americans who had beaten the royal governors into line by controlling the purse regarded townshends tax as another attempt to enchain them.
their worst fears took on greater reality when the london government after passing the townshend taxes suspended the legislature of new york in 1767 for failure to comply with the quartering act.
nonimportation agreements previously potent were quickly revived against the townshend acts.
but they proved less effective than those devised against giving new meaning to the proverbial tempest in a teapot a group of 126 boston women signed an agreement or subscription list that announced we the daughters of those patriots who have and now do appear for the public interest.
do with pleasure engage with them in denying ourselves the drinking of foreign tea in hopes to frustrate a plan that tends to deprive the whole community of.
all that is valuable in life.
the boston massacre two views of the boston massacre 1770 and 1856 both of these prints of the boston massacre were art as well as propaganda.
paul reveres engraving left began circulating within three weeks of the event in march 1770 depicting not a clash of brawlers but armed soldiers taking aim at peaceful citizens.
absent also was any evidence of the mulatto ringleader crispus attucks.
revere wanted his print to convince viewers of the indisputable justice of the colonists cause.
by the mid 1850s when the chromolithograph right circulated it served a new political purpose.
in the era of the abolitionist movement freedman crispus attucks held center place in the print which portrayed his death as an american martyr in the revolutionary struggle for freedom.
the stamp act.
the colonists again enjoying prosperity took the new tax less seriously than might have been expected largely because it was light and indirect.
they found moreover that they could secure smuggled tea at a cheap price and consequently smugglers increased their activities especially in massachusetts.
british ofcials faced with a breakdown of law and order landed two regiments of troops in boston in 1768.
many of the soldiers were drunken and profane characters.
liberty loving colonists resenting the presence of the red coated rufans taunted the bloody backs unmercifully.
a clash was inevitable.
on the evening of march 5 1770 a crowd of some sixty townspeople began taunting and throwing snowballs at a squad of ten redcoats.
the bostonians were still angry over the death of an eleven year old boy shot ten days earlier during a protest against a merchant who had deed the colonial boycott of british goods.
acting apparently without orders but ner vous and provoked by the jeering crowd the troops opened re and killed or wounded eleven citizens an event that became known as the boston massacre.
one of the rst to die was crispus attucks described by contemporaries as a powerfully built runaway mulatto and a leader of the mob.
both sides were in some degree to blame and in the subsequent trial in which future president john adams served as defense attorney for the soldiers only two of the redcoats were found guilty of manslaughter.
the soldiers were released after being branded on the hand.
the seditious committees of correspondence by 1770 king george iii then only thirty two years old was strenuously attempting to assert the power of the british monarchy.
he was a good man in his private morals but he proved to be a bad ruler.
earnest industrious stubborn and lustful for power he surrounded himself with cooperative yes men notably his corpulent prime minister lord north.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 samuel adams 1722 1803 a second cousin of john adams he contributed a potent pen and tongue to the american revolution as a political agitator and organizer of rebellion.
he was the leading spirit in hosting the boston tea party.
a failure in the brewing business he was sent by massachusetts to the first continental congress of 1774.
he signed the declaration of independence and served in congress until 1781.
the ill timed townshend acts had failed to produce revenue though they did produce near rebellion.
net proceeds from the tax in one year were a paltry 295 while in that same year britains military costs in the colonies had mounted to 170 000.
nonimportation agreements though feebly enforced were pinching british manufacturers.
the government of lord north bowing to various pressures nally persuaded parliament to repeal the townshend revenue duties.
but the three pence toll on tea the tax the colonists found most offensive was retained to keep alive the principle of parliaments right to tax the colonies.
flames of discontent in america continued to be fanned by numerous incidents including the redoubled efforts of the british ofcials to enforce the nav igation laws.
resistance was further kindled by a master propagandist and engineer of rebellion samuel portrait traditionally said to be that of abigail adams 1744 1818 the wife of revolutionary war leader and future president john adams she was a prominent patriot in her own right.
she was also among the rst americans to see however faintly the implications of revolutionary ideas for changing the status of women.
adams of boston a cousin of john adams.
unimpressive in appearance his hands trembled he lived and breathed only for politics.
his friends had to buy him a presentable suit of clothes when he left massachusetts on intercolonial business.
zealous tenacious and courageous he was ultrasensitive to infractions of colonial rights.
cherishing a deep faith in the common people he appealed effectively to what was called his trained mob samuel adamss signal contribution was to organize in massachusetts the local committees of correspondence.
after he had formed the rst one in boston during 1772 some eighty towns in the colony speedily set up similar orga ni zations.
their chief function was to spread the spirit of resistance by exchanging letters and thus keep alive opposition to british policy.
one critic referred to the committees as the foulest subtlest and most venomous serpent ever issued from the egg of sedition uniting for rebellion intercolonial committees of correspondence were the next logical step.
virginia led the way in 1773 by creating such a body as a standing committee of the house of burgesses.
within a short time every colony had established a central committee through which it could exchange ideas and information with other colonies.
these intercolonial groups were supremely signicant in stimulating and disseminating sentiment in favor of united action.
they evolved directly into the rst american congresses.
tea brewing in boston thus far that is by 1773 nothing had happened to make rebellion inevitable.
nonimportation was weakening.
increasing numbers of colonists were reluctantly paying the tea tax because the legal tea was now cheaper than the smuggled tea even cheaper than tea in eng land.
a new ogre entered the picture in 1773.
the powerful british east india company overburdened with 17 million pounds of unsold tea was facing bankruptcy.
if it collapsed the london government would lose heavily in tax revenue.
the ministry therefore decided to assist the company by awarding it a complete monopoly of the american tea business.
the giant corporation would now be able to sell the coveted leaves more cheaply than ever before even with the three pence tax tacked on.
but many american tea drinkers rather than rejoicing at the lower prices cried foul.
they saw this british move as a shabby attempt to trick the americans with the bait of cheaper tea into swallowing the principle of the detested tax.
for the determined americans principle remained far more important than price.
if the british ofcials insisted on the letter of the law violence would certainly result.
fatefully the british colonial authorities decided to enforce the law.
once more the colonists rose up in wrath to defy it.
not a single one of the several thousand chests of tea shipped by the east india company ever reached the hands of the consignees.
in philadelphia and new york mass demonstrations forced the tea bearing ships to return to eng land with their cargo holds still full.
at annapolis marylanders burned both cargo and vessel while proclaiming liberty and independence or death in pursuit of it in charleston south carolina ofcials seized the tea for nonpayment of duties after intimidated local merchants refused to accept delivery.
ironically the conscated charleston tea was later auctioned to raise money for the revolutionary army.
only in boston did a british ofcial stubbornly refuse to be cowed.
massachusetts governor thomas hutchinson had already felt the fury of the mob when stamp act protesters had destroyed his home in 1765.
this time he was determined not to budge.
ironically hutchinson agreed that the tea tax was unjust but he believed even more strongly that the colonists had no right to out the law.
hutchinson infuriated bostons radicals when he ordered the tea ships not to clear boston harbor until they had unloaded their cargoes.
sentiment against him was further inamed when hutchinsons enemies published one of his private letters in which he declared that an abridgement of what are called eng lish liberties was necessary for the preservation of law and order in the colonies apparently con rming the darkest conspiracy theories of the american radicals.
on december 16 1773 roughly a hundred bostonians loosely disguised as indians boarded the docked ships smashed open 342 chests of tea and dumped their contents into the atlantic an action that came to be known as the boston tea party.
a crowd of several hundred watched approvingly from the shore as boston harbor became a vast teapot.
donning indian disguise provided protesters with a threatening image and a convenient way of avoiding detection.
tea was the perfect symbol to rally around as almost every colonist rich or poor consumed this imported caffeinated beverage.
ann hulton d.
a loyalist described colonial political divisions and her hopes and fears for her own future in a letter she sent to a friend in england in 1774 those who are well disposed towards government are termed tories.
they daily increase have made some efforts to take the power out of the hands of the patriots but they are intimidated overpowered by numbers.
however i dont despair of seeing peace tranquility in america tho they talk very high furious at present.
they are all preparing their arms ammunition say if any of the leaders are seized they will make reprisals on the friends of government.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 the boston tea party december 16 1773 crying boston harbor a teapot this night sons of liberty disguised as indians hurled chests of tea into the sea to protest the tax on tea and to make sure that its cheap price did not prove an invincible temptation to the people.
reactions varied.
all up and down the eastern seaboard sympathetic colonists applauded.
referring to tea as a badge of slavery they burned the hated leaves in solidarity with boston.
but conser vatives complained that the destruction of private property violated the law and threatened anarchy and the breakdown of civil decorum.
hutchinson chastened and disgusted with the colonies retreated to britain never to return.
the british authorities meanwhile saw little alternative to whipping the upstart colonists into shape.
the granting of some mea sure of home rule to the americans might at this stage still have prevented rebellion but few british politicians were willing to swallow their pride and take the high road.
the perilous path they chose instead led only to reprisals bitterness and escalating con ict.
parliament passes the intolerable acts an irate parliament responded speedily to the boston tea party with mea sures that brewed a revolution.
by huge majorities in 1774 it passed a series of acts designed to chastise boston in particular massachusetts in general.
they were branded in america as the massacre of american liberty most drastic of all was the boston port act.
it closed the tea stained harbor until damages were paid and order could be ensured.
by other intolerable acts as they were called in america many of the chartered rights of colonial massachusetts were swept away.
re strictions were likewise placed on the precious town meetings.
contrary to previous practice enforcing ofcials who killed colonists in the line of duty could now be sent to britain for trial.
there suspicious americans assumed they would be likely to get off scotfree.
particularly intolerable to bostonians was a new quartering act which gave local authorities the power to lodge british soldiers anywhere even in private homes.
by a fateful coincidence the intolerable acts were accompanied in 1774 by the quebec act.
passed at the same time it was erroneously regarded in eng lishspeaking america as part of the british reaction to the turbulence in boston.
actually the quebec act was a good law in bad company.
for many years the british government had debated how it should administer the sixty thousand or so conquered french subjects in canada and it had nally framed this farsighted and statesmanlike mea sure.
the french were guaranteed their catholic religion.
they were also permitted to retain many of their old customs and institutions which did not include a representative assembly or trial by jury in civil cases.
in addition the old boundaries of the province of qubec were now extended southward all the way to the ohio river.
the quebec act from the viewpoint of the french canadians was a shrewd and conciliatory mea sure.
if britain had only shown as much foresight in dealing with its eng lish speaking colonies it might not have lost them.
but from the viewpoint of the american colonists as a whole the quebec act was especially noxious.
all the eve of rebellion 100w 90w 80w 70w 60w 60n 50w hu d s o n bay n n hudsons bay company nova scotia qubec me.
montral m iss n y ip iss pi m penn.
n j r ouri iss r va r.
map 7 1 qubec before and after 1774 young alexander hamilton voiced the fears of many colonists when he warned that the quebec act of 1774 would introduce priestly tyranny into canada making that country another spain or portugal.
does not your blood run cold he asked to think that an english parliament should pass an act for the establishment of arbitrary power and popery in such a country louisiana n h mass.
io oh r i conn n atlantic ocean del.
qubec before 1774 n c qubec after 1774 as envisioned by the quebec act s c ga west florida proclamation line of 1763 30n britains thirteen colonies indian reserve gu l f o f m e x i c o east florida other british territory spanish territory interactive map the other intolerable acts slapped directly at massachusetts but this one had a much wider range.
by sustaining unrepresentative assemblies and denials of jury trials it seemed to set a dangerous precedent in america.
it alarmed land speculators who were distressed to see the huge trans allegheny area snatched from their grasp see map 7 1.
it aroused anti catholics who were shocked by the extension of roman catholic jurisdiction southward into a huge region that had once been earmarked for protestantism a region about as large as the thirteen original colonies.
one angry protestant cried that there ought to be a jubilee in hell over this enormous gain for popery bloodshed american dissenters responded sympathetically to the plight of massachusetts.
it had put itself in the wrong by the violent destruction of the tea cargoes now britain had put itself in the wrong by brutal punishment that seemed far too cruel for the crime.
flags were own at half mast throughout the colonies on the day that the boston port act went into effect and sister colonies rallied to send food to the stricken city.
rice was shipped even from faraway south carolina.
most memorable of the responses to the intolerable acts was the summoning of the first continental congress in 1774.
it was to meet in philadelphia to consider ways of redressing colonial grievances.
twelve of the thirteen colonies with georgia alone missing sent fty ve well respected men among them samuel adams john adams george washington and patrick henry.
intercolonial frictions were partially melted away by social activity after working hours in fty four days george washington dined at his own lodgings only nine times.
the first continental congress deliberated for seven weeks from september 5 to october 26 1774.
it was not a legislative but a consultative body a convention rather than a congress.
john adams played a stellar role.
eloquently swaying his colleagues to a chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 a view of the town of concord ca.
1775 redcoats here drill on the concord green near where colonial militiamen would soon repel their advance on stores of rebel gunpowder.
revolutionary course he helped defeat by the narrowest of margins a proposal by the moderates for a species of american home rule under british direction.
after prolonged argument the congress drew up several dignied papers.
these included a ringing declaration of rights as well as solemn appeals to other british american colonies to the king and to the british people.
the most signicant action of the congress was the creation of the association.
unlike previous nonimportation agreements the association called for a complete boycott of british goods nonimportation nonexportation and nonconsumption.
yet it is important to note that the delegates were not yet calling for independence.
they sought merely to repeal the offensive legislation and return to the happy days before parliamentary taxation.
if colonial grievances were redressed well and good if not the congress was to meet again in may 1775.
resistance had not yet ripened into open rebellion.
but the fatal drift toward war continued.
parliament rejected the congresss petitions.
in america chickens squawked and tar kettles bubbled as violators of the association were tarred and feathered.
muskets were gathered men began to drill openly and a clash seemed imminent.
in april 1775 the british commander in boston sent a detachment of troops to nearby lexington and concord.
they were to seize stores of colonial gunpowder and also to bag the rebel ringleaders samuel adams and john hancock.
at lexington the colonial minute men refused to disperse rapidly enough and shots were red that killed eight americans and wounded several more.
the affair was more the lexington massacre than a battle.
the redcoats pushed on to concord whence they were forced to retreat by the rough and ready americans whom emerson immortalized by the rude bridge that arched the ood their ag to aprils breeze unfurled here once the embattled farmers stood and red the shot heard round the world.
the bewildered british ghting off murderous re from militiamen crouched behind thick stone walls ralph waldo emerson concord hymn copyright 2010 cengage learning inc all rights reserved.
may not be copied scanned or duplicated in whole or in part.
the military balance sheet nally regained the sanctuary of boston.
licking their wounds they could count about three hundred casualties including some seventy killed.
britain now had a war on its hands.
imperial strength and weakness aroused americans had brashly rebelled against a mighty empire see thinking globally imperial rivalry and colonial revolt pp.
the population odds were about three to one against the rebels some 7 5 million britons to 2 5 million colonists.
the odds in monetary wealth and naval power overwhelmingly favored the mother country.
britain then boasted a professional army of some fty thousand men as compared with the numerous but wretchedly trained american militia.
george iii in addition had the treasury to hire foreign soldiers and some thirty thousand germans so called hessians were ultimately employed.
the british enrolled about fty thousand american loyalists and enlisted the services of many indians who though unreliable fairweather ghters inamed long stretches of the frontier.
one british ofcer boasted that the war would offer no problems that could not be solved by an experienced sheep herder the great conservative political theorist and champion of the american cause edmund burke made a stirring speech in britains house of commons in 1775 pleading in vain for reconciliation with the colonies as long as you have the wisdom to keep the sovereign authority of this country as the sanctuary of liberty.
they will turn their faces towards you.
slavery they can have anywhere freedom they can have from none but you.
this is the commodity of price of which you have the monopoly.
this is the true act of navigation which binds to you the commerce of the colonies and through them secures to you the wealth of the world.
deny them this participation of freedom and you break that sole bond which originally made and must still preserve the unity of the empire.
yet britain was weaker than it seemed at rst glance.
oppressed ireland was a smoking volcano and british troops had to be detached to watch it.
france bitter from its recent defeat was awaiting an opportunity to stab britain in the back.
the london government was confused and inept.
there was no william pitt organizer of victory only the stubborn george iii and his pliant tory prime minister lord north.
many earnest and god fearing britons had no desire whatever to kill their american cousins.
william pitt withdrew a son from the army rather than see him thrust his sword into fellow anglo saxons struggling for liberty.
the eng lish whig factions opposed to lord norths tory wing openly cheered american victories at least at the outset.
aside from trying to embarrass the tories politically many whigs believed that the battle for british freedom was being fought in america.
if george iii triumphed his rule at home might become tyrannical.
this outspoken sympathy in britain though plainly a minority voice greatly encouraged the americans.
if they continued their resistance long enough the whigs might come into power and deal generously with them.
britains army in america had to operate under endless difculties.
the generals were second rate the soldiers though on the whole capable were brutally treated.
there was one extreme case of eight hundred lashes on the bare back for striking an ofcer.
provisions were often scarce rancid and wormy.
on one occasion a supply of biscuits captured some fteen years earlier from the french was softened by dropping cannonballs on them.
other handicaps loomed.
the redcoats had to conquer the americans restoring the pre 1763 status quo would be a victory for the colonists.
britain was operating some 3 000 miles from its home base and distance added greatly to the delays and uncertainties arising from storms and other mishaps.
military orders were issued in london that when received months later would not t the changing situation.
americas geographical expanse was enormous roughly 1 000 by 600 miles.
the united colonies had no urban nerve center like frances paris whose capture would cripple the country as a whole.
british armies took every city of any size yet like a boxer punching a feather pillow they made little more than a dent in the entire country.
the americans wisely traded space for time.
benjamin franklin calculated that during the prolonged campaign in which the redcoats captured bunker hill and killed some 150 patriots about 60 000 american babies were born.
thinking globally imperial rivalry and colonial revolt i n 1765 tax revolts exploded almost simultaneously in both britains and spains new world empires.
in boston the hated stamp act sparked riots and inspired a campaign to boycott british goods.
at virtually the same moment in quito in present day ecuador a two mile high spanish colonial city nearly twice the size of boston surging crowds ransacked the local tax collectors ofce.
among other demands they insisted that pure spaniards leave quito unless they had married into the native creole new world born white or indigenous indian communities.
spanish ofcials restored order by force of arms but antitax agitation continued to smolder every where in spanish america.
there is no american a quito lawyer remarked who does not reject any novelty whatsoever in the management of taxation a sentiment that resonated as strongly in philadelphia as in mexico city.
things soon got worse.
madrids new world imperial authority was shaken to the core in 1781 when another tax revolt erupted in new granada present day colombia.
by that time the british colonials war of independence in north america was in its fth year.
intensifying imperial rivalry fueled events on both the american continents.
until the mid seventeenth century the three great old world powers england france and spain had largely conned their competition to struggles over boundaries and religious afliation on the european continent.
but after the treaty of westphalia in 1648 brought a truce to the wars of religion that had racked europe for decades the thirty years war great power competition began to shift overseas.
the faraway new world imperial outposts of britain spain and france now became pawns in a global struggle for mastery in europe.
the seven years war 1756 1763 ushered in a still more ferocious cycle of imperial conict.
britain succeeded in expelling france from north america but victory brought the burdens of managing vast new territories as well as the prospect of fresh confrontations with native americans threatened by westward expansion.
spain frances erstwhile ally grew increasingly wary of the newly invigorated and ambitious british empire which threatened spanish interests at sea and along the sketchy borderlands that separated the two powers imperial domains.
as the risks and costs of imperial competition soared london and madrid adopted the same strategy pressure the colonies to pay their share.
new taxes and customs duties followed along with more energetic efforts to collect them.
to imperial ofcials like britains prime minister george grenville or madrids visitor general to new spain jos glvez such tupac amaru ii a peruvian national hero tupac amaru ii is memorialized to this day with his portrait on the nations currency.
couple with child by miguel cabera this eighteenthcentury portrait of a mexican family illustrates the common intermarriage of europeans and indians in the spanish new world.
the ethnic complexity of spanish america kept colonists there from uniting against imperial authorities as successfully as their northern neighbors.
reforms seemed not only reasonable but in tune with enlightenment ideas about efcient administration.
to colonial subjects these new policies were an anathema a agrant offense to their fundamental rights as colonial subjects.
but why did revolts against these new imperial policies kindle a full edged war for independence in the british colonies but not in spanish america at least not until na poleons invasion of spain in 1808 hurled the spanish empire into tumult.
the role of rich and powerful allies provides part of the answer.
the north american rebels could count on britains french and spanish enemies to tender nancial as well as military support.
spanish american anticolonial rebels had no such allies in london or paris which saw little prospect of unraveling the spanish empire and were already fully engaged on opposite sides of the american war of independence.
the demographic composition of the two empires furnishes another part of the answer.
spanish america was badly riven by sharp ethnic and racial divisions.
the spanish court had long encouraged the relatively few spaniards who settled in the new world to intermarry with the local inhabitants.
by the eighteenth century the spanish colonies had become a complex tension ridden mosaic of european creole mestizo and indian peoples and cultures.
when in 1780 the self proclaimed incan royal descendant tupac amaru ii rebelled against spanish rule he at rst attracted creoles but they bolted as the movement radicalized and his rebellion was soon cruelly crushed.
to be sure the british north american colonists had their ethnic differences too but many fewer.
they had nurtured a culture of exclusion rejecting intermarriage with indians and blacks and banishing indians to the wilderness.
and they faced no indian threat on the scale of tupac amaru iis uprising.
inherited political traditions also played different roles.
british settlers enjoyed long standing institutions of political representation.
they had brought with them from the mother country devotion to individual rights and the privilege of legal assembly that when revolution came gave their cause the kind of legitimacy that comes from timehonored habits.
it was precisely the violation of those rights and privileges that taxation without representation seemed to threaten.
spanish colonists had representative institutions too but in spains much more autocratic imperial scheme local assemblies lacked the authority autonomy and legitimacy they had come to enjoy in the british domains.
north american colonists asserted their right to self government on the basis of their historic rights as british subjects a claim that was much more difcult to make in the absolutist monarchy of the spanish empire.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 american pluses and minuses the revolutionaries were blessed with outstanding leadership.
george washington was a giant among men benjamin franklin was a master among diplomats.
open foreign aid theoretically possible from the start eventually came from france.
numerous european ofcers many of them unemployed and impoverished volunteered their swords for pay.
in a class by himself was a wealthy young french nobleman the marquis de lafayette.
fleeing from boredom loving glory and ultimately liberty the french gamecock was made a major general in the colonial army at age nineteen.
his commission was largely a recognition of his family inuence and political connections but the ser vices of this teenage general in securing further aid from france were invaluable.
other conditions aided the americans.
they were ghting defensively with the odds all things considered favoring the defender.
in agriculture the colonies were mainly self sustaining like a kind of robinson crusoes island.
the americans also enjoyed the moral advantage that came from belief in a just cause.
the historical odds were not impossible.
other peoples had triumphed in the face of greater obstacles greeks against persians swiss against austrians dutch against spaniards.
yet the american rebels were badly orga nized for war.
from the earliest days they had been almost fatally lacking in unity and the new nation lurched forward uncertainly like an uncoordinated centipede.
even the continental congress which directed the con ict was hardly more than a debating society and it grew feebler as the struggle dragged on.
their congress now is quite disjointd gibed an eng lish satirist since gibbits gallows are for them appointed the disorga nized colonists fought almost the entire war before adopting a written constitution the articles of confederation in 1781.
general washingtons 1732 1799 disgust with his countrymen is reected in a diary entry for 1776 chimney corner patriots abound venality corruption prostitution of ofce for selsh ends abuse of trust perversion of funds from a national to a private use and speculations upon the necessities of the times pervade all interests.
gilbert du motier marquis de lafayette 1757 1834 by joseph boze 1790 this youthful french ofcer gave to america not only military service but some 200 000 of his private funds.
he returned to france after the american revolution to play a conspicuous role in the french revolution.
jealousy every where raised its hideous head.
individual states proudly regarding themselves as sovereign resented the attempts of congress to exercise its imsy powers.
sectional jealousy boiled up over the appointment of military leaders some distrustful new eng landers almost preferred british ofcers to americans from other sections.
economic difculties were nearly insuperable.
metallic money had already been heavily drained away.
a cautious continental congress unwilling to raise anew the explosive issue of taxation was forced to print continental paper money in great amounts.
as this currency poured from the presses it depreciated until the expression not worth a continental became current.
one barber contemptuously papered his shop with the near worthless dollars.
the confusion proliferated when the individual states were compelled to issue depreciated paper money of their own.
the rebel army ination of the currency inevitably skyrocketed prices.
families of the soldiers at the ghting front were hard hit and hundreds of anxious husbands and fathers deserted.
debtors easily acquired handfuls of the quasi worthless money and gleefully paid their debts without mercy sometimes with the bayonets of the authorities to back them up.
a thin line of heroes basic military supplies in the colonies were dangerously scanty.
while many families and towns did own rearms widespread militia ser vice meant men needed weapons for training the colonists had long relied heavily on britain for troops armaments and military subsidies during expensive wars against indians france and spain.
the rebels were caught in an unavoidable trap at the very moment that the supply of british funds and war materiel evaporated the cost of home defense mounted.
sufcient stores of gunpowder cannon and other armaments let alone ships to transport them could not be found.
among the reasons for the eventual alliance with france was the need for a reliable source of essential military supplies.
other shortages bedeviled the rebels.
at valley forge pennsylvania shivering american soldiers went without bread for three successive days in the cruel winter of 1777 1778.
in one southern campaign some men fainted for lack of food.
manufactured goods also were generally in short supply in agricultural america and clothing and shoes were appallingly scarce.
the path of the patriot ghting men was often marked by bloody snow.
at frigid valley forge during one anxious period twenty eight hundred men were barefooted or nearly naked.
woolens were desperately needed against the wintry blasts and in general the only real uniform of the colonial army was uniform raggedness.
during a grand parade at valley forge some of the ofcers appeared wrapped in woolen bedcovers.
one rhode island unit was known as the ragged lousy naked regiment american militiamen were numerous but also highly unreliable.
able bodied american males perhaps several hundred thousand of them had received rudimentary training and many of these recruits served for short terms in the rebel armies.
but poorly trained plowboys could not stand up in the open eld against professional british troops advancing with bare bayonets.
many of these undisciplined warriors would in the words of washington y from their own shadows the flutist by brazilla lew this portrait is believed to be that of an african american fer in the revolutionary war.
lew was a veteran of the seven years war who had marched to ticonderoga and served in the army a full seven years as frontline soldier fer and drummer.
in 1775 at the age of thirtytwo he fought at bunker hill as an enlistee in the 27th massachusetts regiment.
a resident of chelmsford massachusetts he was said to have taught all twelve of his children to play musical instruments.
a few thousand regulars perhaps seven or eight thousand at the wars end were nally whipped into shape by stern drillmasters.
notable among them was an orga ni zational genius the salty german baron von steuben.
he spoke no eng lish when he reached america but he soon taught his men that bayonets were not for broiling beefsteaks over open res.
as they gained experience these soldiers of the continental line more than held their own against crack british troops.
blacks also fought and died for the american cause.
although many states initially barred them from militia ser vice by wars end more than ve thousand blacks chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 enslaved blacks hoped that the revolutionary crisis would make it possible for them to secure their own liberty.
on the eve of the war in south carolina merchant josiah smith jr noted such a rumor among the slaves freedom is their common talk throughout the province and has occasioned impertinent behavior in many of them insomuch that our provincial congress now sitting hath voted the immediate raising of two thousand men horse and food to keep those mistaken creatures in awe.
despite such repressive measures slave uprisings continued to plague the southern colonies through 1775 and 1776 had enlisted in the american armed forces.
the largest contingents came from the northern states with substantial numbers of free blacks.
blacks fought at trenton brandywine saratoga and other important battles.
some including prince whipple later immortalized in emanuel leutzes famous painting washington crossing the delaware see p 158 became military heroes.
others served as cooks guides spies drivers and road builders.
african americans also served on the british side.
in november 1775 lord dunmore royal governor of virginia issued a proclamation promising freedom for any enslaved black in virginia who joined the british army.
news of dunmores decree traveled swiftly.
virginia and maryland tightened slave patrols but within one month three hundred slaves had joined what came to be called lord dunmores ethiopian regiment in time thousands of blacks ed plantations for british promises of emancipation.
when one of james madisons slaves was caught trying to escape to the british lines madison refused to punish him for coveting that liberty that white americans proclaimed the right worthy pursuit of every human being at wars end the british kept their word to some at least and evacuated as many as fourteen thousand black loyalists to nova scotia jamaica and eng land.
morale in the revolutionary army was badly undermined by american proteers.
putting prots before patriotism they sold to the british because the invader could pay in gold.
speculators forced prices sky high and some bostonians made prots of 50 to 200 percent on army garb while the american army was freezing at valley forge.
washington never had as many as twenty thousand effective troops in one place at one time despite bounties of land and other inducements.
yet if the rebels had thrown themselves into the struggle with zeal they could easily have raised many times that number.
the brutal truth is that only a select minority of the american colonists attached themselves to the cause of independence with a spirit of seless devotion.
these were the dedicated souls who bore the burden of battle and the risks of defeat.
seldom have so few done so much for so many.
chronology first navigation laws to control colonial commerce board of trade assumes governance of colonies british troops occupy boston boston massacre all townshend acts except tea tax repealed seven years war french and indian war ends committees of correspondence formed sugar act quartering act stamp act stamp act congress british east india company granted tea monopoly governor hutchinsons actions provoke boston tea party intolerable acts quebec act first continental congress the association boycotts british goods battles of lexington and concord declaratory act townshend acts new york legislature suspended by parliament to learn more key terms republicanism 126 radical whigs 127 mercantilism 127 sugar act 129 quartering act 129 stamp tax 129 admiralty courts 129 stamp act congress 130 nonimportation agreements 131 sons of liberty 131 daughters of liberty 131 declaratory act 132 people to know townshend acts 132 boston massacre 133 committees of correspondence 134 boston tea party 135 intolerable acts 136 quebec act 136 first continental congress 137 the association 138 lexington and concord battles of 138 valley forge 140 john hancock george grenville charles champagne charley townshend crispus attucks george iii lord north samuel adams thomas hutchinson marquis de lafayette baron von steuben lord dunmore to learn more r b bernstein thomas jefferson 2003 timothy h breen the marketplace of revolution how consumer politics shaped american independence 2004 david hackett fischer paul reveres ride 1994 sylvia r frey water from the rock black resistance in a revolutionary age 1991 pauline maier from resistance to revolution colonial radicals and the development of american opposition to britain 1765 1776 1972 david mccullough john adams 2001 robert middlekauff the glorious cause the american revolution 1763 1789 1982 edmund s morgan and helen m morgan the stamp act crisis 1953 joseph c morton the american revolution 2003 ray raphael a peoples history of the american revolution 2001 richard ryerson the revolution is now begun the radical committees of philadelphia 1765 1776 1978 walter stahr john jay founding father 2005 alfred f young the shoemaker and the tea party 1999 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 these are the times that try mens souls.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the ser vice of their country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
thomas paine december 1776 b loodshed at lexington and concord in april of 1775 was a clarion call to arms.
about twenty thousand musket bearing minute men swarmed around boston there to coop up the outnumbered british.
the second continental congress met in philadelphia the next month on may 10 1775 and this time the full slate of thirteen colonies was represented.
the conser vative element in congress was still strong despite the shooting in massachusetts.
there was still no wellde ned sentiment for independence merely a desire to continue ghting in the hope that the king and parliament would consent to a redress of grievances.
congress hopefully drafted new appeals to the british people and king appeals that were spurned.
anticipating a possible rebuff the delegates also adopted mea sures to raise money and to create an army and a navy.
the british and the americans now teetered on the brink of all out warfare.
congress drafts george washington perhaps the most important single action of the congress was to select george washington one of its members already in an ofcers uniform to head the hastily improvised army besieging boston.
this choice was made with considerable misgivings.
the tall powerfully built dignied virginia planter then forty three had never risen above the rank of a colonel in the militia.
his largest command had numbered only twelve hundred men and that had been some twenty years earlier.
falling short of true military genius washington would actually lose more pitched battles than he won.
but the distinguished virginian was gifted with outstanding powers of leadership and immense strength of character.
he radiated patience courage self discipline this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website early battles and a sense of justice.
he was a great moral force rather than a great military mind a symbol and a rallying point.
people instinctively trusted him they sensed that when he put himself at the head of a cause he was prepared if necessary to go down with the ship.
he insisted on serving without pay though he kept a careful expense account amounting to more than 100 000.
later he sternly reprimanded his steward at mount vernon for providing the enemy under duress with supplies.
he would have preferred instead to see the enemy put the torch to his mansion.
the continental congress though dimly perceiving washingtons qualities of leadership chose more wisely than it knew.
his selection in truth was largely political.
americans in other sections already jealous were beginning to distrust the large new eng land army being collected around boston.
prudence suggested a commander from virginia the largest and most populous of the colonies.
as a man of wealth both by inheritance and by marriage washington could not be accused of being a fortune seeker.
as an aristocrat he could be counted on by his peers to check the excesses of the masses bunker hill and hessian hirelings the clash of arms continued on a strangely contradictory basis.
on the one hand the americans were emphatically af rming their loyalty to the king and earnestly voicing their desire to patch up difculties.
on the other hand they were raising armies and shooting down his majestys soldiers.
this curious war of inconsistency was fought for fourteen long months from april 1775 to july 1776 before the fateful plunge into independence was taken.
gradually the tempo of warfare increased.
in may 1775 a tiny american force under ethan allen and benedict arnold surprised and captured the british garrisons at ticonderoga and crown point on the scenic lakes of upper new york.
a priceless store of gunpowder and artillery for the siege of boston was thus secured.
in june 1775 the colonists seized a hill now known as bunker hill actually breeds hill from which they menaced the enemy in boston.
the british instead of cutting off the retreat of their foes by anking them blundered bloodily when they launched a frontal attack with three thousand men.
sharpshooting americans numbering fteen hundred and strongly entrenched mowed down the advancing redcoats with frightful washington at verplancks point new york 1782 reviewing the french troops after the victory at yorktown by john trumbull 1790 this noted american artist accentuated washingtons already imposing height six feet two inches by showing him towering over his horse.
washington so appreciated this portrait of himself that he hung it in the dining room of his home at mount vernon virginia.
but the colonists scanty store of gunpowder nally gave out and they were forced to abandon the hill in disorder.
with two more such victories remarked the french foreign minister the british would have no army left in america.
even at this late date in july 1775 the continental congress adopted the olive branch petition professing american loyalty to the crown and begging the king to prevent further hostilities.
but following bunker hill king george iii slammed the door on all hope of reconciliation.
in august 1775 he formally proclaimed the colonies in rebellion the skirmishes were now outand out treason a hanging crime.
the next month he widened the chasm when he sealed arrangements for.
chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 battle of bunker hill june 17 1775 this british engraving conveys the vulnerability of the british regulars to attacks by the american militiamen.
although a defeat for the colonists the battle quickly proved a moral victory for the patriots.
outnumbered and outgunned they held their own against the british and suffered many fewer casualties.
hiring thousands of german troops to help crush his rebellious subjects.
six german princes involved in the transaction needed the money one reputedly had seventy four children george iii needed the men.
because most of these soldiers for hire came from the german principality of hesse the americans called all the european mercenaries hessians.
news of the hessian deal shocked the colonists.
the quarrel they felt was within the family.
why bring in outside mercenaries especially foreigners who had an exaggerated reputation for butchery.
hessian hirelings proved to be good soldiers in a mechanical sense but many of them were more interested in booty than in duty.
for good reason they were dubbed hessian ies seduced by american promises of land hundreds of them nally deserted and remained in america to become respected citizens.
the abortive conquest of canada the unsheathed sword continued to take its toll.
in october 1775 on the eve of a cruel winter the british burned falmouth portland maine.
in that same autumn the rebels daringly undertook a two pronged invasion of canada.
american leaders believed erroneously that the conquered french were explosively restive under the british yoke.
a successful assault on canada would add a fourteenth colony while depriving britain of a valuable base for striking at the colonies in revolt.
but this large scale attack involving some two thousand american troops contradicted the claim of the colonists that they were merely ghting defensively for a redress of grievances.
invasion northward was undisguised offensive warfare.
this bold stroke for canada narrowly missed success see map 8 1.
one invading column under the irish born general richard montgomery formerly of the british army pushed up the lake champlain route and captured montral.
he was joined at qubec by the bedraggled army of general benedict arnold whose men had been reduced to eating dogs and shoe leather during their grueling march through the maine woods.
an assault on qubec launched on the last day of 1775 was beaten off.
the able montgomery was killed the dashing arnold was wounded in one leg.
scattered remnants under his command retreated up the st lawrence river reversing the way montgomery had come.
french canadian leaders who had been generously treated by the british in the quebec act of 1774 showed no real desire to welcome the plundering anti catholic invaders.
bitter ghting persisted in the colonies though most americans continued to disclaim a desire for independence.
in january 1776 the british set re to the toward independence 200 km.
british victory st l l e r ge fort oswego bu mo l champlain arnolds naval battle oct 11 1776 n h manchester albany mass.
lexington april 19 1775 hudson r pennsylvania falmouth saratoga burgoyne surrenders oct 17 1777.
concord april 19 1775 new york conn fort washington nov 16 1776 washington dec 1776 cornwallis dec 1776 princeton jan 3 1777 trenton dec 26 1776 germantown oct 4 1777 newburyport bunker hill june 17 1775 boston siege 1775 1776 r i washingtons retreat 1776 long island aug 27 1776 40n valley forge brandywine sept 11 1777 monmouth court house june 28 1778 philadelphia wilmington md.
ph ia n j l ad el virginia at l a n t i c o c e a n n we to phi del.
70w ho map 8 1 revolution in the north 1775 1776 benedict arnolds troops were described as pretty young men when they sailed from massachusetts.
they were considerably less pretty on their arrival in qubec after eight weeks of struggling through wet and frigid forests often without food.
no one can imagine one of them wrote the sweetness of a roasted shot pouch ammunition bag to the famished appetite maine mass.
er oriskany aug 6 1777 fort stanwix aug 23 1777 montral crown point fort ticonderoga l george lake ontario r aw y1 nn st american victory nc er co fort re g om british forces nt e british north america canada yn ld american forces go no r qubec dec 1776 ar icut ect chesapeake bay interactive map virginia town of norfolk.
in march they were nally forced to evacuate boston taking with them the leading friends of the king.
evacuation day is still celebrated annually in boston.
in the south the rebellious colonists won two victories in 1776 one in february against some fteen hundred loyalists at moores creek bridge in north carolina and the other in june against an invading british eet at charleston harbor.
thomas paine preaches common sense why did americans continue to deny any intention of independence.
loyalty to the empire was deeply ingrained many americans continued to consider themselves part of a transatlantic community in which the chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 mother country of britain played a leading role colonial unity was poor and open rebellion was dangerous especially against a formidable britain.
irish rebels of that day were customarily hanged drawn and quartered.
american rebels might have fared no better.
as late as january 1776 ve months before independence was declared the kings health was being toasted by the ofcers of washingtons mess near boston.
god save the king had not yet been replaced by god save the congress gradually the americans were shocked into recognizing the necessity of separating from the crown.
their eyes were jolted open by harsh british acts like the burning of falmouth and norfolk and especially by the hiring of the hessians.
then in 1776 came the publication of common sense one of the most inuential pamphlets ever written.
its author was the radical thomas paine once an impoverished corset makers apprentice who had come over from britain a year earlier.
he began his incendiary tract with a treatise on the nature of government and eloquently anticipated thomas jeffersons declaration that the only lawful states were those that derive their just powers from the consent of the governed as for the king whom the americans professed to revere he was nothing but the royal brute of great britain common sense became a whirlwind best seller.
within a few months the astonishing total of 120 000 copies were sold.
in common sense thomas paine 1737 1809 argued for the superiority of a republic over a monarchy the nearer any government approaches to a republic the less business there is for a king.
it is somewhat difcult to nd a proper name for the government of england.
sir william meredith calls it a republic but in its present state it is unworthy of the name because the corrupt inuence of the crown by having all the places in its disposal hath so effectively swallowed up the power and eaten out the virtue of the house of commons the republican part of the constitution that the government of england is nearly as monarchical as that of france or spain.
thomas paine by auguste millire paine atly branded the shilly shallying of the colonists as contrary to common sense nowhere in the physical universe did the smaller heavenly body control the larger one.
so why should the tiny island of britain control the vast continent of america.
paines pen went a long way toward convincing the american colonists that their true cause was independence rather than reconciliation with britain not least because without independence they could not hope for foreign assistance.
paine could thus be said to have drafted the foundational document not only of american independence but of american foreign policy as well.
paine and the idea of republicanism paines passionate protest was as compelling as it was eloquent and radical even doubly radical.
it called not simply for independence but for the creation of a new kind of political society a republic where power owed from the people themselves not from a corrupt and jefferson s declaration despotic monarch.
in language laced with biblical imagery familiar to common folk he argued that all government ofcials governors senators and judges not just representatives in a house of commons should derive their authority from popular consent.
paine was hardly the rst person to champion a republican form of government.
political philosophers had advanced the idea since the days of classical greece and rome.
revived in the renaissance and in seventeenth century eng land republican ideals had uneasily survived within the british mixed government with its delicate balance of king nobility and commons.
republicanism particularly appealed to british politicians critical of excessive power in the hands of the king and his advisers.
their writings found a responsive audience among the american colonists who interpreted the vengeful royal acts of the previous decade as part of a monarchical conspiracy to strip them of their liberties as british subjects.
paines radical prescription for the colonies to reject monarchy and empire and embrace an independent republic fell on receptive ears.
the colonists experience with governance had prepared them well for paines summons to create a republic.
many settlers particularly new eng landers had practiced a kind of republicanism in their democratic town meetings and annual elections while the popularly elected committees of correspondence during 1774 and 1775 had demonstrated the feasibility of republican government.
the absence of a hereditary aristocracy and the relative equality of condition enjoyed by landowning farmers meshed well with the republican repudiation of a xed hierarchy of power.
most americans considered citizen virtue fundamental to any successful republican government.
because political power no longer rested with the central all powerful authority of the king individuals in a republic needed to sacrice their personal self interest to the public good.
the collective good of the people the french philosophe abb raynal 1713 1796 wrote in 1770 if any fortunate revolution should take place in the world it will begin in america.
it will become the asylum of our people who have been oppressed by political establishments or driven away by war.
mattered more than the private rights and interests of individuals.
paine inspired his contemporaries to view america as fertile ground for the cultivation of such civic virtue.
yet not all patriots agreed with paines ultrademocratic approach to republicanism.
some favored a republic ruled by a natural aristocracy of talent.
republicanism for them meant an end to hereditary aristocracy but not an end to all social hierarchy.
these more conser vative republicans feared that the fervor for liberty would overwhelm the stability of the social order.
they watched with trepidation as the lower orders of society poorer farmers tenants and laboring classes in towns and cities seemed to embrace a kind of runaway republicanism that amounted to radical leveling the contest to de ne the nature of american republicanism would noisily continue for at least the next hundred years.
jeffersons explanation of independence members of the philadelphia congress instructed by their respective colonies gradually edged toward a clean break.
on june 7 1776 ery richard henry lee of virginia moved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states after considerable debate the motion was adopted nearly a month later on july 2 1776.
the passing of lees resolution was the formal declaration of independence by the american colonies and technically this was all that was needed to cut the british tie.
john adams wrote condently that ever thereafter july 2 would be celebrated annually with reworks.
but something more was required.
an epochal rupture of this kind called for some formal explanation.
an inspirational appeal was also needed to enlist other british colonies in the americas to invite assistance from foreign nations and to rally resistance at home.
shortly after lee made his memorable motion on june 7 congress appointed a committee to prepare a more formal statement of separation.
the task of drafting it fell to thomas jefferson a tall freckled sandyhaired virginia lawyer of thirty three.
despite his youth he was already recognized as a brilliant writer and he measured up splendidly to the awesome assignment.
after some debate and amendment the declaration of independence was formally approved by the congress on july 4 1776.
it might better have been chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 the american signers of the declaration of independence had reason to fear for their necks.
in 1802 twenty six years later george iii 1738 1820 approved this death sentence for seven irish rebels.
you are to be hanged by the neck but not until you are dead for while you are still living your bodies are to be taken down your bowels torn out and burned before your faces your heads then cut off and your bodies divided each into four quarters and your heads and quarters to be then at the kings disposal and may the almighty god have mercy on your souls.
george iii 1738 1820 studio of alan ramsay ca.
1767 americas last king he was a good man unlike some of his scandal tainted brothers and sons but a bad king.
doggedly determined to regain arbitrary power for the crown he antagonized and then lost the thirteen american colonies.
during much of his sixty year reign he seemed to be insane but recently medical science has found that he was suffering from a rare metabolic and hereditary disease called porphyria.
called the explanation of independence or as one contemporary described it mr.
jeffersons advertisement of mr lees resolution jeffersons pronouncement couched in a lofty style was magnicent.
he gave his appeal universality by invoking the natural rights of humankind not just british rights.
he argued persuasively that because the king had outed these rights the colonists were justied in cutting their connection.
he then set forth a long list of the presumably tyrannous misdeeds of george iii.
the overdrawn bill of indictment included imposing taxes without consent dispensing with trial by jury abolishing valued laws establishing a military dictatorship maintaining standing armies in peacetime cutting off trade burning towns hiring mercenaries and inciting hostility among the indians.
jeffersons withering blast was admittedly onesided.
he acted in effect as a prosecuting attorney and he took certain liberties with historical truth.
he was not writing history he was making it through what has been called the worlds greatest editorial he owned many slaves and his af rmation that all men are created equal was to haunt him and his fellow citizens for generations.
the formal declaration of independence cleared the air as a thundershower does on a muggy day.
as paine had predicted and as events were to prove foreign assistance could now be solicited with greater hope of success.
those patriots who deed the king were now rebels not loving subjects shooting their way into reconciliation.
they must all hang together franklin is said to have grimly remarked or they would all hang separately.
or in the eloquent language of the great declaration we mutually pledge to each other our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor jeffersons deant declaration of independence had a universal impact unmatched by any other american document.
this shout heard round the world has been a source of inspiration to countless revolutionary movements against arbitrary authority.
lafayette hung a copy on a wall in his home leaving beside it room for a future french declaration of the rights of man a declaration that was ofcially born thirteen years later.
for an annotated text of the declaration of independence see the appendix.
a revolution for women.
abigail adams chides her husband 1776 n the midst of the revolutionary fervor of 1776 at least one woman abigail adams wife of noted massachusetts patriot and future president john adams raised her voice on behalf of women.
yet she apparently raised it only in private in this personal letter to her husband.
private documents like the correspondence and diaries of individuals both prominent and ordinary offer invaluable sources for the historian seeking to discover sentiments opinions and perspectives that are often difcult to discern in the ofcial public record.
what might it suggest about the historical circumstances of the 1770s that abigail adams con ned her claim for womens equality to this condential exchange with her spouse.
what might have inspired the arguments she employed.
despite her privileged position and persuasive power and despite her threat to foment a rebellion abigail adamss plea went largely unheeded in the revolutionary era as did comparable pleadings to extend the revolutionary principle of equality to blacks.
what might have accounted for this limited application of the ideas of liberty and equality in the midst of a supposedly democratic revolution.
i makers of america the loyalists the great africanamerican migration i n late 1776 catherine van cortlandt wrote to her husband a new jersey merchant ghting in a loyalist brigade about the patriot troops who had quartered themselves in her house.
they were the most disorderly of species she complained and their ofcers were from the dregs of the people like the van cortlandts many loyalists thought of themselves as the better sort of people they viewed their adversaries as lawless mobs and brutes conservative wealthy and well educated loyalists of this breed thought a break with britain would invite anarchy.
loyalism made sense to them too for practical tough times for loyalists under the shadow of the tar bucket and bag of feathers shown in the upper right background these virginia loyalists were roughly handled by a club wielding crowd of patriots.
viewing colonial militias as no match for his majestys army loyalist pamphleteer daniel leonard warned his patriot enemies in 1775 that nothing short of a miracle could gain you one battle but loyalism was hardly con ned to the well todo.
it also appealed to many people of modest means who identied strongly with britain or who had reason to fear a patriot victory.
thousands of british veterans of the seven years war for example had settled in the colonies after 1763.
many of them took up farming on two hundred acre land grants in new york.
they were loath to turn their backs on the crown.
so too were recent immigrants from non eng lish regions of the british isles especially from scotland and ireland who had settled in georgia or the backcountry of north and south carolina.
many of these newcomers resenting the plantation elite who ran these colonies lled the ranks of tory brigades such as the volunteers of ireland and the north carolina highlanders orga nized by the british army to galvanize loyalist support.
other ethnic minorities found their own reasons to support the british.
some members of dutch german and french religious sects believed that religious tolerance would be greater under the british than under the americans whose prejudices they had already encountered.
above all thousands of african americans joined loyalist ranks in the hope that ser vice to the british might offer an escape from bondage.
british ofcials encouraged that belief.
throughout the war and in every colony some african americans ed to british lines where they served as soldiers servants laborers and spies.
many of them joined black regiments that specialized in making small sorties against patriot militias.
in monmouth new jersey the black loyalist colonel tye and his band of raiders became legendary for capturing patriots and their supplies.
as the war drew to an end in 1783 the fate of black loyalists varied enormously.
many thousands who came to loyalism as fugitive slaves managed to nd a way to freedom most notably the large group who won british passage from the port of new york to nova scotia.
other african american loyalists suffered betrayal.
british general lord charles cornwallis abandoned over four thousand former slaves in virginia and many black loyalists who boarded ships from loyalists through british eyes this british cartoon depicts the loyalists as doubly victimized by americans caricatured as savage indians and by the british prime minister the earl of shelburne for offering little protection to britains defenders.
british controlled ports expecting to embark for freedom instead found themselves sold back into slavery in the west indies.
white loyalists faced no threat of enslavement but they did suffer travails beyond mere disgrace arrest exile conscation of property and loss of legal rights.
faced with such retribution some eighty thousand loyalists ed abroad mostly to britain and the maritime provinces of canada where they became known as the united empire loyalists.
some settled contentedly as exiles but many especially those who went to britain where they had difculty becoming accepted lived diminished and lonely lives cut off as loyalist thomas danforth put it from every hope of importance in life.
and in a station much inferior to that of a menial servant but most loyalists remained in america where they faced the special burdens of reestablishing themselves in a society that viewed them as traitors.
some succeeded remarkably despite the odds such as hugh gaine a printer in new york city who eventually reopened a business and even won contracts from the new government.
ironically this former loyalist soldier published the new national army regulations authored by the revolutionary hero baron von steuben.
like many former loyalists gaine reintegrated himself into public life by siding with the federalist call for a strong central government and powerful executive.
when new york ratied the constitution in 1788 gaine rode the oat at the head of the citys celebration parade.
he had like many other former loyalists become an american.
chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 patriots and loyalists the war of independence strictly speaking was a war within a war.
colonials loyal to the king loyalists fought the american rebels patriots while the rebels also fought the british redcoats see makers of america the loyalists pp.
loyalists were derisively called tories after the dominant political factions in britain whereas patriots were called whigs after the opposition factions in britain.
a popular de nition of a tory among the patriots betrayed bitterness a tory is a thing whose head is in eng land and its body in america and its neck ought to be stretched like many revolutions the american revolution was a minority movement.
many colonists were apathetic or neutral including the byrds of virginia who sat on the fence.
the opposing forces contended not only against each other but also for the allegiance and support of the civilian population.
in this struggle for the hearts and minds of the people the british proved fatally inept and the patriot militias played a crucial role.
the british military proved able to control only those areas where it could maintain a massive military presence.
elsewhere as soon as the redcoats had marched on the rebel militiamen appeared and took up the task of political education sometimes by coercive means.
often lacking bayonets but always loaded with political zeal the ragtag militia units served as remarkably effective agents of revolutionary ideas.
they convinced many colonists even those indifferent to independence that the british army was an unreliable friend and that they had better throw in their lot with the patriot cause.
they also mercilessly harassed small british detachments and occupation forces.
one british ofcer ruefully observed that the americans would be less dangerous if they had a regular army loyalists numbering perhaps 16 percent of the american people remained true to their king.
families often split over the issue of independence benjamin franklin supported the patriot side whereas his handsome illegitimate son william franklin the last royal governor of new jersey upheld the loyalist cause.
the loyalists were tragic gures.
for generations the british in the new world had been taught delity to the crown.
loyalty is ordinarily regarded as a major virtue loyalty to ones family ones friends ones country.
if the king had triumphed as he seemed likely to do the loyalists would have been acclaimed patriots and defeated rebels like washington would have been disgraced severely punished and probably forgotten.
many people of education and wealth of culture and caution remained loyal.
these wary souls were satised with their lot and believed that any violent change would only be for the worse.
loyalists were also more numerous among the older generation.
young people make revolutions and from the outset energetic purposeful and militant young people surged forward gures like the sleeplessly scheming samuel adams and the impassioned patrick henry.
his aming outcry before the virginia assembly give me liberty or give me death still quickens patriotic pulses.
loyalists also included the kings ofcers and other beneciaries of the crown people who knew which side their daily bread came from.
the same was generally true of the anglican clergy and a large portion of their congregations all of whom had long been taught submission to the king.
usually the loyalists were most numerous where the anglican church was strongest.
a notable exception was virginia where the debt burdened anglican aristocrats ocked into the rebel camp.
the kings followers were well entrenched in aristocratic new york city and charleston and also in quaker pennsylvania and new jersey where general washington felt that he was ghting in the enemys country while his men were starving at valley forge nearby pennsylvania farmers were selling their produce to the british for the kings gold.
loyalists were least numerous in new eng land where self government was especially strong and mercantilism was especially weak.
rebels were the most numerous where presbyterianism and congregationalism ourished notably in new eng land.
invading british armies vented their contempt and anger by using yankee churches for pigsties.
the loyalist exodus before the declaration of independence in 1776 persecution of the loyalists was relatively mild.
yet they were subjected to some brutality including tarring and feathering and riding astride fence rails.
after the declaration of independence which sharply separated loyalists from patriots harsher methods prevailed.
the rebels naturally desired a united front.
putting loyalty to the colonies rst they regarded their opponents not themselves as traitors.
loyalists were roughly handled hundreds were imprisoned and a few noncombatants were hanged.
but there was no wholesale reign of terror comparable to washington in retreat new york patriots pull down the statue of king george iii erected after the repeal of the stamp act in 1766 this statue was melted down by the revolutionaries into bullets to be used against the kings troops.
that which later bloodied both france and russia during their revolutions.
for one thing the colonists reected anglo saxon regard for order for another the leading loyalists were prudent enough to ee to the british lines.
about eighty thousand loyal supporters of george iii were driven out or ed but several hundred thousand or so of the mild loyalists were permitted to stay.
the estates of many of the fugitives were conscated and sold a relatively painless way to help nance the war.
conscation often worked great hardship as for example when two aristocratic women were forced to live in their former chicken house for leaning toryward.
some fty thousand loyalist volunteers at one time or another bore arms for the british.
they also helped the kings cause by serving as spies by inciting the indians and by keeping patriot soldiers at home to protect their families.
ardent loyalists had their hearts in their cause and a major blunder of the haughty british was not to make full use of them in the ghting.
general washington at bay with boston evacuated in march 1776 the british concentrated on new york as a base of operations.
here was a splendid seaport centrally located where the king could count on cooperation from the numerous loyalists.
an awe inspiring british eet appeared off new york in july 1776.
it consisted of some ve hundred ships and thirty ve thousand men the largest armed force to be seen in america until the civil war.
general washington dangerously outnumbered could muster only eighteen thousand ill trained troops with which to meet the crack army of the invader.
disaster befell the americans in the summer and fall of 1776.
outgeneraled and outmaneuvered they were routed at the battle of long island where panic seized the raw recruits.
by the narrowest of margins and thanks to a favoring wind and fog washington escaped to manhattan island.
retreating northward he crossed the hudson river to new jersey and nally reached the delaware river with the british close at his heels.
tauntingly enemy buglers sounded the foxhunting call so familiar to virginians of washingtons day.
the patriot cause was at low ebb when the rebel remnants ed across the river after collecting all available boats to forestall pursuit.
the wonder is that washingtons adversary general william howe did not speedily crush the demoralized american forces.
but he was no military genius and he well remembered the horrible slaughter at bunker hill where he had commanded.
the country was rough supplies were slow in coming and as a professional soldier howe did not relish the rigors of winter campaigning.
he evidently found more agreeable the bedtime company of his mistress the wife of one of his subordinates a scandal with which american satirists had a good deal of ribald fun.
chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 washington crossing the delaware by emanuel gottlieb leutze 1851 on christmas day 1776 george washington set out from pennsylvania with twenty four hundred men to surprise the british forces chiey hessians in their quarters across the river in new jersey.
the subsequent british defeat proved to be a turning point in the revolution as it checked the british advance toward philadelphia and restored american morale.
seventy ve years later leutze a german american immigrant who had returned to germany mythologized the heroic campaign in this painting.
imbued with the liberal democratic principles of the american revolution leutze intended his painting to inspire europeans in their revolutions of 1848.
to that end he ignored the fact that the stars and stripes held by lieutenant james monroe was not adopted until 1777 that washington could not possibly have stood so long on one leg that the colonists crossed the delaware at night not during the day and that no african american would have been present.
what leutze did capture was the importance of ordinary men in the revolutionary struggle and the tremendous urgency they felt at this particular moment in 1776 when victory seemed so elusive.
washington who was now almost counted out stealthily recrossed the ice clogged delaware river.
at trenton on december 26 1776 he surprised and captured a thousand hessians who were sleeping off the effects of their christmas celebration.
a week later leaving his camp res burning as a ruse he slipped away and inicted a sharp defeat on a smaller british detachment at princeton.
this brilliant new jersey campaign crowned by these two lifesaving victories revealed old fox washington at his military best.
burgoynes blundering invasion london ofcials adopted an intricate scheme for capturing the vital hudson river valley in 1777.
if successful the british would sever new eng land from the rest of the states and paralyze the american cause.
the main invading force under an actor playwright soldier general john gentleman johnny burgoyne would bagging burgoyne in this sermon published in the pennsylvania gazette on april 18 1778 a minister decried the brutality of the british army the waste and ravage produced by this unhappy war are every where felt.
whereever our foes pervade ruin and devastation follow after them or rather they march in their front and on their right and on their left and in their rear they rage without controul.
no house is sacred no person secure.
age or sex from blooming youth to decrepit age they regard or spare not.
and in the eld how many of our countrymen and friends have fallen.
push down the lake champlain route from canada.
general howes troops in new york if needed could advance up the hudson river to meet burgoyne near albany.
a third and much smaller british force commanded by colonel barry st leger would come in from the west by way of lake ontario and the mohawk valley.
british planners did not reckon with general benedict arnold.
after his repulse at qubec in 1775 he had retreated slowly along the st lawrence river back to the lake champlain area by heroic efforts keeping an army in the eld.
the british had pursued his tattered force to lake champlain in 1776.
but they could not move farther south until they had won control of the lake which in the absence of roads was indispensable for carrying their supplies.
while the british stopped to construct a sizable eet the tireless arnold assembled and tted out every oatable vessel.
his tiny otilla was nally destroyed after desperate ghting but time if not the battle had been won.
winter was descending and the british were forced to retire to canada.
general burgoyne had to start anew from this base the following year.
if arnold had not contributed his daring and skill the british invaders of 1776 almost certainly would have recaptured fort ticonderoga.
if burgoyne had started from this springboard in 1777 instead of from montral he almost certainly would have succeeded in his venture.
at last the apparently futile american invasion of canada in 1775 was beginning to pay rich dividends.
revolutionary standard of the light horse of the city of philadelphia by john folwell and james claypoole 1775 silk ags like this were used to identify military units.
in an exercise known as trooping the colors such ags were regularly paraded before the troops so that soldiers could recognize their own units in the confusion of battle.
general burgoyne began his fateful invasion with seven thousand regular troops.
he was encumbered by a heavy baggage train and a considerable number of women many of whom were wives of his ofcers.
progress was painfully slow for sweaty axmen had to chop a path through the forest while american militiamen began to gather like hornets on burgoynes anks.
general howe meanwhile was causing astonished eyebrows to rise.
at a time when it seemed obvious that he should be starting up the hudson river from new york to join his slowly advancing colleague he deliberately embarked with the main british army for an attack on philadelphia the rebel capital.
as scholars now know he wanted to force a general engagement with washingtons army destroy it and leave the path wideopen for burgoynes thrust.
howe apparently assumed that he had ample time to assist burgoyne directly should he be needed.
general washington keeping a wary eye on the british in new york hastily transferred his army to the vicinity of philadelphia.
there late in 1777 he was defeated in two pitched battles at brandywine creek and chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 germantown.
pleasure loving general howe then settled down comfortably in the lively capital leaving burgoyne to ounder through the wilds of upper new york.
benjamin franklin recently sent to paris as an envoy truthfully jested that howe had not captured philadelphia but that philadelphia had captured howe.
washington nally retired to winter quarters at valley forge a strong hilly position some twenty miles northwest of philadelphia.
there his frostbitten and hungry men were short of about every thing except misery.
this rabble was nevertheless whipped into a professional army by the recently arrived prussian drillmaster the profane but patient baron von steuben.
burgoyne meanwhile had begun to bog down north of albany while a host of american militiamen scenting the kill swarmed about him.
in a series of sharp engagements in which general arnold was again shot in the leg at qubec the british army was trapped.
meanwhile the americans had driven back st legers force at oriskany.
unable to advance or retreat burgoyne was forced to surrender his entire command at saratoga on october 17 1777 to the american general horatio gates.
saratoga ranks high among the decisive battles of both american and world history.
the victory immensely revived the faltering colonial cause.
even more important it made possible the urgently needed foreign aid from france which in turn helped ensure american independence.
revolution in diplomacy.
france thirsting for revenge against britain was eager to iname the quarrel that had broken out in america.
stripped of its north american colonies britain would presumably cease to be a front rank power.
france might then regain its former position and prestige the loss of which in the recent seven years war rankled deeply.
for their part the american revolutionaries badly needed help in the struggle to throw off the british yoke.
the stage seemed set for the embattled new nation to make its diplomatic debut by sealing an alliance with france against the common british foe.
yet just as they stood for revolutionary political ideas at home the rebellious americans also harbored revolutionary ideas about international affairs.
they wanted an end to colonialism and mercantilism.
they strongly supported free trade and freedom of the seas.
they hoped to substitute the rule of law for the ancient after concluding the alliance france sent a minister to america to the delight of one patriot journalist who would have thought that the american colonies imperfectly known in europe a few years ago and claimed by every pettifogging lawyer in the house of commons every cobbler in the beer houses of london as a part of their property should to day receive an ambassador from the most powerful monarchy in europe.
reliance on raw power to arbitrate the affairs of nations.
when the new republics great seal proclaimed a new order for the ages novus ordo seculorum in latin the sentiment was meant to apply to international as well as domestic affairs.
the continental congress in the summer of 1776 had accordingly drafted a model treaty to guide the american commissioners it was about to dispatch to the french court.
one of the treatys chief authors john adams described its basic principles 1.
no political connection.
no military connection.
only a commercial connection for a nascent nation struggling to secure its very existence these were remarkably self denying restrictions.
yet they represented an emerging school of thought popular among enlightened gures in both europe and america that deemed history to have reached a momentous turning point when military con ict would be abandoned and the bonds of mutual commercial interest would guarantee peaceful relations among states.
many critics then and later have derided this dream of an imminent golden age as hopelessly naive and impractically utopian yet it infused an element of idealism into american attitudes toward international affairs that has proved stubbornly persistent.
when wily old benjamin franklin arrived in paris to negotiate the treaty with france he was determined that his very appearance should herald the diplomatic revolution the americans hoped to achieve.
in his clothing and demeanor he affected a persona that deliberately violated every norm of diplomatic behavior.
instead of the customary ceremonial sword he toted only a plain white walking stick.
forsaking ermined robes and fancy wigs he sported homespun garments and a simple cap of marten fur.
figure me he wrote the french alliance benjamin franklin in his fabled cap he left school at age ten and became a wealthy businessman a journalist an inventor a scientist a legislator and preeminently a statesman diplomat.
he was sent to france in 1776 as the american envoy at age seventy and he remained there until 1785 negotiating the alliance with the french and helping to negotiate the treaty of peace.
his fame had preceded him and when he discarded his wig for the fur cap of a simple american agriculturist he took french society by storm.
french aristocratic women with whom he was a great favorite honored him by adopting the high coiffure la franklin in imitation of his cap.
to a friend very plainly dressd wearing my thin grey strait hair that peeps out under my only coiffure a ne fur cap which comes down my forehead almost to my spectacles.
think how this must appear among the powderd heads of paris he shocked the royal court besotted as it was with pomp and protocol.
but ordinary parisians adored him as a specimen of a new democratic social order devoid of pretense and ornament.
when franklin embraced and kissed the famed french philosopher voltaire in a paris theater the spectators applauded wildly.
meanwhile the diplomatic game intensied.
after the humiliation at saratoga in 1777 the british parliament belatedly passed a mea sure that in ef fect offered the americans home rule within the empire.
this was essentially all that the colonials had ever asked for except independence.
if the french were going to break up the british empire they would have to bestir themselves.
franklin now played skillfully on french fears of anglo american reconciliation.
on february 6 1778 france offered the americans a treaty of alliance.
it did not conform exactly to the terms of the model treaty franklin had brought with him an early example of practical self interest trumping abstract idealism in americas conduct of foreign affairs.
against its better judgment the young republic concluded its rst entangling military alliance and would soon regret it.
but the treaty with france also constituted an ofcial recognition of americas independence and lent powerful military heft to the patriot cause.
both allies bound themselves to wage war until the united states had fully secured its freedom and until both agreed to terms with the common enemy.
with those pledges the american revolutionary war now became a world war.
the colonial war becomes a wider war eng land and france thus came to blows in 1778 and the shot red at lexington rapidly widened into a global conagration.
spain entered the fray against britain in 1779 as did holland.
combined spanish and french eets outnumbered those of britain and on two occasions the british isles seemed to be at the mercy of hostile warships.
the weak maritime neutrals of europe who had suffered from britains dominance over the seas now began to demand more respect for their rights see table 8 1.
in 1780 the imperious catherine the great of russia took the lead in organizing the armed neutrality which she later sneeringly called the armed nullity it lined up almost all the remaining european neutrals in an attitude of passive hostility toward britain.
the war was now being fought not only in europe and north america but also in south america the caribbean and asia.
to say that america with some french aid defeated britain is like saying daddy and i killed the bear to britain struggling for its very life the scufe in the new world became secondary.
the americans deserve credit for having kept the war going until 1778 with secret french aid.
but they did not achieve their chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 table 8 1 britain against the world britain and allies enemy or unfriendly powers great britain some loyalists and indians 30 000 hired hessians total population on britains side ca.
8 million belligerents total population ca.
39 5 million united states 1775 1783 france 1778 1783 spain 1779 1783 holland 1779 1783 ireland restive members of the armed neutrality with dates of joining russia 1780 denmark norway 1780 sweden 1780 holy roman empire 1781 prussia 1782 portugal 1782 two sicilies 1783 after peace signed independence until the con ict erupted into a multipower world war that was too big for britain to handle.
from 1778 to 1783 france provided the rebels with guns money immense amounts of equipment about one half of americas regular armed forces and practically all of the new nations naval strength.
frances entrance into the con ict forced the british to change their basic strategy in america.
hitherto they could count on blockading the colonial coast and commanding the seas.
now the french had powerful eets in american waters chiey to protect their own valuable west indies islands but in a position to jeopardize britains blockade and lines of supply.
the british therefore decided to evacuate philadelphia and concentrate their strength in new york city.
in june 1778 the withdrawing redcoats were attacked by general washington at monmouth new jersey on a blisteringly hot day.
scores of men collapsed or died from sunstroke.
but the battle was indecisive and the british escaped to new york although about one third of their hessians deserted.
henceforth except for the yorktown interlude of 1781 washington remained in the new york area hemming in the british.
blow and counterblow in the summer of 1780 a powerful french army of six thousand regular troops commanded by the comte de rochambeau arrived in newport rhode island.
the americans were somewhat suspicious of their former enemies in fact several ugly are ups involving minor bloodshed had already occurred between the new allies.
but french gold and goodwill melted hard hearts.
dancing parties were arranged with the prim puritan maidens one french ofcer related doubtless with exaggeration the simple innocence of the garden of eden prevailed no real military advantage came immediately from this french reinforcement although preparations were made for a franco american attack on new york.
improving american morale was staggered later in 1780 when general benedict arnold turned traitor.
a leader of undoubted dash and brilliance he was ambitious greedy unscrupulous and suffering from a wellgrounded but petulant feeling that his valuable ser vices were not fully appreciated.
he plotted with the british to sell out the key stronghold of west point which commanded the hudson river for 6 300 and an ofcers commission.
by the sheerest accident the plot was detected in the nick of time and arnold ed to the british.
whom can we trust now cried general washington in anguish.
the british meanwhile had devised a plan to roll up the colonies beginning with the south where the loyalists were numerous see map 8 2.
the colony of georgia was ruthlessly overrun in 1778 1779 charleston south carolina fell in 1780.
the surrender of the city to the british involved the capture of ve thousand men and four hundred cannon and was a heavier loss war on the frontier g 1 new york new york washing american movements british movements american victory b 40n philadelphia new jersey delaware virginia british victory charlottesville la fa elk hill richmond petersburg norfolk portsmouth e een hillsboro cornwallis salisbury may salem tte charlotte yorktown aug 30 oct.
19 1781 surrender of cornwallis north carolina 35n lis 1 cheraw elizabethtown al fort charlotte co rn orangeburg wilmington nw r south wa carolina llis cl georgetown in to n an d co charleston may 12 1780 georgia savannah oct 9 1779 battle of the capes sept 5 1781 gr kings mountain oct 7 1780 ye atlantic ocean fort moultrie beaufort 100 km.
fort sunbury 80w 100 mi.
de grasse fr.
from wes t indies 1 fort cowpens jan 17 1781 r am t on maryland h oc an d ea u au pennsylvania n 75w map 8 2 war in the south 1780 1781 interactive map to the americans in relation to existing strength than that of burgoyne was to the british.
warfare now intensied in the carolinas where patriots bitterly fought their loyalist neighbors.
it was not uncommon for prisoners on both sides to be butch ered in cold blood after they had thrown down their arms.
the tide turned later in 1780 and early in 1781 when american riemen wiped out a british detachment at kings mountain and then defeated a smaller force at cowpens.
in the carolina campaign of 1781 chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 general nathanael greene a quaker reared tactician distinguished himself by his strategy of delay.
standing and then retreating he exhausted his foe general charles cornwallis in vain pursuit.
by losing battles but winning campaigns the fighting quaker nally succeeded in clearing most of georgia and south carolina of british troops.
the land frontier and the sea frontier la k e m i c h i g a n the west was ablaze during much of the war.
indian allies of george iii hoping to protect their land were busy with torch and tomahawk they were egged on by british agents branded as hair buyers because they allegedly paid bounties for american scalps.
fateful 1777 was known as the bloody year on the frontier.
although two nations of the iroquois confederacy the oneidas and the tuscaroras sided with the americans the senecas mohawks cayugas and onondagas joined the british.
they were urged on by mohawk chief joseph brant a convert to anglicanism who believed not without reason that a victorious britain would restrain american expansion into the west.
brant and the british ravaged large areas of backcountry pennsylvania and new york until checked by an american force in 1779.
in 1784 the pro british iroquois were forced to sign the treaty of fort stanwix the rst treaty between the united states and an indian nation.
under its terms the indians ceded most of their land.
yet even in wartime the human tide of westwardmoving pioneers did not halt its ow.
eloquent testimony is provided by place names in kentucky such as lexington named after the battle and louisville named after americas new ally louis xvi.
in the wild illinois country the british were especially vulnerable to attack for they held only scattered posts that they had captured from the french.
an audacious frontiersman george rogers clark conceived the idea of seizing these forts by surprise.
in 1778 1779 he oated down the ohio river with about 175 men and captured in quick succession the forts kaskaskia cahokia and vincennes see map 8 3.
clarks admirers have argued without positive proof 80w 200 km.
detroit la ke eri e fort pitt m is 90w so n joseph brant by gilbert stuart 1786 siding with the british this mohawk chief led indian frontier raids so ferocious that he was dubbed monster brant when he later met king george iii he declined to kiss the kings hand but asked instead to kiss the hand of the queen.
uri r cahokia kaskaskia vincennes oh 40n io r clarks route 1778 1779 map 8 3 george rogers clarks campaign 1778 1779 interactive map setting the stage for victory baron von steuben 1730 1794 a prussian general who helped train the continental army found the americans to be very different from other soldiers he had known.
as von steuben explained to a fellow european the genius of this nation is not in the least to be compared with that of the prussians austrians or french.
you say to your soldier do this and he doeth it but i am obliged to say this is the reason why you ought to do that and then he does it.
that his success forced the british to cede the region north of the ohio river to the united states at the peace table in paris.
americas infant navy had meanwhile been laying the foundations of a brilliant tradition.
the naval establishment consisted of only a handful of nondescript ships commanded by daring ofcers the most famous of whom was a hard ghting young scotsman john paul jones.
as events turned out this tiny naval force never made a real dent in britains thunderous eets.
its chief contribution was in destroying british merchant shipping and thus carrying the war into the waters around the british isles.
more numerous and damaging than ships of the regular american navy were swift privateers.
these craft were privately owned armed ships legalized pirates in a sense specically authorized by congress to prey on enemy shipping.
altogether over a thousand american privateers responding to the call of patriotism and prot sallied forth with about seventy thousand men sailors of fortune.
they captured some six hundred british prizes while british warships captured about as many american merchantmen and privateers.
privateering was not an unalloyed asset.
it had the unfortunate effect of diverting manpower from the main war effort and involving americans including benedict arnold in speculation and graft.
but the privateers brought in urgently needed gold harassed the enemy and raised american morale by providing victories at a time when victories were few.
british shipping was so badly riddled by privateers and by the regular american navy that insurance rates skyrocketed.
merchant ships were compelled to sail in convoy and british shippers and manufacturers brought increasing pressure on parliament to end the war on honorable terms.
yorktown and the final curtain one of the darkest periods of the war was 1780 1781 before the last decisive victory.
ination of the currency continued at full gallop.
the government virtually bankrupt declared that it would repay many of its debts at the rate of only 2 5 cents on the dollar.
despair prevailed the sense of unity withered and mutinous sentiments infected the army.
meanwhile the british general cornwallis was blundering into a trap.
after futile operations in virginia he had fallen back to chesapeake bay at yorktown to await seaborne supplies and reinforcements.
he assumed britain would continue to control the sea.
but these few fateful weeks happened to be one of the brief periods during the war when british naval superiority slipped away.
the french were now prepared to cooperate energetically in a brilliant stroke.
admiral de grasse operating with a powerful eet in the west indies advised the americans that he was free to join with them in an assault on cornwallis at yorktown.
quick to seize this opportunity general washington made a swift march of more than three hundred miles to the chesapeake from the new york area.
accompanied by rochambeaus french army washington beset the british by land while de grasse blockaded them by sea after beating off the british eet.
completely cornered cornwallis surrendered his entire force of seven thousand men on october 19 1781 as his band appropriately played the world turnd upside down the triumph was no less french than american the french provided essentially all the sea power and about half of the regular troops in the besieging army of some sixteen thousand men.
stunned by news of the disaster prime minister lord north cried oh god.
its all over.
its all over but it was not.
george iii stubbornly planned to continue the struggle for britain was far from being crushed.
it still had fty four thousand troops in north america including thirty two thousand in the united states.
washington returned with his army to new york there to continue keeping a vigilant eye on the british force of ten thousand men.
chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 battle of the chesapeake capes 1781 a young french naval ofcer pierre joseph jennot sketched what is probably the only depiction of the epochal sea battle by a participant.
the british and french eets rst engaged on september 5 and for two days chased each other while drifting one hundred miles south.
on september 8 the french turned back northward and occupied chesapeake bay cutting off general cornwallis ashore in yorktown from support and escape by sea.
when general washington with more french help blocked any british retreat by land a doomed cornwallis surrendered.
fighting actually continued for more than a year after yorktown with patriot loyalist warfare in the south especially savage.
no quarter for tories was the common battle cry.
one of washingtons most valuable contributions was to keep the languishing cause alive the army in the eld and the states together during these critical months.
otherwise a satisfactory peace treaty might never have been signed.
personal rule of george iii.
a whig ministry rather favorable to the americans replaced the tory regime of lord north.
three american peace negotiators had meanwhile gathered at paris the aging but astute benjamin franklin the inty john adams vigilant for new eng land interests and the impulsive john jay of new york deeply peace at paris after yorktown despite george iiis obstinate eagerness to continue ghting many britons were weary of war and increasingly ready to come to terms.
they had suffered heavy reverses in india and in the west indies.
the island of minorca in the mediterranean had fallen the rock of gibraltar was tottering.
lord norths ministry collapsed in march 1782 temporarily ending the blundering george iii a poor loser wrote this of america knavery seems to be so much the striking feature of its inhabitants that it may not in the end be an evil that they become aliens to this kingdom.
setting the stage for victory in 1800 the prussian statesman friedrich von gentz 1764 1832 published an essay titled origins and principles of the american revolution compared with the french in it he argued that the americans escaped the most dangerous of all the rocks which in our times threatens the founders of any revolution the deadly passion for making political experiments with abstract theories and untried systems.
john quincy adams 1767 1848 translated von gentzs work into english because he said it rescues the american revolution from the disgraceful imputation of having proceeded from the same principles as the french.
suspicious of old world intrigue.
the three envoys had explicit instructions from congress to make no separate peace and to consult with their french allies at all stages of the negotiations.
but the american representatives chafed under this directive.
they well knew that it had been written by a subservient congress with the french foreign ofce indirectly guiding the pen.
france was in a painful position.
it had induced spain to enter the war on its side in part by promising to deliver british held gibraltar.
yet the towering rock was defying frantic joint assaults by french and spanish troops.
spain also coveted the immense transallegheny area on which restless american pioneers were already settling.
france ever eager to smash britains empire desired an independent united states but one independent in the abstract not in action.
it therefore schemed to keep the new republic cooped up east of the allegheny mountains.
a weak america like a horse sturdy enough to plow but not vigorous enough to kick would be easier to manage in promoting french interests and policy.
france was paying a heavy price in men and trea sure to win americas independence and it wanted to get its moneys worth.
but john jay was unwilling to play frances game.
suspiciously alert he perceived that the french could not satisfy the con icting ambitions of both ameri cans and spaniards.
he saw signs or thought he did indicating that the paris foreign ofce was about to betray americas trans appalachian interests to satisfy those of spain.
he therefore secretly made separate overtures to london contrary to his instructions from congress.
the hard pressed british eager to entice one of their enemies from the alliance speedily came to terms with the americans.
a preliminary treaty of peace was signed in 1782 the nal peace the next year.
by the treaty of paris of 1783 the british formally recognized the independence of the united states.
in addition they granted generous boundaries stretching majestically to the mississippi on the west to the great lakes on the north and to spanish florida on the south.
spain had recently captured florida from britain.
the yankees though now divorced from the empire were to retain a share in the priceless sheries of newfoundland.
the canadians of course were profoundly displeased.
the americans on their part had to yield important concessions.
loyalists were not to be further persecuted and congress was to recommend to the state legislatures that conscated loyalist property be restored.
as for the debts long owed to british creditors the states vowed to put no lawful obstacles in the way of their collection.
unhappily for future harmony the assurances regarding both loyalists and debts were not carried out in the manner hoped for by london.
as for britain its acceptance of defeat in north america eventually paid enormous strategic dividends.
persisting in the colonial conict might well have bled britain dry.
but shutting down the war against the americans enabled london to rebuild its army and navy and eventually prevail in its titanic struggle with napoleon and to become the preeminent world power in the nineteenth century.
a new nation legitimized britains terms were liberal almost beyond belief.
the enormous trans appalachian area was thrown in as a virtual gift for george rogers clark had captured only a small segment of it.
why the generosity.
had the united states beaten britain to its knees.
the key to the riddle may be found in the old world.
at the time the peace terms were drafted britain was trying to seduce america from its french alliance so it made the terms as alluring as possible.
the shaky whig ministry hanging on by its ngernails for only a few chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 the reconciliation between britannia and her daughter america detail america represented by an indian is invited to buss kiss her mother.
compare this cartoon with the one on p 127 months was more friendly to the americans than were the tories.
it was determined by a policy of liberality to salve recent wounds reopen old trade channels and prevent future wars over the coveted trans appalachian region.
this farsighted policy was regrettably not followed by the successors of the whigs.
in spirit the americans made a separate peace contrary to the french alliance.
in fact they did not.
the paris foreign ofce formally approved the terms of peace though disturbed by the lone wolf course of its american ally.
france was immensely relieved by the prospect of bringing the costly con ict to an end and of freeing itself from its embarrassing promises to the spanish crown.
america alone gained from the world girdling war.
the british though soon to stage a comeback were battered and beaten.
the french savored sweet revenge but plunged headlong down the slippery slope to bankruptcy and revolution.
the americans fared much better.
snatching their independence from the furnace of world con ict they began their national career with a splendid territorial birthright and a priceless heritage of freedom.
seldom if ever have any people been so favored.
chronology chronology battles of lexington and concord second continental congress americans capture british garrisons at ticonderoga and crown point battle of bunker hill king george iii formally proclaims colonies in rebellion failed invasion of canada 1778 clarks victories in the west battle of kings mountain battle of cowpens greene leads carolina campaign french and americans force cornwallis to surrender at yorktown paines common sense declaration of independence battle of trenton norths ministry collapses in britain treaty of paris battle of brandywine battle of germantown battle of saratoga treaty of fort stanwix formation of french american alliance battle of monmouth key terms second continental congress 146 bunker hill battle of 147 olive branch petition 147 hessians 148 common sense 150 declaration of independence 151 declaration of the rights of man 152 loyalists 156 people to know patriots 156 long island battle of 157 trenton battle of 158 saratoga battle of 160 model treaty 160 armed neutrality 161 fort stanwix treaty of 164 privateers 165 yorktown battle of 165 paris treaty of 167 ethan allen benedict arnold richard montgomery thomas paine richard henry lee lord charles cornwallis william howe john gentleman johnny burgoyne benjamin franklin comte de rochambeau nathanael greene joseph brant george rogers clark admiral de grasse chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 whose revolution.
h istorians once assumed that the revolution was just another chapter in the unfolding story of human liberty an important way station on a divinely ordained pathway toward moral perfection in human affairs.
this approach often labeled the whig view of history was best expressed in george bancrofts ten volume history of the united states of america published between the 1830s and 1870s.
by the end of the nineteenth century a group of historians known as the imperial school challenged bancroft arguing that the revolution was best understood not as the ful llment of national destiny but as a constitutional con ict within the british empire.
for historians like george beer charles andrews and lawrence gipson the revolution was the product of a collision between two different views of empire.
while the americans were moving steadily toward more self government britain increasingly tightened its grip threatening a stranglehold that eventually led to wrenching revolution.
by the early twentieth century these approaches were challenged by the so called progressive historians who argued that neither divine destiny nor constitutional quibbles had much to do with the revolution.
rather the revolution stemmed from deepseated class tensions within american society.
once released by revolt those tensions produced a truly transformed social order.
living themselves in a reform age when entrenched economic interests cowered under heavy attack progressive historians like carl becker insisted that the revolution was not just about home rule within the british empire but also about who should rule at home in america the upper or lower classes.
j franklin jameson took beckers analysis one step further in his inuential the american revolution considered as a social movement 1926.
he claimed that the revolution not only grew out of intense struggles between social groups but also inspired many ordinary americans to seek greater economic and political power fundamentally democratizing society in its wake.
in the 1950s the progressive historians fell out of favor as the political climate became more conser vative.
interpretations of the american revolution as a class struggle did not play well in a country obsessed with the spread of communism and in its place arose the so called consensus view.
historians such as robert brown and edmund morgan downplayed the role of class con ict in the revolutionary era but emphasized that colonists of all ranks shared a commitment to certain fundamental political principles of self government.
the unifying power of ideas was now back in fashion almost a hundred years after bancroft.
since the 1950s two broad interpretations have contended with each other and perpetuated the controversy over whether political ideals or economic and social realities were most responsible for the revolution.
the rst articulated most prominently by bernard bailyn has emphasized ideological and psychological factors.
focusing on the power of ideas to foment revolution bailyn argued that the colonists incited by their reading of seventeenth century and early eighteenth century eng lish political theorists grew extraordinarily perhaps even exaggeratedly suspicious of any attempts to tighten the imperial reins on the colonies.
when confronted with new taxes and commercial regulations these hypersensitive colonists screamed conspiracy against liberty and corrupt ministerial plot in time they took up armed insurrection in defense of their intellectual commitment to liberty.
a second school of historians writing during the 1960s and 1970s and inspired by the social movements of that turbulent era revived the progressive interpretation of the revolution.
gary nash in the urban crucible 1979 and edward countryman in a people in revolution 1981 pointed to the increasing social and economic divisions among americans in both the urban seaports and the isolated countryside in the years leading up to the revolution.
attacks by laborers on political elites and expressions of resentment toward wealth were taken as evidence of a society that was breeding revolutionary change from within quite aside from british provocations.
while the concerns of the progressive historians echo in these socioeconomic interpretations of the revolution the neoprogressives have been more careful not to reduce the issues simplistically to the one ring arena of economic self interest.
instead they have argued that the varying material circumstances of american participants led them to hold distinctive to learn more versions of republicanism giving the revolution a less unied and more complex ideological underpinning than the idealistic historians had previously suggested.
the dialogue between proponents of ideas and interests has gradually led to a more nuanced meeting of the two views.
most recently scholars have taken a more transatlantic view of the revolutions origins asking when and how colonists shifted from identifying as british to viewing themselves as american fred anderson has argued that long before rebellion the seven years war 1756 1763 helped create a sense of american identity apart from britain.
other historians such as t h breen argue that british nationalism actually intensied in the colonies over the course of the eighteenth century as economic and cultural ties between britain and north america strengthened through increased trade and the migration of ideas with the growth of print culture.
only when colonists realized that the british did not see them as equal imperial citizens entitled to the same rights as englishmen did american nationalism emerge and americans rebel.
to learn more david armitage the declaration of independence a global history 2007 robert m calhoon the loyalists in revolutionary america 1973 colin g calloway the american revolution in indian country 1995 caroline cox a proper sense of honor service and sacrice in george washingtons army 2004 joseph j ellis his excellency george washington 2004 david hackett fischer washingtons crossing 2004 james h hutson john adams and the diplomacy of the american revolution 1980 linda k kerber women of the republic intellect and ideology in revolutionary america 1980 samuel e morison john paul jones 1959 mary beth norton the british americans the loyalist exiles in england 1972 libertys daughters the revolutionary experience of american women 1980 cassandra pybus epic journeys of freedom runaway slaves of the american revolution and their global quest for liberty 2006 alan taylor liberty men and great proprietors the revolutionary settlement on the maine frontier 1760 1820 1990 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at part two building the new nation 1776 1860 b y 1783 americans had won their freedom.
now they had to build their country.
to be sure they were blessed with a vast and fertile land and they inherited from their colonial experience a proud legacy of selfrule.
but history provided scant precedent for erecting a republic on a national scale.
no law of nature guaranteed that the thirteen rebellious colonies would stay glued together as a single nation or that they would preserve not to mention expand their democratic way of life.
new institutions had to be created new habits of thought cultivated.
who could predict whether the american experiment in gov ernment by the people would succeed.
the feeble national government cobbled together under the articles of confederation during the revolutionary war soon proved woefully inadequate to the task of nation building.
in less than ten years after the revolutionary wars conclusion the articles were replaced by a new constitution but even its adoption did not end the debate over just what form american government should take.
would the president the congress or the courts be the dominant branch.
what should be the proper division of authority between the federal government and the the verdict of the people detail this election day crowd exudes the exuberant spirit of the era of andrew jackson when the advent of universal white male suffrage made the united states the modern worlds rst mass participatory democracy.
yet the black man with the wheelbarrow literally pushing his way into the painting is a pointed reminder that the curse of slavery still blighted this happy scene.
how could the rights of individuals be protected against a potentially powerful government.
what economic policies would best serve the infant republic.
how should the nation defend itself against foreign foes.
what principles should guide foreign policy.
was america a nation at all or was it merely a geographic expression destined to splinter into several bitterly quarreling sections as had happened to so many other would be countries.
after a shaky start under george washington and john adams in the 1790s buffeted by foreign troubles and domestic crises the new republic passed a major test when power was peacefully transferred from the conser vative federalists to the more liberal jeffersonians in the election of 1800.
a condent president jefferson proceeded boldly to expand the national territory with the landmark louisiana purchase in 1803.
but before long jefferson and then his successor james madison were embroiled in what eventually proved to be a fruitless effort to spare the united states from the ravages of the war then raging in europe.
america was dangerously divided during the war of 1812 and suffered a humiliating defeat.
but a new sense of national unity and purpose was unleashed in the land thereafter.
president monroe presiding over this era of good feelings proclaimed in the monroe doctrine of 1823 that both of the american continents were off limits to further european intervention.
the foundations of a continental scale economy were laid as a transportation revolution stitched the country together with canals and railroads and turnpikes.
settlers ooded over those new arteries into the burgeoning west often brusquely shouldering aside the native peoples.
immigrants especially from ireland and germany ocked to american shores.
the combination of new lands new labor and revolutionary new technologies like the telegraph and the railroad fed the growth of a market economy including the women weavers at work detail these simple cotton looms heralded the dawn of the industrial revolution which transformed the lives of americans even more radically than the events of 1776 commercialization of agriculture and the beginnings of the factory system of production.
old ways of life withered as the market economy drew women as well as men children as well as adults blacks as well as whites into its embrace.
ominously the slave system grew robustly as the production of cotton mostly for sale on european markets exploded into the booming southwest.
meanwhile the united states in the era of andrew jackson gave the world an impressive lesson in political science.
between roughly 1820 and 1840 americans virtually invented mass democracy creating huge political parties and enormously expanding political participation by enfranchising nearly all adult white males.
nor was the spirit of innovation con ned to the political realm.
a wave of reform and cultural vitality swept through many sectors of american society.
utopian experiments proliferated.
religious revivals and even new religions like mormonism ourished.
a national literature blossomed.
crusades were launched for temperance prison reform womens rights and the abolition of slavery.
by the second quarter of the nineteenth century the outlines of a distinctive american national character had begun to emerge.
americans were a diverse restless people tramping steadily westward eagerly forging their own nascent industrial revolution proudly exercising their democratic political rights impatient with the old in love with the new testily asserting their superiority over all other peoples and increasingly divided in heart in conscience and in politics over the single greatest blight on their record of nation making and democracy building slavery.
the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 the example of changing a constitution by assembling the wise men of the state instead of assembling armies will be worth as much to the world as the former examples we had given them thomas jefferson 1789 t he american revolution was not a revolution in the sense of a radical or total change.
it did not suddenly and violently overturn the entire political and social framework as later occurred in the french and russian revolutions.
what happened was accelerated evolution rather than outright revolution.
during the con ict itself people went on working and praying marrying and playing.
many of them were not seriously disturbed by the actual ghting and the most isolated communities scarcely knew that a war was on.
yet some striking changes were ushered in affecting social customs political institutions and ideas about society government and even gender roles.
the exodus of some eighty thousand substantial loyalists robbed the new ship of state of conser vative ballast.
this weakening of the aristocratic upper crust with all its culture and elegance paved the way for new patriot elites to emerge.
it also cleared the eld for more egalitarian ideas to sweep across the land.
the pursuit of equality all men are created equal the declaration of independence proclaimed and equality was every where the watchword.
most states reduced but usually did not eliminate altogether property holding requirements for voting.
ordinary men and women demanded to be addressed as mr and mrs titles once reserved for the wealthy and highborn.
employers were now called boss not master in 1784 new yorkers released a shipload of freshly arrived indentured servants on the grounds that their status violated democratic ideals by 1800 servitude was virtually unknown.
most americans ridiculed the lordly pretensions of continental army ofcers who formed an exclusive hereditary order the society of the cincinnati.
social democracy was further stimulated by the growth of trade orga ni zations for artisans and laborers.
citizens this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website aftermath of the revolution in several states ushed with republican fervor also sawed off the remaining shackles of medieval inheritance laws such as primogeniture which awarded all of a fathers property to the eldest son.
a protracted ght for separation of church and state resulted in notable gains.
although the well entrenched congregational church continued to be legally established in some new eng land states the anglican church tainted by association with the british crown was humbled.
de anglicized it re formed as the protestant episcopal church and was every where disestablished.
the struggle for divorce between religion and government proved ercest in virginia.
it was prolonged to 1786 when freethinking thomas jefferson and his co reformers including the baptists won a complete victory with the passage of the virginia statute for religious freedom.
see table 5 1 on established churches on p.
the egalitarian sentiments unleashed by the war likewise challenged the institution of slavery.
philadelphia quakers in 1775 founded the worlds rst antislavery society.
hostilities hampered the noxious trade in black ivory and the continental congress in 1774 called for the complete abolition of the slave trade a summons to which most of the states responded positively.
several northern states went further and either abolished slavery outright or provided for the gradual emancipation of blacks.
even on the plantations of virginia a few idealistic masters freed their human chattels the rst frail sprouts of the later abolitionist movement.
but this revolution of sentiments was sadly incomplete.
no states south of pennsylvania abolished slavery and in both north and south the law discriminated harshly against freed blacks and slaves alike.
emancipated african americans could be barred from purchasing property holding certain jobs and educating their children.
laws against interracial marriage also sprang up at this time.
why in this dawning democratic age did abolition not go further and cleanly blot the evil of slavery from the impact of the american revolution was worldwide.
about 1783 a british ship stopped at some islands off the east african coast where the natives were revolting against their arab masters.
when asked why they were ghting they replied america is free could not we be.
elizabeth mumbet freeman ca.
1744 1829 by susan anne livingston ridley sedgwick 1811 in 1781 having overheard revolutionary era talk about the rights of man mumbet sued her massachusetts master for her freedom from slavery.
she won her suit and lived the rest of her life as a paid domestic servant in the home of the lawyer who had pleaded her case.
the fresh face of the new nation.
the sorry truth is that the edgling idealism of the founding fathers was sacriced to political expediency.
a ght over slavery would have fractured the fragile national unity that was so desperately needed.
great as the evil of slavery is the young virginian james madison wrote in 1787 a dismemberment of the union would be worse nearly a century later the slavery issue did wreck the union temporarily.
likewise incomplete was the extension of the doctrine of equality to women.
some women did serve disguised as men in the military and new jerseys new constitution in 1776 even for a time enabled women to vote.
but though abigail adams teased her husband john in 1776 that the ladies were determined to foment a rebellion of their own if they were not given political rights most of the women in the.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 the revolution enhanced the expectations and power of women as wives and mothers.
as one matrimonial republican wrote in 1792 i object to the word obey in the marriageservice because it is a general word without limitations or denition.
the obedience between man and wife i conceive is or ought to be mutual.
marriage ought never to be considered a contract between a superior and an inferior but a reciprocal union of interest an implied partnership of interests where all differences are accommodated by conference and where the decision admits of no retrospect.
revolutionary era were still doing traditional womens work.
yet women did not go untouched by revolutionary ideals.
central to republican ideology was the concept of civic virtue the notion that democracy depended on the unselsh commitment of each citizen to the public good.
and who could better cultivate the habits of a virtuous citizenry than mothers to whom society entrusted the moral education of the young.
indeed the seless devotion of a mother to her family was often cited as the very model of proper republican behavior.
the idea of republican motherhood thus took root elevating women to a newly prestigious role as the special keepers of the nations conscience.
educational opportunities for women expanded in the expectation that educated wives and mothers could better cultivate the virtues demanded by the republic in their husbands daughters and sons.
republican women now bore crucial responsibility for the survival of the nation.
constitution making in the states the continental congress in 1776 called upon the colonies to draft new constitutions.
in effect the continental congress was actually asking the colonies to summon themselves into being as new states.
the sovereignty of these new states according to the theory of republicanism would rest on the authority of the people.
for a time the manufacture of governments was even more pressing than the manufacture of gunpowder.
although the states of connecticut and rhode island merely retouched their colonial charters constitution writers elsewhere worked tirelessly to capture on black inked parchment the republican spirit of the age.
massachusetts contributed one especially noteworthy innovation when it called a special convention to draft its constitution and then submitted the nal draft directly to the people for ratication.
once adopted in 1780 the massachusetts constitution could be changed only by another specially called constitutional convention.
this procedure was later imitated in the drafting and ratication of the federal constitution.
adopted almost a decade before the federal constitution the massachusetts constitution remains the longest lived constitution in the world.
the newly penned state constitutions had many features in common.
their similarity as it turned out made easier the drafting of a workable federal charter when the time was ripe.
in the british tradition a constitution was not a written document but rather an accumulation of laws customs and precedents.
americans invented something different.
the documents they drafted were contracts that de ned the powers of government as did the old colonial charters but they drew their authority from the people not from the royal seal of a distant king.
as written documents the state constitutions were intended to represent a fundamental law superior to the transient whims of ordinary legislation.
most of these documents included bills of rights specically guaranteeing long prized liberties against later legislative encroachment.
most of them required the annual election of legislators who were thus forced to stay in touch with the mood of the people.
all of them deliberately created weak executive and judicial branches at least by present day standards.
a generation of quarreling with his majestys ofcials had implanted a deep distrust of despotic governors and arbitrary judges.
in all the new state governments the legislatures as presumably the most democratic branch of government were given sweeping powers.
but as thomas jefferson warned 173 despots in a legislature would surely be as oppressive as one many americans soon came to agree with him.
the democratic character of the new state legislatures was vividly reected by the presence of many members from the recently enfranchised poorer west copley family portrait ca.
1776 1777 portrait painting like this one by john singleton copley 1738 1815 documents physical likenesses clothing styles and other material possessions typical of an era.
but it can do more than that.
in the execution of the painting itself the preeminent portrait painter of colonial america revealed important values of his time.
copleys composition and use of light emphasized the importance of the mother in the family.
mrs copley is the visual center of the painting the light falls predominantly on her a ern districts.
their inuence was powerfully felt in their several successful movements to relocate state capitals from the haughty eastern seaports into the less pretentious interior.
in the revolutionary era the capitals of new hampshire new york virginia north carolina south carolina and georgia were all moved westward.
these geographical shifts portended political shifts that deeply discomted many more conser vative americans.
and she provides the focus of activity for the family group.
although copley had moved to eng land in 1774 to avoid the disruptions of war he had made radical friends in his hometown of boston and surely had imbibed the sentiment of the age about republican motherhood a sentiment that revered women as homemakers and mothers the cultivators of good republican values in young citizens.
what other prevailing attitudes about gender and age for example might this painting reveal.
economic crosscurrents economic changes begotten by the war were likewise noteworthy but not overwhelming.
states seized control of former crown lands and although rich speculators had their day many of the large loyalist holdings were conscated and eventually cut up into small farms.
roger morriss huge estate in new york for chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 western merchants negotiating for tea in hong kong ca.
1800 yankee merchants and shippers gured prominently in the booming trade with china in the late eighteenth century.
among the american entrepreneurs who prospered in the china trade was warren delano ancestor of president franklin delano roosevelt.
example was sliced into 250 parcels thus accelerating the spread of economic democracy.
the frightful excesses of the french revolution were avoided partly because cheap land was easily available and because america had so few deeply entrenched landed aristocrats to be overthrown.
it is highly signicant that in the united states economic democracy broadly speaking preceded political democracy.
a sharp stimulus was given to manufacturing by the prewar nonimportation agreements and later by the war itself.
goods that had formerly been imported from britain were mostly cut off and the ingenious yankees were forced to make their own.
ten years after the revolution busy brandywine creek south of philadelphia was turning the water wheels of numerous mills along an eight mile stretch.
yet america remained overwhelmingly a nation of soil tillers.
economically speaking independence had drawbacks.
much of the coveted commerce of britain was still reserved for the loyal parts of the empire.
american ships were now barred from british and british west indies harbors.
fisheries were disrupted and bounties for ships stores had abruptly ended.
in some respects the hated british navigation laws were more disagreeable after independence than before.
new commercial outlets fortunately compensated partially for the loss of old ones.
americans could now trade freely with foreign nations subject to local restrictions a boon they had not enjoyed in the days of mercantilism.
enterprising yankee shippers ventured problems of a new government boldly and protably into the baltic and china seas.
in 1784 the empress of china carrying a valuable weed ginseng that was highly prized by chinese herb doctors as a cure for impotence led the way into the east asian markets.
yet the general economic picture was far from rosy.
war had spawned demoralizing extravagance speculation and proteering with prots for some as indecently high as 300 percent.
state governments had borrowed more during the war than they could ever hope to repay.
runaway ination had been ruinous to many citizens and congress had failed in its feeble attempts to curb economic laws.
the average citizen was probably worse off nancially at the end of the shooting than at the start.
the whole economic and social at mosphere was unhealthy.
a newly rich class of proteers was noisily conspicuous whereas many once wealthy people were left destitute.
the controversy leading to the revolutionary war had bred a keen distaste for taxes and encouraged disrespect for the majesty of the law generally.
john adams had been shocked when gleefully told by a horse jockey neighbor that the courts of justice were all closed a plight that proved to be only temporary.
a shaky start toward union what would the americans do with the independence they had so dearly won.
the revolution had dumped the responsibility of creating and operating a new central government squarely into their laps.
prospects for erecting a lasting regime were far from bright.
it is always difcult to set up a new government and doubly difcult to set up a new type of government.
the picture was further clouded in america by leaders preaching natural rights and looking suspiciously at all persons clothed with authority.
america was more a name than a nation and unity ran little deeper than the color on the map.
disruptive forces stalked the land.
the departure of the conser vative tory element left the political system inclined toward experimentation and innovation.
patriots had fought the war with a high degree of disunity but they had at least concurred on allegiance to a common cause.
now even that was gone.
it would have been almost a miracle if any government fashioned in all this confusion had long endured.
hard times the bane of all regimes set in shortly after the war and hit bottom in 1786.
as if other troubles were not enough british manufacturers with dammedup surpluses began ooding the american market with cut rate goods.
war baby american industries in particular suffered industrial colic from such ruthless competition.
one philadelphia newspaper in 1783 urged readers to don home stitched garments of homespun cloth of foreign gewgaws lets be free and wear the webs of liberty.
yet hopeful signs could be discerned.
the thirteen sovereign states were basically alike in governmental structure and functioned under similar constitutions.
americans enjoyed a rich political inheritance derived partly from britain and partly from their own homegrown devices for self government.
finally they were blessed with political leaders of a high order in men like george washington james madison john adams thomas jefferson and alexander hamilton.
creating a confederation the second continental congress of revolutionary days was little more than a conference of ambassadors from the thirteen states.
it was totally without constitutional authority and in general did only what it dared to do though it asserted some control over military affairs and foreign policy.
in nearly all respects the thirteen states were sovereign for they coined money raised armies and navies and erected tariff barriers.
the legislature of virginia even ratied separately the treaty of alliance of 1778 with france.
shortly before declaring independence in 1776 congress appointed a committee to draft a written constitution for the new nation.
the nished product was the articles of confederation.
adopted by congress in 1777 it was translated into french after the battle of saratoga so as to convince france that america had a genuine government in the making.
the articles were not ratied by all thirteen states until 1781 less than eight months before the victory at yorktown.
the chief apple of discord was western lands.
six of the jealous states including pennsylvania and maryland had no holdings beyond the allegheny mountains.
seven notably new york and virginia were favored with enormous acreage in most cases on the basis of earlier charter grants.
the six land hungry states argued that the more fortunate states would not have retained possession of this splendid prize if all the other states had not fought for it also.
a major chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 is claimed by conn and va 40n ceded by va 1784 ceded by conn 1786 sr ri l e oh io n.
ceded by n c 1790 er se tennessee es by mass.
claimed by conn.
ceded to pa in 1782 pennsylvania.
south carolina r e re l n h mass.
rhode island connecticut new jersey n at l a n t i c o c e a n georgia gulf of mexico mass.
north carolina 30n maine virginia ceded by s c to georgia 1795 aw delaware maryland n.
r s is s ip pi r red claimed by georgia.
ceded 1802 70w susquehanna r ceded by virginia 1792 kentucky te mi s new york r ceded by s c to georgia 1787.
e western reserve claimed by conn.
ceded 1800 claimed by virginia.
ceded 1784.
spanish louisiana ar k a nsa rio onta l ceded on.
claimed by mass.
ceded by va 1784 ceded by mass.
1785 k hur.
r claimed by n h and n y.
ceded 1791 vermont ceded by mass.
to n y 1786 e claimed by virginia.
ceded 1784 ir i m o uri la la k e m i c h i m ip p ss british north america canada e superior northwest sis territory s claimed by u s and great britain st la k 80w nc 90w gan 100w spanish florida 400 km.
boundary of territory ceded by new york 1782 territory ceded by virginia 1784 territory ceded by georgia 1802 other claims original thirteen states after their cessions states without land claims map 9 1 western land cessions to the united states 1782 1802 interactive map complaint was that the land rich states could sell their trans allegheny tracts and thus pay off pensions and other debts incurred in the common cause.
states without such holdings would have to tax themselves heavily to defray these obligations.
why not turn the whole western area over to the central government.
unanimous approval of the articles of confederation by the thirteen states was required and landstarved maryland stubbornly held out until march 1 1781.
maryland at length gave in when new york surrendered its western claims and virginia seemed about to do so.
to sweeten the pill congress pledged itself to dispose of these vast areas for the common benet it further agreed to carve from the new public domain not colonies but a number of republican states which in time would be admitted to the union on terms of complete equality with all the others.
this extraordinary commitment faithfully reected the anticolonial spirit of the revolution and the pledge was later fully redeemed in the famed northwest ordinance of 1787 see map 9 1.
fertile public lands thus transferred to the central government proved to be an invaluable bond of union.
the states that had thrown their heritage into the common pot had to remain in the union if they were to reap their share of the advantages from the land sales.
an army of westward moving pioneers purchased their farms from the federal government directly or indirectly and they learned to look to the national capital rather than to the state capitals with a consequent a crippled confederation weakening of local inuence.
finally a uniform national land policy was made possible.
the articles of confederation americas first constitution the articles of confederation some have said articles of confusion provided for a loose confederation or rm league of friendship thirteen independent states were thus linked together for joint action in dealing with common problems such as foreign affairs.
a clumsy congress was to be the chief agency of government.
there was no executive branch george iii had left a bad taste and the vital judicial arm was left almost exclusively to the states.
congress though dominant was severely hobbled.
each state had a single vote so that some sixty eight thousand rhode islanders had the same voice as more than ten times that many virginians.
all bills dealing with subjects of importance required the support of nine states any amendment of the articles themselves required unanimous ratication.
unanimity was almost impossible and this meant that the amending process perhaps fortunately was unworkable.
if it had been workable the republic might have struggled along with a patched up articles of confederation rather than replace it with an effective constitution.
the shackled congress was weak and was purposely designed to be weak.
suspicious states having just won control over taxation and commerce from britain had no desire to yield their newly acquired privileges to an american parliament even one of their own making.
two handicaps of congress were crippling.
it had no power to regulate commerce and this loophole left the states free to establish different and often con icting laws regarding tariffs and navigation.
nor could congress enforce its tax collection program.
it established a tax quota for each of the states and then asked them please to contribute their share on a voluntary basis.
the central authority a government by independence hall philadelphia 1776 originally built in the 1730s as a meeting place for the pennsylvania colonial assembly this building witnessed much history here washington was given command of the continental army the declaration of independence was signed and the constitution was hammered out.
the building began to be called independence hall in the 1820s and is today a major tourist destination in philadelphia.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 supplication was lucky if in any year it received onefourth of its requests.
the feeble national government in philadelphia could advise and advocate and appeal.
but in dealing with the independent states it could not command or coerce or control.
it could not act directly upon the individual citizens of a sovereign state it could not even protect itself against gross indignities.
in 1783 a group of mutinous pennsylvania soldiers whose pay was in arrears marched to philadelphia and made a threatening demonstration in front of independence hall.
after congress appealed in vain to the state for protection its members ed to safety at princeton college in new jersey.
the new congress with all its paper powers was even less effective than the old continental congress which had wielded no constitutional powers at all.
yet the articles of confederation weak though they were proved to be a landmark in government.
they were for those days a model of what a loose confederation could be.
thomas jefferson enthusiastically hailed the new structure as the best one existing or that ever did exist to compare it with the european governments he thought was like comparing heaven and hell but although the confederation was praiseworthy as confederations went the troubled times demanded not a loosely woven confederation but a tightly knit federation.
this involved the yielding by the states of their sovereignty to a completely recast federal government which in turn would leave them free to control their local affairs.
in spite of their defects the anemic articles of confederation were a signicant steppingstone toward the present constitution.
they clearly outlined the general powers that were to be exercised by the central government such as making treaties and establishing a postal ser vice.
as the rst written constitution of the republic the articles kept alive the ickering ideal of union and held the states together until such time as they were ripe for the establishment of a strong constitution by peaceful evolutionary methods.
without this intermediary jump the states probably would never have consented to the breathtaking leap from the old boycott association of 1774 to the constitution of the united states.
landmarks in land laws handcuffed though the congress of the confederation was it succeeded in passing supremely farsighted pieces of legislation.
these related to an immense part of the public domain recently acquired from the states and commonly known as the old northwest.
this area of land lay northwest of the ohio river east of the mississippi river and south of the great lakes.
the rst of these red letter laws was the land ordinance of 1785 see map 9 2.
it provided that the acreage of the old northwest should be sold and that the proceeds should be used to help pay off the national debt.
the vast area was to be surveyed before sale and settlement thus forestalling endless confusion and lawsuits.
it was to be divided into townships six miles square each of which in turn was to be split into thirtysix sections of one square mile each.
the sixteenth section of each township was set aside to be sold for the benet of the public schools a priceless gift to education in the northwest.
the orderly settlement of the northwest territory where the land was methodically surveyed and titles duly recorded contrasted sharply with the chaos south of the ohio river where uncertain ownership was the norm and fraud was rampant.
even more noteworthy was the northwest ordinance of 1787 which related to the governing of the old northwest.
this law came to grips with the problem of how a nation should deal with its colonies the same problem that had bedeviled the king and parliament in london.
the solution provided by the northwest ordinance was a judicious compromise temporary tutelage then permanent equality.
first there would be two evolutionary territorial stages during which the area would be subordinate to the federal government.
then when a territory could boast sixty thousand inhabitants it might be admitted by congress as a state with all the privileges of the thirteen charter members.
this is precisely what the continental congress had promised the states when they surrendered their lands in 1781.
the ordinance also forbade slavery in the old northwest a path breaking step though it exempted slaves already present.
the wisdom of congress in handling this explosive problem deserves warm praise.
if it had attempted to chain the new territories in permanent subordination a second american revolution almost certainly would have erupted in later years fought this time by the west against the east.
congress thus neatly solved the seemingly insoluble problem of empire.
the scheme worked so well that its basic principles were ultimately carried over from the old northwest to other frontier areas.
troubled foreign relations 90w 50n 80w section 16 reserved for school funds northwest territory boundaries indefinite present state boundary lak e superio r n british north america canada the seven ranges first area surveyed 36 km.
6 miles a township l ak an r 200 km.
lak 200 mi.
10 11 12 18 17 16 15 14 13 19 20 21 22 23 24 30 29 28 27 26 25 e e pennsylvania ania a pi lake michi g ip ron i ss u e h m iss rie spanish louisiana p pa pa 31 32 33 34 35 36 640 acres half section 320 acres oh io r 1 mile 40n virginia marietta tennessee o kentucky hi o r quarter section 160 acres half quarter section 80 acres virginia quarter quarter section 40 acres n c map 9 2 surveying the old northwest under the land ordinance of 1785 sections of a township under the land ordinance of 1785.
interactive map the worlds ugly duckling foreign relations especially with london remained troubled during these anxious years of the confederation.
britain resented the stab in the back from its rebellious offspring and for eight years refused to send a minister to americas backwoods capital.
london suggested with barbed irony that if it sent one it would have to send thirteen.
britain atly declined to make a commercial treaty or to repeal its ancient navigation laws.
lord shefeld whose ungenerous views prevailed argued persuasively in a widely sold pamphlet that britain would win back americas trade anyhow.
commerce he insisted would naturally follow old channels.
so why go to the americans hat in hand.
the british also ofcially closed their protable west indies trade to the united states though the yankees with their time tested skill in smuggling illegally partook nonetheless.
scheming british agents were also active along the far ung northern frontier.
they intrigued with the disgruntled allen brothers of vermont and sought to annex that rebellious area to britain.
along the northern border the redcoats continued to hold a chain of trading posts on u s soil and there they maintained their fur trade with the indians.
one plausible excuse for remaining was the failure of the american states to honor the treaty of peace in regard to debts and loyalists.
but the main purpose of britain in hanging on was probably to curry favor with the indians and keep their tomahawks lined up on the side of the king as a barrier against future american attacks on canada.
all these grievances against britain were maddening to patriotic americans.
some citizens demanded with more heat than wisdom that the united states force the british into line by imposing restrictions on their imports to america.
but congress could not control commerce and the states refused to adopt a uniform tariff policy.
some easy states deliberately lowered their tariffs in order to attract an unfair share of trade.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 spain though recently an enemy of britain was openly unfriendly to the new republic.
it controlled the mouth of the all important mississippi down which the pioneers of tennessee and kentucky were forced to oat their produce.
in 1784 spain closed the river to american commerce threatening the west with strangulation.
spain likewise claimed a large area north of the gulf of mexico including a part of west florida granted to the united states by the british in 1783.
at natchez on disputed soil it held an important fort.
it also schemed with the neighboring indians grievously antagonized by the rapacious land policies of georgia and north carolina to hem in the americans east of the appalachians.
spain and britain to 90w 80w 70w b r i ti sh n o r th am er i c a c an ada mi ss iss pi r ip n maine mass.
fort michilimackinac u s soil.
detroit u s soil n y n h fort niagara u s soil mass.
pa io oh st louis spanish louisiana n j md.
r u n i ted stat es south carolina new orleans georgia natchez 40n the horrid specter of anarchy del.
virginia north carolina disputed by spain and u s r i conn gether radiating their inuence out among resentful indian tribes prevented america from exercising effective control over about half of its total territory see map 9 3.
even france americas comrade in arms cooled off now that it had humbled britain.
the french demanded the repayment of money loaned during the war and restricted trade with their bustling west indies and other ports.
pirates of the north african states including the arrogant dey of algiers were ravaging americas mediterranean commerce and enslaving yankee sailors.
the british purchased protection for their own subjects and as colonists the americans had enjoyed this shield.
but as an independent nation the united states was too weak to ght and too poor to bribe.
a few yankee shippers engaged in the mediterranean trade with forged british protection papers but not all were so bold or so lucky.
john jay secretary for foreign affairs derived some hollow satisfaction from these insults.
he hoped they would at least humiliate the american people into framing a new government at home that would be strong enough to command respect abroad.
at l a n t i c ocean 400 km.
30n spanish florida british influence spanish influence british fort on u s soil map 9 3 main centers of spanish and british inuence after 1783 this map shows graphically that the united states in 1783 achieved complete independence in name only particularly in the area west of the appalachian mountains.
not until twenty years had passed did the new republic with the purchase of louisiana from france in 1803 eliminate foreign inuence from the east bank of the mississippi river.
much of florida remained in spanish hands until the adams ons treaty of 1819 see p 265 267.
interactive map economic storm clouds continued to loom in the mid1780s.
the requisition system of raising money was breaking down some of the states refused to pay anything while complaining bitterly about the tyranny of king congress interest on the public debt was piling up at home and the nations credit was evaporating abroad.
individual states were getting out of hand.
quarrels over boundaries generated numerous minor pitched battles.
some of the states were levying duties on goods from their neighbors new york for example taxed rewood from connecticut and cabbages from new jersey.
a number of the states were again starting to grind out depreciated paper currency and a few of them had passed laws sanctioning the semiworthless rag money as a contemporary rhymester put it bankrupts their creditors with rage pursue no stop no mercy from the debtor crew.
an alarming uprising known as shayss rebellion ared up in western massachusetts in 1786.
impoverished backcountry farmers many of them revolutionary war veterans were losing their farms through mortgage foreclosures and tax delinquencies.
led by the constitutional convention debtors protest 1787 this drawing done on the eve of the writing of the u s constitution features a farmer with a plow a rake and a bottle complaining takes all to pay taxes the discontent of debt rich and currency poor farmers alarmed republican leaders and helped persuade them that the articles of confederation needed to be replaced with a new constitution.
captain daniel shays a veteran of the revolution these desperate debtors demanded that the state issue paper money lighten taxes and suspend property takeovers.
hundreds of angry agitators again seizing their muskets attempted to enforce their demands.
massachusetts authorities responded with drastic action.
supported partly by contributions from wealthy citizens they raised a small army.
several skirmishes occurred at springeld three shaysites were killed and one was wounded and the movement collapsed.
daniel shays who believed that he was ghting anew against tyranny was condemned to death but was later pardoned.
shayss followers were crushed but the nightmarish memory lingered on.
the massachusetts legislature soon passed debtor relief laws of the kind shays had championed seemingly con rming thomas jeffersons fear of democratic despotism an elective despotism was not the government we fought for jefferson wrote.
the outbursts of shays and other distressed debtors struck fear in the hearts of the propertied class who began to suspect that the revolution had created a monster of mobocracy unbridled republicanism it seemed to many of the elite had fed an insatiable appetite for liberty that was fast becoming license.
civic virtue was no longer sufcient to rein in self interest and greed.
it had become undeniably evident one skeptic sorrowfully lamented that some malignant disorder has seized upon our body politic if republicanism was too shaky a ground upon which to construct a new nation a stronger central government would provide the needed foundation.
a few panicky citizens even talked of importing a european monarch to carry on where george iii had failed.
how critical were conditions under the confederation.
conservatives anxious to safeguard their wealth and position naturally exaggerated the seriousness of the nations plight.
they were eager to persuade their fellow citizens to amend the articles of confederation in favor of a muscular central government.
but the poorer states rights people pooh poohed the talk of anarchy.
many were debtors who feared that a powerful federal government would force them to pay their creditors.
yet friends and critics of the confederation agreed that it needed some strengthening.
popular toasts were cement to the union and a hoop to the barrel the chief differences arose over how this goal should be attained and how a maximum degree of states rights could be reconciled with a strong central government.
america probably could have muddled through somehow with amended articles of confederation.
but the adoption of a completely new constitution certainly spared the republic much costly indecision uncertainty and turmoil.
the nationwide picture was actually brightening before the constitution was drafted.
nearly half the states had not issued semiworthless paper currency and some of the monetary black sheep showed signs of returning to the sound money fold.
prosperity was beginning to emerge from the fog of depression.
by 1789 social tensions reached a fever pitch during shayss rebellion in 1787.
in an interview with a local massachusetts paper instigator daniel shays 1747 1825 explained how the debt ridden farmers hoped to free themselves from the demands of a merchantdominated government.
the rebels would seize arms and march directly to boston plunder it and then.
destroy the nest of devils who by their inuence make the court enact what they please burn it and lay the town of boston in ashes.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 overseas shipping had largely regained its place in the commercial world.
if conditions had been as grim in 1787 as painted by foes of the articles of confederation the move for a new constitution would hardly have encountered such heated opposition.
a convention of demigods control of commerce more than any other problem touched off the chain reaction that led to a constitutional convention.
interstate squabbling over this issue had become so alarming by 1786 that virginia taking the lead issued a call for a convention at annapolis maryland.
nine states appointed delegates but only ve were nally represented.
with so laughable a showing nothing could be done about the ticklish question of commerce.
a charismatic new yorker thirty oneyear old alexander hamilton brilliantly saved the convention from complete failure by engineering the adoption of his report.
it called upon congress to summon a convention to meet in philadelphia the next year not to deal with commerce alone but to bolster the entire fabric of the articles of confederation.
congress though slowly and certainly dying in new york city was reluctant to take a step that might hasten its day of reckoning.
but after six of the states had seized the bit in their teeth and appointed delegates anyhow congress belatedly issued the call for a convention for the sole and express purpose of revising the articles of confederation.
alexander hamilton 1755 1804 clearly revealed his preference for an aristocratic government in his philadelphia speech 1787 all communities divide themselves into the few and the many.
the rst are the rich and wellborn the other the mass of the people.
the people are turbulent and changing they seldom judge or determine right.
give therefore to the rst class a distinct permanent share in the government.
they will check the unsteadiness of the second and as they cannot receive any advantage by change they therefore will ever maintain good government.
every state chose representatives except for independent minded rhode island still rogues island a stronghold of paper moneyites.
these leaders were all appointed by the state legislatures whose members had been elected by voters who could qualify as property holders.
this double distillation inevitably brought together a select group of propertied men though it is a grotesque distortion to claim that they shaped the constitution primarily to protect their personal nancial interests.
when one of them did suggest restricting federal ofce to major property owners he was promptly denounced for the unwisdom of interweaving into a republican constitution a veneration for wealth a quorum of the fty ve emissaries from twelve states nally convened at philadelphia on may 25 1787 in the imposing red brick statehouse.
the smallness of the assemblage facilitated intimate acquaintance and hence compromise.
sessions were held in complete secrecy with armed sentinels posted at the doors.
delegates knew that they would generate heated differences and they did not want to advertise their own dissensions or put the ammunition of harmful arguments into the mouths of the opposition.
the caliber of the participants was extraordinarily high demigods jefferson called them.
the urgency of the crisis induced the ablest men to drop their personal pursuits and come to the aid of their country.
most of the members were lawyers and most of them fortunately were old hands at constitution making in their own states.
george washington towering austere and aloof among the demigods was unanimously elected chairman.
his enormous prestige as the sword of the revolution served to quiet overheated tempers.
benjamin franklin then eighty one added the urbanity of an elder statesman though he was inclined to be indiscreetly talkative in his declining years.
concerned for the secrecy of their deliberations the convention assigned chaperones to accompany franklin to dinner parties and make sure he held his tongue.
james madison then thirty six and a profound student of government made contributions so notable that he has been dubbed the father of the constitution alexander hamilton then only thirty two was present as an advocate of a super powerful central government.
his ve hour speech in behalf of his plan though the most eloquent of the convention left only one delegate convinced himself.
most of the ery revolutionary leaders of 1776 were absent.
thomas jefferson john adams and thomas searching for compromise thomas jefferson 1743 1826 despite his high regard for the leaders at the philadelphia convention still was not unduly concerned about shaysite rebellions.
he wrote in november 1787 what country before ever existed a century and a half without a rebellion.
the tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants.
it is its natural manure.
rising sun symbol at the top of washingtons chair this brass sun adorned the chair in which george washington sat during the constitutional convention.
pondering the symbol benjamin franklin observed i have the happiness to know it is a rising and not a setting sun paine were in europe samuel adams and john hancock were not elected by massachusetts.
patrick henry ardent champion of states rights was chosen as a delegate from virginia but declined to serve declaring that he smelled a rat it was perhaps well that these architects of revolution were absent.
the time had come to yield the stage to leaders interested in fashioning solid political systems.
patriots in philadelphia the fty ve delegates were a conser vative well to do body lawyers merchants shippers land speculators and moneylenders.
not a single spokesperson was present from the poorer debtor groups.
nineteen of the fty ve owned slaves.
they were young the average age was about forty two but experienced statesmen.
above all they were nationalists more interested in preserving and strengthening the young republic than in further stirring the roiling cauldron of popular democracy.
the delegates hoped to crystallize the last evaporating pools of revolutionary idealism into a stable political structure that would endure.
they strongly desired a rm dignied and respected government.
they believed in republicanism but sought to protect the american experiment from its weaknesses abroad and excesses at home.
in a broad sense the piratical dey of algiers who drove the delegates to their work was a founding father.
they aimed to clothe the central authority with genuine power especially in controlling tariffs so that the united states could wrest satisfactory commercial treaties from foreign nations.
the shortsighted hostility of the british mercantilists spurred the constitution framers to their task and in this sense the illiberal lord shefeld was also a founding father.
other motives hovered in the philadelphia hall.
delegates were determined to preserve the union forestall anarchy and ensure security of life and property against dangerous uprisings by the mobocracy above all they sought to curb the unrestrained democracy rampant in the various states.
we have probably had too good an opinion of human nature in forming our confederation washington concluded.
the specter of the recent outburst in massachusetts was especially alarming and in this sense daniel shays was yet another founding father.
grinding necessity extorted the constitution from a reluctant nation.
fear occupied the fty sixth chair.
hammering out a bundle of compromises some of the travel stained delegates when they rst reached philadelphia decided upon a daring step.
they would completely scrap the old articles of confederation despite explicit instructions from congress to revise.
technically these bolder spirits were determined to overthrow the existing government of the united states see table 9 1 by peaceful means.
a scheme proposed by populous virginia and known as the large state plan was rst pushed forward chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 table 9 1 evolution of federal union years attempts at union participants 1643 1684 1686 1689 1772 1776 1775 1781 1781 1789 1789 1790 new eng land confederation dominion of new eng land albany congress stamp act congress committees of correspondence first continental congress adopts the association second continental congress articles of confederation federal constitution as the framework of the constitution.
the virginia plans essence was that representation in both houses of a bicameral congress should be based on population an arrangement that would naturally give the larger states an advantage.
tiny new jersey suspicious of brawny virginia countered with the small state plan the new jersey plan provided for equal representation in a unicameral congress by states regardless of size and population as under the existing articles of confederation.
the weaker states feared that under the virginia scheme the stronger states would band together and lord it over the rest.
angry debate heightened by a sti ing heat wave led to deadlock.
the danger loomed that the convention would unravel in complete failure.
even skeptical old benjamin franklin seriously proposed that the daily sessions be opened with a prayer by a local clergyman.
after bitter and prolonged debate the great compromise of the convention was hammered out and agreed upon.
a cooling of tempers came coincidentally with a cooling of the temperature.
the larger states were conceded representation by population in the house of representatives art.
3 see the appendix and the smaller states were appeased by equal representation in the senate see art.
each state no matter how poor or small would have two senators.
the big states obviously yielded more.
as a sop to them the delegates agreed that every tax bill or revenue measure must originate in the house where population counted more heavily see art.
this critical compromise broke the logjam and from then on success seemed within reach.
the nal constitution was short not least because it grew out of the anglo american common law legal tradition which made it unnecessary to be specic about every conceivable detail.
it mostly provided a exible guide to broad rules of procedure rather than colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies states states a xed set of detailed laws.
the original unamended constitution contained just seven articles and ran to about ten printed pages.
elsewhere where civil law traditions prevailed constitutions took the form of elaborate legal codes and were often strikingly lengthy.
indias constitution for example which came into force in 1950 contains almost four hundred articles and runs to nearly two hundred pages.
in a signicant reversal of the arrangement most state constitutions had embodied the new constitution provided for a robust though still legally restrained executive in the presidency.
the framers were here partly inspired by the example of massachusetts where a vigorous popularly elected governor had suppressed shayss rebellion.
the president was to have broad authority to make appointments to domestic ofces including judgeships as well as veto power over legislation.
yet presidential power was far from absolute.
the president as commander in dr james mchenry 1753 1816 a delegate from maryland to the constitutional convention of 1787 took notes on the arguments made for and against the drafting of a new constitution gov.
randolph observed that the confederation is incompetent to any one object for which it was instituted.
the framers of it wise and great men but human rights were the chief knowle d ge of the times when it was framed so far as they applied to oppose great britain.
requisitions for men and money had never offered their form to our assemblies.
none of those vices that have since discovered themselves were apprehended.
a conservative constitution signing of the constitution of the united states 1787 george washington presided from the dais as the constitutional conventions president.
at a table in the front row sat james madison later called the father of the constitution who recorded the proceedings in shorthand.
daily from 10 a m to 3 p m from late may through mid september 1787 the fty ve delegates wrangled over ideas for a new federal government.
chief was granted the power to wage war but congress retained the crucial right to declare war a division of responsibilities that has been an invitation to con ict between president and congress ever since.
the constitution as drafted was a bundle of compromises they stand out in every section.
a key compromise was the method of electing the president indirectly by the electoral college rather than by direct means.
while the large states would have the advantage in the rst round of popular voting as a states share of electors was based on the total of its senators and representatives in congress the small states would gain a larger voice if no candidate got a majority of electoral votes and the election was thrown to the house of representatives where each state would have for this purpose only just a single vote see art.
although the framers of the constitution expected election by the house to occur frequently it has happened just twice in 1800 and in 1824.
sectional jealousy also intruded.
should the voteless slave of the southern states count as a person in apportioning direct taxes and in according representation in the house of representatives.
the south not wishing to be deprived of inuence answered yes the north replied no arguing that as slaves were not citi zens the north might as logically demand additional representation based on its horses.
as a compromise between total representation and none at all it was decided that a slave might count as three fths of a person.
hence the memorable if arbitrary three fths compromise see art.
most of the states wanted to shut off the african slave trade.
but south carolina and georgia requiring slave labor in their rice paddies and malarial swamps raised vehement protests.
by way of compromise the convention stipulated that the slave trade might continue until the end of 1807 at which time congress could turn off the spigot see art.
it did so as soon as the prescribed interval had elapsed.
meanwhile all the new state constitutions except georgias forbade overseas slave trade.
safeguards for conservatism heated clashes among the delegates have been overplayed.
the area of agreement was actually large otherwise the convention would have speedily disbanded.
economically the members of the constitutional convention generally saw eye to eye they demanded chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 sound money and the protection of private property.
politically they were in basic agreement they favored a stronger government with three branches and with checks and balances among them what critics branded a triple headed monster finally the convention was virtually unanimous in believing that manhood suffrage democracy government by democratick babblers was something to be feared and fought.
daniel shays the prime bogeyman still frightened the conser vative minded delegates.
they deliberately erected safeguards against the excesses of the mob and they made these barriers as strong as they dared.
the awesome federal judges were to be appointed for life.
the powerful president was to be elected indirectly by the electoral college the lordly senators were to be chosen indirectly by state legislatures see art.
only in the case of one half of one of the three great branches the house of representatives were qualied propertied citizens permitted to choose their ofcials by direct vote see art.
yet the new charter also contained democratic elements.
above all it stood foursquare on the two great principles of republicanism that the only legitimate government was one based on the consent of the governed and that the powers of government should be limited in this case specically limited by a written constitution.
the virtue of the people not the authority of the state was to be the ultimate guarantor of liberty justice and order.
we the people the preamble began in a ringing af rmation of these republican doctrines.
at the end of seventeen muggy weeks may 25 to september 17 1787 only forty two of the original ftyve members remained to sign the constitution.
three of the forty two refusing to do so returned to their states to resist ratication.
the remainder adjourning one of the philadelphia delegates recorded in his journal a brief episode involving benjamin franklin who was asked by a woman when the convention ended well doctor what have we got a republic or a monarchy.
the elder statesman answered a republic if you can keep it.
to the city tavern celebrated the toastworthy occasion.
but no members of the convention were completely happy about the result.
they were too near their work and too weary.
whatever their personal desires they nally had to compromise and adopt what was acceptable to the entire body and what presumably would be acceptable to the entire country.
the clash of federalists and antifederalists the framing fathers early foresaw that nationwide acceptance of the constitution would not be easy to obtain.
a formidable barrier was unanimous ratication by all thirteen states as required for amendment by the still standing articles of confederation.
but since absent rhode island was certain to veto the constitution the delegates boldly adopted a different scheme.
they stipulated that when nine states had registered their approval through specially elected conventions the constitution would become the supreme law of the land in those states ratifying see art.
this was extraordinary even revolutionary.
it was in effect an appeal over the heads of the congress that had called the convention and over the heads of the legislatures that had chosen its members to the people or those of the people who could vote.
in this way the framers could claim greater popular sanction for their handiwork.
a divided congress submitted the document to the states on this basis without recommendation of any kind.
the american people were somewhat astonished so well had the secrets of the convention been concealed.
the public had expected the old articles of confederation to be patched up now it was handed a startling new document in which many thought the precious jewel of state sovereignty was swallowed up see table 9 2.
one of the hottest debates of american history forthwith erupted.
the antifederalists who opposed the stronger federal government were arrayed against the federalists who obviously favored it.
a motley crew gathered in the antifederalist camp.
its leaders included prominent revolutionaries like samuel adams patrick henry and richard henry lee.
their followers consisted primarily though not exclusively of states rights devotees backcountry dwellers and one horse farmers in general the poorest classes see map 9 4.
they were joined by paper moneyites and debtors many of whom feared that a potent central government would force them to pay off their federalists and antifederalists table 9 2 strengthening the central government under articles of confederation under federal constitution a loose confederation of states 1 vote in congress for each state a rm union of people 2 votes in senate for each state representation by population in house see art.
ii iii simple majority vote in congress subject to presidential veto see art.
2 laws executed by powerful president see art.
ii iii congress to regulate both foreign and interstate commerce see art.
3 extensive power in congress to levy taxes see art.
1 federal courts capped by supreme court see art.
iii amendment less difcult see art.
v ample power to enforce laws by coercion of individuals and to some extent of states vote of 9 states in congress for all important mea sures laws administered loosely by committees of congress no congressional power over commerce no congressional power to levy taxes limited federal courts unanimity of states for amendment no authority to act directly upon individuals and no power to coerce states british north america canada rior r aw re nc e new york june 1788 vote 30 for 27 against l la k e s u p e st la ke new hampshire june 1788 vote 57 for 47 against massachusetts february 1788 vote 187 for 168 against rhode island may 1790 vote 34 for 32 against 40n connecticut january 1788 vote 128 for 40 against n la k e m i c h iga n ro hu n ntario lake o e lak erie pennsylvania december 1787 vote 46 for 23 against ohio interactive map r maryland april 1788 vote 63 for 11 against kentucky district n tennessee district s es ee virginia 70 w june 1788 vote 89 for 79 against r te n map 9 4 the struggle over ratication this mottled map shows that federalist support tended to cluster around the coastal areas which had enjoyed protable commerce with the outside world including the export of grain and tobacco.
impoverished frontiersmen suspicious of a powerful new central government under the constitution were generally antifederalists.
new jersey december 1787 vote 38 for 0 against delaware december 1787 vote 30 for 0 against north carolina november 1789 vote 194 for 77 against south carolina may 1788 vote 149 for 73 against federalist majority antifederalist majority georgia january 1788 vote 26 for 0 against 30 n evenly divided politically unorganized 8 0 w 300 km.
at l a n t i c ocean chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 richard henry lee 1732 1794 a prominent antifederalist attacked the proposed constitution in 1788 tis really astonishing that the same people who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty should now agree to x an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity.
the same year prominent patriot patrick henry 1736 1799 agreed that the proposed constitution endangered everything the revolution had sought to protect this constitution is said to have beautiful features but when i come to examine these features sir they appear to me horridly frightful among other deformities it has an awful squinting it squints towards monarchy and does not this raise indignation in the breast of every american.
your president may easily become king your senate is so imperfectly constructed that your dearest rights may be sacriced by what may be a small minority.
where are your checks in this government.
debts and at full value.
large numbers of antifederalists saw in the constitution a plot by the upper crust to steal power back from the common folk.
silver buckled federalists had power and inuence on their side.
they enjoyed the support of such commanding gures as george washington and benjamin franklin.
most of them lived in the settled areas along the seaboard not in the raw backcountry.
overall they were wealthier than the antifederalists more educated and better orga nized.
they also controlled the press.
more than a hundred newspapers were published in america in the 1780s only a dozen supported the antifederalist cause.
antifederalists voiced vehement objections to the gilded trap known as the constitution.
they cried with much truth that it had been drawn up by the aristocratic elements and hence was antidemocratic.
they likewise charged that the sovereignty of the states was being submerged and that the freedoms of the indi vidual were jeopardized by the absence of a bill of rights.
they decried the dropping of annual elections for congressional representatives the erecting of a federal stronghold ten miles square later the district of columbia the creation of a standing army the omission of any reference to god and the highly questionable procedure of ratifying with only two thirds of the states.
a philadelphia newspaper added that benjamin franklin was a fool from age and george washington a fool from nature the great debate in the states special elections some apathetic but others hotly contested were held in the various states for members of the ratifying conventions see table 9 3.
the candidates federalist or antifederalist were elected on the basis of their pledges for or against the constitution.
with the ink barely dry on the parchment four small states quickly accepted the constitution for they had come off much better than they expected.
pennsylvania number two on the list of ratiers was the rst large state to act but not until high handed irregularities had been employed by the federalist legislature in calling a convention.
these included the forcible seating of two antifederalist members their clothes torn and their faces red with rage in order to complete a quorum.
massachusetts the second most populous state provided an acid test.
if the constitution had failed in massachusetts the entire movement might easily have bogged down.
the boston ratifying convention at rst contained an antifederalist majority.
it included grudging shaysites and the aging samuel adams as suspicious of government power in 1787 as he had been in 1776.
the assembly buzzed with dismaying talk of summoning another constitutional convention as though the nation had not already shot its bolt.
clearly the choice was not between this constitution and a better one but between this constitution and the creaking articles of confederation.
the absence of a bill of rights alarmed the antifederalists.
but the federalists gave them solemn assurances that the rst congress would add such a safeguard by amendment and ratication was then secured in massachusetts by the rather narrow margin of 187 to 168.
three more states fell into line.
the last of these was new hampshire whose convention at rst had contained a strong antifederalist majority.
the federal ratifying the constitution table 9 3 ratication of the constitution state date vote in convention rank in population population 1.
dec 7 1787 dec 12 1787 dec 18 1787 jan 2 1788 jan 9 1788 feb 7 1788 unanimous 46 to 23 unanimous unanimous 128 to 40 187 to 168 59 096 433 611 184 139 82 548 237 655 475 199 apr.
28 1788 may 23 1788 june 21 1788 june 26 1788 july 26 1788 nov 21 1789 may 29 1790 63 to 11 149 to 73 57 to 46 89 to 79 30 to 27 195 to 77 34 to 32 319 728 249 073 141 899 747 610 340 241 395 005 69 112 7.
delaware pennsylvania new jersey georgia connecticut massachusetts incl.
maine maryland south carolina new hampshire virginia new york north carolina rhode island ists cleverly arranged a prompt adjournment and then won over enough waverers to secure ratication.
nine states all but virginia new york north carolina and rhode island had now taken shelter under the new federal roof and the document was ofcially adopted on june 21 1788.
francis hopkinson exulted in his song the new roof huzza.
my brave boys our work is complete the world shall admire columbias fair seat.
but such rejoicing was premature so long as the four dissenters conspicuously new york and virginia dug in their heels.
the four laggard states proud virginia the biggest and most populous state provided erce antifederalist opposition.
there the college bred federalist orators for once encountered worthy antagonists including the ery patrick henry.
he professed to see in the fearsome document the death warrant of liberty.
george washington james madison and john marshall on the federalist side lent inuential support.
with new hampshire about to ratify the new union was going to be formed anyhow and virginia could not very well continue comfortably as an independent state.
after exciting debate in the state convention ratication carried 89 to 79.
new york also experienced an uphill struggle burdened as it was with its own heavily antifederalist state convention.
alexander hamilton at heart favored a much stronger central government than that under debate but he contributed his sparkling personality and persuasive eloquence to whipping up support for federalism as framed.
he also joined john jay and james madison in penning a masterly series of articles for the new york newspapers.
though designed as propaganda these essays remain the most penetrating commentary ever written on the constitution and are still widely sold in book form as the federalist.
probably the most famous of these is madisons federalist no.
10 which brilliantly refuted the conventional wisdom of the day that it was impossible to extend a republican form of government over a large territory.
new york nally yielded.
realizing that the state could not prosper apart from the union the convention ratied the document by the close count of 30 to 27.
at the same time it approved thirty two proposed amendments and vain hope issued a call for yet another convention to modify the constitution.
last ditch dissent developed in only two states.
a hostile convention met in north carolina then adjourned without taking a vote.
rhode island did not even summon a ratifying convention rejecting the constitution by popular referendum.
the two most ruggedly individualist centers of the colonial era homes of the otherwise minded thus ran true to chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 banner paraded by the society of pewterers in new york city 1788 this silk banner was carried by members of the society of pewterers in a parade in new york city on july 23 1788 to celebrate the impending ratication of the united states constitution by new york state.
the enthusiasm of these craftsmen for the constitution conrms that not all federalists were well to do.
the first coin authorized by congress 1787 the fugio cent was minted by a private company and remained in circulation until the 1850s.
the word fugio i y and the sundial show that time ies mind your business urges diligence.
they were to change their course albeit unwillingly only after the new government had been in operation for some months.
the race for ratication despite much apathy was close and quite bitter in some localities.
no lives were lost but riotous disturbances broke out in new york and pennsylvania involving bruises and bloodshed.
there was much behind the scenes pressure on delegates who had promised their constituents to vote against the constitution.
the last four states ratied a triumphant cartoon this cartoon appeared in the massachusetts centinel on august 2 1788.
note the two laggards especially the sorry condition of rhode island.
the new constitution not because they wanted to but because they had to.
they could not safely exist outside the fold.
a conservative triumph the minority had triumphed twice.
a militant minority of american radicals had engineered the military revolution that cast off the unwritten british constitution.
a militant minority of conser vatives now embracing many of the earlier radicals had engineered two massachusetts citizens took opposite positions on the new constitution.
jonathan smith a farmer unsympathetic to shayss rebellion of 1787 wrote i am a plain man and i get my living by the plow.
i have lived in a part of the country where i have known the worth of good government by the want of it.
the black cloud of shays rebellion rose last winter in my area.
it brought on a state of anarchy that led to tyranny.
when i saw this constitution i found that it was a cure for these disorders.
i got a copy of it and read it over and over.
i dont think the worse of the constitution because lawyers and men of learning and moneyed men are fond of it.
they are all embarked in the same cause with us and we must all swim or sink together.
amos singletary 1721 1806 who described himself as a poor man argued against the constitution we fought great britain some said for a three penny tax on tea but it was not that.
it was because they claimed a right to tax us and bind us in all cases whatever.
and does not this constitution do the same.
these lawyers and men of learning and money men that talk so nely and gloss over matters so smoothly to make us poor illiterate people swallow down the pill.
they expect to be the managers of the constitution and get all the power and money into their own hands.
and then they will swallow up all us little folks just as the whale swallowed up jonah.
the peaceful revolution that overthrew the inadequate constitution known as the articles of confederation.
eleven states in effect had seceded from the confederation leaving the two still in actually out in the cold.
a majority had not spoken.
only about one fourth of the adult white males in the country chiey the propertied people had voted for delegates to the ratifying conventions.
careful estimates indicate that if the new constitution had been submitted to a manhoodsuffrage vote as in new york it would have encountered much more opposition probably defeat.
conservatism was victorious.
safeguards had been erected against mob rule excesses while the republican gains of the revolution were conserved.
radicals such as patrick henry who had ousted british rule saw themselves in turn upended by american conser vatives.
the federalists were convinced that by setting the drifting ship of state on a steady course they could restore economic and political stability.
yet if the architects of the constitution were conservative it is worth emphasizing that they conserved the principle of republican government through a redenition of popular sovereignty.
unlike the antifederalists who believed that the sovereignty of the people resided in a single branch of government the legislature the federalists contended that every branch executive judiciary and legislature effectively represented the people.
by ingeniously embedding the doctrine of selfrule in a self limiting system of checks and balances among these branches the constitution reconciled the potentially con icting principles of liberty and order.
it represented a marvelous achievement one that elevated the ideals of the revolution even while setting boundaries to them.
one of the distinctive and enduring paradoxes of american history was thus revealed in the united states conser vatives and radicals alike have championed the heritage of republican revolution.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 chronology first continental congress calls for abolition of slave trade military ofcers form society of the cincinnati philadelphia quakers found worlds rst antislavery society land ordinance of 1785 new jersey constitution temporarily gives women the vote virginia statute for religious freedom shayss rebellion meeting of ve states to discuss revision of the articles of confederation articles of confederation adopted by second continental congress northwest ordinance constitutional convention in philadelphia ratication by nine states guarantees a new government under the constitution massachusetts adopts rst constitution drafted in convention and ratied by popular vote articles of confederation put into effect key terms society of the cincinnati 174 disestablished 175 virginia statute for religious freedom 175 civic virtue 176 articles of confederation 179 old northwest 182 land ordinance of 1785 182 northwest ordinance 182 people to know shayss rebellion 184 virginia plan 188 new jersey plan 188 great compromise 188 common law 188 civil law 188 three fths compromise 189 antifederalists 190 federalists 190 the federalist 193 lord shefeld daniel shays patrick henry varying viewpoints the constitution revolutionary or counterrevolutionary.
a lthough the constitution has endured for over two centuries as the basis of american government historians have differed sharply over how to interpret its origins and meaning.
the so called nationalist school of historians writing in the late nineteenth century viewed the constitution as the logical culmination of the revolution and more generally as a crucial step in the god given progress of anglosaxon peoples.
as described in john fiskes the critical period of american history 1888 the young nation buffeted by foreign threats and growing internal chaos with only a weak central government to lean on was saved by the adoption of a more rigorous constitution the ultimate ful llment of republican ideals.
by the early twentieth century however the progressive historians had turned a more critical eye to the constitution.
having observed the supreme court of their own day repeatedly overrule legislation designed to better social conditions for the masses they began to view the original document as an instrument created by elite conser vatives to wrest political power away from the common people.
for historians like carl becker and charles beard the constitution was part of the revolutionary struggle between the lower classes small farmers debtors and laborers and the upper classes merchants nanciers and manufacturers.
beards an economic interpretation of the constitution of the united states 1913 argued that the articles of confederation had protected debtors and small property owners and displeased wealthy elites heavily invested in trade the public debt and the promotion of manufacturing.
only a stronger more centralized government could protect their extensive property interests.
reviewing the economic holdings of the founding fathers beard determined that most of those men were indeed deeply involved in investments that would increase in value under the constitution.
in effect beard argued the constitution represented a successful attempt by conser vative elites to buttress their own economic supremacy at the expense of less fortunate americans.
he further contended that the constitution was ratied by default because the people most disadvantaged by the new government did not possess the property quali cations needed to vote more evidence of the class con ict underlying the struggle between the federalists and the antifederalists.
beards economic interpretation of the constitution held sway through the 1940s.
historians like merrill jensen elaborated on beards analysis by arguing that the 1780s were not in fact mired in chaos but rather were hopeful times for many americans.
in the 1950s however this analysis fell victim to the attacks of the consensus historians who sought explanations for the constitution in factors other than class interest.
scholars such as robert brown and forrest mcdonald convincingly disputed beards evidence about delegates property ownership and refuted his portrayal of the masses as propertyless and disfranchised.
they argued that the constitution derived from an emerging consensus that the country needed a stronger central government.
scholars since the 1950s have searched for new ways to understand the origins of the constitution.
the most inuential work has been gordon woods creation of the american republic 1969.
wood reinterpreted the ratication controversy as a struggle to de ne the true essence of republicanism.
antifederalists so feared human inclination toward corruption that they shuddered at the prospect of putting powerful political weapons in the hands of a central government.
they saw small governments susceptible to local control as the only safeguard against tyranny.
federalists on the other hand believed that a strong balanced national government would rein in selsh human instincts and channel them toward the pursuit of the common good.
alarmed by the indulgences of the state governments the federalists james madison in particular especially in federalist no.
10 developed the novel ideal of an extensive republic a polity that would achieve stability by virtue of its great size and diversity.
this conception challenged the conventional wisdom that a republic could survive only if it extended over a small area with a homogeneous population.
in this sense wood argued the constitution represented a bold experiment the ful llment rather than the repudiation of the most advanced ideas of the revolutionary era even though it emanated from traditional elites determined to curtail dangerous disruptions to the social order.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 to learn more richard bernstein with kim s rice are we to be a nation.
the making of the constitution 1987 ruth bloch visionary republic millennial themes in american thought 1756 1800 1986 richard bushman the renement of america persons houses cities 1992 ron chernow alexander hamilton 2004 joseph ellis founding brothers the revolutionary generation 2001 joanne pope melish disowning slavery gradual emancipation and race in new england 1780 1860 1998 jack rakove james madison and the creation of the american republic 2002 ed the federalist the essential essays by alexander hamilton james madison and john jay 2003 david szatmary shays rebellion 1980 gordon s wood the radicalism of the american revolution 1991 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 i shall only say that i hold with montesquieu that a government must be tted to a nation as much as a coat to the individual and consequently that what may be good at philadelphia may be bad at paris and ridiculous at petersburg russia.
alexander hamilton 1799 a mericas new ship of state did not spread its sails to the most favorable breezes.
within twelve troubled years the american people had risen up and thrown overboard both the british yoke and the articles of confederation.
a decade of lawbreaking and constitution smashing was not the best training for government making.
americans had come to regard a central authority replacing that of george iii as a necessary evil something to be distrusted watched and curbed.
the nances of the infant government were likewise precarious.
the revenue had declined to a trickle whereas the public debt with interest heavily in arrears was mountainous.
worthless paper money both state and national was as plentiful as metallic money was scarce.
americas precarious national security was also threatened by the wars that rocked europe in the wake of the french revolution of 1789 an event that also roiled domestic politics in the edgling united states.
in the face of all those difculties the americans were brashly trying to erect a republic on an immense scale something that no other people had attempted and that traditional political theory deemed impossible.
the eyes of a skeptical world were on the upstart united states.
growing pains when the constitution was launched in 1789 the republic was continuing to grow at an amazing rate.
population was doubling about every twenty ve years and the rst ofcial census of 1790 recorded almost 4 million people.
cities had blossomed proportionately philadelphia numbered 42 000 new york 33 000 boston 18 000 charleston 16 000 and baltimore 13 000.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
