Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


90°W


80°W


 WIS.







N.H.


200 Mi.


 MASS.

N.Y.


Boston


 MICH.

CONN. R.I.

Chicago
Mississippi R.


MO. N

St. Louis


Pittsburgh


 IND.





Louisville


 KY.







W. VA.
 VA.



 ARK.

 TENN.



N.J.


39°N


 DEL.



Cincinnati






 OHIO

Indianapolis


New York


 PA.

Cleveland


 ILL.

 ME.

 VT.

200 Km.


N.C.


Washington, D.C.


 MD.

AT L A N T I C OCEAN
Center of population, by decade 
Map 14.1 Westward Movement of Center of Population, 1790–2000
 The triangles indicate the points at which a map of the United States weighted for the population of the country in a given year would balance. Note the remarkable equilibrium of the north-south pull from 1790 to about 1940, and the strong spurt west and south thereafter. The 1980 census revealed that the nation’s center of population had at last moved west of the Mississippi River. The map also shows the slowing of the westward movement between 1890 and 1940—the period of heaviest immigration from Europe, which ended up mainly in East Coast cities. Interactive Map

 Alleghenies (see Map 14.1). By the eve of the Civil War, it had marched across the Ohio River. Legend portrays an army of muscular axmen triumphantly carving civilization out of the western woods. But in reality life was downright grim for most pioneer families. Poorly fed, ill-clad, housed in hastily erected shanties (Abraham Lincoln’s family lived for a year in a three-sided lean-to made of brush and sticks), they were perpetual victims of disease, depression, and premature death. Above all, unbearable loneliness haunted them, especially the women, who were often cut off from human contact, even their neighbors, for days or even weeks, while conﬁ ned to the cramped orbit of a dark cabin in a secluded clearing. Breakdowns and even madness were all too frequently the “opportunities” that the frontier offered to pioneer women. Frontier life could be tough and crude for men as well. No-holds-barred wrestling, which permitted such niceties as the biting off of noses and the gouging out of eyes, was a popular entertainment. Pioneering Americans, marooned by geography, were often ill-informed, superstitious, provincial, and ﬁercely individualistic. Ralph Waldo Emerson’s popular lecture-essay “Self-

 Reliance” struck a deeply responsive chord. Popular literature of the period abounded with portraits of unique, isolated ﬁgures like James Fenimore Cooper’s heroic Natty Bumppo and Herman Melville’s restless Captain Ahab—just as Jacksonian politics aimed to emancipate the lone-wolf, enterprising businessperson. Yet even in this heyday of “rugged individualism,” there were important exceptions. Pioneers, in tasks clearly beyond their own individual resources, would call upon their neighbors for logrolling and barn raising and upon their governments for help in building internal improvements.

Shaping the Western
Landscape
 The westward movement also molded the physical environment. Pioneers in a hurry often exhausted the land in the tobacco regions and then pushed on, leaving behind barren and rain-gutted ﬁelds. In the Kentucky bottomlands, cane as high as ﬁ fteen feet posed a seemingly insurmountable barrier to the plow. But set-

Opening the West




 Major Dougherty’s Indian Agency on the Missouri River, by Karl Bodmer, 1833 The Swiss-born and Paris-trained artist Karl Bodmer painted this scene while accompanying German Prince Maximilian on his expedition across the American West. From St. Louis, the party traveled up the Missouri River by steamboat under the protection of John Jacob Astor’s Fur Company. Bodmer painted scenes along the way, especially of Indians and their surroundings. Trading posts like this one both promoted commerce with the Indians and served settlers heading west.

 tlers soon discovered that when the cane was burned off, European bluegrass thrived in the charred caneﬁelds. “Kentucky bluegrass,” as it was somewhat inaccurately called, made ideal pasture for livestock—and lured thousands more American homesteaders into Kentucky. The American West felt the pressure of civilization in additional ways. By the 1820s American fur-trappers were setting their traplines all over the vast Rocky Mountain region. The fur-trapping empire was based on the rendezvous (French for “meeting”) system. Each summer, traders ventured from St. Louis to a verdant Rocky Mountain valley, made camp, and waited for the trappers and Indians to arrive with beaver pelts to swap for manufactured goods from the East. This trade thrived for some two decades; by the time beaver hats had gone out of fashion, the hapless beaver had all but disappeared from the region. Trade in buffalo robes also ﬂourished, leading eventually to the virtually total annihilation of the massive bison herds that once

 blanketed the western prairies. Still farther west, on the Cal i fornia coast, other traders bought up prodigious quantities of sea-otter pelts, driv ing the oncebountiful otters to the point of near-extinction. Some historians have called this aggressive and often heedless exploitation of the West’s natural bounty ecological imperialism. Yet Americans in this period also revered nature and admired its beauty. Indeed the spirit of nationalism fed a growing belief in the uniqueness of the American wilderness. Searching for the United States’ distinctive characteristics in this nation-conscious age, many observers found the wild, unspoiled character of the land, especially in the West, to be among the young nation’s deﬁ ning attributes. Other countries might have impressive mountains or sparkling rivers, but none had the pristine, natural beauty of America, unspoiled by human hands and reminiscent of a time before the dawn of civilization. This attitude toward wilderness became in time a kind of national mystique,



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 inspiring literature and painting, and eventually kindling a powerful conservation movement. George Catlin, a painter and student of Native American life, was among the ﬁ rst Americans to advocate the preservation of nature as a deliberate national policy. In 1832 he observed Sioux Indians in South Dakota recklessly slaughtering buffalo in order to trade the animals’ tongues for the white man’s whiskey. Appalled at this spectacle and fearing for the preservation of Indians and buffalo alike, Catlin proposed the creation of a national park. His idea later bore fruit with the creation of a national park system—the world’s ﬁ rst—beginning with Yellowstone Park in 1872.

The March of the Millions
 As the American people moved west, they also multiplied at an amazing rate. By midcentury the population was still doubling approximately every twenty-ﬁve years, as in fertile colonial days (see Figure 14.1).

 By 1860 the original thirteen states had more than doubled in number: thirty-three stars graced the American ﬂag. The United States was the fourth most populous nation in the western world, exceeded only by three European countries—Russia, France, and Austria. Urban growth continued explosively. In 1790 there had been only two American cities that could boast populations of twenty thousand or more souls: Philadelphia and New York. By 1860 there were forty-three, and about three hundred other places claimed over ﬁve thousand inhabitants apiece. New York was the metropolis; New Orleans, the “Queen of the South”; and Chicago, the swaggering lord of the Midwest, destined to be “hog butcher for the world.” Such overrapid urbanization unfortunately brought undesirable by-products. It intensiﬁed the problems of smelly slums, feeble street lighting, inadequate policing, impure water, foul sewage, ravenous rats, and improper garbage disposal. Hogs poked their scavenging snouts about many city streets as late as the 1840s. Bos-

 Mouth of the Platte River, 900 Miles Above St. Louis, by George Catlin, 1832 Catlin’s West unfolded as a vast panorama of ﬂat, open space peopled only by the Indians shown in the foreground. Catlin believed that capturing the unending prairie on canvas required a new aesthetic, the sublime horizontal, and an acceptance of a landscape bereft of man-built features, without “anything rising above the horizon, which was a perfect straight line around us, like that of the blue and boundless ocean.”

 An Inﬂux of Immigrants

Year


White


Nonwhite


Percent
Nonwhite


Total
Population




3,172,000


757,000




3,929,000




4,306,000


1,002,000




5,308,000




5,862,000


1,378,000




7,240,000




7,867,000


1,772,000




9,639,000




10,537,000


2,329,000




12,866,000




14,196,000


2,874,000




17,070,000




19,553,000


3,639,000




23,192,000




26,922,000


4,521,000




31,443,000
10M


20M


30M




40M


Figure 14.1 Population Increase, Including Slaves and Indians, 1790–
 1860 Increasing European immigration and the closing of the slave trade gradually “whitened” the population beginning in 1820. This trend continued into the early twentieth century.

 ton in 1823 pioneered a sewer system, and New York in 1842 abandoned wells and cisterns for a piped-in water supply. The city thus unknowingly eliminated the breeding places of many disease-carrying mosquitoes. A continuing high birthrate accounted for most of the increase in population, but by the 1840s the tides of immigration were adding hundreds of thousands more. Before this decade immigrants had been ﬂowing in at a rate of sixty thousand a year, but suddenly the inﬂux tripled in the 1840s and then quadrupled in the 1850s. During these two feverish decades, over a million and

 a half Irish, and nearly as many Germans, swarmed down the gangplanks (see Table 14.1). Why did they come? The immigrants came partly because Europe seemed to be running out of room. The population of the Old World more than doubled in the nineteenth century, and Europe began to generate a seething pool of apparently “surplus” people. They were displaced and footloose in their homelands before they felt the tug of the American magnet. Indeed at least as many people moved about within Europe as crossed the Atlantic. America beneﬁted from these people-churning changes

 Cleveland in 1853, by J. W. Hill Looking west across the Cuyahoga River down Superior Street, the painting features the warehouses, canals, and industries that fed the city’s prosperity and supported its thirty thousand residents.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


Table 14.1 Irish and German Immigration by
Decade, 1830–1900
Years


Irish


Germans


1831–1840
1841–1850
1851–1860
1861–1870
1871–1880
1881–1890
1891–1900


207,381
780,719
914,119
435,778
436,871
655,482
388,416


152,454
434,626
951,667
787,468
718,182
1,452,970
505,152


3,818,766


5,000,519


 total

 but did not set them all in motion. Nor was the United States the sole beneﬁciary of the process: of the nearly 60 million people who abandoned Europe in the century after 1840, about 25 million went somewhere other than the United States. Yet America still beckoned most strongly to the struggling masses of Europe, and the majority of migrants headed for the “land of freedom and opportunity.” There was freedom from aristocratic caste and state church; there was abundant opportunity to secure broad acres and better one’s condition. Much-read letters sent home by immigrants—“America letters”— often described in glowing terms the richer life: low

A
German immigrant living in Cincinnati wrote to his relatives in Germany in 1847, 
“


 A lot of people come over here who were well off in Germany but were enticed to leave their fatherland by boastful and imprudent letters from their friends or children and thought they could become rich in America. This deceives a lot of people, since what can they do here? If they stay in the city they can only earn their bread at hard and unaccustomed labor. If they want to live in the country and don’t have enough money to buy a piece of land that is cleared and has a house then they have to settle in the wild bush and have to work very hard to clear the trees out of the way so they can sow and plant. But people who are healthy, strong, and hardworking do pretty well.

”


 taxes, no compulsory military ser vice, and “three meat meals a day.” The introduction of transoceanic steamships also meant that the immigrants could come speedily and cheaply. The journey to the United States now took ten or twelve days, instead of ten or twelve weeks on a sailing vessel, and was much less expensive than a voyage to more distant immigrant destinations such as Australia, Argentina, or South Africa. The United States also received a far more diverse array of immigrants than did other countries. Argentina, for example, had a higher proportion of immigrants relative to its population than did the United States, but they came mostly from Spain and Italy. In contrast, the United States beckoned to immigrants from dozens of different nations.

The Emerald Isle Moves West
 Ireland, already groaning under the heavy hand of British overlords, was prostrated in the mid-1840s. A terrible rot attacked the potato crop, on which the people had become dangerously dependent, and about onefourth of them were swept away by disease and hunger. Starved bodies were found dead by the roadsides with grass in their mouths. All told, about 2 million perished. Tens of thousands of destitute souls, ﬂeeing the Land of Famine for the Land of Plenty, ﬂocked to America in the “Black Forties.” Ireland’s great export has been population, and the Irish take their place beside the Jews and the Africans as a dispersed people (see “Makers of America: The Irish,” pp. 312–313). These uprooted newcomers—too poor to move west and buy the necessary land, livestock, and equipment—swarmed into the larger seaboard cities. Noteworthy were Boston and particularly New York, which rapidly became the largest Irish city in the world. Before many decades had passed, more people of Hibernian blood lived in America than on the “ould sod” of Erin’s Isle. The luckless Irish immigrants received no redcarpet treatment. Forced to live in squalor, they were rudely crammed into the already vile slums. They were scorned by the older American stock, especially “proper” Protestant Bostonians, who regarded the scruffy Catholic arrivals as a social menace. Barely literate “Biddies” (Bridgets) took jobs as kitchen maids. Broad-shouldered “Paddies” (Patricks) were pushed into pick-and-shovel drudgery on canals and railroads, where thousands left their bones as victims of disease

Irish and German Immigration


 Margaret McCarthy, a recent arrival to America, captured much of the complexity of the immigrant experience in a letter she wrote from New York to her family in Ireland in 1850:

“


 This is a good place and a good country, but there is one thing that’s ruining this place. The emigrants have not money enough to take them to the interior of the country, which obliges them to remain here in New York and the like places, which causes the less demand for labor and also the great reduction in wages. For this reason I would advise no one to come to America that would not have some money after landing here that would enable them to go west in case they would get no work to do here.

”


 and accidental explosions. It was said that an Irishman lay buried under every railroad tie. As wage-depressing competitors for jobs, the Irish were hated by native workers. “No Irish Need Apply” was a sign commonly posted at factory gates and was often abbreviated to NINA. The Irish, for similar reasons, ﬁercely resented the blacks, with whom they shared society’s basement. Race riots between black and Irish dockworkers ﬂared up in several port cities, and the Irish were generally cool to the abolitionist cause. The friendless “famine Irish” were forced to fend for themselves. The Ancient Order of Hibernians, a semisecret society founded in Ireland to ﬁght rapacious landlords, served in America as a benevolent society, aiding the downtrodden. It also helped to spawn the Molly Maguires, a shadowy Irish miners’ union that rocked the Pennsylvania coal districts in the 1860s and 1870s. The Irish tended to remain in low-skill occupations but gradually improved their lot, usually by acquiring modest amounts of property. The education of children was cut short as families struggled to save money to purchase a home. But for humble Irish peasants, cruelly cast out of their homeland, property ownership counted as a grand “success.” Politics quickly attracted these gregarious Gaelic newcomers. They soon began to gain control of powerful city machines, notably New York’s Tammany Hall, and reaped the patronage rewards. Before long, beguilingly brogued Irishmen dominated police departments



 An early-nineteenth-century French traveler recorded his impressions of America and Ireland:

“


 I have seen the Indian in his forests and the Negro in his chains, and thought, as I contemplated their pitiable condition, that I saw the very extreme of human wretchedness; but I did not then know the condition of unfortunate Ireland.

”


 in many big cities, where they now drove the “Paddy wagons” that had once carted their brawling forebears to jail. American politicians made haste to cultivate the Irish vote, especially in the politically potent state of New York. Irish hatred of the British lost nothing in the transatlantic transplanting. As the Irish Americans increased in number—nearly 2 million arrived between 1830 and 1860—ofﬁcials in Washington glimpsed political gold in those emerald green hills. Politicians often found it politically proﬁtable to ﬁ re verbal volleys at London—a process vulgarly known as “twisting the British lion’s tail.”

The German Forty-Eighters
 The inﬂux of refugees from Germany between 1830 and 1860 was hardly less spectacular than that from Ireland. During these troubled years, over a million and a half Germans stepped onto American soil (see “Makers of America: The Germans,” pp. 316–317). The bulk of them were uprooted farmers, displaced by crop failures and other hardships. But a strong sprinkling were liberal political refugees. Saddened by the collapse of the democratic revolutions of 1848, they had decided to leave the autocratic fatherland and ﬂee to America—the brightest hope of democracy. Germany’s loss was America’s gain. Zealous German liberals like the lanky and public-spirited Carl Schurz, a relentless foe of slavery and public corruption, contributed richly to the elevation of American political life. Unlike the Irish, many of the Germanic newcomers possessed a modest amount of material goods. Most of them pushed out to the lush lands of the Middle West, notably Wisconsin, where they settled and established model farms. Like the Irish, they formed an inﬂuential

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Irish The The Great AfricanAmerican Migration 
F


 or a generation, from 1793 to 1815, war raged across Europe. Ruinous as it was on the Continent, the ﬁghting brought unprecedented prosperity to the longsuffering landsmen of Ireland, groaning since the twelfth century under the yoke of Eng lish rule. For as Europe’s ﬁelds lay fallow, irrigated only by the blood of its farmers, Ireland fed the hungry armies that ravened for food as well as territory. Irish farmers planted every available acre, interspersing the lowly potato amongst their ﬁelds of grain. With prices for food products ever mounting, tenant farmers reaped a temporary respite from their perpetual struggle to remain on the land. Most landlords were satisﬁed by the prosperity and so relaxed their pressure on tenants; others, stymied by the absence of British police forces that had been stripped of manpower to ﬁght in Europe, had little means to enforce eviction notices. But the peace that brought solace to battle-scarred Europe changed all this. After 1815 war-inﬂated wheat prices plummeted by half. Hard-pressed landlords resolved to leave vast ﬁelds unplanted. Assisted now by a strengthened British constabulary, they vowed to sweep the pesky peasants from the retired acreage. Many of those forced to leave sought work in Eng land; some went to America. Then in 1845 a blight that ravaged the potato crop sounded the ﬁ nal knell for the Irish peasantry. The resultant famine spread desolation throughout the island. In ﬁve years more than a million people died. Another million sailed for America. Of the emigrants, most were young and literate in Eng lish, the majority under thirty-ﬁve years old. Families typically pooled money to send strong young sons to the New World, where they would earn wages to pay the fares for those who waited at home. These “famine Irish” mostly remained in the port cities of the Northeast, abandoning the farmer’s life for the dingy congestion of the urban metropolis. The disembarking Irish were poorly prepared for urban life. They found progress up the economic ladder painfully slow. Their work as domestic servants or construction laborers was dull and arduous, and mortality rates were astoundingly high. Escape from the potato famine hardly guaranteed a long life to an Irish American; a gray-bearded Irishman was a rare sight in nineteenth-century America. Most of the new arrivals



 toiled as day laborers. A fortunate few owned boardinghouses or saloons, where their dispirited countrymen sought solace in the bottle. For Irish-born women, opportunities were still scarcer; they worked mainly as domestic servants. But it was their Roman Catholicism, more even than their penury or their perceived fondness for alcohol, that earned the Irish the distrust and resentment of their native-born, Protestant American neighbors. The cornerstone of social and religious life for Irish immigrants was the parish. Worries about safeguard-

Outward Bound, the Quay at Dublin, 1854
 Thousands ﬂed famine in Ireland by coming to America in the 1840s and 1850s.

 St. Patrick’s Day Parade in America, Union Square, ca. 1870 This painting shows a St. Patrick’s Day parade in New York City. The religious festival was celebrated with greater fanfare in America than in Ireland itself, as Irish immigrants used it to boost their ethnic solidarity and assert their distinctive identity in their adopted country.

 ing their children’s faith inspired the construction of parish schools, ﬁ nanced by the pennies of struggling working-class Irish parents. If Ireland’s green ﬁelds scarcely equipped her sons and daughters for the scrap and scramble of economic life in America’s cities, life in the Old Country nevertheless had instilled in them an aptitude for politics. Irish Catholic resistance against centuries of Eng lish Anglican domination had instructed many Old Country Irish in the ways of mass politics. That political experience readied them for the boss system of the political “machines” in America’s northeastern cities. The boss’s local representatives met each newcomer

 soon after he landed in America. Asking only for votes, the machine supplied coal in wintertime, food, and help with the law. Irish voters soon became a bulwark of the Democratic party, reliably supporting the party of Jefferson and Jackson in cities like New York and Boston. As Irish Americans like New York’s “Honest John” Kelly themselves became bosses, white-collar jobs in government ser vice opened up to the Irish. They became building inspectors, aldermen, and even policemen—an astonishing irony for a people driven from their homeland by the nightsticks and bayonets of the British police.





Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 body of voters whom American politicians shamelessly wooed. But the Germans were less potent politically because their strength was more widely scattered. The hand of Germans in shaping American life was widely felt in still other ways. The Conestoga wagon, the Kentucky riﬂe, and the Christmas tree were all German contributions to American culture. Germans had ﬂed from the militarism and wars of Europe and consequently came to be a bulwark of isolationist sentiment in the upper Mississippi Valley. Better educated on the whole than the stump-grubbing Americans, they warmly supported public schools, including their Kindergarten (children’s garden). They likewise did much to stimulate art and music. As outspoken champions of freedom, they became relentless enemies of slavery during the fevered years before the Civil War. Yet the Germans—often dubbed “damned Dutchmen”—were occasionally regarded with suspicion by their old-stock American neighbors. Seeking to preserve their language and culture, they sometimes settled in compact “colonies” and kept aloof from the surrounding community. Accustomed to the “Continental Sunday” and uncurbed by Puritan tradition, they made merry on the Sabbath and drank huge quantities of an amber beverage called bier (beer), which dates its real popularity in America to their coming. Their Old World drinking habits, like those of the Irish, spurred advocates of temperance in the use of alcohol to redouble their reform efforts.

 Flare-ups of Antiforeignism The invasion by this so-called immigrant “rabble” in the 1840s and 1850s inﬂamed the prejudices of American “nativists.” They feared that these foreign hordes would outbreed, outvote, and overwhelm the old “native” stock. Not only did the newcomers take jobs from “native” Americans, but the bulk of the displaced Irish were Roman Catholics, as were a substantial minority of the Germans. The Church of Rome was still widely regarded by many old-line Americans as a “foreign” church; convents were commonly referred to as “popish brothels.” Roman Catholics were now on the move. Seeking to protect their children from Protestant indoctrination in the public schools, they began in the 1840s to construct an entirely separate Catholic educational system—an enormously expensive undertaking for a poor immigrant community, but one that revealed the strength of its religious commitment. They had formed

 Crooked Voting A bitter “nativist” cartoon charging Irish and German immigrants with “stealing” elections.

 a negligible minority during colonial days, and their numbers had increased gradually. But with the enormous inﬂux of the Irish and Germans in the 1840s and 1850s, the Catholics became a powerful religious group. In 1840 they had ranked ﬁ fth, behind the Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians, and Congregationalists. By 1850, with some 1.8 million communicants, they had bounded into ﬁ rst place—a position they have never lost. Older-stock Americans were alarmed by these mounting ﬁgures. They professed to believe that in due time the “alien riffraff” would “establish” the Catholic Church at the expense of Protestantism and would introduce “popish idols.” The noisier American “nativists” rallied for political action. In 1849 they formed the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, which soon developed into the formidable American party, more commonly known as the Know-Nothing party, a name derived from its secretiveness. “Nativists” agitated for rigid restrictions on immigration and naturalization and for laws authorizing the deportation of alien paupers. They also promoted a lurid literature of exposure, much of it pure ﬁction. The authors, sometimes posing as escaped nuns, described the shocking sins they imagined the cloisters concealed, including the secret burial of babies. One of these sensational books—Maria Monk’s Awful Disclosures (1836)—sold over 300,000 copies.

Dawn of the Industrial Revolution


 Even uglier was occasional mass violence. As early as 1834, a Catholic convent near Boston was burned by a howling mob, and in ensuing years a few scattered attacks fell upon Catholic schools and churches. The most frightful ﬂare-up occurred during 1844 in Philadelphia, where the Irish Catholics fought back against the threats of the “nativists.” The City of Brotherly Love did not quiet down until two Catholic churches had been burned and some thirteen citizens had been killed and ﬁ fty wounded in several days of ﬁghting. These outbursts of intolerance, though infrequent and generally localized in the larger cities, remain an unfortunate blot on the record of America’s treatment of minority groups. Immigrants were undeniably making America a more pluralistic society—one of the most ethnically and racially varied in the history of the world—and perhaps it was small wonder that cultural clashes would occur. Why, in fact, were such episodes not even more frequent and more violent? Part of the answer lies in the robustness of the American economy. The vigorous growth of the economy in these years both attracted immigrants in the ﬁ rst place and ensured that, once arrived, they could claim their share of American wealth without jeopardizing the wealth of others. Their hands and brains, in fact, helped fuel economic expansion. Immigrants and the American economy, in short, needed one another. Without the newcomers, a preponderantly agricultural United States might well have been condemned to watch in envy as the Industrial Revolution swept through nineteenth-century Europe.

Creeping Mechanization
 A group of gifted British inventors, beginning about 1750, perfected a series of machines for the mass production of textiles. This harnessing of steam multiplied the power of human muscles some ten-thousandfold and ushered in the modern factory system—and with it, the so-called Industrial Revolution. It was accompanied by a no-less-spectacular transformation in agricultural production and in the methods of transportation and communication. The factory system gradually spread from Britain— “the world’s workshop”—to other lands. It took a generation or so to reach western Europe, and then the United States. Why was the youthful American Republic, eventually to become an industrial giant, so slow to embrace the machine?



 Strong antiforeignism was reﬂected in the platform of the American (Know-Nothing) party in 1856:

“


 Americans must rule America; and to this end, native-born citizens should be selected for all state, federal, or municipal ofﬁces of government employment, in preference to naturalized citizens.

”


 For one thing, land was cheap in America. Landstarved descendants of land-starved peasants were not going to coop themselves up in smelly factories when they might till their own acres in God’s fresh air and sunlight. Labor was therefore generally scarce, and enough nimble hands to operate the machines were hard to ﬁ nd—until immigrants began to pour ashore in the 1840s. Money for capital investment, moreover, was not plentiful in pioneering America, whose Industrial Revolution, like that of many a developing country in later centuries, awaited an inﬂux of foreign capital— which in turn awaited assurance of secure property rights, sufﬁcient infrastructure, an adequate work force, and political stability. Without such capital, raw materials lay undeveloped, undiscovered, or unsuspected. The Republic was one day to become the world’s leading coal producer, but much of the coal burned in colonial times was imported all the way from Britain. The young country also had difﬁculty producing goods of high enough quality and cheap enough cost to compete with mass-produced European products. Long-established British factories in particular provided cutthroat competition. Their superiority was attested by the fact that a few unscrupulous Yankee manufacturers, out to make a dishonest dollar, stamped their own products with fake Eng lish trademarks. The British also enjoyed a monopoly of the textile machinery, whose secrets they were anxious to hide from foreign competitors. Parliament enacted laws, in harmony with the mercantile system, forbidding the export of the machines or the emigration of mechanics able to reproduce them. Although a number of small manufacturing enterprises existed in the early Republic, the future industrial colossus was still snoring. Not until well past the middle of the nineteenth century did the value of the output of the factories exceed that of the farms.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The Germans The Great AfricanAmerican Migration 
B


 etween 1820 and 1920, a sea of Germans lapped at America’s shores and seeped into its very heartland. Their numbers surpassed those of any other immigrant group, even the proliﬁc and often-detested Irish. Yet this Germanic ﬂood, unlike its Gaelic equivalent, stirred little panic in the hearts of native-born Americans because the Germans largely stayed to themselves, far from the madding crowds and nativist fears of northeastern cities. They prospered with astonishing ease, building towns in Wisconsin, agricultural colonies in Texas, and religious communities in Pennsylvania. They added a decidedly Germanic ﬂavor to the heady brew of reform and community building that so animated antebellum America. These “Germans” actually hailed from many different Old World lands, because there was no uniﬁed nation of Germany until 1871, when the ruthless and crafty Prussian Otto von Bismarck assembled the German state out of a mosaic of independent principali-

 “Little Germany” Cincinnati’s “Over-the-Rhine” district in 1887.



 ties, kingdoms, and duchies. Until that time, “Germans” came to America as Prussians, Bavarians, Hessians, Rhinelanders, Pomeranians, and Westphalians. They arrived at different times and for many different reasons. Some, particularly the so-called Forty-Eighters— the refugees from the abortive democratic revolutions of 1848—hungered for the democracy they had failed to win in Germany. Others, particularly Jews, Pietists, and Anabaptist groups like the Amish and the Mennonites, coveted religious freedom. And they came not only to America. Like the Italians later, many Germans sought a new life in Brazil, Argentina, and Chile. But the largest number ventured into the United States. Typical German immigrants arrived with fatter purses than their Irish counterparts. Small landowners or independent artisans in their native countries, they did not have to settle for bottom-rung industrial employment in the grimy factories of the Northeast and instead could afford to push on to the open spaces of the American West. In Wisconsin these immigrants found a home away from home, a place with a climate, soil, and geography much like central Europe’s. Milwaukee, a crude frontier town before the Germans’ arrival, became the “German Athens.” It boasted a German theater, German beer gardens, a German volunteer ﬁre company, and a German-Eng lish academy. In distant Texas, German settlements like New Braunfels and Friedrichsburg ﬂourished. When the famous landscape architect and writer Frederick Law Olmsted stumbled upon these prairie outposts of Teutonic culture in 1857, he was shocked to be “welcomed by a ﬁgure in a blue ﬂannel shirt and pendant beard, quoting Tacitus.” These German colonies in the frontier Southwest mixed high European elegance with Texas ruggedness. Olmsted described a visit to a German household where the settlers drank “coffee in tin cups upon Dresden saucers” and sat upon “barrels for seats, to hear a Beethoven symphony on the grand piano.” These Germanic colonizers of America’s heartland also formed religious communities, none more distinctive or durable than the Amish settlements of Pennsylvania, Indiana, and Ohio. The Amish took their name from their founder and leader, the Swiss Anabaptist Jacob Amman. Like other Anabaptist groups, they

 shunned extravagance and reserved baptism for adults, repudiating the tradition of infant baptism practiced by most Europeans. For this they were persecuted, even imprisoned, in Europe. Seeking escape from their oppression, some ﬁve hundred Amish ventured to Pennsylvania in the 1700s, followed by three thousand in the years from 1815 to 1865. In America they formed enduring religious communities— isolated enclaves where they could shield themselves from the corruption and the conveniences of the modern world. To this day the German-speaking Amish still travel in horse-drawn carriages and farm without heavy machinery. No electric lights brighten the darkness that nightly envelops their tidy farmhouses; no ringing telephones punctuate the rev-

Marriage Plate, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania, ca. 1806 The Germans
 who settled the “Pennsylvania Dutch” communities in the eighteenth century preserved ancient traditions of handicraft and art, as exempliﬁed by this whimsical “marriage plate” made by a sixteen-year-old potter named John Leidy. The inscription reads, “Rather would I single live than the wife the breeches [trousers] give.”

 erent tranquility of their mealtime prayer; no ornaments relieve the austere simplicity of their black garments. The Amish remain a stalwart, traditional community in a rootless, turbulent society, a living testament to the religious ferment and social experiments of the antebellum era.

 Amish Country, Near Lancaster, Pennsylvania For more than two centuries, the Amish people have preserved their traditional way of life.





Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


Whitney Ends the Fiber Famine
 Samuel Slater has been acclaimed the “Father of the Factory System” in America, and seldom can the paternity of a movement more properly be ascribed to one person. A skilled British mechanic of twenty-one, he was attracted by bounties being offered to British workers familiar with the textile machines. After memorizing the plans for the machinery, he escaped in disguise to America, where he won the backing of Moses Brown, a Quaker capitalist in Rhode Island. Laboriously reconstructing the essential apparatus with the aid of a blacksmith and a carpenter, he put into operation in 1791 the ﬁ rst efﬁcient American machinery for spinning cotton thread. The ravenous mechanism was now ready, but where was the cotton ﬁber? Handpicking one pound of lint from three pounds of seed was a full day’s work for one slave, and this process was so expensive that American-made cotton cloth was relatively rare. Another mechanical genius, Massachusetts-born Eli Whitney, now made his mark. After graduating from Yale, he journeyed to Georgia to serve as a private tutor while preparing for the law. There he was told that the poverty of the South would be relieved if someone

 could only invent a workable device for separating the seed from the short-staple cotton ﬁber. Within ten days, in 1793, he built a crude machine called the cotton gin (short for engine) that was ﬁ fty times more effective than the handpicking process. Few machines have ever wrought so wondrous a change. The gin affected not only the history of America but that of the world. Almost overnight the raising of cotton became highly proﬁtable, and the South was tied hand and foot to the throne of King Cotton. Human bondage had been dying out, but the insatiable demand for cotton reriveted the chains on the limbs of the downtrodden southern blacks. South and North both prospered. Slave-driv ing planters cleared more acres for cotton, pushing the Cotton Kingdom westward off the depleted tidewater plains, over the Piedmont, and onto the black loam bottomlands of Alabama and Mississippi. Humming gins poured out avalanches of snowy ﬁber for the spindles of the Yankee machines, though for decades to come the mills of Britain bought the lion’s share of southern cotton. The American phase of the Industrial Revolution, which ﬁ rst blossomed in cotton textiles, was well on its way. Factories at ﬁ rst ﬂourished most actively in New Eng land, though they branched out into the more populous areas of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. The South, increasingly wedded to the production of

 Francis Cabot Lowell’s Mill, Waltham, Massachusetts, 1826 and Cotton Industry; Carding, Drawing, and Roving; Engraving, 1835 Built in 1814, Lowell’s mill (left) was a marvel of manufacturing efﬁciency. It combined all phases of production, including spinning and weaving, under one roof. The mill’s labor force (right) was composed primarily of young women from the local farming communities.

The Upsurge of Manufacturing




A
Pioneer Woman Batting Cotton Making cotton “batts” from the raw ﬁber was the ﬁrst step in making “homespun” cloth. Mechanical looms and sewing machines would soon make this traditional women’s work obsolete. 
 cotton, could boast of comparatively little manufacturing. Its capital was bound up in slaves; its local consumers for the most part were desperately poor. New Eng land was singularly favored as an industrial center for several reasons. Its narrow belt of stony soil made farming difﬁcult and hence made manufacturing attractive. A relatively dense population provided labor and accessible markets, shipping brought in capital, and snug seaports made easy the import of raw materials and the export of the ﬁ nished products. Finally, the rapid rivers—notably the Merrimack in Massachusetts—provided abundant water power to turn the cogs of the machines. By 1860 more than 400 million pounds of southern cotton poured annually into the gaping maws of over a thousand mills, mostly in New Eng land.

Marvels in Manufacturing
 America’s factories spread slowly until about 1807, when there began the fateful sequence of the embargo, nonintercourse, and the War of 1812. Stern necessity dictated the manufacture of substitutes for normal imports, while the stoppage of European commerce was temporarily ruinous to Yankee shipping. Both capital and labor were driven from the waves onto the factory ﬂoor, as New Eng land, in the striking phrase of John

 Eli Whitney’s Cotton Gin Whitney’s revolutionary little machine was artfully simple. Wire hooks on a rotating cylinder pulled the cotton ﬁbers through slots too narrow to allow seeds to pass. A set of brushes then removed the ﬁbers. Whitney’s gin made possible the mass cultivation of upland, or short-staple, cotton, which was unproﬁtable to raise when its seeds had to be laboriously removed by hand. Before Whitney’s invention, cotton growing had been largely conﬁned to long-staple, or Sea Island cotton, which could grow only in hot, humid coastal areas. With the advent of the cotton gin, short-staple cotton cultivation spread across the southern interior— and so did slavery.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


Daguerreotype of a Young
 Girl with a Sample of Cotton Dress Fabric, ca. 1850s The growing availability of inexpensive American-made calico, or printed cotton cloth, vastly expanded women’s wardrobes.

 Randolph, exchanged the trident for the distaff. Generous bounties were offered by local authorities for homegrown goods, “Buy American” and “Wear American” became popular slogans, and patriotism prompted the wearing of baggy homespun garments. President Madison donned some at his inauguration, where he was said to have been a walking argument for the better processing of native wool. But the manufacturing boomlet broke abruptly with the peace of Ghent in 1815. British competitors unloaded their dammed-up surpluses at ruinously low prices, and American newspapers were so full of British advertisements for goods on credit that little space was left for news. In one Rhode Island district, all 150 mills were forced to close their doors, except the original Slater plant. Responding to pained outcries, Congress provided some relief when it passed the mildly protective Tariff of 1816—among the earliest political contests to control the shape of the economy. As the factory system ﬂourished, it embraced numerous other industries in addition to textiles. Prominent among them was the manufacturing of ﬁ rearms, and here the wizardly Eli Whitney again appeared with an extraordinary contribution. Frustrated in his earlier efforts to monopolize the cotton gin, he turned to the mass production of muskets for the U.S. Army. Up to this time, each part of a ﬁ rearm had been hand-tooled, and if the trigger of one broke, the trigger of another might or might not ﬁt. About 1798 Whitney seized upon the idea of having machines make each part, so that all

 the triggers, for example, would be as much alike as the successive imprints of a copperplate engraving. Journeying to Washington, he reportedly dismantled ten of his new muskets in the presence of skeptical ofﬁcials, scrambled the parts together, and then quickly reassembled ten different muskets. The principle of interchangeable parts was widely adopted by 1850. It gave rise to a host of other innovations, including Samuel Colt’s fabled revolver, and it ultimately became the basis of modern massproduction, assembly-line methods. It gave to the North the vast industrial plant that ensured military preponderance over the South. Ironically, the Yankee Eli Whitney, by perfecting the cotton gin, gave slavery a

 Said Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) in a lecture in 1859,

“


 The patent system secured to the inventor for a limited time exclusive use of his invention, and thereby added the fuel of interest to the ﬁre of genius in the discovery and production of new and useful things.

”


 Ten years earlier Lincoln had received patent no. 6469 for a scheme to buoy steamboats over shoals. It was never practically applied, but he remains the only president ever to have secured a patent.

Inventions and Industrialization


 renewed lease on life, and perhaps made the Civil War more likely. At the same time, by popularizing the principle of interchangeable parts, Whitney helped factories to ﬂourish in the North, giving the Union a decided advantage when that showdown came. The sewing machine, invented by Elias Howe in 1846 and perfected by Isaac Singer, gave another strong boost to northern industrialization. The sewing machine became the foundation of the ready-made clothing industry, which took root about the time of the Civil War. It drove many a seamstress from the shelter of the private home to the factory, where, like a human robot, she tended the clattering mechanisms. Each momentous new invention seemed to stimulate still more imaginative inventions. For the decade ending in 1800, only 306 patents were registered in Washington; but the decade ending in 1860 saw the amazing total of 28,000. Yet in 1838 the clerk of the Pat-

 Manufacturing Guns, ca. 1860 A rare daguerreotype showing an operator working the Lock Frame Jigging Machine in Samuel Colt’s state-of-the-art Hartford, Connecticut, gun factory.



 ent Ofﬁce resigned in despair, complaining that all worthwhile inventions had been discovered. Technical advances spurred equally important changes in the form and legal status of business organizations. The principle of limited liability aided the concentration of capital by permitting the individual investor, in cases of legal claims or bankruptcy, to risk no more than his own share of the corporation’s stock. Fifteen Boston families formed one of the earliest investment capital companies, the Boston Associates. They eventually dominated the textile, railroad, insurance, and banking business of Massachusetts. Laws of “free incorporation,” ﬁ rst passed in New York in 1848, meant that businessmen could create corporations without applying for individual charters from the legislature. Samuel F. B. Morse’s telegraph was among the inventions that tightened the sinews of an increasingly complex business world. A distinguished but povertystricken portrait painter, Morse ﬁ nally secured from Congress, to the accompaniment of the usual jeers, an appropriation of $30,000 to support his experiment with “talking wires.” In 1844 Morse strung a wire forty miles from Washington to Baltimore and tapped out the historic message, “What hath God wrought?” The invention brought fame and fortune to Morse, as he put distantly separated people in almost instant communication with one another. By the eve of the Civil War, a web of singing wires spanned nearly the entire continent, revolutionizing news gathering, diplomacy, and ﬁ nance. Thus, by the time of the fabled London World’s Fair in 1851, known as the Great Exhibition, American products were prominent among the world’s commercial wonders. Fairgoers crowded into the dazzling Crystal Palace to see McCormick’s reaper, Morse’s telegraph, Colt’s ﬁ rearms, and Charles Goodyear’s vulcanized rubber goods.

Workers and “Wage Slaves”
 One ugly outgrowth of the factory system was an increasingly acute labor problem. Hitherto manufacturing had been done in the home, or in the small shop, where the master craftsman and his apprentice, rubbing elbows at the same bench, could maintain an intimate and friendly relationship. The Industrial Revolution submerged this personal association in the impersonal ownership of stuffy factories in “spindle cities.” Around these, like tumors, the slumlike hovels of the “wage slaves” tended to cluster.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


The Master Craftsman Dignity and
 pride of workmanship are evident in this tidy wheelwright’s shop. Smallscale, intimate workplaces like this were eventually overshadowed by the mass-production, impersonal factory system, as in the illustrations on pages 325 and 327.

 Clearly the early factory system did not shower its beneﬁts evenly on all. While many owners grew plump, workingpeople often wasted away at their workbenches. Hours were long, wages were low, and meals were skimpy and hastily gulped. Workers were forced to toil in unsanitary buildings that were poorly ventilated, lighted, and heated. They were forbidden by law to form labor unions to raise wages, for such cooperative activity was regarded as a criminal conspiracy. Not surprisingly, only twenty-four recorded strikes occurred before 1835. Especially vulnerable to exploitation were child workers. In 1820 a signiﬁcant portion of the nation’s industrial toilers were children under ten years of age. Victims of factory labor, many children were mentally blighted, emotionally starved, physically stunted, and even brutally whipped in special “whipping rooms.” In Samuel Slater’s mill of 1791, the ﬁrst machine tenders were seven boys and two girls, all under twelve years of age. By contrast, the lot of most adult wage workers improved markedly in the 1820s and 1830s. In the full ﬂush of Jacksonian democracy, many of the states granted the laboring man the vote. Brandishing the ballot, he ﬁ rst strove to lighten his burden through

 workingmen’s parties. Eventually many workers gave their loyalty to the Democratic party of Andrew Jackson, whose attack on the Bank of the United States and against all forms of “privilege” reﬂected their anxieties about the emerging capitalist economy. In addition to such goals as the ten-hour day, higher wages, and tolerable working conditions, they demanded public educa-

 One observer in 1836 published a newspaper account of conditions in some of the New England factories:

“


 The operatives work thirteen hours a day in the summer time, and from daylight to dark in the winter. At half past four in the morning the factory bell rings, and at ﬁve the girls must be in the mills. . . . So fatigued . . . are numbers of girls that they go to bed soon after receiving their evening meal, and endeavor by a comparatively long sleep to resuscitate their weakened frames for the toil of the coming day.

”


Examining the Evidence




The Invention of the Sewing Machine
 istorians of technology examine not only the documentary evidence of plans and patents left behind by inventors, but surviving machines themselves. In 1845 Elias Howe, a twenty-six-yearold apprentice to a Boston watchmaker, invented a sewing machine that could make 250 stitches a minute, ﬁve times what the swiftest hand-sewer could do. A year later Howe received a patent for his invention, but because the hand-cranked machine could only stitch straight seams for a short distance before requiring resetting, it had limited commercial appeal. Howe took his sewing machine abroad, where he worked with British manufacturers to improve it, and then returned to America and combined his patent with those of other inventors, including Isaac M. Singer. Hundreds of thousands of sewing machines

H


 were produced beginning in the 1850s for the commercial manufacture of clothing, books, shoes, and many other products and also for home use. The sewing machine became the ﬁ rst widely advertised consumer product. Due to its high cost, the Singer company introduced an installment buying plan, which helped place sewing machines in most middleclass households. Why was the sewing machine able to ﬁ nd eager customers in commercial workshops and home sewing rooms alike? How might the sewing machine have changed other aspects of American life, such as work patterns, clothing styles, and retail selling? What other advances in technology might have been necessary for the invention of the sewing machine?



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 tion for their children and an end to the inhuman practice of imprisonment for debt. Employers, abhorring the rise of the “rabble” in politics, fought the ten-hour day to the last ditch. They argued that reduced hours would lessen production, increase costs, and demoralize the workers. Laborers would have so much leisure time that the Devil would lead them into mischief. A red-letter gain was at length registered for labor in 1840, when President Van Buren established the ten-hour day for federal employees on public works. In ensuing years a number of states gradually fell into line by reducing the hours of working people. Day laborers at last learned that their strongest weapon was to lay down their tools, even at the risk of prosecution under the law. Dozens of strikes erupted in the 1830s and 1840s, most of them for higher wages, some for the ten-hour day, and a few for such unusual goals as the right to smoke on the job. The workers usually lost more strikes than they won, for the employer could resort to such tactics as the importing of strikebreakers—often derisively called “scabs” or “rats,” and often fresh off the boat from the Old World. Labor long raised its voice against the unrestricted inpouring of wage-depressing and union-busting immigrant workers. Labor’s early and painful efforts at orga ni zation had netted some 300,000 trade unionists by 1830. But such encouraging gains were dashed on the rocks of hard times following the severe depression of 1837. As unemployment spread, union membership shriveled. Yet toilers won a promising legal victory in 1842. The supreme court of Massachusetts ruled in the case of

 Violence broke out along the New York waterfront in 1836 when laborers striking for higher wages attacked “scabs.” Philip Hone’s (1780–1851) diary records,

“


 The Mayor, who acts with vigour and ﬁrmness, ordered out the troops, who are now on duty with loaded arms. . . . These measures have restored order for the present, but I fear the elements of disorder are at work; the bands of Irish and other foreigners, instigated by the mischievous councils of the tradesunion and other combinations of discontented men, are acquiring strength and importance which will ere long be difﬁcult to quell.

”


 Commonwealth v. Hunt that labor unions were not illegal conspiracies, provided that their methods were “honorable and peaceful.” This enlightened decision did not legalize the strike overnight throughout the country, but it was a signiﬁcant signpost of the times. Trade unions still had a rocky row to hoe, stretching ahead for about a century, before they could meet management on relatively even terms.

Women and the Economy
 Women were also sucked into the clanging mechanism of factory production. Farm women and girls had an important place in the preindustrial economy, spinning yarn, weaving cloth, and making candles, soap, butter, and cheese. New factories such as the textile mills of New Eng land undermined these activities, cranking out manufactured goods much faster than they could be made by hand at home. Yet these same factories offered employment to the very young women whose work they were displacing. Factory jobs promised greater economic independence for women, as well as the means to buy the manufactured products of the new market economy. “Factory girls” typically toiled six days a week, earning a pittance for dreary, limb-numbing, earsplitting stints of twelve or thirteen hours—“from dark to dark.” The Boston Associates, nonetheless, proudly pointed to their textile mill at Lowell, Massachusetts, as a showplace factory. The workers were virtually all New England farm girls, carefully supervised on and off the job by watchful matrons. Escorted regularly to church from their company boardinghouses and forbidden to form unions, they had few opportunities to share dissatisfactions over their grueling working conditions. But factory jobs of any kind were still unusual for women. Opportunities for women to be economically self-supporting were scarce and consisted mainly of nursing, domestic ser vice, and especially teaching. The dedicated Catharine Beecher, unmarried daughter of a famous preacher and sister of Harriet Beecher Stowe, tirelessly urged women to enter the teaching profession. She eventually succeeded beyond her dreams, as men left teaching for other lines of work and schoolteaching became a thoroughly “feminized” occupation. Other work “opportunities” for women beckoned in household ser vice. Perhaps one white family in ten employed servants at midcentury, most of whom were poor white, immigrant, or black women. About 10 percent of white women were working for pay outside their own homes in 1850, and estimates are that about



Working Women


 The Sewing Floor of Thompson’s Skirt Factory, 1859 The burgeoning textile industry provided employment for thousands of women in antebellum America—and also produced the clothes that women wore. This view of a New York City shop in 1859 illustrates the transition from hand-sewing (on the right) to machine-stitching (on the left). It also vividly illustrates the contrast between the kinds of “sewing circles” in which women had traditionally sought companionship to the impersonal mass-production line of the modern manufacturing plant. Note especially the stark exhortation on the wall: “Strive to Excel.” Contrast this impersonal scene with the workplace depicted on page 322.

 20 percent of all women had been employed at some time prior to marriage The vast majority of workingwomen were single. Upon marriage they left their paying jobs and took up their new work (without wages) as wives and mothers. In the home they were enshrined in a cult of domesticity, a widespread cultural creed that gloriﬁed the customary functions of the homemaker. From their pedestal, married women commanded immense moral power, and they increasingly made decisions that altered the character of the family itself. Women’s changing roles and the spreading Industrial Revolution brought some important changes in the life of the nineteenth-century home—the traditional “women’s sphere.” Love, not parental “arrangement,” more and more frequently determined the choice of a spouse—yet parents often retained the power of veto. Families thus became more closely knit and affectionate, providing the emotional refuge that made the threatening impersonality of big-city industrialism tolerable to many people.

 Most striking, families grew smaller. The average household had nearly six members at the end of the eighteenth century but fewer than ﬁve members a century later. The “fertility rate,” or number of births

 A woman worker in the Lowell mills wrote a friend in 1844,

“


 You wish to know minutely of our hours of labor. We go in [to the mill] at ﬁve o’clock; at seven we come out to breakfast; at half-past seven we return to our work, and stay until half-past twelve. At one, or quarter-past one four months in the year, we return to our work, and stay until seven at night. Then the evening is all our own, which is more than some laboring girls can say, who think nothing is more tedious than a factory life.

”




Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 among women ages fourteen to forty-ﬁve, dropped sharply among white women in the years after the Revolution and, in the course of the nineteenth century as a whole, fell by half. Birth control was still a taboo topic for polite conversation, and contraceptive technology was primitive, but clearly some form of family limitation was being practiced quietly and effectively in countless families, rural and urban alike. Women undoubtedly played a large part—perhaps the leading part—in decisions to have fewer children. This newly assertive role for women has been called “domestic feminism,” because it signiﬁed the growing power and

 independence of women, even while they remained wrapped in the “cult of domesticity.” Smaller families, in turn, meant child-centered families, since where children are fewer, parents can lavish more care on them individually. European visitors to the United States in the nineteenth century often complained about the unruly behavior of American “brats.” But though American parents may have increasingly spared the rod, they did not spoil their children. Lessons were enforced by punishments other than the hickory stick. When the daughter of novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe neglected to do her homework, her mother sent her from the dinner table and gave her “only bread and water in her own apartment.” What Europeans saw as permissiveness was in reality the consequence of an emerging new idea of child-rearing, in which the child’s will was not to be simply broken, but rather shaped. In the little republic of the family, as in the Republic at large, good citizens were raised not to be meekly obedient to authority, but to be independent individuals who could make their own decisions on the basis of internalized moral standards. Thus the outlines of the “modern” family were clear by midcentury: it was small, affectionate, and child-centered, and it provided a special arena for the talents of women. Feminists of a later day might decry the stiﬂ ing at mosphere of the nineteenth-century home, but to many women of the time, it seemed a big step upward from the conditions of grinding toil—often alongside men in the ﬁelds—in which their mothers had lived.

Western Farmers Reap
 a Revolution in the Fields

 York, Pennsylvania, Family with Negro Servant, ca. 1828 This portrait of a Pennsylvania family presents a somewhat idealized picture of the home as the woman’s sphere. The wife and mother sits at the center of activity; while she reads to the children, the husband and father stands by somewhat superﬂuously. A black servant cares for an infant in the corner, suggesting the prosperous status of this household.

 As smoke-belching factories altered the eastern skyline, ﬂourishing farms were changing the face of the West. The trans-Allegheny region—especially the OhioIndiana-Illinois tier—was fast becoming the nation’s breadbasket. Before long it would become a granary to the world. Pioneer families ﬁ rst hacked a clearing out of the forest and then planted their painfully furrowed ﬁelds to corn. The yellow grain was amazingly versatile. It could be fed to hogs (“corn on the hoof”) or distilled into liquor (“corn in the bottle”). Both these products could be transported more easily than the bulky grain itself, and they became the early western farmer’s staple market items. So many hogs were butchered, traded,

Advances in Agriculture




 McCormick’s Miraculous Reaper This illustration shows an early test of Cyrus McCormick’s mechanical reaper near his home in Virginia in 1831. The reaper was best suited, however, to the horizonless ﬁelds of wheat on the rolling prairies of the Midwest. By the 1850s McCormick’s Chicago factory was cranking out more than twenty thousand reapers a year for midwestern farmers.

 or shipped at Cincinnati that the city was known as the “Porkopolis” of the West. Most western produce was at ﬁrst ﬂoated down the Ohio-Mississippi River system, to feed the lusty appetite of the booming Cotton Kingdom. But western farmers were as hungry for proﬁts as southern slaves and

 planters were for food. These tillers, spurred on by the easy availability of seemingly boundless acres, sought ways to bring more and more land into cultivation. Ingenious inventors came to their aid. One of the ﬁ rst obstacles that frustrated the farmers was the thickly matted soil of the West, which snagged and

 McCormick Reaper Works, 1850s Contrast this scene of “mass production” with the workplace depicted in “The Master Craftsman” on page 322.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 snapped fragile wooden plows. John Deere of Illinois in 1837 ﬁ nally produced a steel plow that broke the stubborn soil. Sharp and effective, it was also light enough to be pulled by horses, rather than oxen. In the 1830s Virginia-born Cyrus McCormick contributed the most wondrous contraption of all: a mechanical mower-reaper. The clattering cogs of McCormick’s horse-drawn machine were to the western farmers what the cotton gin was to the southern planters. Seated on his red-chariot reaper, a single husbandman could do the work of ﬁve men with sickles and scythes. No other American invention cut so wide a swath as the McCormick reaper. It made ambitious capitalists out of humble plowmen, who now scrambled for more acres on which to plant more ﬁelds of billowing wheat. Subsistence farming gave way to food production for both domestic and foreign markets, as largescale (“extensive”), specialized, cash-crop agriculture came to dominate the trans-Allegheny West. With it followed mounting indebtedness, as farmers bought more land and more machinery to work it. Soon hustling farmer-businesspeople were annually harvesting a larger crop than the South—which was becoming self-sufﬁcient in food production— could devour. They began to dream of markets elsewhere—in the mushrooming factory towns of the East or across the faraway Atlantic. But they were still largely landlocked. Commerce moved north and south on the river systems. Before it could begin to move east-west in bulk, a transportation revolution would have to occur.

Highways and Steamboats
 In 1789, when the Constitution was launched, primitive methods of travel were still in use. Waterborne commerce, whether along the coast or on the rivers, was slow, uncertain, and often dangerous. Stagecoaches and wagons lurched over bone-shaking roads. Passengers would be routed out to lay nearby fence rails across muddy stretches, and occasionally horses would drown in muddy pits while wagons sank slowly out of sight. Cheap and efﬁcient carriers were imperative if raw materials were to be transported to factories and if ﬁ nished products were to be delivered to consumers. On December 3, 1803, a ﬁ rm in Providence, Rhode Island, sent a shipment of yarn to a point sixty miles away, notifying the purchaser that the consignment

 could be expected to arrive in “the course of the winter.” A promising improvement came in the 1790s, when a private company completed the Lancaster Turnpike in Pennsylvania. It was a broad, hard-surfaced highway that thrust sixty-two miles westward from Philadelphia to Lancaster. As drivers approached the tollgate, they were confronted with a barrier of sharp pikes, which were turned aside when they paid their toll. Hence the term turnpike. The Lancaster Turnpike proved to be a highly successful venture, returning as high as 15 percent annual dividends to its stockholders. It attracted a rich trade to Philadelphia and touched off a turnpikebuilding boom that lasted about twenty years. It also stimulated western development. The turnpikes beckoned to the canvas-covered Conestoga wagons, whose creakings heralded a westward advance that would know no real retreat. Western road building, always expensive, encountered many obstacles. One pesky roadblock was the noisy states’ righters, who opposed federal aid to local projects. Eastern states also protested against being bled of their populations by the westward-reaching arteries. Westerners scored a notable triumph in 1811 when the federal government started construction of the National Road, also known as the Cumberland Road, in honor of its starting point in Cumberland, Maryland. Although construction was interrupted by the War of 1812 and by states’ righters’ complaints about federal grants for internal improvements, the road reached Vandalia, Illinois, 591 miles to the west, in 1839. Later extensions brought it from Baltimore, on Chesapeake Bay, to the banks of the Mississippi River in St. Louis. The steamboat craze, which overlapped the turnpike craze, was touched off by an ambitious painterengineer named Robert Fulton. He installed a powerful steam engine in a vessel that posterity came to know as the Clermont but that a dubious public dubbed “Fulton’s Folly.” On a historic day in 1807, the quaint little ship, belching sparks from its single smokestack, churned steadily from New York City up the Hudson River toward Albany. It made the run of 150 miles in 32 hours. The success of the steamboat was sensational. People could now in large degree defy wind, wave, tide, and downstream current. Within a few years, Fulton had changed all of America’s navigable streams into two-way arteries, thereby doubling their carrying ca-

The Transportation Revolution




Mississippi in Time of Peace, by Mrs. Frances Flora Bond Palmer, 1865 By the
 mid-nineteenth century, steamboats had made the Mississippi a bustling river highway—as it remains today.

 pacity. Hitherto keelboats had been pushed up the Mississippi, with quivering poles and raucous profanity, at less than one mile an hour—a process that was prohibitively expensive. Now the steamboats could churn rapidly against the current, ultimately attaining speeds in excess of ten miles an hour. The mighty Mississippi had met its master. By 1820 there were some sixty steamboats on the Mississippi and its tributaries; by 1860 about one thousand, some of them luxurious river palaces. Keen rivalry among the swift and gaudy steamers led to memorable races. Excited passengers would urge the captain to pile on wood at the risk of bursting the boilers, which all too often exploded, with tragic results for the ﬂoating ﬁ retraps. When the steamer Sultana blew up in April 1865, the explosion killed seventeen hundred passengers, including many Union prisoners of war being repatriated to the North. Chugging steamboats played a vital role in the opening of the West and South, both of which were richly endowed with navigable rivers. Like bunches of grapes on a vine, population clustered along the banks of the broad-ﬂowing streams. Cotton growers and other

 farmers made haste to take up and turn over the nowproﬁtable soil. Not only could they ﬂoat their produce out to market, but, hardly less important, they could ship in at low cost their shoes, hardware, and other manufactured necessities.

 “Clinton’s Big Ditch” in New York A canal-cutting craze paralleled the boom in turnpikes and steamboats (see Map 14.2). A few canals had been built around falls and elsewhere in colonial days, but ambitious projects lay in the future. Resourceful New Yorkers, cut off from federal aid by states’ righters, themselves dug the Erie Canal, linking the Great Lakes with the Hudson River. They were blessed with the driv ing leadership of Governor DeWitt Clinton, whose grandiose project was scofﬁ ngly called “Clinton’s Big Ditch” or “the Governor’s Gutter.” Begun in 1817, the canal eventually ribboned 363 miles. On its completion in 1825, a garlanded canal boat glided from Buffalo, on Lake Erie, to the Hudson

 n

 he

Al
 le g

 e

Connecticut R
.


N


 ad

Raleigh
Cape
Fear R.


Wilmington


Columbia


.


 EA

 e

 ac

R.


Santee


 ad

R.


A


 l Ro

Norfolk


C


Te


Natchez


Ala
 ba ma

 ce

MISSISSIPPI
Re d R. 
 era

Chesapeake
Bay


Roan
 ok

SOUTH CAROLINA
Augusta 
Fed


Montgomery


Lynchburg


 TI

R.
 pp i

 ssi Mi ssi ra

 d

R.


Sa


R


 zT

 at V

 oa yR alle

R.
 ee

 h na

 he

 ee R. igb

N


 c at

 b Tom

Vicksburg


Richmond


Buchanan


NORTH CAROLINA

 oad

 n va

.


 MARYLAND

 e

Cumberland
Gap
Knoxville
R


 s es nn

Washington, D.C.


 VIRGINIA

Gre


 s

 sa an Ark

Florence


Delaware and
Raritan C.


 DELAWARE

Ohio C.


Staunton


 es

 le

 ad

 TENNESSEE

 vil

. Rd.


Portsmouth


Kentucky
R.


 ern

Ro


Nash


Wild


Nashville


New York City
New Brunswick


Lancaster
Tpk.


Rd


R.I.
 CONN.

 s . Trenton rbe Fo Lancaster Philadelphia Bedford NEW Hagerstown JERSEY Baltimore Chesapeake and

Ohio
R.
 and Erie io C. Oh

Boonesboro


R.
Cum
 berland

 sR

 n

 nn

Providence


Wheeling
Zanesville
Marietta
Cumberland


Lexington


 KENTUCKY

 ARKANSAS

Za


Pe


Boston
Worcester


 OC

Louisville


Pennsylvania
State
C.
System 

Ro


 ri

 e’s

 ou

Maysville


Evansville


 MISSOURI

Pittsburgh
Columbus


Cincinnati


Vandalia


Binghamton


 PENNSYLVANIA

 OHIO

Tr


 ss

Haute
St. Louis


Olean


NEW YORK

 TL

Springfield


 l Road Nationa Terre ( C u m b e r l a n d )

Franklin
R.


Ft.


Cleveland


Ohio and
Erie C.


R.


Coastal


 an

Toledo


 y

Lowell


 MASS.

 AN

 an n

 ash

Indianapolis


Springfield
Mi


 ab

Wayne
R.
 sh ba INDIANA a W

W


 ILLINOIS

Illi


R.


C.


Mi ami a nd Erie C.


4 0 °N


 s oi

 ie d Er

 r i e Erie e E

Troy


Albany
Chenango C.


Portland


N.H.


Hudson R.


Genesee
Valley
C.


Harrison


R.


La ke M
 ic

 ron

La Salle


 VT. ck ima Merr

Hu


 hig

 ke

Erie C.


Buffalo


Lak


L.
Champlain 

C.


Lockport


Chicago


 MAINE

 nc re

Oswego
C.
 ario Champlain C. O n tOswego Rome Utica La k e

Welland C.


Detroit


 w La

Carthage Black R.


 MICHIGAN

 IOWA

St
.


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

La


 WISCONSIN

70°W
R.


8 0 °W


9 0 °W


 GEORGIA

Charleston


N


Columbus


Canal


Savannah


 ALABAMA

 Navigable river

 LOUISIANA

 Major road

30 °N
New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico


St. Augustine


 FLORIDA





200 Km.


200 Mi.


Map 14.2 Major Rivers, Roads, and Canals, 1825–1860
Interactive Map


 River and on to New York harbor. There, with colorful ceremony, Governor Clinton emptied a cask of water from the lake to symbolize “the marriage of the waters.” The water from Clinton’s keg baptized the Empire State. Mule-drawn passengers and bulky freight could now be handled with thrift and dispatch, at the dizzy speed of ﬁve miles an hour. The cost of shipping a ton

 of grain from Buffalo to New York City fell from $100 to $5, and the time of transit from about twenty days to six. Ever-widening economic ripples followed the completion of the Erie Canal. The value of land along the route skyrocketed, and new cities—such as Rochester and Syracuse—blossomed. Industry in the state boomed. The new proﬁtability of farming in the Old Northwest—



Canals and Railroads


80°W


 Québec ME.

 Montréal VT.

 WIS.

R.


Chicago


N.H.


Detroit


 IND.

 ILL.

L. O
L.


 e Eri

 ntar

 io

Boston
N.Y.


 PA.

New York


Pittsburgh


N.J.


Philadelphia


 OHIO

DEL. MD.

Washington,
D.C.
Cincinnati VA.


40°N


St.
Joseph


R.
Louisville
 o i Oh KY.

N
N.C.


 TENN.

 EA

 MO.

Richmond


 OC

St. Louis


S.C.
ALA. MISS.

Charleston


 GA.

Savannah


 LA.

Jacksonville


 TEX.

Houston


 FLA.

N


 AT

New Orleans


 IC

 ARK.

30°N


MASS. R.I. CONN.

 NT

 IOWA

 MICH.

 LA

 ss ip MINN. TERR.

 ron

L.
Michi gan 

L.


 ssi

Hu


Mi


70°W


BR IT ISH NO R T H AMER ICA (CANADA)

La k e S u p e r i o r


 pi

 notably in Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, and Illinois— attracted thousands of European immigrants to the unaxed and untaxed lands now available. Flotillas of steamships soon plied the Great Lakes, connecting with canal barges at Buffalo. Interior waterside villages like Cleveland, Detroit, and Chicago exploded into mighty cities. Other profound economic and political changes followed the canal’s completion. The price of potatoes in New York City was cut in half, and many dispirited New Eng land farmers, no longer able to face the ruinous competition, abandoned their rocky holdings and went elsewhere. Some became mill hands, thus speeding the industrialization of America. Others, ﬁ nding it easy to go west over the Erie Canal, took up new farmland south of the Great Lakes, where they were joined by thousands of New Yorkers and other northerners. Still others shifted to fruit, vegetable, and dairy farming. The transformations in the Northeast—canal consequences—showed how long-established local market structures could be swamped by the emerging behemoth of a continental economy. And as American products began to ﬂow into international markets, even far-off Europeans began to feel the effects of America’s economic vitality. Before long, Italian and Polish peasants, displaced from their marginal farms by the arrival of cheap American grains, would come to America to build new lives.

G ulf of
Mexico


Railroads, 1850
 Railroads built 1850–1860 Free state or territory Slave state or territory





400 Km.


 Open to slavery



400 Mi.


The Iron Horse
 The most signiﬁcant contribution to the development of such an economy proved to be the railroad. It was fast, reliable, cheaper than canals to construct, and not frozen over in winter. Able to go almost anywhere, even through the Allegheny barrier, it deﬁed terrain and weather. The ﬁ rst railroad appeared in the United States in 1828, and new lines spread with amazing swiftness. Andrew Jackson rode to his ﬁ rst presidential inauguration in 1829 in a horse-drawn carriage. At the end of his second term, eight years later, he departed from Washington in a railway car. By 1860, on the eve of the Civil War, the United States boasted thirty thousand miles of railroad track, three-fourths of it in the rapidly industrializing North (see Map 14.3). At ﬁ rst the railroad faced strong opposition from vested interests, especially canal backers. Anxious to protect its investment in the Erie Canal, the New York legislature in 1833 prohibited the railroads from carrying freight—at least temporarily. Early railroads

Map 14.3 The Railroad Revolution Note the
 explosion of new railroad construction in the 1850s and its heavy concentration in the North. Interactive Map

 were also considered a dangerous public menace, for ﬂying sparks could set ﬁ re to nearby haystacks and houses, and appalling railway accidents could turn the wooden “miniature hells” into ﬂaming funeral pyres for their riders. Railroad pioneers had to overcome other obstacles as well. Brakes were so feeble that the engineer might miss the station twice, both arriving and backing up. Arrivals and departures were conjectural, and numerous differences in gauge (the distance between the rails) meant frequent changes of trains for passengers. In 1840 there were seven transfers between Philadelphia and Charleston. But gauges gradually



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


Poster-Timetable for Baltimore & Susquehanna
Railroad, 1840 Advertising the Baltimore &
 Susquehanna’s train schedule alone was not sufﬁcient to get passengers to their destinations. A typical trip often entailed coordinating legs on other railroad lines, stagecoaches, and canal boats.

 became standardized, better brakes did brake, safety devices were adopted, and the Pullman “sleeping palace” was introduced in 1859. America at long last was being bound together with braces of iron, later to be made of steel.

Cables, Clippers,
 and Pony Riders Other forms of transportation and communication were binding together the United States and the world. A crucial development came in 1858 when Cyrus Field, called “the greatest wire-puller in history,” orga nized a joint Anglo-American-Canadian venture to stretch a cable under the deep North Atlantic waters from Newfoundland to Ireland. Although this initial cable went

 dead after three weeks of public rejoicing, a heavier cable laid in 1866 permanently linked the American and European continents. The United States merchant marine encountered rough sailing during much of the early nineteenth century. American vessels had been repeatedly laid up by the embargo, the War of 1812, and the panics of 1819 and 1837. American naval designers made few contributions to maritime progress. A pioneer American steamer, the Savannah, crept across the Atlantic in 1819, but it used sail most of the time and was pursued for a day by a British captain who thought it aﬁ re. In the 1840s and 1850s, a golden age dawned for American shipping. Yankee naval yards, notably Donald McKay’s at Boston, began to send down the ways sleek new craft called clipper ships. Long, narrow, and majestic, they glided across the sea under towering

Communication and Trade




 Chariot of Fame Clipper Ship, by Duncan McFarlane, 1854

 masts and clouds of canvas. In a fair breeze, they could outrun any steamer. The stately clippers sacriﬁced cargo space for speed, and their captains made kill ings by hauling high-value cargoes in record times. They wrested much of the tea-carrying trade between the Far East and Britain from their slower-sailing British competitors, and they sped thousands of impatient adventurers to the goldﬁelds of Cal i fornia and Australia. But the hour of glory for the clipper was relatively brief. On the eve of the Civil War, the British had clearly won the world race for maritime ascendancy with their iron tramp steamers (“teakettles”). Although slower and less romantic than the clipper, these vessels were steadier, roomier, more reliable, and hence more proﬁtable. No story of rapid American communication would be complete without including the Far West. By 1858 horse-drawn overland stagecoaches, immortalized by Mark Twain’s Roughing It, were a familiar sight. Their

 dusty tracks stretched from the banks of the muddy Missouri River clear to Cal i fornia (see Map 14.4). Even more dramatic was the Pony Express, established in 1860 to carry mail speedily the two thousand lonely miles from St. Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, Cal i fornia. Daring, lightweight riders, leaping onto wiry ponies saddled at stations approximately ten miles

 As late as 1877, stagecoach passengers were advised in print,

“


 Never shoot on the road as the noise might frighten the horses. . . . Don’t point out where murders have been committed, especially if there are women passengers. . . . Expect annoyances, discomfort, and some hardships.

”


BRITIS H N ORTH A M E RIC A ( C A N A DA ) 110°W

 b

 on

R.


Ta
 o

Tr
 a

 il

 le

Gr e


 en

 il

 s

Tr
 a

 te

El Paso
 del Norte

B ut


Sa c r a m e nt o
R.


 l

Sa


 l

30°N


 ILL.

Eri


 e

Nauvoo


 as

St.
Louis


 an

Oh


 io

R.


KY. TENN.

R.


Ft. Smith


 TERRITORY rl Ove

 OHIO

 IND.

Independence


 MO.

 rail dT

ARK. MISS.

 TEXAS

 ALA.

 GA.

 LA.

San
Antonio


Gr


Galveston


Gulf of Mexico


 an

N


 MICH.

UNITED STATES

 INDIAN

 ld fie

Rio


Chihuahua


 r

 on Trail

Trail


R.


 ron

 i Tra

Gila


Hu


Red


 r field Ov erland

WIS. R.

 s

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 pi

 an

 on arr il Cim g Tra Taos n i s s Cro Santa Fe Fe Trail Ft. Smith–Sa nta

 ip

IOWA
Morm 
Ft. Leavenworth


S a n t a Fe


 e

.


 iss

L.


 t P la t e R.

KANSAS
Tr TERRITORY 
 or La k

 iss

 uri R.

A rk


 tte

 l

 INS

 NS

Bu


IC IF N C A PA CE O

San
Diego


 s

 nT rai

 so

Ft.
Kearney


 PLA

R.


 go

E AT


Salt Lake City


 GREAT e BASIN ng CALIF. sA R. o to L do ra ke o l a o C tL ish d Span Ol

Los Angeles


Ft. Laramie
N.
P la
O
 tte re R.

TA I

Santa Barbara


Trail


 UN

 r Great Salt lifo Lake Ca Express Overland Mail y n Po

UTAH
Sacramento (Sutter’s Fort) TERRITORY 
 rmon

 is

Mo


M


R.


 ra il aT

 MO

San
Francisco


 ni

Ft. Hall


 GR

40°N


Y


 ke

Superi


 MINN.

NEBRASKA TERRITORY

 CK

Sna


Ft.
Lane


La k e


UNORG. TERR.

M


 RO

 il

R.


 a Tr

OREGON TERRITORY

R.


.
 ri R Mis s ou . e n R wsto Yello

 TER

Or eg


 ON

Portland


Milk


IN GT

 n

Colum


WAS H

Ft.
Vancouver


Astoria


80°W


90°W


100°W


La k e M i c h i g a


120°W
 ia R.

 de

 MEXICO





400 Km.


400 Mi.


 Map 14.4 Main Routes West Before the Civil War Mark Twain described his stagecoach trip to California in the 1860s in Roughing It: “We began to get into country, now, threaded here and there with little streams. These had high, steep banks on each side, and every time we ﬂew down one bank and scrambled up the other, our party inside got mixed somewhat. First we would all be down in a pile at the forward end of the stage, . . . and in a second we would shoot to the other end, and stand on our heads. And . . . as the dust rose from the tumult, we would all sneeze in chorus, and the majority of us would grumble, and probably say some hasty thing, like: ‘Take your elbow out of my ribs!—can’t you quit crowding?’ ”

 apart, could make the trip in an amazing ten days. These unarmed horsemen galloped on, summer or winter, day or night, through dust or snow, past Indians and bandits. The speeding postmen missed only one trip, though the whole enterprise lost money heavily and folded after only eighteen legend-leaving months. Just as the clippers had succumbed to steam, so were the express riders unhorsed by Samuel Morse’s clacking keys, which began tapping messages to Cal ifornia in 1861. The swift ships and the ﬂeet ponies ush334

Interactive Map


 ered out a dying technology of wind and muscle. In the future, machines would be in the saddle.

The Transport Web
Binds the Union
 More than anything else, the desire of the East to tap the West stimulated the transportation revolution. Until about 1830 the produce of the western region

Forging a Continental Economy


 drained southward to the cotton belt or to the heapedup wharves of New Orleans. The steamboat vastly aided the reverse ﬂow of ﬁ nished goods up the watery western arteries and helped bind West and South together. But the truly revolutionary changes in commerce and communication came in the three decades before the Civil War, as canals and railroad tracks radiated out from the East, across the Alleghenies and into the blossoming heartland. The ditch-diggers and tie-layers were attempting nothing less than a conquest of nature itself. They would offset the “natural” ﬂow of trade on the interior rivers by laying down an impressive grid of “internal improvements.” The builders succeeded beyond their wildest dreams. The Mississippi was increasingly robbed of its trafﬁc, as goods moved eastward on chugging trains, pufﬁ ng lake boats, and mule-tugged canal barges. Governor Clinton had in effect picked up the mighty Father of Waters and ﬂung it over the Alleghenies, forcing it to empty into the sea at New York City. By the 1840s the city of Buffalo handled more western produce than New Orleans. Between 1836 and 1860, grain shipments through Buffalo increased a staggering sixtyfold. New York City became the seaboard queen of the nation, a gigantic port through which a vast hinterland poured its wealth and to which it daily paid economic tribute. By the eve of the Civil War, a truly continental economy had emerged. The principle of division of labor, which spelled productivity and proﬁts in the factory, applied on a national scale as well. Each region now specialized in a particular type of economic activity. The South raised cotton for export to New England and Britain; the West grew grain and livestock to feed factory workers in the East and in Europe; the East made machines and textiles for the South and the West. The economic pattern thus woven had fateful political and military implications. Many southerners regarded the Mississippi as a silver chain that naturally linked together the upper valley states and the Cotton Kingdom. They would become convinced, as secession approached in the 1850s, that some or all of these states would have to secede with them or be strangled. But they would overlook the man-made links that increasingly bound the upper Mississippi Valley to the East in intimate commercial union. Southern rebels would have to ﬁght not only Northern armies but the tight bonds of an interdependent continental economy. Economically, the two northerly sections were Siamese twins.



The Market Revolution
 No less revolutionary than the political upheavals of the antebellum era was the market revolution that transformed a subsistence economy of scattered farms and tiny workshops into a national network of industry and commerce (see Map 14.5). Greater mechanization and a more robust market-oriented economy raised new legal questions about winners and losers. How tightly should patents protect inventions? Should the government regulate monopolies? Who should own the technologies and networks that made America hum in the 1840s and 1850s? Under Chief Justice John Marshall, the U.S. Supreme Court vigilantly protected contract rights by requiring state governments to grant irrevocable charters. Monopolies easily developed, as new companies found it difﬁcult to break into markets. After Marshall died in 1835, the climate began to change and the winds of economic opportunity blew more freely. When the proprietors of Boston’s Charles River Bridge (which included Harvard College) sued the owners of the new Warren Bridge for unconstitutionally violating their original contract, the new chief justice, Roger B. Taney, sided with the newcomers and argued that “the rights of the community” outweighed any exclusive corporate rights. Taney’s decision opened new entrepreneurial channels and encouraged greater competition. So did the passage of more liberal state incorporation laws beginning in the 1830s, granting investors the beneﬁt of “limited liability” if their companies were sued or went bankrupt. As more and more Americans—mill workers as well as farmhands, women as well as men—linked their economic fate to the burgeoning market economy, the self-sufﬁcient households of colonial days were transformed. Most families had once raised all their own food, spun their own wool, and bartered with their neighbors for the few necessities they could not make themselves. In growing numbers they now scattered to work for wages in the mills, or they planted just a few crops for sale at market and used the money to buy goods made by strangers in far-off factories. As storebought fabric, candles, and soap replaced homemade products, a quiet revolution occurred in the household division of labor and status. Traditional women’s work was rendered superﬂuous and devalued. The home itself, once a center of economic production in which all family members cooperated, grew into a place of refuge from the world of work, a refuge that became increasingly the special and separate sphere of women.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 Revolutionary advances in manufacturing and transportation brought increased prosperity to all Americans, but they also widened the gulf between the rich and the poor. Millionaires had been rare in the early days of the Republic, but by the eve of the Civil War, several specimens of colossal ﬁ nancial success were strutting across the national stage. Spectacular was the case of fur-trader and real estate speculator John Jacob Astor, who left an estate of $30 million on his death in 1848. Cities bred the greatest extremes of economic inequality. Unskilled workers, then as always, fared worst. Many of them came to make up a ﬂoating mass of “drifters,” buffeted from town to town by the shifting

 prospects for menial jobs. These wandering workers accounted at various times for up to half the population of the brawling industrial centers. Although their numbers were large, they left little behind them but the homely fruits of their transient labor. Largely unstoried and unsung, they are among the forgotten men and women of American history. Many myths about “social mobility” grew up over the buried memories of these unfortunate day laborers. Mobility did exist in industrializing America—but not in the proportions that legend often portrays. Ragsto-riches success stories were relatively few. Yet America, with its dynamic society and wideopen spaces, undoubtedly provided more “opportu-

 Map 14.5 Industry and Agriculture, 1860 Still a nation of farmers on the eve of the Civil War, Americans had nevertheless made an impressive start on their own Industrial Revolution, especially in the Northeast.

 First oil well, 1859 Titusville, PA.

 WIS.

N.H.Manchester
 MASS.

O


 KY.

 TENN.

N.C.


Knoxville


Memphis


 ARK.

S.C.
 MISS.

Atlanta


N
EA OC

 ALA.

30°N


Richmond


 GA.

Industry
F
Flour and meal 
Natchez


 TEXAS

Mobile


 LA.

New Orleans


Houston


 FLA.

 MEXICO

G ul f of M ex i c o


Agriculture
 Corn and wheat Dairy cattle and hay Tobacco and hemp

 Range and ranch cattle

Cotton


 Orchard fruits

 Rice and sugar cane

 Lumber and timber





400 Km.


400 Mi.


N


N


Albuquerque


T


Louisville


F


A


INDIAN TERRITORY

DEL. MD.

F VA.


L


Los Angeles


OH. I

St. Louis


 MO.

N.J.


Baltimore


T


IC PAC I F

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

Kansas
City


R.I.


I
TPhiladelphia 
Cincinnati


 ILL.

KANSAS TERRITORY

F


Cleveland Pittsburgh PA.


 IND.

New Bedford


T S
Providence  New YorkCONN. Newark

 IC

UTAH TERRITORY

Boston


 ST

Detroit


Chicago
Des Moines


T
S I


A


Salt Lake City


N.Y.


 MICH.

Milwaukee


 IOWA

Albany
Troy


Rochester


F


40°N


 CALIF.

 VT.

T


Minneapolis


 ME.

N


 MINN.

.
NEBRASKA TERRITORY

San
Francisco


70°W


A


UNORG. TERR.

 TERR

OREGON TERRITORY

80°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

G
N
 TO

Portland


 IN

90°W


E


WAS H

100°W


C


110°W


Interactive Map


T
Textiles S
Shoes and clothing I Iron and steelworks Mining 
 Principal manufacturing cities’ product value

 Silver and gold

 T over $100,000,000

Iron ore


  over $10,000,000

 Bituminous coal

 Other major city

Copper


 Anthracite coal

Social Mobility in Industrializing America




 Chicago, 1857 A modest village of a few hundred souls in the 1830s, Chicago was a teeming metropolis just two decades later—one of the fastest-growing cities in the world. A food and livestock processing center and transportation hub, it served the vast farming area of the western plains, a remarkably productive agricultural region and breadbasket to the world.

 nity” than did the contemporary countries of the Old World—which is why millions of immigrants packed their bags and headed for New World shores. Moreover, a rising tide lifts all boats, and the improvement in overall standards of living was real. Wages for unskilled workers in a labor-hungry America rose about 1 percent a year from 1820 to 1860. This general prosperity helped defuse the potential class conﬂ ict that might otherwise have exploded—and that did explode in many European countries.

 The famed English writer Charles Dickens (1812– 1870) traveled to the United States in 1842 and was sharply critical of certain aspects of the national character:

“


 Another prominent feature is the love of ‘smart’ dealing which gilds over many a swindle and gross breach of trust; many a defalcation [embezzlement], public and private; and enables many a knave to hold his head up with the best, who well deserves a halter.

”


 Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 CHRONOLOGY ca. 1843–

 Era of clipper ships



 Samuel Morse invents telegraph Anti-Catholic riot in Philadelphia

 Whitney develops interchangeable parts for muskets

1845–


 Potato famine in Ireland



 Robert Fulton’s ﬁ rst steamboat Embargo spurs American manufacturing



 Elias Howe invents sewing machine



 Cumberland Road construction begins



 Erie Canal construction begins

 First general incorporation laws in New York Democratic revolutions collapse in Germany



 Erie Canal completed



 American, or Know-Nothing, party formed



 First railroad in United States



 London World’s Fair

 1830s

 Cyrus McCormick invents mechanical mower-reaper



 Cumberland Road completed





 Cyrus Field lays ﬁ rst transatlantic cable

 Anti-Catholic riot in Boston





 Pony Express established

 John Deere develops steel plow





 First transcontinental telegraph

 President Van Buren establishes ten-hour day for federal employees



 Permanent transatlantic cable established

 ca. 1750

 Industrial Revolution begins in Britain



 Samuel Slater builds ﬁ rst U.S. textile factory



 Eli Whitney invents cotton gin





 Massachusetts declares labor unions legal in Commonwealth v. Hunt

KEY TERMS
“Self-Reliance” (306) rendezvous (307) ecological imperialism (307) Ancient Order of Hibernians (311) Molly Maguires (311) Tammany Hall (311) Know-Nothing party (314) Awful Disclosures (314) cotton gin (318) Patent Ofﬁce (321) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
limited liability (321) Commonwealth v. Hunt (324) cult of domesticity (325) McCormick reaper (328) turnpike (328) Erie Canal (329) clipper ships (332) Pony Express (333) transportation revolution (334) market revolution (335) 
Samuel Slater
Eli Whitney
Elias Howe
Isaac Singer
Samuel F. B. Morse
John Deere
 Cyrus McCormick

Robert Fulton
 DeWitt Clinton Cyrus Field John Jacob Astor

To Learn More




To Learn More
John Bodnar, The Transplanted: A History of Immigrants in
Urban America (1985)
Christopher Clark, Social Change in America: From the
Revolution Through the Civil War (2006)
Thomas C. Cochran, Frontiers of Change: Early
Industrialism in America (1981)
 Hasia Diner, Erin’s Daughters in America (1983) David H. Hounshell, From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States (1984) Paul E. Johnson, Sam Patch, the Famous Jumper (2003) Bruce Levine, The Spirit of 1848: German Immigrants, Labor Conﬂict, and the Coming of the Civil War (1992)

David Nye, Consuming Power: A Social History of American
Energies (1998)
Michael O’Malley, Keeping Watch: A History of American
Time (1996)
 Carol Sheriff, The Artiﬁcial River (1996) Augustus J. Veenendaal, American Railroads in the Nineteenth Century (2003) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Ferment of
Reform and Culture





1790–1860
 We [Americans] will walk on our own feet; we will work with our own hands; we will speak our own minds. R ALPH WALDO EMERSON, “THE AMERICAN SCHOLAR,” 1837

A


 third revolution accompanied the reformation of American politics and the transformation of the American economy in the mid-nineteenth century. It consisted of a diffuse yet deeply felt commitment to improve the character of ordinary Americans, to make them more upstanding, God-fearing, and literate. Some high-minded souls were disillusioned by the roughand-tumble realities of democratic politics. Others, notably women, were excluded from the political game altogether. As the young Republic grew, increasing numbers of Americans poured their considerable energies into an astonishing variety of religious revivals and reform movements. Reform campaigns of all types ﬂourished in sometimes bewildering abundance. There was not “a reading man” who was without some scheme for a new utopia in his “waistcoat pocket,” claimed Ralph Waldo Emerson. Reformers promoted better public schools and rights for women, as well as miracle medicines, polygamy, celibacy, rule by prophets, and guidance by

 spirits. Societies were formed against alcohol, tobacco, profanity, and the transit of mail on the Sabbath. Eventually overshadowing all other reforms was the great crusade against slavery (see pp. 383–384). Many reformers drew their crusading zeal from religion. Beginning in the late 1790s and boiling over into the early nineteenth century, the Second Great Awakening swept through America’s Protestant churches, transforming the place of religion in American life and sending a generation of believers out on their missions to perfect the world.

Reviving Religion
 Church attendance was still a regular ritual for about three-fourths of the 23 million Americans in 1850. Alexis de Tocqueville declared that there was “no country in the world where the Christian religion retains a greater inﬂuence over the souls of men than in Amer-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Religious Revivalism


 ica.” Yet the religion of these years was not the old-time religion of colonial days. The austere Calvinist rigor had long been seeping out of the American churches. The rationalist ideas of the French Revolutionary era had done much to soften the older orthodoxy. Thomas Paine’s widely circulated book The Age of Reason (1794) had shockingly declared that all churches were “set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and proﬁt.” American anticlericalism was seldom that virulent, but many of the Founding Fathers, including Jefferson and Franklin, embraced the liberal doctrines of Deism that Paine promoted. Deists relied on reason rather than revelation, on science rather than the Bible. They rejected the concept of original sin and denied Christ’s divinity. Yet Deists believed in a Supreme Being who had created a knowable universe and endowed human beings with a capacity for moral behavior. Deism helped to inspire an important spinoff from the severe Puritanism of the past—the Unitarian faith, which began to gather momentum in New Eng land at the end of the eighteenth century. Unitarians held that God existed in only one person (hence unitarian), and not in the orthodox Trinity (God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit). Although denying the deity of Jesus, Unitarians stressed the essential goodness of human nature rather than its vileness; they proclaimed their belief in free will and the possibility of salvation through good works; they pictured God not



 as a stern Creator but as a loving Father. Embraced by many leading thinkers (including Ralph Waldo Emerson), the Unitarian movement appealed mostly to intellectuals whose rationalism and optimism contrasted sharply with the hellﬁ re doctrines of Calvinism, especially predestination and human depravity. A boiling reaction against the growing liberalism in religion set in about 1800. A fresh wave of roaring revivals, beginning on the southern frontier but soon rolling even into the cities of the Northeast, sent the Second Great Awakening surging across the land. Sweeping up even more people than the First Great Awakening (see p. 98) almost a century earlier, the Second Awakening was one of the most momentous episodes in the history of American religion. This tidal wave of spiritual fervor left in its wake countless converted souls, many shattered and reorga nized churches, and numerous new sects. It also encouraged an effervescent evangelicalism that bubbled up into innumerable areas of American life—including prison reform, the temperance cause, the women’s movement, and the crusade to abolish slavery. The Second Great Awakening was spread to the masses on the frontier by huge “camp meetings.” As many as twenty-ﬁve thousand people would gather for an encampment of several days to drink the hellﬁ re gospel as served up by an itinerant preacher. Thousands of spiritually starved souls “got religion” at these

Religious Camp Meeting, by J. Maze
 Burbank, 1839 At huge, daylong encampments, repentant sinners dedicated themselves to lives of personal rectitude and social reform. Fire-and-brimstone preachers like the one depicted here inspired convulsions, speaking in tongues, and ecstatic singing and dancing among the converted. Out of this religious upheaval grew many of the movements for social improvement in the pre– Civil War decades, including the abolitionist crusade.



