Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


 a hoe, a few barrels of corn, a suit of clothes, and perhaps a small parcel of land. Both Virginia and Maryland employed the headright system to encourage the importation of servant workers. Under its terms, whoever paid the passage of a laborer received the right to acquire ﬁ fty acres of land. Masters—not the servants themselves—thus reaped the beneﬁts of landownership from the headright system. Some masters, men who already had at least modest ﬁ nancial means, soon parlayed their investments in servants into vast holdings in real estate. They became the great merchant-planters, lords of sprawling riverfront estates that came to dominate the agriculture and commerce of the southern colonies. Ravenous for both labor and land, Chesapeake planters brought some 100,000 indentured servants to the region by 1700. These “white slaves” represented more than threequarters of all European immigrants to Virginia and Maryland in the seventeenth century. Indentured servants led a hard but hopeful life in the early days of the Chesapeake settlements. They looked forward to becoming free and acquiring land of their own after completing their term of servitude. But as prime land became scarcer, masters became increasingly resistant to including land grants in “freedom dues.” The servants’ lot grew harsher as the seventeenth century wore on. Misbehaving servants, such as a housemaid who became pregnant or a laborer who killed a hog, might be punished with an extended term of ser vice. Even after formal freedom was granted, penniless freed workers often had little choice but to hire themselves out for pitifully low wages to their former masters.

Frustrated Freemen and
 Bacon’s Rebellion An accumulating mass of footloose, impoverished freemen drifted discontentedly about the Chesapeake region by the late seventeenth century. Mostly single young men, they were frustrated by their broken hopes of acquiring land, as well as by their gnawing failure to ﬁ nd single women to marry. The swelling numbers of these wretched bachelors rattled the established planters. The Virginia assembly in 1670 disfranchised most of the landless knockabouts, accusing them of “having little interest in the country” and causing “tumults at the election to the disturbance of his majesty’s peace.” Virginia’s Governor William Berkeley lamented his lot as ruler of this rabble: “How

 miserable that man is that governs a people where six parts of seven at least are poor, endebted, discontented, and armed.” Berkeley’s misery soon increased. About a thousand Virginians broke out of control in 1676, led by a twenty-nine-year-old planter, Nathaniel Bacon. Many of the rebels were frontiersmen who had been forced into the untamed backcountry in search of arable land. They ﬁercely resented Berkeley’s friendly policies toward the Indians, whose thriving fur trade the governor monopolized. When Berkeley refused to retaliate against a series of brutal Indian attacks on frontier settlements, Bacon and his followers took matters into their own hands. They fell murderously upon the Indians, friendly and hostile alike, chased Berkeley from Jamestown, and put the torch to the capital. Chaos swept the raw colony, as frustrated freemen and resentful servants—described as “a rabble of the basest sort of people”—went on a rampage of plundering and pilfering. As this civil war in Virginia ground on, Bacon suddenly died of disease, like so many of his fellow colonists. Berkeley thereupon crushed the uprising with brutal cruelty, hanging more than twenty rebels. Back in Eng land Charles II complained, “That old fool has put to death more people in that naked country than I did here for the murder of my father.”

 Nathaniel Bacon (ca. 1647-1676) assailed Virginia’s Governor William Berkeley (1606-1677) in 1676

“


 for having protected, favored, and emboldened the Indians against His Majesty’s loyal subjects, never contriving, requiring, or appointing any due or proper means of satisfaction for their many invasions, robberies, and murders committed upon us.

 For his part, Governor Berkeley declared,

“


”


 I have lived thirty-four years amongst you [Virginians], as uncorrupt and diligent as ever [a] Governor was, [while] Bacon is a man of two years amongst you, his person and qualities unknown to most of you, and to all men else, by any virtuous act that ever I heard of. . . . I will take counsel of wiser men than myself, but Mr. Bacon has none about him but the lowest of the people.

”


 An Indentured Servant’s Contract, 1746 egal documents, such as this contract signed in Virginia in 1746, not only provide evidence about the ever-changing rules by which societies have regulated their affairs, but also furnish rich information about the conditions of life and the terms of human relationships in the past. This agreement between Thomas Clayton and James Grifﬁ n provides a reminder that not all indentured servants in early America came from abroad. Indentured servitude could be equivalent to an apprenticeship, in which a young person traded several years of ser vice to a master in exchange for instruction in the master’s craft. Here Clayton pledges himself to ﬁve years in Grifﬁ n’s employ in return for a promise to initiate the young man into the “Mystery” of the master’s craft. Why might the master’s trade be described as a “mystery”? From the evidence of this contract, what are the principal objectives of each of the parties to it? What problems does each anticipate? What obligations does each assume? What does the consent of Clayton’s mother to the contract suggest about the young man’s situation?

L




THINKING GLOBALLY

The Atlantic Slave Trade, 1500–1860


I


 n the three and a half centuries following Columbus’s discovery, slave merchants crammed more than 11 million African men, women, and children into the holds of ships and carried them like common cargo to the New World. Roughly 2 million souls perished midvoyage before confronting the agonies and indignities of slavery in the Americas. As Table 4.1 shows, some 400,000 enslaved Africans came ashore in North America, while the overwhelming majority were destined for Latin America and the Caribbean (see Map 4.1). European trading companies and New England merchants reaped enormous proﬁts from this human trafﬁcking, and the slavers were not the only ones to beneﬁt. Slave trading fed off the insatiable appetite for sugar, tobacco, cotton, and other New World products that Europeans and Americans craved. It thrived, too, on the willingness of

 Africans themselves to sell their fellow Africans to European and American slavers. Marketing human beings on such a vast scale required the complicity of African warlords, slave-ship captains and crews, stevedores, planters, tea drinkers, tailors, bakers, smokers, bankers, and a host of middlemen on four continents. Only in the nineteenth century did nations in Europe and the Americas begin to outlaw the international slave trade (see “The Struggle to Abolish Slavery,” p. 388), beginning with Britain in 1807. After Congress banned further slave importations to the United States in 1808, a ﬂourishing internal market developed. Masters in the upper South bred slaves for sale on the rapidly expanding cotton frontier in the Old Southwest. Europeans, as well as Americans in the “free states,” lent indirect support to that domestic slave trade as they continued to consume slave-produced goods.

 An African Slave Cofﬂe Yoked and bound, these men, women, and children were on their way to a coastal slave market, where they would be herded aboard ship for the Americas.



Liverpool
Bristol


EUROPE NORTH AMERICA

Constantinople
New York
Baltimore


Azores


Charleston


90°W


30°N


 st

Ind


Cape Verde
Is.


 ies

4,


 GUIANA zon R Am a



0,




ARGUIN SENEGAMBIA

SIERRA LEONE WINDWARD COAST GOLD COAST



Bight of Benin
Bight
 of Biafra

Equator 0°


.


SOUTH AMERICA

Brazi


 BRAZIL

00,
 l 3,9

Co


 n go R

 LOANGO

INDIAN OCEAN



N


Benguela
MADAGASCAR
Tropic of Capricorn 
Paraná
R


.


Rio de Janeiro


Buenos
Aires


60°W


Muscat


 AFRICA

ANGOLA
Luanda 
Recife
Bahia


 ARABIA

.


 Main sources of African slaves Main slave-trade routes from Africa Main areas of slave importation in the Western Hemisphere

We


R.


 OCEAN

O C EA N


Cartagena
 VENEZUELA

 ECUADOR

PACIF IC

 ASIA

Baghdad


R.
 er Nig

 HAITI

Spanish
Mainland
430,000


Euro
10 0 , 0 p e


A TLA N TI C
PUERTO RICO

Canary
Is.


Nile


 JAMAICA

 erica Am 0,0

MEXICO
Mexico City 
Damascus
Sea
Cairo




Tropic of Cancer


 rra nea n Tripoli

Tangier


Madeira


N.


New
Orleans
 CUBA

Lisbon
M
Algiers Tunis e d i t e


1,000




2,000 Km.
1,000


30°W


30°S
2,000 Mi.


0°


Map 4.1 Main Sources and Destinations of African Slaves, c. 1500-1860 More
 than three centuries of the “African Diaspora” scattered blacks throughout the New World. Britain’s North American colonies (the future United States) constituted the extreme northern periphery of this system, receiving about 400,000 of the nearly ten million arrivals, the great majority of whom ended up in the West Indies and Brazil.

30°E


60°E


Interactive Map


The “Middle Passage”
 The “middle passage” referred to the transatlantic sea voyage that brought slaves to the New World—the long and hazardous “middle” segment of a journey that began with a forced march to the African coast and ended with a trek into the American interior.





Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


 The distant Eng lish king could scarcely imagine the depths of passion and fear that Bacon’s Rebellion excited in Virginia. Bacon had ignited the smoldering resentments of landless former servants, and he had pitted the hardscrabble backcountry frontiersmen against the haughty gentry of the tidewater plantations. The rebellion was now suppressed, but these tensions remained. Lordly planters, surrounded by a still-seething sea of malcontents, anxiously looked about for less troublesome laborers to toil in the restless tobacco kingdom. Their eyes soon lit on Africa.

Colonial Slavery
 More than 7 million Africans were carried in chains to the New World in the three centuries or so following Columbus’s landing (see “Thinking Globally: The Atlantic Slave Trade, 1500–1860,” pp. 72–73). Only about 400,000 of them ended up in North America, the great majority arriving after 1700. Most of the early human cargoes were hauled to Spanish and Portuguese South America or to the sugar-rich West Indies. Africans had been brought to Jamestown as early as 1619, but as late as 1670 they numbered only about 2,000 in Virginia (out of a total population of some 35,000 persons) and about 7 percent of the 50,000 people in the southern plantation colonies as a whole. Hard-pinched white colonists, struggling to stay alive and to hack crude clearings out of the forests, could not afford to pay high prices for slaves who might die soon after arrival. White servants might die, too, but they were far less costly.

The Mennonites of Germantown, Pennsylvania,
 recorded the earliest known protest against slavery in America in 1688:

“


 There is a saying, that we should do to all men like as we will be done ourselves. . . . But to bring men hither, or to rob and sell them against their will, we stand against. . . . Pray, what thing in the world can be done worse towards us, than if men should rob or steal us away, and sell us for slaves to strange countries, separating husbands from their wives and children?

”


 Drastic change came in the 1680s. Rising wages in Eng land shrank the pool of penniless folk willing to gamble on a new life or an early death as indentured servants in America. At the same time, the large planters were growing increasingly fearful of the multitudes of potentially mutinous former servants in their midst. By the mid-1680s, for the ﬁ rst time, black slaves outnumbered white servants among the plantation colonies’ new arrivals. In 1698 the Royal African Company, ﬁ rst chartered in 1672, lost its crown-granted monopoly on carrying slaves to the colonies. Enterprising Americans, especially Rhode Islanders, rushed to cash in on the lucrative slave trade, and the supply of slaves rose steeply. More than ten thousand Africans were pushed ashore in America in the decade after 1700, and tens of thousands more in the next half-century. Blacks accounted for nearly half the population of Virginia by 1750. In South Carolina they outnumbered whites two to one. Most of the slaves who reached North America came from the west coast of Africa, especially the area stretching from present-day Senegal to Angola. They were originally captured by African coastal tribes, who traded them in crude markets on the shimmering tropical beaches to itinerant European—and American— ﬂesh merchants. Usually branded and bound, the captives were herded aboard sweltering ships for the gruesome middle passage, on which death rates ran as high as 20 percent. Terriﬁed survivors were eventually shoved onto auction blocks in New World ports like Newport, Rhode Island, or Charleston, South Carolina, where a giant slave market traded in human misery for more than a century. A few of the earliest African immigrants gained their freedom, and some even became slaveowners themselves. But as the number of Africans in their midst increased dramatically toward the end of the seventeenth century, white colonists reacted remorselessly to this supposed racial threat. Earlier in the century, the legal difference between a slave and a servant was unclear. But now the law began to make sharp distinctions between the two— largely on the basis of race. Beginning in Virginia in 1662, statutes appeared that formally decreed the iron conditions of slavery for blacks. These earliest “slave codes” made blacks and their children the property (or “chattels”) for life of their white masters. Some colonies made it a crime to teach a slave to read or write. Not even conversion to Christianity could qualify a slave for freedom. Thus did the God-fearing whites put the fear of God into their hapless black laborers. Slavery might have begun in America for economic reasons,

The Origins of American Slavery




The Slave Ship
Albatross, 1846
 This eyewitness painting captures the dankness, gloom, and despair that reigned in the slaver’s cargo hold.

 but by the end of the seventeenth century, it was clear that racial discrimination also powerfully molded the American slave system.

Africans in America
 In the deepest South, slave life was especially severe. The climate was hostile to health, and the labor was life-draining. The widely scattered South Carolina rice and indigo plantations were lonely hells on earth where gangs of mostly male Africans toiled and perished. Only fresh imports could sustain the slave population under these loathsome conditions. Blacks in the tobacco-growing Chesapeake region had a somewhat easier lot. Tobacco was a less physically demanding crop than those of the deeper South. Tobacco plantations were larger and closer to one another than rice plantations. The size and proximity of these plantations permitted the slaves more frequent contact with friends and relatives. By about 1720 the proportion of females in the Chesapeake slave population had begun to rise, making family life possible. The captive black population of the Chesapeake area soon began to grow not only through new imports but also

 through its own fertility—making it one of the few slave societies in history to perpetuate itself by its own natural reproduction. Native-born African Americans contributed to the growth of a stable and distinctive slave culture, a mixture of African and American elements of speech, religion, and folkways (see “Makers of America: From African to African American,” pp. 78–79). On the sea islands off South Carolina’s coast, blacks evolved a unique language, Gullah (probably a corruption of Angola, the African region from which many of them had come). It blended Eng lish with several African languages, including Yoruba, Igbo, and Hausa. Through it many African words have passed into American speech—such as goober (peanut), gumbo (okra), and voodoo (witchcraft). The ringshout, a West African religious dance performed by shufﬂ ing in a circle while answering a preacher’s shouts, was brought to colonial America by slaves and eventually contributed to the development of jazz. The banjo and the bongo drum were other African contributions to American culture. Slaves also helped mightily to build the country with their labor. A few became skilled artisans— carpenters, bricklayers, and tanners. But chieﬂy they performed the sweaty toil of clearing swamps, grubbing



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


Rice Cultivation in
 the Colonial South Rice growing, imported from Africa along with African slaves to work the swampy rice ﬁelds, made South Carolina the rice basket of the British Empire.

 out trees, and other menial tasks. Condemned to life under the lash, slaves naturally pined for freedom. The New York slave revolt that erupted in 1712 cost the lives of nine whites and caused the execution of twenty-one blacks, some of them burned at the stake over a slow ﬁre. A South Carolina slave revolt erupted in 1739 when more than ﬁ fty resentful blacks along the Stono River tried to march to Spanish Florida, only to be stopped by the local militia. But in the end, enslaved Africans in the South proved to be a more tightly controlled labor force than the white indentured servants they gradually replaced. No slave uprising in American history matched the scale of Bacon’s Rebellion.

Southern Society
 As slavery spread, the gaps in the South’s social structure widened. The rough equality of poverty and disease of the early days was giving way to a deﬁ ned hierarchy of wealth and status in the early eighteenth century. At the top of this southern social ladder perched a small but powerful covey of great planters. Owning gangs of slaves and vast domains of land, the planters ruled the region’s economy and virtually monopolized political power. A clutch of extended clans—such as the Fitzhughs, the Lees, and the Washingtons—possessed among them horizonless tracts of Virginia real estate, and together they dominated the House of Burgesses. Just before the Revolu-

 tionary War, 70 percent of the leaders of the Virginia legislature came from families established in Virginia before 1690—the famed “ﬁ rst families of Virginia,” or “FFVs.” Yet, legend to the contrary, these great seventeenthcentury merchant-planters were not silk-swathed cavaliers gallantly imitating the ways of Eng lish country gentlemen. They did eventually build stately riverfront manors, occasionally rode to the hounds, and some of them even cultivated the arts and accumulated distinguished libraries. But for the most part, they were a hard-working, businesslike lot, laboring long hours over the problems of plantation management. Few problems were more vexatious than the unruly, often surly, servants. One Virginia governor had such difﬁculty keeping his servants sober that he struck a deal allowing them to get drunk the next day if they would only lay off the liquor long enough to look after his guests at a celebration of the queen’s birthday in 1711. Beneath the planters—far beneath them in wealth, prestige, and political power—were the small farmers, the largest social group. They tilled their modest plots and might own one or two slaves, but they lived a ragged, hand-to-mouth existence. Still lower on the social scale were the landless whites, most of them luckless former indentured servants. Beneath them were those persons still serving out the term of their indenture. Their numbers gradually diminished as black slaves increasingly replaced white indentured servants toward the end of the seventeenth century. The op-

The Colonial South




A
Merchant-Planter’s Home and Its Dining Room Simple by later standards, this house was home to the family of a substantial planter in the early eighteenth century. It stands on land in the Virginia tidewater region ﬁrst acquired by Adam Thoroughgood, who arrived in the Virginia colony as an indentured servant in 1621. By 1635, as a freeman, he had recruited 105 settlers to the colony and was rewarded, according to the practice of the headright system, with the title to some 5,250 acres along the Lynnhaven River. There his great-grandson erected this house in about 1720. It was continuously occupied by the Thoroughgood family for more than a century, until the 1860’s. 
 pressed black slaves, of course, remained enchained in society’s basement. Few cities sprouted in the colonial South, and consequently an urban professional class, including lawyers and ﬁnanciers, was slow to emerge. Southern life revolved around the great plantations, distantly isolated

 from one another. Waterways provided the principal means of transportation. Roads were so wretched that in bad weather funeral parties could not reach church burial grounds—an obstacle that accounts for the development of family burial plots in the South, a practice unlike anything in old Eng land or New Eng land.

 Charleston, South Carolina Founded in 1680, Charleston grew to become the bustling seaport pictured in this drawing done in the 1730s. Charleston was by then the largest city in the mostly rural southern colonies. It ﬂourished as a seaport for the shipment to England of slave-grown Carolina rice.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
From African to The Great AfricanAfrican American American Migration 
D


 ragged in chains from West African shores, the ﬁ rst African Americans struggled to preserve their diverse heritages from the ravages of slavery. Their children, the ﬁ rst generation of American-born slaves, melded these various African traditions—Guinean, Igbo, Yoruba, Angolan—into a distinctive African American culture. Their achievement sustained them during the cruelties of enslavement and has endured to enrich American life to this day. With the arrival of the ﬁ rst Africans in the seventeenth century, a cornucopia of African traditions poured into the New World: handicrafts and skills in numerous trades; a plethora of languages, styles of music, and cuisines; even rice-planting techniques that conquered the inhospitable soil of South Carolina. It was North America’s rice paddies, tilled by experienced West Africans, that introduced rice into the English diet and furnished so many Eng lish tables with the sticky staple. These ﬁ rst American slaves were mostly males. Upon arrival they were sent off to small isolated farms,

 where social contact with other Africans, especially women, was an unheard-of luxury. Yet their legal status was at ﬁ rst uncertain. A few slaves were able to buy their freedom in the seventeenth century. One, Anthony Johnson of Northampton County, Virginia, actually became a slaveholder himself. But by the beginning of the eighteenth century, a settled slave society was emerging in the southern colonies. Laws tightened; slave traders stepped up their deliveries of human cargo; large plantations formed. Most signiﬁcantly, a new generation of American-born slaves joined their forebears at labor in the ﬁelds. By 1740 large groups of slaves lived together on sprawling plantations, the American-born outnumbered the Africanborn, and the importation of African slaves slowed. Forging a common culture and ﬁ nding a psychological weapon with which to resist their masters and preserve their dignity were daunting challenges for American-born slaves. Plantation life was beastly, an endless cycle of miserable toil in the ﬁeld or foundry from sunup to sundown. Female slaves were forced to

 (above) Africans Destined for Slavery This engraving from 1830 is an example of antislavery propaganda in the pre–Civil War era. It shows hapless Africans being brought ashore in America under the whips of slave traders and, ironically, under the ﬁgurative shadow of the national Capitol. (right) Advertisements for Slave Sales in Charleston, South Carolina, 1753 Charleston had the largest slave market in the colonies.



 (left) Yarrow Mamout, by Charles Willson Peale, 1819 When Peale painted this portrait, Mamout was over one hundred years old. A devout Muslim brought to Maryland as a slave, he eventually bought his freedom and settled in Georgetown. (right) The Emergence of an African American Culture In this scene from the mid-nineteenth century, African Americans play musical instruments of European derivation, like the ﬁddle, as well as instruments of African origin, like the bones and banjo—a vivid illustration of the blending of the two cultures in the crucible of the New World.

 perform double duty. After a day’s backbreaking work, women were expected to sit up for hours spinning, weaving, or sewing to clothe themselves and their families. Enslaved women also lived in constant fear of sexual exploitation by predatory masters. Yet eventually a vibrant slave culture began to ﬂower. And precisely because of the diversity of African peoples represented in America, the culture that emerged was a uniquely New World creation. It derived from no single African model and incorporated many Western elements, though often with signiﬁcant modiﬁcations. Slave religion illustrates this pattern. Cut off from their native African religions, most slaves became Christians but fused elements of African and Western traditions and drew their own conclusions from Scripture. White Christians might point to Christ’s teachings of humility and obedience to encourage slaves to “stay in their place,” but black Christians emphasized God’s role in freeing the Hebrews from slavery and saw Jesus as the Messiah who would deliver them from bondage. They also often retained an African deﬁnition of heaven as a place where they would be reunited with their ancestors. At their Sunday and evening-time prayer meetings, slaves also patched African remnants onto conventional

 Christian ritual. Black Methodists, for example, ingeniously evaded the traditional Methodist ban on dancing as sinful: three or four people would stand still in a ring, clapping hands and beating time with their feet (but never crossing their legs, thus not ofﬁcially “dancing”), while others walked around the ring, singing in unison. This “ringshout” derived from African practices; modern American dances, including the Charleston, in turn derived from this African American hybrid. Christian slaves also often used outwardly religious songs as encoded messages about escape or rebellion. “Good News, the Chariot’s Comin’” might sound like an innocent hymn about divine deliverance, but it could also announce the arrival of a guide to lead fugitives safely to the North. Similarly, “Wade in the Water” taught ﬂeeing slaves one way of covering their trail. The “Negro spirituals” that took shape as a distinctive form of American music thus had their origins in both Christianity and slavery. Indeed much American music was born in the slave quarters from African importations. Jazz, with its meandering improvisations and complex syncopations and rhythms, constitutes the most famous example. But this rich cultural harvest came at the cost of generations of human agony.



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


The New England Family
 Nature smiled more benignly on pioneer New Englanders than on their disease-plagued fellow colonists to the south. Clean water and cool temperatures retarded the spread of killer microbes. In stark contrast to the fate of Chesapeake immigrants, settlers in seventeenth-century New Eng land added ten years to their life spans by migrating from the Old World. One settler claimed that “a sip of New England’s air is better than a whole draft of old Eng land’s ale.” The ﬁ rst generations of Puritan colonists enjoyed, on the average, about seventy years on this earth—not very different from the life expectancy of present-day Americans. In further contrast with the Chesapeake, New Englanders tended to migrate not as single individuals but as families, and the family remained at the center of New Eng land life. Almost from the outset, New Eng-

 land’s population grew from natural reproductive increase. The people were remarkably fertile, even if the soil was not. Early marriage encouraged the booming birthrate. Women typically wed by their early twenties and produced babies about every two years thereafter until menopause. Ceaseless childbearing drained the vitality of many pioneer women, as the weather-eroded colonial tombstones eloquently reveal. A number of the largest families were borne by several mothers, though claims about the frequency of death in childbirth have probably been exaggerated. But the dread of death in the birthing bed haunted many women, and it was small wonder that they came to fear pregnancy. A married woman could expect to experience up to ten pregnancies and rear as many as eight surviving children. Massachusetts governor William Phips was one of twenty-seven children, all by the same mother. A New Eng land woman might well have dependent children living in her household from the earliest days of her marriage up until the day of her death, and child raising became in essence her full-time occupation. The longevity of the New Eng landers contributed to family stability. Children grew up in nurturing environments where they were expected to learn habits of obedience, above all. They received guidance not only from their parents but from their grandparents as well. This novel intergenerational continuity has inspired the observation that New Eng land “invented” grandparents. Family stability was reﬂected in low

 New England early acquired a reputation as a healthy environment. Urging his fellow Englishmen to emigrate to the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630, the Reverend John White described New England (somewhat fancifully) as follows:

“
 Mrs. Elizabeth Freake and Baby Mary This portrait of a Boston mother and child in about 1674 suggests the strong family ties that characterized early New England society.

 No country yields a more propitious air for our temper than New England. . . . Many of our people that have found themselves always weak and sickly at home, have become strong and healthy there: perhaps by the dryness of the air and constant temper[ature] of it, which seldom varies from cold to heat, as it does with us. . . . Neither are the natives at any time troubled with pain of teeth, soreness of eyes, or ache in their limbs.

”


Pioneering New Englanders




 Graveyard Art These New England colonists evidently died in the prime of life. Carving likenesses on grave markers was a common way of commemorating the dead.

 premarital pregnancy rates (again in contrast with the Chesapeake) and in the generally strong, tranquil social structure characteristic of colonial New Eng land. Still other contrasts came to differentiate the southern and New Eng land ways of life. Oddly enough, the fragility of southern families advanced the economic security of southern women, especially of women’s property rights. Because southern men frequently died young, leaving widows with small children to support, the southern colonies generally allowed married women to retain separate title to their property and gave widows the right to inherit their husbands’ estates. But in New Eng land, Puritan lawmakers worried that recognizing women’s separate property rights would undercut the unity of married persons by acknowledging conﬂ icting interests between husband and wife. New Eng land women, therefore, usually gave up their property rights when they married. Yet in contrast to old Eng land, the laws of New Eng land made secure provision for the property rights of widows—and even extended important protections to women within marriage. “A true wife accounts subjection her honor,” one Massachusetts Puritan leader declared, expressing a sentiment then common in Europe as well as America. But in the New World, a rudimentary conception of

 women’s rights as individuals was beginning to appear in the seventeenth century. Women still could not vote, and the popular attitude persisted that they were morally weaker than men—a belief rooted in the biblical tale of Eve’s treachery in the Garden of Eden. But a husband’s power over his wife was not absolute. The New Eng land authorities could and did intervene to restrain abusive spouses. One man was punished for kicking his wife off a stool; another was disciplined for drawing an “uncivil” portrait of his mate in the snow. Women also had some spheres of autonomy. Midwifery—assisting with childbirths—was a virtual female monopoly, and midwives often fostered networks of women bonded by the common travails of motherhood. One Boston midwife alone delivered over three thousand babies. Above all, the laws of Puritan New Eng land sought to defend the integrity of marriages. Divorce was exceedingly rare, and the authorities commonly ordered separated couples to reunite. Outright abandonment was among the very few permissible grounds for divorce. Adultery was another. Convicted adulterers— especially if they were women—were whipped in public and forced forever after to wear the capital letter “A” cut out in cloth and sewed on their outer garments— the basis for Nathaniel Hawthorne’s famous 1850 tale The Scarlet Letter.



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


Life in the New England Towns
 Sturdy New Eng landers evolved a tightly knit society, the basis of which was small villages and farms. This development was natural in a people anchored by geography and hemmed in by the Indians, the French, and the Dutch. Puritanism likewise made for unity of purpose—and for concern about the moral health of the whole community. It was no accident that the nineteenth-century crusade for abolishing black slavery—with Massachusetts agitators at the forefront—sprang in some degree from the New Eng land conscience, with its Puritan roots. In the Chesapeake region, the expansion of settlement was somewhat random and was usually undertaken by lone-wolf planters on their own initiative, but New Eng land society grew in a more orderly fashion. New towns were legally chartered by the colonial authorities, and the distribution of land was entrusted to the steady hands of sober-minded town fathers, or “proprietors.” After receiving a grant of land from the colonial legislature, the proprietors moved themselves and their families to the designated place and laid out their town. It usually consisted of a meetinghouse, which served as both the place of worship and the town hall, surrounded by houses. Also marked out was a village green, where the militia could drill. Each family received several parcels of land, including a woodlot for fuel, a tract suitable for growing crops, and another for pasturing animals.

A
Colonial Primer  Religious instruction loomed large in early colonial schools. This eighteenth-century textbook from Germantown, Pennsylvania, taught lessons of social duty and Christian faith, as well as reading and writing.

 The Massachusetts School Law of 1647 stated,

“


 It being one chief project of the old deluder, Satan, to keep men from the knowledge of the Scriptures, as in former times by keeping them in an unknown tongue, it is therefore ordered that every township in this jurisdiction, after the Lord has increased them [in] number to ﬁfty householders, shall then forthwith appoint one within their town to teach all such children as shall resort to him to write and read, whose wages shall be paid either by the parents or masters of such children, or by the inhabitants in general.

”


 Towns of more than ﬁ fty families were required to provide elementary education, and roughly half of the adults knew how to read and write. As early as 1636, just six years after the colony’s founding, the Massachusetts Puritans established Harvard College, today the oldest corporation in America, to train local boys for the ministry. Only in 1693, eighty-six years after staking out Jamestown, did the Virginians establish their ﬁrst college, William and Mary. Puritans ran their own churches, and democracy in Congregational Church government led logically to democracy in political government. The town meeting,

The New England Character


 in which the adult males met together and each man voted, was a showcase and a classroom for democracy. New Eng land villagers from the outset gathered regularly in their meetinghouses to elect their ofﬁcials, appoint schoolmasters, and discuss such mundane matters as road repairs. The town meeting, observed Thomas Jefferson, was “the best school of political liberty the world ever saw.”



The Half-Way Covenant and
 the Salem Witch Trials

 from about this time onward, women were in the majority in the Puritan congregations. Women also played a prominent role in one of New Eng land’s most frightening religious episodes. A group of adolescent girls in Salem, Massachusetts, claimed to have been bewitched by certain older women. A hysterical “witch hunt” ensued, leading to the legal lynching in 1692 of twenty individuals, nineteen of whom were hanged and one of whom was pressed to death. Two dogs were also hanged. Larger-scale witchcraft persecutions were then common in Europe, and several outbreaks had already

 Yet worries plagued the God-fearing pioneers of these tidy New Eng land settlements. The pressure of a growing population was gradually dispersing the Puritans onto outlying farms, far from the control of church and neighbors. And although the core of Puritan belief still burned brightly, the passage of time was dampening the ﬁ rst generation’s ﬂaming religious zeal. About the middle of the seventeenth century, a new form of sermon began to be heard from Puritan pulpits—the jeremiad. Taking their cue from the doom-saying Old Testament prophet Jeremiah, earnest preachers scolded parishioners for their waning piety. Especially alarming was the apparent decline in conversions— testimonials by individuals that they had received God’s grace and therefore deserved to be admitted to the church as members of the elect. Troubled ministers in 1662 announced a new formula for church membership, the Half-Way Covenant. This new arrangement modiﬁed the “covenant,” or the agreement between the church and its adherents, to admit to baptism—but not “full communion”—the children of baptized but not-yet-converted existing members. (On “conversion,” see p. 47.) By conferring partial membership rights in the once-exclusive Puritan congregations, the Half-Way Covenant weakened the distinction between the “elect” and others, further diluting the spiritual purity of the original settlers’ godly community. The Half-Way Covenant dramatized the difﬁculty of maintaining at fever pitch the religious devotion of the founding generation. Jeremiads continued to thunder from the pulpits, but as time went on, the doors of the Puritan churches swung fully open to all comers, whether converted or not. This widening of church membership gradually erased the distinction between the “elect” and other members of society. In effect, strict religious purity was sacriﬁced somewhat to the cause of wider religious participation. Interestingly,

 Matthew Hopkins’s Witch Finder Hopkins was a seventeenth-century English witch-hunter whose techniques included watching suspects to see if diabolical creatures, in the form of common animals, fed on the alleged witch’s blood. He also urged that suspected witches be bound hand and foot and tossed in a pond. The innocent, he claimed, would sink (and often drown), while the guilty would ﬂoat to the surface. His methods brought death to hundreds of women, men, and children in eastern England in the 1640s.



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


 ﬂared forth in the colonies—often directed at propertyowning women. But the reign of horror in Salem grew not only from the superstitions and prejudices of the age but also from the turmoil of the wars with the Indians, as well as the unsettled social and religious conditions of the rapidly evolving Massachusetts village. Most of the accused witches came from families associated with Salem’s burgeoning market economy; their accusers came largely from subsistence farming families in Salem’s hinterland. The Salem witch trials thus reﬂected the widening social stratiﬁcation of New Eng land, as well as the fear of many religious traditionalists that the Puritan heritage was being eclipsed by Yankee commercialism. The witchcraft hysteria eventually ended in 1693 when the governor, alarmed by an accusation against his own wife and supported by the more responsible members of the clergy, prohibited any further trials and pardoned those already convicted. Twenty years later a penitent Massachusetts legislature annulled the “convictions” of the “witches” and made reparations to their heirs. The Salem witchcraft delusion marked an all-time high in the American experience of popular passions run wild. “Witch-hunting” passed into the American vocabulary as a metaphor for the often dangerously irrational urge to ﬁ nd a scapegoat for social resentments.

The New England Way of Life
 Oddly enough, the story of New Eng land was largely written by rocks. The heavily glaciated soil was strewn with countless stones, many of which were forced to the surface after a winter freeze. In a sense the Puritans did not possess the soil; it possessed them by shaping their character. Scratching a living from the protesting earth was an early American success story. Backbending toil put a premium on industry and pennypinching frugality, for which New Eng landers became famous. Traditionally sharp Yankee traders, some of them palming off wooden nutmegs, made their mark. Connecticut came in time to be called good-humoredly “the Nutmeg State.” Cynics exaggerated when they said that the three stages of progress in New Eng land were “to get on, to get honor, to get honest.” The grudging land also left colonial New Eng land less ethnically mixed than its southern neighbors. NonEng lish immigrants were less attracted to a site where the soil was so stony—and the sermons so sulfurous.

 Climate likewise molded New Eng land, where the summers were often uncomfortably hot and the winters cruelly cold. Many early immigrants complained of the region’s extremes of weather. Yet the soil and climate of New Eng land eventually encouraged a diversiﬁed agriculture and industry. Staple products like tobacco did not ﬂourish, as in the South. Black slavery, although attempted, could not exist proﬁtably on small farms, especially where the surest crop was stones. No broad, fertile expanses comparable to those in the tidewater South beckoned people inland. The mountains ran fairly close to the shore, and the rivers were generally short and rapid. And just as the land shaped New Eng landers, so they shaped the land. The Native Americans had left an early imprint on the New Eng land earth. They traditionally beat trails through the woods as they migrated seasonally for hunting and ﬁshing. They periodically burned the woodlands to restore leafy ﬁ rst-growth forests that would sustain the deer population. The Indians recognized the right to use the land, but the concept of exclusive, individual ownership of the land was alien to them. The Eng lish settlers had a different philosophy. They condemned the Indians for “wasting” the earth by underutilizing its bounty and used this logic to justify their own expropriation of the land from the native inhabitants. Consistent with this outlook, the Europeans felt a virtual duty to “improve” the land by clearing woodlands for pasturage and tillage, building roads and fences, and laying out permanent settlements. Some of the greatest changes resulted from the introduction of livestock. The Eng lish brought pigs, horses, sheep, and cattle from Europe to the settlements. Because the growing herds needed ever more pastureland, the colonists were continually clearing forests. The animals’ voracious appetites and heavy hooves compacted the soil, speeding erosion and ﬂooding. In some cases the combined effect of these developments actually may have changed local climates and made some areas even more susceptible to extremes of heat and cold. Repelled by the rocks, the hardy New Eng landers turned instinctively to their ﬁne natural harbors. Hacking timber from their dense forests, they became experts in shipbuilding and commerce. They also ceaselessly exploited the self-perpetuating codﬁsh lode off the coast of Newfoundland—the ﬁshy “gold mines of New Eng land,” which have yielded more wealth than all the trea sure chests of the Aztecs. During colonial

The Early Settlers and the Land


 days the wayfarer seldom got far from the sound of the ax and hammer, or the swift rush of the ship down the ways to the sea, or the smell of rotting ﬁsh. As a reminder of the importance of ﬁshing, a handsome replica of the “sacred cod” is proudly displayed to this day in the Massachusetts Statehouse in Boston. The combination of Calvinism, soil, and climate in New Eng land made for energy, purposefulness, sternness, stubbornness, self-reliance, and resourcefulness. Righteous New Eng landers prided themselves on being God’s chosen people. They long boasted that Boston was “the hub of the universe”—at least in spirit. A famous jingle of later days ran, I come from the city of Boston The home of the bean and the cod Where the Cabots speak only to Lowells And the Lowells speak only to God. New Eng land has had an incalculable impact on the rest of the nation. Ousted by their sterile soil, thousands of New Eng landers scattered from Ohio to Oregon and even Hawaii. They sprinkled the land with new communities modeled on the orderly New Eng land town, with its central green and tidy schoolhouse, and its simple town-meeting democracy. “Yankee ingenuity,” originally fostered by the ﬂ inty ﬁelds and comfortless climate of New Eng land, came to be claimed by all Americans as a proud national trait. And the fabled



 “New Eng land conscience,” born of the steadfast Puritan heritage, left a legacy of high idealism in the national character and inspired many later reformers.

The Early Settlers’ Days
 and Ways The cycles of the seasons and the sun set the schedules of all the earliest American colonists, men as well as women, northerners as well as southerners, blacks as well as whites. The overwhelming majority of colonists were farmers. They planted in the spring, tended their crops in the summer, harvested in the fall, and prepared in the winter to begin the cycle anew. They usually rose at dawn and went to bed at dusk. Chores might be performed after nightfall only if they were “worth the candle,” a phrase that has persisted in American speech. Women, slave or free, on southern plantations or northern farms, wove, cooked, cleaned, and cared for children. Men cleared land; fenced, planted, and cropped it; cut ﬁ rewood; and butchered livestock as needed. Children helped with all these tasks, while picking up such schooling as they could. Life was humble but comfortable by contemporary standards. Compared to most seventeenth-century Europeans, Americans lived in afﬂuent abundance.

Life and Death in Colonial America, by
 Prudence Punderson Note the artist’s initials, “P.P.,” on the cofﬁn. This embroidery suggests the stoic resolve of a colonial woman, calmly depicting the inevitable progression of her own life from the cradle to the grave.



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


 Land was relatively cheap, though somewhat less available in the planter-dominated South than elsewhere. In the northern and middle colonies, an acre of virgin soil cost about what American carpenters could earn in one day as wages, which were roughly three times those of their Eng lish counterparts. “Dukes don’t emigrate,” the saying goes, for if people enjoy wealth and security, they are not likely to risk exposing their lives in the wilderness. Similarly, the very poorest members of a society may not possess even the modest means needed to pull up stakes and seek a fresh start in life. Accordingly, most white migrants to early colonial America came neither from the aristocracy nor from the dregs of European society— with the partial exception of the impoverished indentured servants. Crude frontier life did not in any case permit the ﬂagrant display of class distinctions, and seventeenthcentury society in all the colonies had a certain simple sameness to it, especially in the more egalitarian New Eng land and middle colonies. Yet many settlers, who considered themselves to be of the “better sort,” tried

 to re-create on a modiﬁed scale the social structure they had known in the Old World. To some extent they succeeded, though yeasty democratic forces frustrated their full triumph. Resentment against upper-class pretensions helped to spark outbursts like Bacon’s Rebellion of 1676 in Virginia and the uprising of Maryland’s Protestants toward the end of the seventeenth century. In New York animosity between lordly landholders and aspiring merchants fueled Leisler’s Rebellion, an ill-starred and bloody insurgence that rocked New York City from 1689 to 1691. For their part, would-be American blue bloods resented the pretensions of the “meaner sort” and passed laws to try to keep them in their place. Massachusetts in 1651 prohibited poorer folk from “wearing gold or silver lace,” and in eighteenth-century Virginia a tailor was ﬁ ned and jailed for arranging to race his horse— “a sport only for gentlemen.” But these efforts to reproduce the ﬁ nely stratiﬁed societies of Europe proved feeble in the early American wilderness, where equality and democracy found fertile soil—at least for white people.

 CHRONOLOGY

 First Africans arrive in Virginia

1689–


 Leisler’s Rebellion in New York



 Population of Eng lish colonies in America about 2,000



 Salem witch trials in Massachusetts



 Harvard College founded



 College of William and Mary founded



Half-Way Covenant for Congregational
 Church membership established



 Royal African Company slave trade monopoly ended



 Virginia assembly disfranchises landless freemen



 Population of Eng lish colonies in America about 250,000



 Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia



 New York City slave revolt

 1680s

 Mass expansion of slavery in colonies



 South Carolina slave revolt

To Learn More


KEY TERMS
indentured servants (69) headright system (70) Bacon’s Rebellion (74) Royal African Company (74) middle passage (74) New York slave revolt (76) South Carolina slave revolt (Stono River) (76) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Congregational Church (82) jeremiad (83) Half-Way Covenant (83) Salem witch trials (84) Leisler’s Rebellion (86) 
William Berkeley
Nathaniel Bacon
Anthony Johnson


To Learn More
David Cressy, Coming Over: Migration and Communication
Between England and New England in the Seventeenth
Century (1987)
William Cronon, Changes in the Land (1983)
John Demos, Entertaining Satan (1982)
A
Little Commonwealth: Family Life in Plymouth Colony (1970)
 David Hackett Fischer, Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America (1989) Richard Godbeer, Escaping Salem: The Other Witch Hunt of 1692 (2005) Patrick Grifﬁ n, The People with No Name: Ireland’s Ulster Scots, America’s Scots Irish, and the Creation of a British Atlantic World, 1689–1764 (2001) Kenneth Lockridge, New England Town: Dedham (1970)

 Mary Beth Norton, In the Devil’s Snare: The Salem Witchcraft Crisis of 1692 (2002) Daniel Blake Smith, Inside the Great House: Planter Family Life in Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake Society (1980) Laurel T. Ulrich, Good Wives: Image and Reality in the Lives of Women in Northern New England, 1650–1750 (1982) Daniel Vickers, Farmers and Fishermen: Two Centuries of Work in Essex County, Massachusetts, 1630–1850 (1994)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Colonial Society on the
Eve of Revolution





1700–1775
 Driven from every other corner of the earth, freedom of thought and the right of private judgment in matters of conscience direct their course to this happy country as their last asylum.

T


 he common term thirteen original colonies is misleading. Britain ruled thirty-two colonies in North America by 1775, including Canada, the Floridas, and various Caribbean islands. But only thirteen of them unfurled the standard of rebellion. A few of the nonrebels, such as Canada and Jamaica, were larger, wealthier, or more populous than some of the revolting thirteen. Why, then, did some British colonies eventually strike for their independence, while others did not? Part of the answer is to be found in the distinctive social, economic, and political structures of the thirteen Atlantic seaboard colonies—and in the halting, gradual appearance of a recognizably American way of life.

Conquest by the Cradle
 Among the distinguishing characteristics that the eventually rebellious settlements shared was lusty population growth. In 1700 they contained fewer than 300,000

 souls, about 20,000 of whom were black. By 1775, 2.5 million people inhabited the thirteen colonies, of whom about half a million were black. White immigrants made up nearly 400,000 of the increased number, and black “forced immigrants” accounted for almost as many again. But most of the spurt stemmed from the remarkable natural fertility of all Americans, white and black. To the amazement and dismay of Europeans, the colonists were doubling their numbers every twenty-ﬁve years. Unfriendly Dr. Samuel Johnson, back in Eng land, growled that the Americans were multiplying like their own rattlesnakes. They were also a youthful people, whose average age in 1775 was about sixteen. This population boom had political consequences. In 1700 there were twenty Eng lish subjects for each American colonist. By 1775 the Eng lish advantage in numbers had fallen to three to one—setting the stage for a momentous shift in the balance of power between the colonies and Britain.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Immigration to the Colonies


 ce r en

St. L
 aw

ABENAKI MAINE (MASS.)







200 Km.


N.H.


200 Mi.


NEW YORK

 DE

Er


 i

 e

L.


 PENNSYLVANIA

°N 70°W




New York
N.J.


 hi O

 SH

 AW

NE E
oR . 
MO UN TAI NS

Philadelphia


N


 MD.

R.I.
Newport 

 CONN.

 LA

 SE

 MASS.

 RA

 ario

TU WA SCA RO RE

 nt L. O

A
Mingling of the Races 

 DEL.

 VIRGINIA

To Philadelphia:
Germans,
Scots-Irish


To the Chesapeake:
Africans,
 British convicts

AT L A N T I C OC EAN

 TA

 CH

NORTH CAROLINA

 CA

ERO AP KEE PAL ACH IAN

N
35°


W


BA SOUTH CAROLINA

To Charleston:
Africans, Germans,
Charleston Scots-Irish, Scots


 CR

 Colonial America was a melting pot and had been from the outset. The population, although basically Eng lish in stock and language, was picturesquely mottled with numerous foreign groups (see Map 5.1). Heavy-accented Germans constituted about 6 percent of the total population, or 150,000, by 1775. Fleeing religious persecution, economic oppression, and the ravages of war, they had ﬂocked to America in the early 1700s and had settled chieﬂy in Pennsylvania. They belonged to several different Protestant sects—primarily Lutheran—and thus further enhanced the religious diversity of the colony. Known popularly but erroneously as the Pennsylvania Dutch (a corruption of the German word Deutsch, for “German”), they totaled about onethird of the colony’s population. In parts of Philadelphia, the street signs were painted in both German and Eng lish. These German newcomers moved into the backcountry of Pennsylvania, where their splendid stone barns gave—and still give—mute evidence of industry and prosperity. Not having been brought up Eng lish, they had no deep-rooted loyalty to the British crown, and they clung tenaciously to their German language and customs. The Scots-Irish, who in 1775 numbered around 175,000, or 7 percent of the population, were an important non-Eng lish group, although they spoke Eng lish. They were not Irish at all, but turbulent Scots Lowlanders. Over many decades, they had been transplanted to northern Ireland, where they had not prospered. The Irish Catholics already there, hating Scottish Presbyterianism, resented the intruders and still do—the source of many of the modern-day “troubles” in the Northern Ireland province of Ulster. The economic life of the Scots-Irish was severely hampered, especially when the Eng lish government placed burdensome restrictions on their production of linens and woolens.

°N




R.


NE CA CA YU ON GA ON ON DAG EI A MO DA HA WK

 The bulk of the population was cooped up east of the Alleghenies, although by 1775 a vanguard of pioneers had trickled into the stump-studded clearings of Tennessee and Kentucky. The most populous colonies in 1775 were Virginia, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and Maryland—in that order. Only four communities could properly be called cities: Philadelphia, including suburbs, was ﬁ rst with about 34,000 residents, trailed by New York, Boston, and Charleston. About 90 percent of the people lived in rural areas.

 EE

K


80°W


 GEORGIA

Savannah


CREEK
Indian lands 
30°N


75°W


 Predominant immigrant group African

Scots-Irish


Dutch
English
 and Welsh German

Scottish
No European
 settlement

Map 5.1 Immigrant Groups in 1775 America was
 already a nation of diverse nationalities in the colonial period. This map shows the great variety of immigrant groups, especially in Pennsylvania and New York. It also illustrates the tendency of later arrivals, particularly the Scots-Irish, to push into the backcountry. Interactive Map



