Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 age. Burly “Boss” Tweed—240 pounds of rascality— employed bribery, graft, and fraudulent elections to milk the metropolis of as much as $200 million. Honest citizens were cowed into silence. Protesters found their tax assessments raised.

 In a famous series of newspaper interviews in 1905, George Washington Plunkitt (1842–1924), a political “boss” in the same Tammany Hall Democratic political “machine” that had spawned William Marcy (“Boss”) Tweed, candidly described his ethical and political principles:

 Tweed’s luck ﬁ nally ran out. The New York Times secured damning evidence in 1871 and courageously published it, though offered $5 million not to do so. Gifted cartoonist Thomas Nast pilloried Tweed mercilessly, after spurning a heavy bribe to desist. The portly thief reportedly complained that his illiterate followers could not help seeing “them damn pictures.” New York attorney Samuel J. Tilden headed the prosecution, gaining fame that later paved the path to his presidential nomination. Unbailed and unwept, Tweed died behind bars.

“


 Everybody is talkin’ these days about Tammany men growin’ rich on graft, but nobody thinks of drawin’ the distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft. There’s all the difference in the world between the two. Yes, many of our men have grown rich in politics. I have myself. I’ve made a big fortune out of the game, and I’m gettin’ richer every day, but I’ve not gone in for dishonest graft—blackmailin’ gamblers, saloonkeepers, disorderly people, etc.—and neither has any of the men who have made big fortunes in politics. “There’s an honest graft, and I’m an example of how it works. I might sum up the whole thing by sayin’: ‘I seen my opportunities and I took ’em.’ “Just let me explain by examples. My party’s in power in the city, and it’s goin’ to undertake a lot of public improvements. Well, I’m tipped off, say, that they’re going to lay out a new park at a certain place. “I see my opportunity and I take it. I go to that place and I buy up all the land I can in the neighborhood. Then the board of this or that makes its plan public, and there is a rush to get my land, which nobody cared particular for before. “Ain’t it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a proﬁt on my investment and foresight? Of course, it is. Well, that’s honest graft.

”


Can the Law Reach Him? 1872 Cartoonist Thomas
 Nast attacked “Boss” Tweed in a series of cartoons like this one that appeared in Harper’s Weekly in 1872. Here Nast depicts the corrupt Tweed as a powerful giant, towering over a puny law force.

The Stirrings of Reform




A
Carnival of Corruption  More serious than Boss Tweed’s peccadilloes were the misdeeds of the federal government. President Grant’s cabinet was a rodent’s nest of grafters and incompetents. Favor seekers haunted the White House, plying Grant himself with cigars, wines, and horses. His election was a godsend to his in-laws of the Dent family, several dozen of whom attached themselves to the public payroll. The easygoing Grant was ﬁ rst tarred by the Crédit Mobilier scandal, which erupted in 1872. Union Paciﬁc Railroad insiders had formed the Crédit Mobilier construction company and then cleverly hired themselves at inﬂated prices to build the railroad line, earning dividends as high as 348 percent. Fearing that Congress might blow the whistle, the company furtively distributed shares of its valuable stock to key congressmen. A newspaper exposé and congressional investigation of the scandal led to the formal censure of two congressmen and the revelation that the vice president of the United States had accepted payments from Crédit Mobilier. The breath of scandal in Washington also reeked of alcohol. In 1874–1875 the sprawling Whiskey Ring robbed the Treasury of millions in excise-tax revenues. “Let no guilty man escape,” declared President Grant. But when his own private secretary turned up among the culprits, he volunteered a written statement to the jury that helped exonerate the thief. Further rottenness in the Grant administration came to light in 1876, forcing Secretary of War William Belknap to resign after pocketing bribes from suppliers to the Indian reservations. Grant, ever loyal to his crooked cronies, accepted Belknap’s resignation “with great regret.”

The Liberal Republican
Revolt of 1872
 By 1872 a powerful wave of disgust with Grantism was beginning to build up throughout the nation, even before some of the worst scandals had been exposed. Reform-minded citizens banded together to form the Liberal Republican party. Voicing the slogan “Turn the Rascals Out,” they urged puriﬁcation of the Washington administration as well as an end to military Reconstruction. The Liberal Republicans muffed their chance when their Cincinnati nominating convention astounded the

Can Greeley and the Democrats “Swallow” Each
 Other? 1872 This cartoon by Thomas Nast is a Republican gibe at the forced alliance between these former foes. General William Tecumseh Sherman wrote from Paris to his brother, “I feel amazed to see the turn things have taken. Grant who never was a Republican is your candidate; and Greeley who never was a Democrat, but quite the reverse, is the Democratic candidate.”

 country by nominating the brilliant but erratic Horace Greeley for the presidency. Although Greeley was the fearless editor of the New York Tribune, he was dogmatic, emotional, petulant, and notoriously unsound in his political judgments. More astonishing still was the action of the ofﬁcehungry Democrats, who foolishly proceeded to endorse Greeley’s candidacy. In swallowing Greeley the Democrats “ate crow” in large gulps, for the eccentric editor had long blasted them as traitors, slave shippers, saloon keepers, horse thieves, and idiots. Yet Greeley pleased the Democrats, North and South, when he pleaded for clasping hands across “the bloody chasm.” The Republicans dutifully renominated Grant. The voters were thus presented with a choice between two candidates who had made their careers in ﬁelds other than politics and who were both eminently unqualiﬁed, by temperament and lifelong training, for high political ofﬁce.



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 In the mud-spattered campaign that followed, regular Republicans denounced Greeley as an atheist, a communist, a free-lover, a vegetarian, a brown-bread eater, and a cosigner of Jefferson Davis’s bail bond. Democrats derided Grant as an ignoramus, a drunkard, and a swindler. But the regular Republicans, chanting “Grant us another term,” pulled the president through. The count in the electoral column was 286 to 66, in the popular column 3,596,745 to 2,843,446. Liberal Republican agitation frightened the regular Republicans into cleaning their own house before they were thrown out of it. The Republican Congress in 1872 passed a general amnesty act, removing political disabilities from all but some ﬁve hundred former Confederate leaders. Congress also moved to reduce high Civil War tariffs and to fumigate the Grant administration with mild civil-ser vice reform. Like many American third parties, the Liberal Republicans left some enduring footprints, even in defeat.

 Depression, Deﬂation, and Inﬂation Grant’s woes deepened in the paralyzing economic panic of 1873. Bursting with startling rapidity, the crash was one of those periodic plummets that rollercoastered the economy in this age of unbridled capitalist expansion. Overreaching promoters had laid more railroad track, sunk more mines, erected more factories, and sowed more grainﬁelds than existing markets could bear. Bankers, in turn, had made too many imprudent loans to ﬁ nance those enterprises. When profits failed to materialize, loans went unpaid, and the whole credit-based house of cards ﬂuttered down. The United States did not suffer alone. Nations worldwide underwent a similar economic collapse in 1873. Boom times became gloom times as more than ﬁ fteen thousand American businesses went bankrupt. In New York City, an army of unemployed riotously battled police. Black Americans were hard hit. The Freedman’s Savings and Trust Company had made unsecured loans to several companies that went under. Black depositors who had entrusted over $7 million to the bank lost their savings, and black economic development and black conﬁdence in savings institutions went down with it. Hard times inﬂ icted the worst punishment on debtors, who intensiﬁed their clamor for inﬂationary policies. Proponents of inﬂation breathed new life into

 the issue of greenbacks. During the war $450 million of the “folding money” had been issued, but it had depreciated under a cloud of popular mistrust and dubious legality.* By 1868 the Treasury had already withdrawn $100 million of the “battle-born currency” from circulation, and “hard-money” people every where looked forward to its complete disappearance. But now afﬂ icted agrarian and debtor groups—“cheap-money” supporters—clamored for a reissuance of the greenbacks. With a crude but essentially accurate grasp of monetary theory, they reasoned that more money meant cheaper money and, hence, rising prices and easier-to-pay debts. Creditors, of course, reasoning from the same premises, advocated precisely the opposite policy. They had no desire to see the money they had loaned repaid in depreciated dollars. They wanted deﬂation, not inﬂation. The “hard-money” advocates carried the day. In 1874 they persuaded a confused Grant to veto a bill to print more paper money. They scored another victory in the Resumption Act of 1875, which pledged the government to the further withdrawal of greenbacks from circulation and to the redemption of all paper currency in gold at face value, beginning in 1879. Down but not out, debtors now looked for relief to another precious metal, silver. The “sacred white metal,” they claimed, had received a raw deal. In the early 1870s, the Treasury stubbornly and unrealistically maintained that an ounce of silver was worth only one-sixteenth as much as an ounce of gold, though open-market prices for silver were higher. Silver miners thus stopped offering their shiny product for sale to the federal mints. With no silver ﬂowing into the federal coffers, Congress formally dropped the coinage of silver dollars in 1873. Fate then played a sly joke when new silver discoveries later in the 1870s shot production up and forced silver prices down. Westerners from silver-mining states joined with debtors in assailing the “Crime of ’73,” demanding a return to the “Dollar of Our Daddies.” Like the demand for more greenbacks, the demand for the coinage of more silver was nothing more nor less than another scheme to promote inﬂation.

 *The Supreme Court in 1870 declared the Civil War Legal Tender Act unconstitutional. With the concurrence of the Senate, Grant thereupon added to the bench two justices who could be counted on to help reverse that decision, which happened in 1871. This is how the Court grew to its current size of nine justices.

Partisan Competition


 David A. Wells (1828–1898), a leading economist of the era, described the global dimensions of the depression that struck the United States in 1873:

“


 Its most noteworthy peculiarity has been its universality; affecting nations that have been involved in war as well as those which have maintained peace; those which have a stable currency, based on gold, and those which have an unstable currency, based on promises which have not been kept; those which live under systems of free exchange of commodities, and those whose exchanges are more or less restricted. It has been grievous in old communities like England and Germany, and equally so in Australia, South Africa, and California, which represent the new; it has been a calamity exceeding[ly] heavy to be borne, alike by the inhabitants of sterile Newfoundland and Labrador, and of the sunny, fruitful sugar-islands of the East and West Indies.

”


 Hard-money Republicans resisted this scheme and counted on Grant to hold the line against it. He did not disappoint them. The Treasury began to accumulate gold stocks against the appointed day for resumption of metallic-money payments. Coupled with the reduction of greenbacks, this policy was called “contraction.” It had a noticeable deﬂationary effect—the amount of money per capita in circulation actually decreased between 1870 and 1880, from $19.42 to $19.37. Contraction probably worsened the impact of the depression. But the new policy did restore the government’s credit rating, and it brought the embattled greenbacks up to their full face value. When Redemption Day came in 1879, few greenback holders bothered to exchange the lighter and more convenient bills for gold. Republican hard-money policy had a political backlash. It helped elect a Democratic House of Representatives in 1874, and in 1878 it spawned the Greenback Labor party, which polled over a million votes and elected fourteen members of Congress. The contest over monetary policy was far from over.



Pallid Politics in
 the Gilded Age The political seesaw was delicately balanced throughout most of the Gilded Age (a sarcastic name given to the three-decade-long post–Civil War era by Mark Twain in 1873). Even a slight nudge could tip the teetertotter to the advantage of the opposition party. Every presidential election was a squeaker, and the majority party in the House of Representatives switched six times in the eleven sessions between 1869 and 1891. In only three sessions did the same party control the House, the Senate, and the White House. Wobbling in such shaky equilibrium, politicians tiptoed timidly, producing a political record that was often trivial and petty. Few signiﬁcant economic issues separated the major parties. Democrats and Republicans saw very nearly eye-to-eye on questions like the tariff and civil-ser vice reform, and majorities in both parties substantially agreed even on the much-debated currency question. Yet despite their rough agreement on these national matters, the two parties were ferociously competitive with each other. They were tightly and efﬁciently organized, and they commanded ﬁerce loyalty from their members. Voter turnouts reached heights unmatched before or since. Nearly 80 percent of eligible voters cast their ballots in presidential elections in the three decades after the Civil War. On election days droves of the party faithful tramped behind marching bands to the polling places, and “ticket splitting,” or failing to vote the straight party line, was as rare as a silver dollar. How can this apparent paradox of political consensus and partisan fervor be explained? The answer lies in the sharp ethnic and cultural differences in the membership of the two parties—in distinctions of style and tone, and especially of religious sentiment. Republican voters tended to adhere to those creeds that traced their lineage to Puritanism. They stressed strict codes of personal morality and believed that government should play a role in regulating both the economic and the moral affairs of society. Democrats, among whom immigrant Lutherans and Roman Catholics ﬁgured heavily, were more likely to adhere to faiths that took a less stern view of human weakness. Their religions professed toleration of differences in an imperfect world, and they spurned government efforts to impose a single moral standard on the entire



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 society. These differences in temperament and religious values often produced raucous political contests at the local level, where issues like prohibition and education loomed large. Democrats had a solid electoral base in the South and in the northern industrial cities, teeming with immigrants and controlled by well-oiled political machines. Republican strength lay largely in the Midwest and the rural and small-town Northeast. Grateful freedmen in the South continued to vote Republican in signiﬁcant numbers. Another important bloc of Republican ballots came from the members of the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR)—a politically potent fraternal orga ni zation of several hundred thousand Union veterans of the Civil War. The lifeblood of both parties was patronage—disbursing jobs by the bucketful in return for votes, kickbacks, and party ser vice. Boisterous inﬁghting over patronage beset the Republican party in the 1870s and 1880s. A “Stalwart” faction, led by the handsome and imperious Roscoe (“Lord Roscoe”) Conkling, U.S. senator from New York, unblushingly embraced the timehonored system of swapping civil-ser vice jobs for votes.

Paper Broadsides for the 1876 Election
 Then, as now, the parties printed voting instructions to encourage citizens to vote the straight party line.

 Opposed to the Conklingites were the so-called HalfBreeds, who ﬂ irted coyly with civil-ser vice reform, but whose real quarrel with the Stalwarts was over who should grasp the ladle that dished out the spoils. The champion of the Half-Breeds was James G. Blaine of Maine, a radiantly personable congressman with an elastic conscience. But despite the color of their personalities, Conkling and Blaine succeeded only in stalemating each other and deadlocking their party.

The Hayes-Tilden
Standoff, 1876
 Hangers-on around Grant, like ﬂeas urging their ailing dog to live, begged the “Old Man” to try for a third term in 1876. The general, blind to his own ineptitudes, showed a disquieting willingness. But the House, by a lopsided bipartisan vote of 233 to 18, derailed the third-term bandwagon. It passed a resolution that sternly reminded the country—and Grant—of the antidictator implications of the two-term tradition.

The Compromise of 1877


 With Grant out of the running and with the Conklingites and Blaineites neutralizing each other, the Republicans turned to a compromise candidate, Rutherford B. Hayes, who was obscure enough to be dubbed “The Great Unknown.” His foremost qualiﬁcation was the fact that he hailed from the electorally doubtful but potent state of Ohio, where he had served three terms as governor. So crucial were the “swing” votes of Ohio in the cliffhanging presidential contests of the day that the state produced more than its share of presidential candidates. A political saying of the 1870s paraphrased Shakespeare: Some are born great, Some achieve greatness, And some are born in Ohio. Pitted against the humdrum Hayes was the Democratic nominee, Samuel J. Tilden, who had risen to fame as the man who bagged Boss Tweed in New York. Campaigning against Republican scandal, Tilden racked up 184 electoral votes of the needed 185, with 20 votes in

OR R-2/C-1

VT NH ME 5 5 7

MONTANA TERR. IDAHO TERR.

 NV

DAKOTA TERR.

ARIZONA TERR.

 CO

KS INDIAN TERR.

NEW MEXICO TERR.

 WI

 IA

 NE

UTAH TERR.

 CA

 MN

WYOMING TERR.

 TX

 IL

 MO

 OH

KY TN

AR LA

 IN

 MS

 AL

 MA

 NY

 MI

 GA

PA WV VA 5 11 NC SC

RI NJ CT 4 9 6 DE MD

 FL

Popular Vote


Hayes (Republican)


Uncontested
Electoral
Electoral Vote
Vote
185 50%


Tilden (Democrat)




4,288,546 51.0%


Candidate (Party)


184 50%


 four states—three of them in the South—doubtful because of irregular returns (see Map 23.1). Surely Tilden could pick up at least one of these, especially in view of the fact that he had polled 247,448 more popular votes than Hayes, 4,284,020 to 4,036,572. Both parties scurried to send “visiting statesmen” to the contested southern states of Louisiana, South Carolina, and Florida. All three disputed states submitted two sets of returns, one Democratic and one Republican. As the weeks drifted by, the paralysis tightened, generating a dramatic constitutional crisis. The Constitution merely speciﬁes that the electoral returns from the states shall be sent to Congress, and in the presence of the House and Senate, they shall be opened by the president of the Senate (see the Twelfth Amendment in the Appendix). But who should count them? On this point the Constitution was silent. If counted by the president of the Senate (a Republican), the Republican returns would be selected. If counted by the Speaker of the House (a Democrat), the Democratic returns would be chosen. How could the impasse be resolved?

The Compromise of 1877 and
 the End of Reconstruction



WASH. TERR.



4,034,311 48.0%


Contested
Territories


Map 23.1 Hayes-Tilden Disputed Election of 1876
 (with electoral vote by state) Nineteen of the twenty disputed votes composed the total electoral count of Louisiana, South Carolina, and Florida. The twentieth was one of Oregon’s three votes, cast by an elector who turned out to be ineligible because he was a federal ofﬁceholder (a postmaster), contrary to the Constitution (see Art. II, Sec. I, para. 2). Interactive Map

 Clash or compromise was the stark choice. The danger loomed that there would be no president on Inauguration Day, March 4, 1877. “Tilden or Blood!” cried Democratic hotheads, and some of their “Minute Men” began to drill with arms. But behind the scenes, frantically laboring statesmen gradually hammered out an agreement in the Henry Clay tradition—the Compromise of 1877. The election deadlock itself was to be broken by the Electoral Count Act, which Congress passed early in 1877. It set up an electoral commission consisting of ﬁ fteen men selected from the Senate, the House, and the Supreme Court (see Table 23.1). In February 1877, about a month before Inauguration Day, the Senate and House met together in an electric at mosphere to settle the dispute. The roll of the states was tolled off alphabetically. When Florida was reached—the ﬁ rst of the three southern states with two sets of returns—the disputed documents were referred to the electoral commission, which sat in a nearby chamber. After prolonged discussion the members agreed, by the partisan vote of eight Republicans to seven Democrats, to accept the Republican returns. Outraged Democrats in Congress, smelling defeat, undertook to launch a ﬁ libuster “until hell froze over.”



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


Table 23.1 Composition of the Electoral
Commission, 1877
Members


Republicans


Democrats










Senate (Republican
 majority) House (Democratic majority) Supreme Court total

 Renewed deadlock was avoided by the rest of the complex Compromise of 1877, already partially concluded behind closed doors. The Democrats reluctantly agreed that Hayes might take ofﬁce in return for his withdrawing intrusive federal troops from the two states in which they remained, Louisiana and South Carolina. Among various concessions, the Republicans assured the Democrats a place at the presidential patronage trough and support for a bill subsidizing the Texas and Paciﬁc Railroad’s construction of a southern transcontinental line. Not all of these promises were kept in later years, including the Texas and Paciﬁc subsidy. But the deal held together long enough to break the dangerous electoral standoff. The Democrats permitted Hayes to receive the remainder of the disputed

The End of Reconstruction,
 1877 President Hayes’s “Let ’em Alone” policy replaces the carpetbags and bayonets of the Grant administration, signifying the end of federal efforts to promote racial equality in the South—until the “second Reconstruction” of the civil rights era nearly a century later.

 returns—all by the partisan vote of 8 to 7. So close was the margin of safety that the explosive issue was settled only three days before the new president was ofﬁcially sworn into ofﬁce. The nation breathed a collective sigh of relief. The compromise bought peace at a price. Partisan violence was averted by sacriﬁcing the civil rights of southern blacks. With the Hayes-Tilden deal, the Republican party quietly abandoned its commitment to racial equality. That commitment had been weakening in any case. Many Republicans had begun to question the worthiness of Reconstruction and were less willing to send dollars and enlisted sons to bolster southern state governments. The Civil Rights Act of 1875 was in a sense the last feeble gasp of the congressional radical Republicans. The act supposedly guaranteed equal accommodations in public places and prohibited racial discrimination in jury selection, but the law was born toothless and stayed that way for nearly a century. The Supreme Court pronounced much of the act unconstitutional in the Civil Rights Cases (1883). The Court declared that the Fourteenth Amendment prohibited only government violations of civil rights, not the denial of civil rights by individuals. When President Hayes withdrew the blue-clad federal troops that were propping up Reconstruction governments, the bayonet-backed Republican regimes collapsed.

The Emergence of Jim Crow


The Birth of Jim Crow in the
Post-Reconstruction South
 The Democratic South speedily solidiﬁed and swiftly suppressed the now-friendless blacks. Reconstruction, for better or worse, was ofﬁcially ended. Shamelessly relying on fraud and intimidation, white Democrats (“Redeemers”) reassumed political power in the South and exercised it ruthlessly. Blacks who tried to assert their rights faced unemployment, eviction, and physical harm. Many blacks (as well as poor whites) were forced into sharecropping and tenant farming. Former slaves often found themselves at the mercy of former masters who were now their landlords and creditors. Through the “crop-lien” system, storekeepers extended credit to small farmers for food and supplies and in return took



 a lien on their harvests. Shrewd merchants manipulated the system so that farmers remained perpetually in debt to them. For generations to come, southern blacks were condemned to eke out a threadbare living under conditions scarcely better than slavery (see Map 23.2). With white southerners back in the political saddle, daily discrimination against blacks grew increasingly oppressive. What had started as the informal separation of blacks and whites in the immediate postwar years developed by the 1890s into systematic state-level legal codes of segregation known as Jim Crow laws. Southern states also enacted literacy requirements, voter-registration laws, and poll taxes—and tolerated violent intimidation of black voters—to ensure fullscale disfranchisement of the South’s freedmen. The Supreme Court validated the South’s segregationist social order in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson (1896). It

 Jim Crow Justice In 1893 a black man named Henry Smith was burned at the stake in Paris, Texas, for supposedly molesting a four-year-old white girl. Hundreds of gawkers poured into the city from the surrounding county to watch the gruesome spectacle. Public executions like this one, or the more common lynching of black men, were aimed at intimidating African Americans into accepting second-class status in the Jim Crow South.



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896




 Tenant farmer’s residence

Roa


 ht ’s

 r ive

Br
 an ch

 d

Gin House
 Master’s House

Slave Quarters
 hC Branc

 k ree

?
Sabrina Dalton
Lizzie Dalton
 r ive

Frank
Maxey
Joe Bug
Jim Reid
Nancy
Pope
Cane Pope
Gub
Church
Barrow
Willis Bryant
School
Lem Bryant
Gin House
Lewis Watson
Reuben Barrow
Tom Wright
Ben Thomas
Granny
Tom
Omy Barrow
 Landlord’s Thomas House Peter Barrow Ro Milly Barrow ad Handy Old Isaac Barrow Calvin Tom Parker Tang

Little R


W
 rig

Little R


 Wooded areas

Beckton
Barrow
Lem
Douglas


 k rk FoFr o lll'sl’s SSyy

Map 23.2 A Southern
Plantation, Before and
After the Civil War
 The emancipated blacks moved out of the slave quarters and into humble cabins dispersed around the plantation. The master had now become the landlord and the employer, and the slaves had become tenant farmers and sharecroppers—but were they better off? Interactive Map

Table 23.2 Persons in United States Lynched
 (by race), 1882–1970* Year

Whites


Blacks


Total










 *There were no lynchings in 1965–1970. In every year from 1882 (when records were ﬁ rst kept) to 1964, the number of lynchings corresponded roughly to the ﬁgures given here. The worst year was 1892, when 161 blacks and 69 whites were lynched (total 230); the next worst was 1884, when 164 whites and 51 blacks were lynched (total 215).

 ruled that “separate but equal” facilities were constitutional under the “equal protection” clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. But in reality the quality of African American life was grotesquely unequal to that of whites. Segregated in inferior schools and separated from whites in virtually all public facilities, including railroad cars, theaters, and even restrooms, blacks were assaulted daily by galling reminders of their secondclass citizenship. To ensure the stability of this political and economic “new order,” southern whites dealt harshly with any black who dared to violate the South’s racial code of conduct. A record number of blacks were lynched during the 1890s, most often for the “crime” of asserting themselves as equals (see Table 23.2). It would take a second Reconstruction, nearly a century later, to redress the racist imbalance of southern society.

 Class Conﬂicts and Ethnic Clashes The year 1877 marked more than the end of Reconstruction. As the curtains ofﬁcially closed on regional warfare, they opened on scenes of class struggle. The explosive atmosphere was largely a by-product of the long years of depression and deﬂation following the panic

 Class Conﬂicts and Ethnic Clashes

 of 1873. Railroad workers faced particularly hard times, while they watched the railroads continue to rake in huge proﬁts. When the presidents of the nation’s four largest railroads collectively decided in 1877 to cut employees’ wages by 10 percent, the workers struck back. President Hayes’s decision to call in federal troops to quell the unrest brought the striking laborers an outpouring of working-class support. Work stoppages spread like wildﬁre in cities from Baltimore to St. Louis. When the battling between workers and soldiers ended after several weeks, over one hundred people were dead. The failure of the great railroad strike exposed the weakness of the labor movement in the face of massive government intervention on the side of the railroads. The federal courts, United States Army, state militias, and local police all lent their muscle to keeping the engines of big business operating at full throttle, and the workers be damned. Meanwhile, racial and ethnic ﬁssures among workers fractured labor unity. Divisions were particularly acute between the Irish and the Chinese in Cal i fornia (see “Makers of America: The Chinese,” pp. 550–551). By 1880 the Golden State counted seventy-ﬁve thousand Asian newcomers, about 9 percent of its entire population. Mostly poor, uneducated, single males, they derived predominantly from the Taishan district of K’uang-t’ung (Guangdong) province in southern China. They had originally come to America to dig in the goldﬁelds and to sledgehammer the tracks of the transcontinental railroads across the West. When the gold supply petered out and the tracks were laid, many—perhaps half of those who arrived before the 1880s—returned home to China with their meager savings. Those who remained in America faced extraordinary hardships. They worked at the most menial jobs, often as cooks, laundrymen, or domestic servants. Without women or families, they were deprived of the children who in other immigrant communities eased their parents’ assimilation through their exposure to the English language and American customs in school. The phrase “not a Chinaman’s chance” emerged in this era to describe the daunting odds against which they struggled. In San Francisco Irish-born demagogue Denis Kearney incited his followers to violent abuse of the hapless Chinese. The Kearneyites, many of whom were recently arrived immigrants from Europe, hotly resented the competition of cheap labor from the still more recently arrived Chinese. The beef-eater, they claimed, had no chance against the rice-eater in a lifeand-death struggle for jobs and wages. The present tens of thousands of Chinese “coolies” were regarded as a



 menace, the prospective millions as a calamity. Taking to the streets, gangs of Kearneyites terrorized the Chinese by shearing off their precious pigtails. Some victims were murdered outright. Congress slammed the door on Chinese immigrant laborers when it passed the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882, prohibiting nearly all further immigration from China. The door stayed shut until 1943. Some exclusionists even tried to strip native-born Chinese Americans of their citizenship, but the Supreme Court ruled in U.S. v. Wong Kim Ark in 1898 that the Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed citizenship to all persons born in the United States. This doctrine of “birthright citizenship” (or jus soli, the “right of the soil,” as contrasted with jus sanguinis, the “right of blood-tie,” which based citizenship on the parents’ nationality) provided important protections to Chinese Americans as well as to other immigrant communities.

The First Blow at the Chinese Question, 1877
 Caucasian workers, seething with economic anxiety and ethnic prejudice, savagely mistreated the Chinese in California in the 1870s.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Chinese American Migration 
B


 etween 1800 and 1925, at least 3 million Chinese left their homeland to labor around the globe. The once-great Chinese Empire was disintegrating at the same time that its population was exploding, creating severe land shortages and opening up the unstable country to European imperial powers bent on unlocking the riches of a nation closed to outsiders for centuries. Chinese men, faced with economic hardship and political turmoil in their homeland and lured by labor shortages as far aﬁeld as Southeast Asia, Australia, and the Americas, migrated by the tens of thousands to work the plantations and dig the mines that fueled a burgeoning global economy. By 1900 more than 300,000 Chinese had entered the United States to contribute their muscle to building the West, wrenching minerals from stubborn rock and helping to lay the transcontinental railroads that stitched together the American nation (see Table 23.3).

A
Chinese Railroad Worker Totes His Tools to Work 



 Although those who set off from China for destinations as diverse as Vietnam, Cuba, Peru, and the United States included a few merchants and artisans, most were unskilled country folk. In some cases families pooled their money to send out a son, but most travelers, desperately poor, obtained their passage through Chinese middlemen, who advanced them ship fare in return for their promise to work off their debts after they landed. This contracting sometimes led to conditions so cruel that the practice was ignominiously called “pig selling.” The ﬁ rst Chinese arrived in Spanish America as early as 1565, but few followed those earliest pioneers. Until the 1848 discovery of gold in Cal i fornia, there were fewer than 50 Chinese living in the United States. But by 1852 at least 25,000 Chinese had arrived in Cal ifornia, which they dubbed the “golden mountain.” At that decade’s end, Chinese workers made up nearly a quarter of the state’s manual laborers, even though they were only a tenth of the population. Employers nationwide viewed the Chinese as cheap labor, recruiting them to cut sugar cane in the South and break strikes in New Eng land shoe factories. A treaty negotiated with China in 1868 by the American diplomat Anson Burlingame guaranteed important civil rights to Chinese immigrants. The Chinese America of the late nineteenth century was overwhelmingly a bachelor society. Women of good repute rarely made the passage. Of the very few Chinese women who ventured to Cal i fornia at this time, most became prostitutes. Many of them had been deceived by the false promise of honest jobs. Although a stream of workers returned to their homeland, many Chinese stayed. “Chinatowns” sprang up wherever economic opportunities presented themselves—in railroad towns, farming villages, and cities. Chinese in these settlements spoke their own language, enjoyed the fellowship of their own compatriots, and sought safety from prejudice and violence, never rare in American society. Many immigrant clubs, American adaptations of Chinese traditions of loyalty to clan or region, were established in these communities. Rivaling such clubs and associations were the secret societies known as tongs. The word tong—literally, “meeting hall”—acquired a sinister reputation among non-

Chinese Butcher Shop, San Francisco, ca. 1890


 Chinese, for the tongs counted the poorest and shadiest immigrants among their members. These were people without ties to a clan, those individuals most alienated from traditional Chinese orga ni zations and from American society as well. Mounting anti-Chinese agitation forced the repudiation of the Burlingame Treaty in 1880, and in 1882 the Chinese Exclusion Act barred nearly all Chinese from the United States for six decades. Slowly, however, those men and the few women who remained raised families and reared a new generation of Chinese Americans. They were joined by thousands more immigrants who made the journey illegally or took advantage of the few exceptions permissible under the Exclusion Act. But this second generation still suffered from discrimination, eking out their living in jobs despised by Caucasian laborers or taking daunting risks in small entrepreneurial ventures. Yet many hard-working Chinese did manage to open their own restaurants, laundries, and other small businesses. The enterprises formed a solid economic foundation for their small community and the much larger one that would emerge by the late twentieth century with a huge inﬂux of new immigrants arriving from China.

Table 23.3 Population of Chinese Ancestry in the
United States, 1850–2000
Year


1970††


Population


4,018†
34,933
63,199
105,465
107,488
89,863
435,062
806,027
1,645,472
2,432,585


Males per
One Female


Percentage
U.S.-Born


Total Chinese
Immigrants in
Preceding Decade*


—


—
—


—
41,397
64,301
123,201
61,711
14,799


N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
.94


N.A.
N.A.
N.A.


34,764
124,326
346,747
419,114


 *Includes Chinese immigrants in Hawaii after 1898; by 1970 Hawaii was a state. †Estimated. ††The passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882 sharply reduced the Chinese population in the United States. Liberalization of American immigration laws and Chinese policies beginning in the 1970s , however, has led to a great increase in population of Chinese ancestry in the United States. (Sources: U.S. Census Bureau, relevant years; U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, 2000.)





Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 Garﬁeld and Arthur As the presidential campaign of 1880 approached, “Rutherfraud” Hayes was a man without a party, denounced and repudiated by the Republican Old Guard. The Republican party sought a new standard-bearer for 1880 and ﬁ nally settled on a dark-horse candidate, James A. Garﬁeld, from the electorally powerful state of Ohio. His vice-presidential running mate was a notorious Stalwart henchman, Chester A. Arthur of New York. Energetically waving the bloody shirt, Garﬁeld barely squeaked out a victory over the Democratic candidate and Civil War hero, Winﬁeld Scott Hancock. He

 polled only 39,213 more votes than Hancock—4,453,295 to 4,414,082—but his margin in the electoral column was a comfortable 214 to 155. The new president was energetic and able, but he was immediately ensnared in a political conﬂ ict between his secretary of state, James G. Blaine, and Blaine’s Stalwart nemesis, Senator Roscoe Conkling. Then, as the Republican factions dueled, tragedy struck. A disappointed and mentally deranged ofﬁce seeker, Charles J. Guiteau, shot President Garﬁeld in the back in a Washington railroad station. Garﬁeld lingered in agony for eleven weeks and died on September 19, 1881. Guiteau, when seized, reportedly cried, “I am a Stalwart. Arthur is now President of the United States.” The implication was that now the Conklingites would all get good jobs. Guiteau’s attorneys argued that he was not guilty because of his incapacity to distinguish right from wrong—an early instance of the “insanity defense.” The defendant himself demonstrated his weak grip on reality when he asked all those who had beneﬁted politically from the assassination to contribute to his defense fund. These tactics availed little. Guiteau was found guilty of murder and hanged. Garﬁeld’s death had one positive outcome: it shocked politicians into reforming the shameful spoils system. The unlikely instrument of reform was Chester Arthur. Observers at ﬁ rst underestimated him. His record of cronyism and his fondness for ﬁ ne wines and elegant clothing (including eighty pairs of trou-

 Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919), an ardent civilservice reformer, condemned the patronage system as

“


 The Ofﬁce Makes the Man, 1881 Besieged by his former New York cronies, Arthur tries to assert the dignity of his new presidential ofﬁce.

 tending to degrade American politics. . . . The men who are in ofﬁce only for what they can make out of it are thoroughly unwholesome citizens, and their activity in politics is simply noxious. . . . Decent private citizens must inevitably be driven out of politics if it is suffered to become a mere selﬁsh scramble for plunder, where victory rests with the most greedy, the most cunning, the most brazen. The whole patronage system is inimical to American institutions; it forms one of the gravest problems with which democratic and republican government has to grapple.

”


The Election of 1884


 sers) suggested that he was little more than a foppish dandy. But Arthur surprised his critics by prosecuting several fraud cases and giving his former Stalwart pals the cold shoulder. Disgust with Garﬁeld’s murder gave the Republican party itself a previously undetected taste for reform. The medicine ﬁ nally applied to the long-suffering federal government was the Pendleton Act of 1883— the so-called Magna Carta of civil-ser vice reform. It made compulsory campaign contributions from federal employees illegal, and it established the Civil Service Commission to make appointments to federal jobs on the basis of competitive examinations rather than “pull.” Although at ﬁ rst covering only about 10 percent of federal jobs, civil-ser vice reform did rein in the most blatant abuses. Yet like many well-intentioned reforms, it bred unintended problems of its own. With the

PRESIDENT ARTHUR 10%
McKINLEY 
 13,780 offices out of 131,208 106,205 offices out of 256,000

41%


 WILSON

71%


 497,603 offices out of 691,116

 ROOSEVELT

72%


 662,832 offices out of 920,310

 TRUMAN

87%


NIXON G.H.W. BUSH

90%


57%


 2,278,446 offices out of 2,603,267 2,393,000 offices out of 2,645,000 1,694,000 offices out of 2,940,000

 CLINTON

49%


 1,351,072 offices out of 2,734,338

G.W. BUSH

49%


 1,298,263 offices out of 2,670,857

 Figure 23.1 Civil-Service Employment The total number of civil-service jobs has remained relatively stable since the 1950s, even as the government has expanded in size and budget. The decline in classiﬁed civil-service jobs (those subject to competitive requirements) in recent decades reﬂects the changes mandated by the Postal Reorganization Act of 1971, which moved U.S. Postal Service employees from competitive to excepted service. Excepted jobs are not subject to rigid civil-service laws passed by Congress. (Source: U.S. Ofﬁce of Personnel Management.)



 “plum” federal posts now beyond their reach, politicians were forced to look elsewhere for money, “the mother’s milk of politics.” Increasingly, they turned to the bulging coffers of the big corporations. A new breed of “boss” emerged—less skilled at mobilizing small armies of immigrants and other voters on election day, but more adept at milking dollars from manufacturers and lobbyists. The Pendleton Act partially divorced politics from patronage, but it helped drive politicians into “marriages of convenience” with big-business leaders (see Figure 23.1). President Arthur’s surprising display of integrity offended too many powerful Republicans. His ungrateful party turned him out to pasture, and in 1886 he died of a cerebral hemorrhage.

The Blaine-Cleveland
Mudslingers of 1884
 James G. Blaine’s persistence in pursuit of his party’s presidential nomination ﬁnally paid off in 1884. The dashing Maine politician, blessed with almost every political asset except a reputation for honesty, was the clear choice of the Republican convention in Chicago. But many reform-minded Republicans gagged on Blaine’s candidacy. Blaine’s enemies publicized the ﬁshy-smelling “Mulligan letters,” written by Blaine to a Boston businessman and linking the powerful politician to a corrupt deal involving federal favors to a southern railroad. At least one of the damning documents ended with the furtive warning “Burn this letter.” Some reformers, unable to swallow Blaine, bolted to the Democrats. They were sneeringly dubbed Mugwumps, a word of Indian derivation meant to suggest that they were “sanctimonious” or “holier-than-thou.”* Victory-starved Democrats turned enthusiastically to a noted reformer, Grover Cleveland. A burly bachelor with a soup-straining mustache and a taste for chewing tobacco, Cleveland was a solid but not brilliant lawyer of forty-seven. He had rocketed from the mayor’s ofﬁce in Buffalo to the governorship of New York and the presidential nomination in three short years. Known as “Grover the Good,” he enjoyed a welldeserved reputation for probity in ofﬁce. But Cleveland’s admirers soon got a shock. Resolute Republicans, digging for dirt in the past of bachelor

 *Latter-day punsters gibed that the Mugwumps were priggish politicians who sat on the fence with their “mugs” on one side and their “wumps” on the other.



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


Little Lost Mugwumps Who Had
Gone Astray James G. Blaine,
 depicted as Little Bo Peep, tries to woo the errant Mugwump reformers back into the Republican fold in 1884.

 Cleveland, unearthed the report that he had been involved in an amorous affair with a Buffalo widow. She had an illegitimate son, now eight years old, for whom Cleveland had made ﬁ nancial provision. Democratic elders were demoralized. They hurried to Cleveland and urged him to lie like a gentleman, but their ruggedly honest candidate insisted, “Tell the truth.” The campaign of 1884 sank to perhaps the lowest level in American experience, as the two parties grunted

 “I Want My Pa!” Malicious anti-Cleveland cartoon.

 and shoved for the hog trough of ofﬁce. Few fundamental differences separated them. Even the bloody shirt had faded to a pale pink.* Personalities, not principles, claimed the headlines. Crowds of Democrats surged through city streets, chanting—to the rhythm of left, left, left, right, left—“Burn, burn, burn this letter!” Republicans taunted in return, “Ma, ma, where’s my pa?” Deﬁant Democrats shouted back, “Gone to the White House, ha, ha, ha!” The contest hinged on the state of New York, where Blaine blundered badly in the closing days of the campaign. A witless Republican clergyman damned the Democrats in a speech as the party of “Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion”—insulting with one swift stroke the culture, the faith, and the patriotism of New York’s numerous Irish American voters. Blaine was present at the time but lacked the presence of mind to repudiate the statement immediately. The pungent phrase, shortened to “RRR,” stung and stuck. Blaine’s silence seemed to give assent, and the wavering Irishmen who deserted his camp helped account for Cleveland’s paper-thin plurality of about a thousand votes in New York State, enough to give him the presidency. Cleveland swept the solid South and squeaked into of-

 *Neither candidate had served in the Civil War. Cleveland had hired a substitute to go in his stead while he supported his widowed mother and two sisters. Blaine was the only Republican presidential candidate from Grant through McKinley (1868 to 1900) who had not been a Civil War ofﬁcer.

Cleveland Battles for a Lower Tariff


 ﬁce with 219 to 182 electoral votes and 4,879,507 to 4,850,293 popular votes.

“Old Grover” Takes Over
 Bull-necked Cleveland in 1885 was the ﬁ rst Democrat to take the oath of presidential ofﬁce since Buchanan, twenty-eight years earlier. Huge question marks hung over his ample frame (5 feet 11 inches, 250 pounds). Could the “party of disunion” be trusted to govern the Union? Would desperate Democrats, ravenously hungry after twenty-four years of exile, trample the frail sprouts of civil-ser vice reform in a stampede to the patronage trough? Could Cleveland restore a mea sure

 Battling over Lowering the Tariff in the 1880s Advocates for both higher and lower tariffs claimed to be protecting American workers. In fact, workers were affected differently, depending on their jobs. Some U.S. manufacturing ﬁ rms beneﬁted from a protective tariff that shielded them from foreign competition, while others suffered from high duties on raw materials. Recognizing this tension, the American Federation of Labor declared neutrality on the tariff question in 1882.



 of respect and power to the maligned and enfeebled presidency? Cleveland was a man of principles, most of them safely orthodox by the standards of his day. A staunch apostle of the hands-off creed of laissez-faire, the new president caused the hearts of businesspeople and bankers to throb with contentment. He summed up his political philosophy in 1887 when he vetoed a bill to provide seeds for drought-ravaged Texas farmers. “Though the people support the government,” he declared, “the government should not support the people.” As tactless as a mirror and as direct as a bulldozer, he was outspoken, unbending, and profanely hot-tempered. At the outset Cleveland narrowed the North-South chasm by naming to his cabinet two former Confederates. As for the civil ser vice, Cleveland was whipsawed between the demands of the Democratic faithful for jobs and the demands of the Mugwumps, who had helped elect him, for reform. Believing in the merit system, Cleveland at ﬁ rst favored the cause of the reformers, but he eventually caved in to the carpings of Democratic bosses and ﬁ red almost two-thirds of the 120,000 federal employees, including 40,000 incumbent (Republican) postmasters, to make room for “deserving Democrats.” Military pensions gave Cleveland some of his most painful political headaches. The politically powerful Grand Army of the Republic (GAR) routinely lobbied hundreds of private pension bills through a compliant Congress. Beneﬁts were granted to deserters, to bounty jumpers, to men who never served, and to former soldiers who in later years had incurred disabilities in no way connected with war ser vice. A Democrat and a nonveteran, Cleveland was in an awkward position when it came to ﬁghting the pension-grabbers. But the conscience-driven president read each bill carefully, vetoed several hundred of them, and then laboriously penned individual veto messages for Congress.

Cleveland Battles for
 a Lower Tariff Cleveland also risked his political neck by prodding the hornet’s nest of the tariff issue. During the Civil War, tariff schedules had been jacked up to new high levels, partly to raise revenues for the insatiable military machine. American industry, which was preponderantly in Republican hands, had proﬁted from this protection and hated to see the sheltering beneﬁts reduced in



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 peacetime. But the high duties continued to pile up revenue at the customshouses, and by 1881 the Treasury was running an annual surplus amounting to an embarrassing $145 million. Most of the government’s income, in those pre–income tax days, came from the tariff. Congress could reduce the vexatious surplus in two ways. One was to squander it on pensions and “porkbarrel” bills and thus curry favor with veterans and other self-seeking groups. The other was to lower the tariff—something the big industrialists vehemently opposed. Grover Cleveland, the rustic Buffalo attorney, had known little and cared less about the tariff before entering the White House. But as he studied the subject, he was much impressed by the arguments for downward revision of the tariff schedules. Lower barriers would mean lower prices for consumers and less protection for monopolies. Most important, they would mean an end to the Treasury surplus, a standing mockery of Cleveland’s professed belief in ﬁscal orthodoxy and small-government frugality. After much hesitation Cleveland saw his duty and overdid it. With his characteristic bluntness, Cleveland tossed an appeal for lower tariffs like a bombshell into the lap of Congress in late 1887. The response was electric. Cleveland succeeded admirably in smoking the issue out into the open. Democrats were deeply frustrated by

 the obstinacy of their chief. Republicans rejoiced at his apparent recklessness, bellowing loudly that lower tariffs would mean higher taxes, lower wages, and increased unemployment. The old warrior Blaine gloated, “There’s one more President for us in [tariff ] protection.” For the ﬁ rst time in years, a real issue divided the two parties as the 1888 presidential election loomed. Dismayed Democrats, seeing no alternative, somewhat dejectedly renominated Grover Cleveland in their St. Louis convention. Eager Republicans turned to Benjamin Harrison, whose grandfather was former president William Henry (“Tippecanoe”) Harrison. The tariff was the prime issue. The two parties ﬂooded the country with some 10 million pamphlets on the subject. The specter of a lowered tariff spurred the Republicans to frantic action. In an impressive demonstration of the post–Pendleton Act politics of alliances with big business, they raised a war chest of some $3 million— the heftiest yet—largely by “frying the fat” out of nervous industrialists. The money was widely used to line up corrupt “voting cattle” known as “repeaters” and “ﬂoaters.” In Indiana, always a crucial “swing” state, votes were shamelessly purchased for as much as $20 each. On election day Harrison nosed out Cleveland, 233 to 168 electoral votes. A change of about 7,000 ballots in New York would have reversed the outcome. Cleveland actually polled more popular votes, 5,537,857 to 5,447,129, but he nevertheless became the ﬁ rst sitting president to be voted out of his chair since Martin Van Buren in 1840.

The Billion-Dollar Congress


 Weighing the Candidates, 1888 Novelties like this were widely distributed in late-nineteenth-century political campaigns. This miniature scale could be adjusted in either candidate’s favor. Here the Republican Harrison rather improbably outweighs the corpulent Democratic candidate, Grover Cleveland.

 After a four-year famine, the Republicans under Harrison licked their lips hungrily for the bounty of federal ofﬁces. They yearned to lavish upon the party faithful the fat surpluses produced by the high tariffs. But in the House of Representatives, they had only three more votes than the necessary quorum of 163 members, and the Democrats were preparing to obstruct all House business by refusing to answer roll calls, demanding roll calls to determine the presence of a quorum, and employing other delaying tactics. Into this tense cockpit stepped the new Republican Speaker of the House, Thomas B. Reed of Maine. A hulking ﬁgure who towered six feet three inches, he was renowned as a master debater. He spoke with a harsh nasal drawl and wielded a verbal harpoon of sarcasm. To one congressman who quoted Henry Clay that

Populist Protest




 boosting rates to their highest peacetime level ever (an average of 48.4 percent on dutiable goods). Sponsored in the House by rising Republican star William McKinley of Ohio, the new tariff act brought fresh woes to farmers. Debt-burdened farmers had no choice but to buy manufactured goods from highpriced protected American industrialists, but were compelled to sell their own agricultural products into highly competitive, unprotected world markets. Mounting discontent against the McKinley Tariff caused many rural voters to rise in wrath. In the congressional elections of 1890, the Republicans lost their precarious majority and were reduced to just 88 seats, as compared with 235 Democrats. Even the muchtouted McKinley went down to defeat. Ominously for conser vatives, the new Congress also included nine members of the Farmers’ Alliance, a militant orga ni zation of southern and western farmers.

The Drumbeat
 of Discontent

Thomas B. Reed of Maine, Republican Speaker of the
 House, 1890 Sometimes referred to as “Czar” Reed, he served as Speaker for six years, dramatically increasing the power of the ofﬁce in line with his dictum that “the best system is to have one party govern and the other party watch.”

 he would “rather be right than be president,” Reed caustically retorted that he “would never be either.” Opponents cringed at the crack of his quip. Reed soon bent the intimidated House to his imperious will. He counted as present Democrats who had not answered the roll and who, rule book in hand, furiously denied that they were legally there. By such tactics “Czar” Reed utterly dominated the “Billion-Dollar” Congress—the ﬁ rst in history to appropriate that sum. Congress showered pensions on Civil War veterans and increased government purchases of silver. To keep the revenues ﬂowing in—and to protect Republican industrialists from foreign competition—the Billion-Dollar Congress also passed the McKinley Tariff Act of 1890,

 Politics was no longer “as usual” in 1892, when the newly formed People’s party, or “Populists,” burst upon the scene. Rooted in the Farmers’ Alliance of frustrated farmers in the great agricultural belts of the West and South, the Populists met in Omaha and adopted a scorching platform that denounced “the proliﬁc womb of governmental injustice.” They demanded inﬂation through free and unlimited coinage of silver at the rate of sixteen ounces of silver to one ounce of gold. They further called for a graduated income tax; government ownership of the railroads, telegraph, and telephone; the direct election of U.S. senators; a one-term limit on the presidency; the adoption of the initiative and referendum to allow citizens to shape legislation more directly; a shorter workday; and immigration restriction. As their presidential candidate, the Populists uproariously nominated the eloquent old Greenbacker, General James B. Weaver. An epidemic of nationwide strikes in the summer of 1892 raised the prospect that the Populists could weld together a coalition of aggrieved workers and indebted farmers in a revolutionary joint assault on the capitalist order. At Andrew Carnegie’s Homestead steel plant near Pittsburgh, company ofﬁcials called in three hundred armed Pinkerton detectives in July to crush the deﬁant Homestead Strike by steelworkers angry over pay cuts. Strikers, armed with riﬂes and dynamite, forced their assailants to surrender after a vicious battle



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


Minnesota Farmers Loading
 a Husker-Shredder, 1890s The purchase of technologically advanced farm equipment increased the productivity of farmers but also saddled them with debt. Many sought debt relief in the 1890s by clamoring for inﬂationary schemes, including the monetization of silver.

 that left ten people dead and some sixty wounded. Troops were eventually summoned, and both the strike and the union were broken. That same month, federal troops bloodily smashed a strike among silver miners in Idaho’s fabled Coeur d’Alene district.

 The Populists made a remarkable showing in the 1892 presidential election (see Map 23.3). Singing “Good-by, Party Bosses,” they rolled up 1,029,846 popular votes and 22 electoral votes for General Weaver. They thus became one of the few third parties in U.S. history to break into the electoral column. But they fell far short of an electoral majority. Industrial laborers, especially in the urban East, did not rally to the Populist banner in appreciable numbers. Populist electoral votes came from only six midwestern and western states, four of which (Kansas, Colorado, Idaho, and Nevada) fell completely into the Populist basket. The South, although a hotbed of agrarian agitation, proved especially unwilling to throw in its lot with the new party. Race was the reason. The more than one million southern black farmers orga nized in the Colored Farmers’ National Alliance shared a host of complaints with poor white farmers, and for a time their common economic goals promised to overcome their

 The Homestead Strike, 1892 Three hundred armed Pinkerton detectives ﬂoated on barges down the Monongahela River to the site of the Carnegie steel plant at Homestead, Pennsylvania. Met by a deﬁant and disciplined force of strikers, they were compelled to surrender. Here the Pinkerton men are shown disembarking from their barges after their capitulation, while the jeering strikers ashore exult in their victory.



The Election of 1892


 racial differences. Recognizing the crucial edge that black votes could give them in the South, Populist leaders like Georgia’s Tom Watson reached out to the black community. Watson was a wiry redhead who could “talk like the thrust of a Bowie knife.” He declared, “There is no reason why the black man should not understand that the law that hurts me, as a farmer, hurts him, as a farmer.” Many blacks were disillusioned enough with the Republican party to respond. Alarmed, the conser vative white “Bourbon” elite in the South played cynically upon historic racial antagonisms to counter the Populists’ appeal for interracial solidarity and woo back poor whites. Southern blacks were heavy losers. The Populistinspired reminder of potential black political strength led to the near-total extinction of what little African American suffrage remained in the South. White southerners more aggressively than ever used literacy tests

 A popular protest song of the 1890s among western farmers was titled “The Hayseed.” One stanza ran,

 I once was a tool of oppression, And as green as a sucker could be, And monopolies banded together To beat a poor hayseed like me.

 and poll taxes to deny blacks the ballot. The notorious grandfather clause exempted from those requirements anyone whose forebear had voted in 1860—when, of course, black slaves had not voted at all. More than half a century would pass before southern blacks could again vote in considerable numbers. Accompanying this disfranchisement were more severe Jim Crow laws,

 Map 23.3 Presidential Election of 1892 (showing vote by county) Note the concentration of Populist strength in the semiarid farming regions of the western half of the country. (Compare this with Map 26.4, showing average annual precipitation with major agricultural products as of 1900, on p. 647). Interactive Map

 WASH.

N.H.
VT. R-4

R-4


 MONT.

 ME.

R-4


N. DAK.

R-3


R-6


D-1/R-1/P-1


 OREGON

 MINN.

R-3/P-1


 MASS.

R-9


 IDAHO

S. DAK.

P-3


 WISC.

R-4


 WYO.

D-12


R-3


R-13


R-8


UTAH TERR.

 CALIF.

 ILL.

D-24


COLO. P-4

OKLA. TERR. NEW MEXICO TERR.

IND. D-15

R-32


 OHIO

D-12


D-13


D-8


D-11


D-12


S.C.


 ARK.

D-9


D-8


MISS. D-9

 TEXAS

 MD.

N.C.


TENN. IND. TERR.

N.J. D-6


D-10
D-3


 VA.

D-6


 KY.

D-17


 CONN.

 DEL.

D-1/R-22


W. VA.


 MO.

KANSAS P-10

ARIZONA TERR.

R.I.
R-4


 PA.

 IOWA

 NEB.

D-8/R-1


D-36


MICH. D-5/R-9

NEV. P-3

R-15


N.Y.


ALA. D-11

 GA.

D-13


 LA.

D-15


D-8


FLA. D-4

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Cleveland (Democrat)




62%


5,555,426


46.1%


Harrison (Republican)




33%


5,182,690


43.0%




5%


1,029,846


8.5%


 Weaver (People’s)

Territories, Indian
 reservations, unsettled, etc.



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


The Kansas Legislature,
 1893 Riﬂe-bearing Populists seized the Kansas capitol after the election of 1892 to make good their claim that they had won at the polls. Republicans disagreed and eventually prevailed when sergeants at arms, shown here, restored order.

 designed to enforce racial segregation in public places, including hotels and restaurants, and backed up by atrocious lynchings and other forms of intimidation. The conser vative crusade to eliminate the black vote also had dire consequences for the Populist party

 itself. Even Tom Watson abandoned his interracial appeals and, in time, became a vociferous racist himself. After 1896 the Populist party lapsed increasingly into vile racism and staunchly advocated black disfranchisement. Such were the bitterly ironic fruits of the Populist campaign in the South.

Cleveland and Depression
 With the Populists divided and the Republicans discredited, Grover Cleveland took ofﬁce once again in 1893, the only president ever reelected after defeat. He was the same old bull-necked and bullheaded Cleveland, with a little more weight, polish, conservatism, and self-assertiveness. But though it was the same old

 Thomas Edward Watson (1865–1922) Populist leader Tom Watson of Georgia began his public career promoting interracial political cooperation, though he sometimes despaired that many poor white farmers preferred to “hug the chains of . . . wretchedness rather than do any experimenting on [the race] question.” Watson himself eventually succumbed to racism. In 1913 he proclaimed that “the Negro has no comprehension of virtue, honesty, truth, gratitude, and principle. The South has to lynch him occasionally, and ﬂog him, now and then, to keep him from blaspheming the Almighty by his conduct . . . and color.”

The Return of Cleveland


 Cleveland, it was not the same old country. Debtors were up in arms, workers were restless, and the advance shadows of panic were falling. Hardly had Cleveland seated himself in the presidential chair when the devastating depression of 1893 burst about his burly frame. Lasting for about four years, it was the most punishing economic downturn of the nineteenth century. Contributing causes were the splurge of overbuilding and speculation, labor disorders, and the ongoing agricultural depression. Free-silver agitation—the cry to expand the money supply with unlimited coinage of silver—had also damaged American credit abroad, and the usual pinch on American ﬁ nances had come when European banking houses began to call in loans from the United States. Distress ran deep and far. About eight thousand American businesses collapsed in six months. Dozens of railroad lines went into the hands of receivers. Soup kitchens fed the unemployed, while gangs of hoboes (“tramps”) wandered aimlessly about the country. Local charities did their feeble best, but the federal government, bound by the let-nature-take-its-course philosophy of the times, saw no legitimate way to relieve the suffering masses. Cleveland, who had earlier been bothered by a surplus, was now burdened with a deepening deﬁcit. The Treasury was required to issue legal tender notes for the silver bullion that it bought. Owners of the paper currency would then present it for gold, and by law the notes had to be reissued. New holders would repeat the process, thus draining away precious gold in an “endless-chain” operation. Alarmingly, the gold reserve in the Treasury dropped below $100 million, which was popularly regarded as the safe minimum for supporting about $350 million in outstanding paper money. Cleveland saw no alternative but to halt the bleeding away of gold by engineering a repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890. For this purpose he summoned Congress into an extra session in the summer of 1893. Unknown to the country, complications threatened from another quarter. A malignant growth had developed on the roof of Cleveland’s mouth, and it had to be removed on a private yacht with extreme secrecy. If the president had died under the surgeon’s knife, his place would have been taken by the “softmoney” vice president, Adlai E. Stevenson—an eventuality that would have deepened the crisis. In Congress the debate over the repeal of the silver act was meanwhile running its heated course. A silver-tongued young Democratic congressman from



 Nebraska, thirty-three-year-old William Jennings Bryan, held the galleries spellbound for three hours as he championed the cause of free silver. The friends of silver announced that “hell would freeze over” before Congress would pass the repeal mea sure. But an angered Cleveland used his job-granting power to break the ﬁlibuster in the Senate. He thus alienated the Democratic silverites like Bryan and disrupted his party at the very outset of his administration. Repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act only partially stopped the hemorrhaging of gold from the Treasury. In February 1894 the gold reserve sank to a dismaying $41 million. The United States was now in grave danger of going off the gold standard—a move that would render the nation’s currency volatile and unreliable as a mea sure of value and that would also mortally cripple America’s international trade. Cleveland ﬂoated two Treasury bond issues in 1894, totaling over $100 million, but the “endless-chain” operations continued relentlessly. Early in 1895 Cleveland turned in desperation to J. P. Morgan, “the bankers’ banker” and the head of a Wall Street syndicate. After tense negotiations at the White House, the bankers agreed to lend the government $65 million in gold. They were obviously in business for proﬁt, so they charged a commission amounting to about $7 million. But they did make a signiﬁcant concession when they agreed to obtain one-half of the gold abroad and take the necessary steps to dam it up in the leaky Treasury. The loan, at least temporarily, helped restore conﬁdence in the nation’s ﬁ nances.

Cleveland Breeds a Backlash
 The bond deal stirred up a storm. The Wall Street ogre, especially in the eyes of the silverites and other debtors, symbolized all that was wicked and grasping in American politics. President Cleveland’s secretive dealings with the mighty “Jupiter” Morgan were savagely condemned as a “sellout” of the national government. But Cleveland was certain that he had done no wrong. Sarcastically denying that he was “Morgan’s errand boy,” Cleveland asserted, “Without shame and without repentance I confess my share of the guilt.” Cleveland suffered further embarrassment with the passage of the Wilson-Gorman Tariff in 1894. The Democrats had pledged to lower tariffs, but by the time their tariff bill made it through Congress, it had been so loaded with special-interest protection that it made scarcely a dent in the high McKinley Tariff rates. An



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 outraged Cleveland grudgingly allowed the bill, which also contained a 2 percent tax on incomes over $4,000, to become law without his signature. When the Supreme Court struck down the income-tax provision in 1895,* the Populists and other disaffected groups found proof that the courts were only the tools of the plutocrats. Democratic political fortunes naturally suffered in the face of these several setbacks. The tariff dynamite that had blasted the Republicans out of the House in 1890 now dislodged the Democrats, with a strong helping hand from the depression. The revitalized Republicans, singing “Times Are Mighty Hard,” won the congressional elections of 1894 in a landslide—244 seats to 105 for the Democrats. The Republicans be-

 *It violated the “direct tax” clause. See Art. I, Sec. IX, para. 4 in the Appendix. The Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution, adopted in 1913, permitted an income tax.

 gan to look forward to the presidential race of 1896 with unconcealed glee. Despite his gruff integrity and occasional courage, Grover Cleveland failed utterly to cope with the serious economic crisis that befell the country in 1893. He was tied down in ofﬁce by the same threads that held all the politicians of the day to Lilliputian levels. Grant, Hayes, Garﬁeld, Arthur, Harrison, and Cleveland are often referred to as the “forgettable presidents.” Bewhiskered and bland in person, they left mostly blanks—or blots—on the nation’s political record, as issues like the tariff, the money question, and the rights of labor continued to fester. What little political vitality existed in Gilded Age America was to be found in local settings or in Congress, which overshadowed the White House for most of this period. But before the century ended, down-and-out debtors and disgruntled workers would make one last titanic effort to wring reform out of the political system—in the momentous election of 1896.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Grant defeats Seymour for presidency



 Fisk and Gould corner gold market



 Tweed scandal in New York



 Crédit Mobilier scandal exposed Liberal Republicans break with Grant Grant defeats Greeley for presidency



Panic of 1873




 Whiskey Ring scandal Civil Rights Act of 1875 Resumption Act



 Hayes-Tilden election standoff and crisis



Compromise of 1877
 Reconstruction ends Railroad strikes paralyze nation



 Garﬁeld defeats Hancock for presidency



 Garﬁeld assassinated; Arthur assumes presidency



Chinese Exclusion Act




Civil Rights Cases
 Pendleton Act sets up Civil Service Commission



 Cleveland defeats Blaine for presidency



 Harrison defeats Cleveland for presidency



“Billion-Dollar” Congress
 McKinley Tariff Act Sherman Silver Purchase Act (repealed 1893)



 Homestead steel strike Coeur d’Alene (Idaho) silver miners’ strike People’s party candidate James B. Weaver wins twenty-two electoral votes Cleveland defeats Harrison and Weaver to regain presidency



 Depression of 1893 begins Republicans regain House of Representatives



J. P.
Morgan’s banking syndicate loans $65 million in gold to federal government 


 Plessy v. Ferguson legitimizes “separate but equal” doctrine

Varying Viewpoints


KEY TERMS
“waving the bloody shirt” (539) Tweed Ring (539) Crédit Mobilier scandal (541) panic of 1873 (542) Gilded Age (543) patronage (544) Compromise of 1877 (545) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Civil Rights Act of 1875 (546) sharecropping (547) Jim Crow (547) Plessy v. Ferguson (547) Chinese Exclusion Act (549) Pendleton Act (553) Homestead Strike (557) grandfather clause (559) 
Jay Gould
Horace Greeley
Rutherford B. Hayes
 James A. Garﬁeld Chester Arthur

Grover Cleveland
Thomas B. Reed
Tom Watson
William Jennings Bryan
J. P.
Morgan 

The Populists: Radicals or Reactionaries?


T


 aking their cue from contemporary satirical commentaries like Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner’s The Gilded Age (1873), the ﬁ rst historians who wrote about the post–Civil War era judged it harshly. They condemned its politicians as petty and corrupt, lamented the emergence of a new plutocratic class, and railed against the arrogance of corporate power. Such a view is conspicuous in Charles and Mary Beard’s The Rise of American Civilization (4 vols., 1927–1942), perhaps the most inﬂuential American history textbook ever written. The Beards were leaders of the so-called progressive school of historical writing that ﬂourished in the early years of the twentieth century. Progressive historians, many of whom grew up in the Gilded Age, shared in a widespread disillusionment that the Civil War had failed to generate a rebirth of American idealism. Their political sympathies were chillingly antibusiness and warmly pro-labor, pro-farmer, and pro-reform. Historians of the progressive persuasion identiﬁed Populism as virtually the only orga nized opposition to the social, economic, and political order that took shape in the last decades of the nineteenth century. The Populists thus became heroes to several generations of writers who bemoaned that order and looked back longingly at Americans’ agrarian past. John D. Hicks, The Populist Revolt (1931), is the classic

 portrayal of the Populists as embattled farmers hurling deﬁance at Wall Street and the robber barons in a last-ditch defense of their simple, honest way of life. Bowed but unbroken by the defeat of their great champion, William Jennings Bryan, in the presidential election of 1896, the Populists, Hicks claimed, left a reforming legacy that ﬂourished again in the progressive era and the New Deal. Hicks’s point of view was the dominant one until the 1950s, when it was sharply criticized by Richard Hofstadter in The Age of Reform (1955). Hofstadter charged that the progressive historians had romanticized the Populists, who were best understood not as picturesque protesters, but as “harassed little country businessmen” bristling with provincial prejudices. The city-born-and-bred Hofstadter argued that the Populist revolt was aimed not just at big business and the money power but also somewhat irrationally at urbanism, immigrants, the East, and modernity itself. Hofstadter thus exposed a “dark side” of Populism, which contained elements of backwoods antiintellectualism, paranoia, and even anti-Semitism. In the 1960s several scholars, inspired by the work of C. Vann Woodward, as well as by sympathy with the protest movements of that turbulent decade, began to rehabilitate the Populists as authentic reformers with genuine grievances. Especially notable in this vein was Lawrence Goodwyn’s Democratic Promise:



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


The Populist Movement in America (1976). Goodwyn
 depicted the Populists as reasonable radicals who were justiﬁably resentful of their eclipse by urban industrialism and ﬁ nance capitalism. He also portrayed Populism as the last gasp of popular political participation, a democratic “moment” in American history that expired with the Populists’ absorption into the Democratic party. Two subsequent works, Edward L. Ayers’s Promise of the New South (1992) and Robert C. McMath’s American Populism (1993), synthesized many of the older

 perspectives and presented a balanced view of the Populists as radical in many ways but also limited by their nostalgia for a lost agrarian past. Recently, Eric Rauchway’s Blessed Among Nations (2006) argued that Populism was a reaction to America’s increased reliance on foreign investment. Farmers in southern and western states resented control by foreign capitalists, particularly the British. Although Hofstadter made a similar point ﬁ fty years earlier, the impact of the international economy on domestic politics is reemerging as a direction for new research.

To Learn More
 William Gillette, Retreat from Reconstruction, 1869–1879 (1979) Steven Hahn, A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery to the Great Migration (2003) Paul Krause, The Battle for Homestead, 1880–1892: Politics, Culture, and Steel (1992) Roy Morris, Jr., Fraud of the Century: Rutherford B. Hayes, Samuel Tilden, and the Stolen Election of 1876 (2003) Heather Cox Richardson, The Death of Reconstruction: Race, Labor, and Politics in the Post–Civil War North, 1865–1901 (2001) Mark W. Summers, The Era of Good Stealings (1993)

Alan Trachtenberg, The Incorporation of America: Culture
 and Society in the Gilded Age (1982) Robert Wiebe, The Search for Order, 1877–1920 (1967) C. Vann Woodward, Origins of the New South, 1877–1913 (1951) ———, The Strange Career of Jim Crow (rev. ed., 1974)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Industry
Comes of Age





1865–1900
 The wealthy class is becoming more wealthy; but the poorer class is becoming more dependent. The gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider; social contrasts are becoming sharper; as liveried carriages appear; so do barefooted children.

A


 s the nineteenth century drew to a close, observers were asking, “Why are the best men not in politics?” One answer was that they were being lured away from public life by the lusty attractions of the booming private economy. As America’s Industrial Revolution slipped into high gear, talented men ached for proﬁts, not the presidency. They dreamed of controlling corporations, not the Congress. What the nation lost in civic leadership, it gained in an astounding surge of economic growth. As late as 1870, agriculture was the nation’s biggest business. By 1900 its share of the economy was half that. Until the end of the Civil War, the United States imported more merchandise than it exported. By 1900 it annually delivered more than $600 million worth of manufactured goods to the world’s marketplace. Americans did not achieve this economic transformation all by themselves. Foreign investment,

 labor, trade, and technology made it possible. Although in many ways still a political dwarf, the United States was about to stand up before the world as an industrial colossus—and the lives of millions of working Americans would be transformed in the process.

The Iron Colt Becomes
 an Iron Horse The government-business entanglements that increasingly shaped politics after the Civil War also undergirded the industrial development of the nation. The unparalleled outburst of railroad construction was a crucial case. When Lincoln was shot in 1865, there were only 35,000 miles of steam railways in the United States, mostly east of the Mississippi. By 1900 the ﬁgure had

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





