Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 “planted” them with new Protestant landlords from Scotland and Eng land. This policy also planted the seeds of the centuries-old religious conﬂ icts that persist in Ireland to the present day. Many Eng lish soldiers developed in Ireland a sneering contempt for the “savage” natives, an attitude that they brought with them to the New World.

Elizabeth Energizes England


Elizabeth I (1533–1603), by Marcus Gheeraets the
 Younger, ca. 1592 Although accused of being vain, ﬁckle, prejudiced, and miserly, she proved to be an unusually successful ruler. She never married (hence, the “Virgin Queen”), although various royal matches were projected.

 the Protestant Elizabeth ascended to the Eng lish throne in 1558, Protestantism became dominant in Eng land, and rivalry with Catholic Spain intensiﬁed. Ireland, which nominally had been under Eng lish rule since the twelfth century, became an early scene of that rivalry. The Catholic Irish sought help from Catholic Spain to throw off the yoke of the new Protestant Eng lish queen. But Spanish aid never amounted to much; in the 1570s and 1580s, Elizabeth’s troops crushed the Irish uprising with terrible ferocity, inﬂ icting unspeakable atrocities upon the native Irish people. The Eng lish crown conﬁscated Catholic Irish lands and

 Encouraged by the ambitious Elizabeth I (see Table 2.1), hardy Eng lish buccaneers now swarmed out upon the shipping lanes. They sought to promote the twin goals of Protestantism and plunder by seizing Spanish trea sure ships and raiding Spanish settlements, even though Eng land and Spain were technically at peace. The most famous of these semipiratical “sea dogs” was the courtly Sir Francis Drake. He swashbuckled and looted his way around the planet, returning in 1580 with his ship heavily ballasted with Spanish booty. The venture netted proﬁts of about 4,600 percent to his ﬁ nancial backers, among whom, in secret, was Queen Elizabeth. Defying Spanish protest, she brazenly knighted Drake on the deck of his barnacled ship. The bleak coast of Newfoundland was the scene of the ﬁ rst Eng lish attempt at colonization. This effort collapsed when its promoter, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, lost his life at sea in 1583. Gilbert’s ill-starred dream inspired his gallant half-brother Sir Walter Raleigh to try again in warmer climes. Raleigh orga nized an expedition that ﬁ rst landed in 1585 on North Carolina’s Roanoke Island, off the coast of Virginia—a vaguely deﬁ ned region named in honor of Elizabeth, the “Virgin Queen.” After several false starts, the hapless Roanoke colony mysteriously vanished, swallowed up by the wilderness. These pathetic Eng lish failures at colonization contrasted embarrassingly with the glories of the Spanish Empire, whose proﬁts were fabulously enriching Spain. Philip II of Spain, self-anointed foe of the Protestant Reformation, used part of his imperial gains to amass an “Invincible Armada” of ships for an invasion of Eng land. The showdown came in 1588, when the lumbering Spanish ﬂotilla, 130 strong, hove into the Eng lish Channel. The Eng lish sea dogs fought back. Using craft that were swifter, more maneuverable, and more ably manned, they inﬂ icted heavy damage on the cumbersome, overladen Spanish ships. Then a devastating storm arose (the “Protestant wind”), scattering the crippled Spanish ﬂeet.

England Prepares for Colonization




 In the years immediately following the defeat of the Spanish Armada, the English writer Richard Hakluyt (1552?–1616) extravagantly exhorted his countrymen to cast off their “sluggish security” and undertake the colonization of the New World:

“


 There is under our noses the great and ample country of Virginia; the inland whereof is found of late to be so sweet and wholesome a climate, so rich and abundant in silver mines, a better and richer country than Mexico itself. If it shall please the Almighty to stir up Her Majesty’s heart to continue with transporting one or two thousand of her people, she shall by God’s assistance, in short space, increase her dominions, enrich her coffers, and reduce many pagans to the faith of Christ.

”


 The rout of the Spanish Armada marked the beginning of the end of Spanish imperial dreams, though Spain’s New World empire would not fully collapse for three more centuries. Within a few decades, the SpanSir Walter Ralegh (Raleigh) (c. 1552–1618), ish Netherlands (Holland) would secure its indepen1588 A dashing courtier who was one of Queen dence, and much of the Spanish Caribbean would slip Elizabeth’s favorites for his wit, good looks, and courtly from Spain’s grasp. Bloated by Peruvian and Mexican manners, he launched important colonizing failures in silver and cockily convinced of its own invincibility, the New World. For this portrait, Raleigh presented Spain had overreached itself, sowing the seeds of its himself as the queen’s devoted servant, wearing her own decline. colors of black and white and her emblem of a pearl in Eng land’s victory over the Spanish Armada also his left ear. After seducing (and secretly marrying) one marked a red-letter day in American history. It dampof Queen Elizabeth’s maids of honor, he fell out of favor ened Spain’s ﬁghting spirit and helped ensure Engbut continued his colonial ventures in the hopes of challenging Catholic Spain’s dominance in the land’s naval dominance in the North Atlantic. It started Americas. He was ultimately beheaded for treason. Eng land on its way to becoming master of the world oceans—a fact of enormous importance to the American people. Indeed Eng land now had Table 2.1 The Tudor Rulers of England* many of the characteristics that Spain displayed on the eve of its colonizing Name, Reign Relation to America adventure a century earlier: a strong, Cabot voyages, 1497, 1498 uniﬁed national state under a pop- Henry VII, 1485–1509 Henry VIII, 1509–1547 Eng lish Reformation began ular monarch; a mea sure of religious Edward VI, 1547–1553 Strong Protestant tendencies unity after a protracted struggle be“Bloody” Mary, 1553–1558 Catholic reaction tween Protestants and Catholics; and Elizabeth I, 1558–1603 Break with Roman Catholic Church ﬁ nal; a vibrant sense of nationalism and Drake; Spanish Armada defeated national destiny. A wondrous ﬂowering of the Eng- *See Table 3.1, p. 55, for a continuation of the table. lish national spirit bloomed in the



Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 wake of the Spanish Armada’s defeat. A golden age of literature dawned in this exhilarating at mosphere, with William Shakespeare, at its forefront, making occasional poetical references to England’s American colonies. The English were seized with restlessness, with thirst for adventure, and with curiosity about the unknown. Everywhere there blossomed a new spirit of self-conﬁdence, of vibrant patriotism, and of boundless faith in the future of the Eng lish nation. When England and Spain ﬁ nally signed a treaty of peace in 1604, the Eng lish people were poised to plunge headlong into the planting of their own colonial empire in the New World.

England on the Eve of Empire
 Eng land’s scepter’d isle, as Shakespeare called it, throbbed with social and economic change as the seventeenth century opened. Its population was mushrooming, from some 3 million people in 1550 to about 4 million in 1600. In the ever-green Eng lish countryside, landlords were “enclosing” croplands for sheep grazing, forcing many small farmers into precarious tenancy or off the land altogether. It was no accident that the woolen districts of eastern and western Eng land—where Puritanism had taken strong root— supplied many of the earliest immigrants to America. When economic depression hit the woolen trade in the late 1500s, thousands of footloose farmers took to the roads. They drifted about Eng land, chronically unemployed, often ending up as beggars and paupers in cities like Bristol and London. This remarkably mobile population alarmed many contemporaries. They concluded that Eng land was burdened with a “surplus population,” though present-day London holds twice as many people as did all of England in 1600. At the same time, laws of primogeniture decreed that only eldest sons were eligible to inherit landed estates. Landholders’ ambitious younger sons, among them Gilbert, Raleigh, and Drake, were forced to seek their fortunes elsewhere. Bad luck plagued their early, lone-wolf enterprises. But by the early 1600s, the jointstock company, forerunner of the modern corporation, was perfected. It enabled a considerable number of investors, called “adventurers,” to pool their capital. Peace with a chastened Spain provided the opportunity for Eng lish colonization. Population growth provided the workers. Unemployment, as well as a thirst for

 adventure, for markets, and for religious freedom, provided the motives. Joint-stock companies provided the ﬁ nancial means. The stage was now set for a historic effort to establish an Eng lish beachhead in the still uncharted North American wilderness.

England Plants the
Jamestown Seedling
 In 1606, two years after peace with Spain, the hand of destiny beckoned toward Virginia. A joint-stock company, known as the Virginia Company of London, received a charter from King James I of Eng land for a settlement in the New World. The main attraction was the promise of gold, combined with a strong desire to ﬁ nd a passage through America to the Indies. Like most joint-stock companies of the day, the Virginia Company was intended to endure for only a few years, after which its stockholders hoped to liquidate it for a proﬁt. This arrangement put severe pressure on the luckless colonists, who were threatened with abandonment in the wilderness if they did not quickly strike it rich on the company’s behalf. Few of the investors thought in terms of long-term colonization. Apparently no one even faintly suspected that the seeds of a mighty nation were being planted. The charter of the Virginia Company is a signiﬁcant document in American history. It guaranteed to the overseas settlers the same rights of Eng lishmen that they would have enjoyed if they had stayed at home. This precious boon was gradually extended to subsequent Eng lish colonies, helping to reinforce the colonists’ sense that even on the far shores of the Atlantic, they remained comfortably within the embrace of traditional Eng lish institutions. But ironically, a century and a half later, their insistence on the “rights of Eng lishmen” fed the hot resentment of the colonists against an increasingly meddlesome mother country and nourished their appetite for independence. Setting sail in late 1606, the Virginia Company’s three ships landed near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay, where Indians attacked them. Pushing on up the bay, the tiny band of colonists eventually chose a location on the wooded and malarial banks of the James River, named in honor of King James I. The site was easy to defend, but it was mosquito-infested and devastatingly unhealthful. There, on May 24, 1607, about a hundred Eng lish settlers, all of them men, disembarked. They called the place Jamestown (see Map 2.1).



 Virginia's Beginnings

 to eating “dogges, Catts, Ratts, and Myce” and even to digging up corpses for food. One hungry man killed, salted, and ate his wife, for which misbehavior he was executed. Of the four hundred settlers who managed to make it to Virginia by 1609, only sixty survived the “starving time” winter of 1609–1610. Diseased and despairing, the remaining colonists dragged themselves aboard homeward-bound ships in the spring of 1610, only to be met at the mouth of the James River by a long-awaited relief party headed by a new governor, Lord De La Warr. He ordered the settlers back to Jamestown, imposed a harsh military regime on the colony, and soon undertook aggressive military action against the Indians.

 sq





 ue

 ha

 Areas settled by 1675

50 Km.


50 Mi.


 nn a

 Areas settled by 1700

Y


 LI

N


E


LE VA L

 FA

Annapolis


Ba


 LL

DO AH

 e

 AN

 ar

 EN

D


 law

 SH

40°N
R.


De


 ac

R.


 e ar

Del a


 w

R.


MA RY LA N

 tom

 y

Ra


N


 pp ah an

 St. Mary’s 1634 (capital to 1694)

R.


Fort Henry (Petersburg)


Yorktown


 AN

 OCE

Hampton 1691
Norfolk


 TIC

Williamsburg
Jamestown 1607
 (capital to 1699)

 AN

Henrico 1611


 es R.

38°N


B ay


V I R G I N I A


AT L

 ck

Chesapeake


 no

Jam


76°W


N


E


 PIEDMONT

”


 FA

“


 Our men were destroyed with cruel diseases as swellings, burning fevers, and by wars, and some departed suddenly, but for the most part they died of mere famine. There were never Englishmen left in a foreign country in such misery as we were in this new discovered Virginia.

 LL

 LI

 George Percy (1580–1631) accompanied Captain John Smith on his expedition to Virginia in 1606– 1607. He served as deputy governor of the colony in 1609–1610 and returned to England in 1612, where he wrote A Discourse of the Plantation of Virginia about his experiences:



Su


 Areas settled by 1650

Po


 The early years of Jamestown proved a nightmare for all concerned—except the buzzards. Forty wouldbe colonists perished during the initial voyage in 1606– 1607. Another expedition in 1609 lost its leaders and many of its precious supplies in a shipwreck off Bermuda. Once ashore in Virginia, the settlers died by the dozens from disease, malnutrition, and starvation. Ironically, the woods rustled with game and the rivers ﬂopped with ﬁsh, but the greenhorn settlers, many of them self-styled “gentlemen” unaccustomed to fending for themselves, wasted valuable time grubbing for nonexistent gold when they should have been gathering provisions. Virginia was saved from utter collapse at the start largely by the leadership and resourcefulness of an intrepid young adventurer, Captain John Smith. Taking over in 1608, he whipped the gold-hungry colonists into line with the rule, “He who shall not work shall not eat.” He had been kidnapped in December 1607 and subjected to a mock execution by the Indian chieftain Powhatan, whose daughter Pocahontas had “saved” Smith by dramatically interposing her head between his and the war clubs of his captors. The symbolism of this ritual was apparently intended to impress Smith with Powhatan’s power and with the Indians’ desire for peaceful relations with the Virginians. Pocahontas became an intermediary between the Indians and the settlers, helping to preserve a shaky peace and to provide needed foodstuffs. Still, the colonists died in droves, and living skeletons were driven to desperate acts. They were reduced

36°N


T I D E WAT E R


78°W


Map 2.1 Early Maryland and Virginia
Interactive Map




Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 The wife of a Virginia governor wrote to her sister in England in 1623 of her voyage:

“


 For our Shippe was so pestered with people and goods that we were so full of infection that after a while we saw little but throwing folkes over board: It pleased god to send me my helth till I came to shoare and 3 dayes after I fell sick but I thank god I am well recovered. Few else are left alive that came in that Shippe.

”


Cultural Clashes
 in the Chesapeake

 Pocahontas (ca. 1595–1617) Taken to England by her husband, she was received as a princess. She died when preparing to return, but her infant son ultimately reached Virginia, where hundreds of his descendants have lived, including the second Mrs. Woodrow Wilson.

 Disease continued to reap a gruesome harvest among the Virginians. By 1625 Virginia contained only some twelve hundred hard-bitten survivors of the nearly eight thousand adventurers who had tried to start life anew in the ill-fated colony.

 The authorities meted out harsh discipline in the young Virginia colony. One Jamestown settler who publicly criticized the governor was sentenced to

“


 be disarmed [and] have his arms broken and his tongue bored through with an awl [and] shall pass through a guard of 40 men and shall be butted [with muskets] by every one of them and at the head of the troop kicked down and footed out of the fort.

”


 When the Eng lish landed in 1607, the chieftain Powhatan dominated the native peoples living in the James River area. He had asserted supremacy over a few dozen small tribes, loosely afﬁ liated in what somewhat grandly came to be called Powhatan’s Confederacy. The English colonists dubbed all the local Indians, somewhat inaccurately, the Powhatans. Powhatan at ﬁrst may have considered the Eng lish potential allies in his struggle to extend his power still further over his Indian rivals, and he tried to be conciliatory. But relations between the Indians and the Eng lish remained tense, especially as the starving colonists took to raiding Indian food supplies. The at mosphere grew even more strained after Lord De La Warr arrived in 1610. He carried orders from the Virginia Company that amounted to a declaration of war against the Indians in the Jamestown region. A veteran of the vicious campaigns against the Irish, De La Warr now introduced “Irish tactics” against the Indians. His troops raided Indian villages, burned houses, conﬁscated provisions, and torched cornﬁelds. A peace settlement ended this First Anglo-Powhatan War in 1614, sealed by the marriage of Pocahontas to the colonist John Rolfe—the ﬁ rst known interracial union in Virginia. A fragile respite followed, which endured eight years. But the Indians, pressed by the land-hungry whites and ravaged by European diseases, struck back in 1622. A series of Indian attacks left 347 settlers dead, including John Rolfe. In response the Virginia Company issued new orders calling for “a perpetual war without peace or truce,” one that would prevent the In-

Virginians and Native Americans




 remained in Virginia, perhaps 10 percent of the population the original Eng lish settlers had encountered in 1607. By 1685 the Eng lish considered the Powhatan peoples extinct. It had been the Powhatans’ calamitous misfortune to fall victim to three Ds: disease, disorga ni zation, and disposability. Like native peoples throughout the New World, they were extremely susceptible to Europeanborne maladies. Epidemics of smallpox and measles raced mercilessly through their villages. The Powhatans also—despite the apparent cohesiveness of “Powhatan’s Confederacy”—lacked the unity with which to make effective opposition to the comparatively wellorga nized and militarily disciplined whites. Finally, unlike the Indians whom the Spaniards had encountered to the south, who could be put to work in the mines and had gold and silver to trade, the Powhatans served no economic function for the Virginia colonists. They provided no reliable labor source and, after the Virginians began growing their own food crops, had no valuable commodities to offer in commerce. The natives, as far as the Virginians were concerned, could be disposed of without harm to the colonial economy. Indeed the Indian presence frustrated the colonists’ desire for a local commodity the Europeans desperately wanted: land.

The Indians’ New World
A
Carolina Indian Woman and Child, by John  White The artist was a member of the Raleigh expedition of 1585. Notice that the Indian girl carries a European doll, illustrating the mingling of cultures that had already begun.

 dians “from being any longer a people.” Periodic punitive raids systematically reduced the native population and drove the survivors ever farther westward. In the Second Anglo-Powhatan War in 1644, the Indians made one last effort to dislodge the Virginians. They were again defeated. The peace treaty of 1646 repudiated any thought of assimilating the native peoples into Virginia society or of peacefully coexisting with them. Instead it effectively banished the Chesapeake Indians from their ancestral lands and formally separated Indian from white areas of settlement—the origins of the later reservation system. By 1669 an ofﬁcial census revealed that only about two thousand Indians

 The fate of the Powhatans foreshadowed the destinies of indigenous peoples throughout the continent as the process of European settlement went forward. Native Americans, of course, had a history well before Columbus’s arrival. They were no strangers to change, adaptation, and even catastrophe, as the rise and decline of civilizations such as the Mississippians and the Anasazis demonstrated. But the shock of large-scale European colonization disrupted Native American life on a vast scale, inducing unprecedented demographic and cultural transformations. Some changes were fairly benign. Horses—stolen, strayed, or purchased from Spanish invaders— catalyzed a substantial Indian migration onto the Great Plains in the eighteenth century. Peoples such as the Lakotas (Sioux), who had previously been sedentary forest dwellers, now moved onto the wide-open plains. There they thrived impressively, adopting an entirely new way of life as mounted nomadic hunters. But the effects of contact with Europeans proved less salutary for most other native peoples.



Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 Disease was by far the biggest disrupter, as Old World pathogens licked lethally through biologically defenseless Indian populations. Disease took more than human life; it extinguished entire cultures and occasionally helped shape new ones. Epidemics often robbed native peoples of the elders who preserved the oral traditions that held clans together. Devastated Indian bands then faced the daunting task of literally reinventing themselves without beneﬁt of accumulated wisdom or kin networks. The decimation and forced migration of native peoples sometimes scrambled them together in wholly new ways. The Catawba nation of the southern Piedmont region, for example, was formed from splintered remnants of several different groups uprooted by the shock of the Europeans’ arrival. Trade also transformed Indian life, as traditional barter-and-exchange networks gave way to the temptations of European commerce. Firearms, for example, conferred enormous advantages on those who could purchase them from Europeans. The desire for ﬁ rearms thus intensiﬁed competition among the tribes for access to prime hunting grounds that could supply the skins and pelts that the European arms traders wanted.

 Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) in a 1753 letter to Peter Collinson commented on the attractiveness of Indian life to Europeans:

“


 When an Indian child has been brought up among us, taught our language and habituated to our customs, yet if he goes to see his relations and make one Indian ramble with them, there is no persuading him ever to return. [But] when white persons of either sex have been taken prisoners by the Indians, and lived awhile among them, though ransomed by their friends, and treated with all imaginable tenderness to prevail with them to stay among the English, yet in a short time they become disgusted with our manner of life, and the care and pains that are necessary to support it, and take the ﬁrst good opportunity of escaping again into the woods, from whence there is no reclaiming them.

 Carolina Indians German painter Philip Georg Friedrich von Reck drew these Yuchi Indians in the 1730s. The blanket and riﬂe show that trade with the English settlers had already begun to transform Native American culture.

”


Slavery and Democracy in Early Virginia


 The result was an escalating cycle of Indian-on-Indian violence, fueled by the lure and demands of European trade goods. Native Americans were swept up in the expanding Atlantic economy, but they usually struggled in vain to control their own place in it. One desperate band of Virginia Indians, resentful at the prices offered by British traders for their deerskins, loaded a ﬂeet of canoes with hides and tried to paddle to Eng land to sell their goods directly. Not far from the Virginia shore, a storm swamped their frail craft. Their cargo lost, the few survivors were picked up by an Eng lish ship and sold into slavery in the West Indies. Indians along the Atlantic seaboard felt the most ferocious effects of European contact. Farther inland, native peoples had the advantages of time, space, and numbers as they sought to adapt to the European incursion. The Algonquins in the Great Lakes area, for instance, became a substantial regional power. They bolstered their population by absorbing various surrounding bands and dealt from a position of strength with the few Europeans who managed to penetrate the interior. As a result, a British or French trader wanting to do business with the inland tribes had little choice but to conform to Indian ways, often taking an Indian wife. Thus was created a middle ground, a zone where both Europeans and Native Americans were compelled to accommodate to one another—at least until the Europeans began to arrive in large numbers.

Virginia: Child of Tobacco
 John Rolfe, the husband of Pocahontas, became father of the tobacco industry and an economic savior of the Virginia colony. By 1612 he had perfected methods of raising and curing the pungent weed, eliminating much of the bitter tang. Soon the European demand for tobacco was nearly insatiable. A tobacco rush swept over Virginia, as crops were planted in the streets of Jamestown and even between the numerous graves. So exclusively did the colonists concentrate on planting the yellow leaf that at ﬁ rst they had to import some of their foodstuffs. Colonists who had once hungered for food now hungered for land, ever more land on which to plant ever more tobacco. Relentlessly, they pressed the frontier of settlement up the river valleys to the west, abrasively edging against the Indians. Virginia’s prosperity was ﬁ nally built on tobacco smoke. This “bewitching weed” played a vital role in



 putting the colony on ﬁ rm economic foundations. But tobacco—King Nicotine—was something of a tyrant. It was ruinous to the soil when greedily planted in successive years, and it enchained the fortunes of Virginia to the ﬂuctuating price of a single crop. Fatefully, tobacco also promoted the broad-acred plantation system and with it a brisk demand for fresh labor. In 1619, the year before the Plymouth Pilgrims landed in New Eng land, what was described as a Dutch warship appeared off Jamestown and sold some twenty Africans. The scanty record does not reveal whether they were purchased as lifelong slaves or as servants committed to limited years of servitude. However it transpired, this simple commercial transaction planted

Advertisement for a Voyage to America, 1609




Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 the seeds of the North American slave system. Yet blacks were too costly for most of the hard-pinched white colonists to acquire, and for decades few were brought to Virginia. In 1650 Virginia counted but three hundred blacks, although by the end of the century blacks, most of them enslaved, made up approximately 14 percent of the colony’s population. Representative self-government was also born in primitive Virginia, in the same cradle with slavery and in the same year—1619. The Virginia Company authorized the settlers to summon an assembly, known as the House of Burgesses. A momentous precedent was thus feebly established, for this assemblage was the ﬁrst of many miniature parliaments to ﬂourish in the soil of America. As time passed, James I grew increasingly hostile to Virginia. He detested tobacco, and he distrusted the representative House of Burgesses, which he branded a “seminary of sedition.” In 1624 he revoked the charter of the bankrupt and beleaguered Virginia Company, thus making Virginia a royal colony directly under his control.

Maryland: Catholic Haven
 Maryland—the second plantation colony but the fourth Eng lish colony to be planted—was founded in 1634 by Lord Baltimore, of a prominent Eng lish Catholic family. He embarked upon the venture partly to reap ﬁnancial proﬁts and partly to create a refuge for his fellow Catholics. Protestant Eng land was still persecuting Roman Catholics; among numerous discriminations, a couple seeking wedlock could not be legally married by a Catholic priest. Absentee proprietor Lord Baltimore hoped that the two hundred settlers who founded Maryland at St. Marys, on Chesapeake Bay, would be the vanguard of a vast new feudal domain. Huge estates were to be awarded to his largely Catholic relatives, and gracious manor houses, modeled on those of Eng land’s aristocracy, were intended to arise amidst the fertile forests. As in Virginia, colonists proved willing to come only if offered the opportunity to acquire land of their own. Soon they were dispersed around the Chesapeake region on modest farms, and the haughty land barons, mostly Catholic, were surrounded by resentful backcountry planters, mostly Protestant. Resentment ﬂared into open rebellion near the end of the century, and the Baltimore family for a time lost its proprietary rights.

 Despite these tensions Maryland prospered. Like Virginia, it blossomed forth in acres of tobacco. Also like Virginia, it depended for labor in its early years mainly on white indentured servants—penniless persons who bound themselves to work for a number of years to pay their passage. In both colonies it was only in the later years of the seventeenth century that black slaves began to be imported in large numbers. Lord Baltimore, a canny soul, permitted unusual freedom of worship at the outset. He hoped that he would thus purchase toleration for his own fellow worshipers. But the heavy tide of Protestants threatened to submerge the Catholics and place severe restrictions on them, as in Eng land. Faced with disaster, the Catholics of Maryland threw their support behind the famed Act of Toleration, which was passed in 1649 by the local representative assembly. Maryland’s new religious statute guaranteed toleration to all Christians. But, less liberally, it decreed the death penalty for those, like Jews and atheists, who denied the divinity of Jesus. The law thus sanctioned less toleration than had previously existed in the settlement, but it did extend a temporary cloak of protection to the uneasy Catholic minority. One result was that when the colonial era ended, Maryland probably sheltered more Roman Catholics than any other Eng lishspeaking colony in the New World.

The West Indies: Way Station
 to Mainland America While the Eng lish were planting the ﬁrst frail colonial shoots in the Chesapeake, they also were busily colonizing the islands of the West Indies. Spain, weakened by military overextension and distracted by its rebellious Dutch provinces, relaxed its grip on much of the Caribbean in the early 1600s. By the mid-seventeenth century, Eng land had secured its claim to several West Indian islands, including the large prize of Jamaica in 1655. Sugar formed the foundation of the West Indian economy. What tobacco was to the Chesapeake, sugar cane was to the Caribbean—with one crucial difference. Tobacco was a poor man’s crop. It could be planted easily, it produced commercially marketable leaves within a year, and it required only simple processing. Sugar cane, in contrast, was a rich man’s crop. It had to be planted extensively to yield commercially viable quantities of sugar. Extensive planting, in turn, required extensive and arduous land clearing. And the

English Colonization in the Caribbean




 (above) Sugar Mill in Brazil, by Frans Post, ca. 1640; (left) Saccharum Ofﬁcinarum (sugar cane)

 African peoples throughout the New World in the three and a half centuries following Columbus’s discovery. To control this large and potentially restive slave population, Eng lish authorities devised formal “codes” that deﬁ ned the slaves’ legal status and their masters’ prerogatives. The notorious Barbados slave code of 1661 denied even the most fundamental rights to slaves and gave masters virtually complete control over their laborers, including the right to inﬂ ict vicious punishments for even slight infractions. cane stalks yielded their sugar only after an elaborate process of reﬁ ning in a sugar mill. The need for land and for the labor to clear it and to run the mills made sugar cultivation a capital-intensive business. Only wealthy growers with abundant capital to invest could succeed in sugar. The sugar lords extended their dominion over the West Indies in the seventeenth century. To work their sprawling plantations, they imported enormous numbers of enslaved Africans—more than a quarter of a million in the ﬁve decades after 1640. By about 1700, black slaves outnumbered white settlers in the Eng lish West Indies by nearly four to one, and the region’s population has remained predominantly black ever since. West Indians thus take their place among the numerous children of the African diaspora—the vast scattering of

 African slaves destined for the West Indian sugar plantations were bound and branded on West African beaches and ferried out in canoes to the waiting slave ships. An English sailor described the scene:

“


 The Negroes are so wilful and loth to leave their own country, that have often leap’d out of the canoes, boat and ship, into the sea, and kept under water till they were drowned, to avoid being taken up and saved by our boats, which pursued them; they having a more dreadful apprehension of Barbadoes than we can have of hell.

”




Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 The Barbados slave code (1661) declared,

“


 If any Negro or slave whatsoever shall offer any violence to any Christian by striking or the like, such Negro or slave shall for his or her ﬁrst offence be severely whipped by the Constable. For his second offence of that nature he shall be severely whipped, his nose slit, and be burned in some part of his face with a hot iron. And being brutish slaves, [they] deserve not, for the baseness of their condition, to be tried by the legal trial of twelve men of their peers, as the subjects of England are. And it is further enacted and ordained that if any Negro or other slave under punishment by his master unfortunately shall suffer in life or member, which seldom happens, no person whatsoever shall be liable to any ﬁne therefore.

”


 The proﬁtable sugar-plantation system soon crowded out almost all other forms of Caribbean agriculture. The West Indies increasingly depended on the North American mainland for foodstuffs and other basic supplies. And smaller Eng lish farmers, squeezed out by the greedy sugar barons, began to migrate to the newly founded southern mainland colonies. A group of displaced Eng lish settlers from Barbados arrived in Carolina in 1670. They brought with them a few enslaved Africans, as well as the model of the Barbados slave code, which eventually inspired statutes governing slavery throughout the mainland colonies. Carolina ofﬁcially adopted a version of the Barbados slave code in 1696. Just as the West Indies had been a testing ground for the encomienda system that the Spanish had brought to Mexico and South America, so the Caribbean islands now served as a staging area for the slave system that would take root elsewhere in Eng lish North America.

Colonizing the Carolinas
 Civil war convulsed Eng land in the 1640s. King Charles I had dismissed Parliament in 1629, and when he eventually recalled it in 1640, the members were mutinous.

 Finding their great champion in the Puritan-soldier Oliver Cromwell, they ultimately beheaded Charles in 1649, and Cromwell ruled Eng land for nearly a decade. Finally, Charles II, son of the decapitated king, was restored to the throne in 1660. Colonization had been interrupted during this period of bloody unrest. Now, in the so-called Restoration period, empire building resumed with even greater intensity—and royal involvement (see Table 2.2). Carolina, named for Charles II, was formally created in 1670, after the king granted to eight of his court favorites, the Lords Proprietors, an expanse of wilderness ribboning across the continent to the Paciﬁc. These aristocratic founders hoped to grow foodstuffs to provision the sugar plantations in Barbados and to export nonEng lish products like wine, silk, and olive oil. Carolina prospered by developing close economic ties with the ﬂourishing sugar islands of the Eng lish West Indies. In a broad sense, the mainland colony was but the most northerly of those outposts. Many original Carolina settlers, in fact, had emigrated from Barbados, bringing that island’s slave system with them. They also established a vigorous slave trade in Carolina itself. Enlisting the aid of the coastal Savannah Indians, they forayed into the interior in search of captives. The Lords Proprietors in London protested against Indian slave trading in their colony, but to no avail. Manacled Indians soon were among the young colony’s major exports. As many as ten thousand Indians were dispatched to lifelong labor in the West Indian caneﬁelds and sugar mills. Others were sent to New Eng land. One Rhode Island town in 1730 counted more than two hundred Indian slaves from Carolina in its midst.

 Early Carolina Coins These copper halfpennies bore the image of an elephant, an unofﬁcial symbol of the colony, and a prayer for the Lords Proprietors.

The "Restoration Colonies"


 In 1707 the Savannah Indians decided to end their alliance with the Carolinians and to migrate to the backcountry of Maryland and Pennsylvania, where a new colony founded by Quakers under William Penn promised better relations between whites and Indians. But the Carolinians determined to “thin” the Savannahs before they could depart. A series of bloody raids all but annihilated the Indian tribes of coastal Carolina by 1710. After much experimentation, rice emerged as the principal export crop in Carolina. Rice was then an exotic food in Eng land; no rice seeds were sent out from London in the ﬁ rst supply ships to Carolina. But rice was grown in Africa, and the Carolinians were soon

 paying premium prices for West African slaves experienced in rice cultivation. The Africans’ agricultural skill and their relative immunity to malaria (thanks to a genetic trait that also, unfortunately, made them and their descendants susceptible to sickle-cell anemia) made them ideal laborers on the hot and swampy rice plantations. By 1710 they constituted a majority of Carolinians. Moss-festooned Charles Town—also named for the king—rapidly became the busiest seaport in the South. Many high-spirited sons of Eng lish landed families, deprived of an inheritance, came to the Charleston area and gave it a rich aristocratic ﬂavor. The village became a colorfully diverse community, to which French

Table 2.2 The Thirteen Original Colonies
Name


Founded by


Year


1. Virginia


London Co.




2. New Hampshire




3. Massachusetts
Plymouth
Maine
4. Maryland


John Mason
 and others Puritans Separatists F. Gorges Lord Baltimore

5. Connecticut


 Mass. emigrants

Charter


{


 Royal (under the crown)







———


 Mass. emigrants



None


6. Rhode Island


R.
Williams 



7. Delaware


Swedes


N.
Carolina 

Virginians


9. New York


Dutch
Duke of York
Berkeley and
Carteret
 Eight nobles

11. Carolina
12. Pennsylvania
13. Georgia


William Penn
Oglethorpe and
 others

{


1775 Status




———


10. New Jersey


 ca. 1628



Made Royal


None


New Haven




———


 Royal (absorbed by Mass., 1641–1679) Royal (Merged with Mass., 1691) (Bought by Mass., 1677) Proprietary (controlled by proprietor) Self-governing (under local control) (Merged with Conn., 1662) Self-governing



None


———








None




Royal
Royal












———


 Royal (separated formally from N.C., 1712) Proprietary Royal

 ca. 1613



 Proprietary (merged with Pa., 1682; same governor, but separate assembly, granted 1703) Royal (separated informally from S.C., 1691)



Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 Fort and trading post VIRGINIA

200 Km.


NORTH CAROLINA GEORGIA

 n an

 ah

SOUTH CAROLINA

.


Fort
Moore


Savannah
Carolina Grant 1


35°N


Roanoke I.
N


R.


Fort
Augusta


NEW SPAIN

 ke R

New
Bern
Campbelltown


S


Grant to Trustees
 of Georgia 1732

The Emergence of
North Carolina
 The wild northern expanse of the huge Carolina grant bordered on Virginia. From the older colony there drifted down a ragtag group of poverty-stricken outcasts and religious dissenters. Many of them had been repelled by the rareﬁed at mosphere of Virginia, dominated as it was by big-plantation gentry belonging to the Church of Eng land. North Carolinians, as a result, have been called “the quintessence of Virginia’s discontent.” The newcomers, who frequently were “squatters” without legal right to the soil, raised their tobacco and other crops on small farms, with little need for slaves. Distinctive traits developed rapidly in North Carolina. The poor but sturdy inhabitants, regarded as riffraff by their snobbish neighbors, earned a reputation for being irreligious and hospitable to pirates. Isolated from neighbors by raw wilderness and stormy Cape Hatteras, “graveyard of the Atlantic,” the North Carolinians developed a strong spirit of resistance to authority. Their location between aristocratic Virginia and aristocratic South Carolina caused the area to be dubbed “a vale of humility between two mountains of conceit.” Following much friction with governors, North Carolina was ofﬁcially separated from South Carolina in 1712, and subsequently each segment became a royal colony (see Map 2.2). North Carolina shares with tiny Rhode Island several distinctions. These two outposts were the most democratic, the most independent-minded, and the least aristocratic of the original thirteen Eng lish colonies. Although northern Carolina, unlike the colony’s southern reaches, did not at ﬁ rst import large numbers of African slaves, both regions shared in the ongoing tragedy of bloody relations between Indians and Europeans. Tuscarora Indians fell upon the ﬂedgling settlement at New Bern in 1711. The North Carolinians,

Roa


200 Mi.


 no





 av

 Protestant refugees, Jews, and others were attracted by religious toleration. Nearby, in Florida, the Catholic Spaniards abhorred the intrusion of these Protestant heretics. Carolina’s frontier was often aﬂame. Spanish-incited Indians brandished their tomahawks, and armor-clad warriors of Spain frequently unsheathed their swords during the successive Anglo-Spanish wars. But by 1700 Carolina was too strong to be wiped out.

Dorchester
Charles Town
(Charleston)


ATLANTIC OCEAN

Fort King George
Fort St. Andrew
Fort William


Fort
St. George


Carolina Grant


30°N


80°W


Map 2.2 Early Carolina and Georgia Settlements
Interactive Map


 aided by their heavily armed brothers from the south, retaliated by crushing the Indians in the Tuscarora War, selling hundreds of them into slavery and leaving the survivors to wander northward to seek the protection of the Iroquois. The Tuscaroras eventually became the Sixth Nation of the Iroquois Confederacy. In another ferocious encounter four years later, the South Carolinians defeated and dispersed the Yamasee Indians. With the conquest of the Yamasees, virtually all the coastal Indian tribes in the southern colonies had been utterly devastated by about 1720. Yet in the interior, in the hills and valleys of the Appalachian Mountains, the powerful Cherokees, Creeks, and Iroquois (see “Makers of America: The Iroquois,” pp. 42–43) remained. Stronger and more numerous than their coastal cousins, they managed for half a century more to contain British settlement to the coastal plain east of the mountains.

The Colonial South


Late-Coming Georgia:
The Buffer Colony
 Pine-forested Georgia, with the harbor of Savannah nourishing its chief settlement, was formally founded in 1733. It proved to be the last of the thirteen colonies to be planted—126 years after the ﬁrst, Virginia, and 52 years after the twelfth, Pennsylvania. Chronologically Georgia belongs elsewhere, but geographically it may be grouped with its southern neighbors. The Eng lish crown intended Georgia to serve chieﬂy as a buffer. It would protect the more valuable Carolinas against vengeful Spaniards from Florida and against the hostile French from Louisiana. Georgia indeed suffered much buffeting, especially when wars broke out between Spain and Eng land in the European arena. As a vital link in imperial defense, the exposed colony received monetary subsidies from the British government at the outset—the only one of the “original thirteen” to enjoy this beneﬁt in its founding stage. Named in honor of King George II of Eng land, Georgia was launched by a high-minded group of philanthropists. In addition to protecting their neighboring northern colonies and producing silk and wine, they were determined to carve out a haven for wretched souls imprisoned for debt. They were also determined, at least at ﬁ rst, to keep slavery out of Georgia. The ablest of the founders was the dynamic soldier-statesman James Oglethorpe, who became keenly interested in prison reform after one of his friends died in a debtors’ jail. As an able military leader, Oglethorpe repelled Spanish attacks. As an imperialist and a philanthropist, he saved “the Charity Colony” by his energetic leadership and by heavily mortgaging his own personal fortune. The hamlet of Savannah, like Charleston, was a melting-pot community. German Lutherans and kilted Scots Highlanders, among others, added color to the pattern. All Christian worshipers except Catholics enjoyed religious toleration. Many missionaries armed



 with Bibles and hope arrived in Savannah to work among debtors and Indians. Prominent among them was young John Wesley, who later returned to Eng land and founded the Methodist Church. Georgia grew with painful slowness and at the end of the colonial era was perhaps the least populous of the colonies. The development of a plantation economy was thwarted by an unhealthy climate, by early restrictions on black slavery, and by demoralizing Spanish attacks.

The Plantation Colonies
 Certain distinctive features were shared by Eng land’s southern mainland colonies: Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. Broad-acred, these outposts of empire were all in some degree devoted to exporting commercial agricultural products. Proﬁtable staple crops were the rule, notably tobacco and rice, though to a lesser extent in small-farm North Carolina. Slavery was found in all the plantation colonies, though only after 1750 in reform-minded Georgia. Immense acreage in the hands of a favored few fostered a strong aristocratic at mosphere, except in North Carolina and to some extent in debtor-tinged Georgia. The wide scattering of plantations and farms, often along stately rivers, retarded the growth of cities and made the establishment of churches and schools both difﬁcult and expensive. In 1671 the governor of Virginia actually thanked God that no free schools or printing presses existed in his colony. All the plantation colonies permitted some religious toleration. The tax-supported Church of Eng land became the dominant faith, though weakest of all in nonconformist North Carolina. These colonies were in some degree expansionary. “Soil butchery” by excessive tobacco growing drove settlers westward, and the long, lazy rivers invited penetration of the continent—and continuing confrontation with Native Americans.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Iroquois American Migration 
W


 ell before the crowned heads of Europe turned their eyes and their dreams of empire toward North America, a great military power had emerged in the Mohawk Valley of what is now New York State. The Iroquois Confederacy, dubbed by whites the “League

75°W
 MONTAGNAIS

Fort


 Québec

N


 ALGONQUIN

45°N


W


.


Fort Orange


 ue

 a nn ha

Delaware


Susq


R.


 NE

N EW
EN G L A N D
Connecticut R 
 HERL

Mo
 hawk R.

A


GA NDA

ON E ID

 CAYUGA

OIS IROQU

NF CO

 ONO

 SENECA

 rie

L. E


 MOHAWK

 ED

Lake Ontario


 AND

Y
AC ER

 HURON

 AKI

Lake
Champlain


 MAHICAN

100 Mi.


 ce en

 NET



 wr

 EN

Hudson R.




100 Km.


La




St
.




 Montréal

R.


 AB

N E W FR AN C E


New Amsterdam


R


.


 of the Iroquois,” bound together ﬁve Indian nations— the Mohawks, the Oneidas, the Onondagas, the Cayugas, and the Senecas (see Map 2.3). According to Iroquois legend, it was founded in the late 1500s by two leaders, Deganawidah and Hiawatha. This proud and potent league vied initially with neighboring Indians for territorial supremacy, then with the French, English, and Dutch for control of the fur trade. Ultimately, infected by the white man’s diseases, intoxicated by his whiskey, and intimidated by his muskets, the Iroquois struggled for their very survival as a people. The building block of Iroquois society was the longhouse. This wooden structure deserved its descriptive name. Only twenty-ﬁve feet in breadth, the longhouse stretched from eight to two hundred feet in length. Each building contained three to ﬁve ﬁ replaces, around which gathered two nuclear families consisting of parents and children. All families residing in the longhouse were related, their connections of blood running exclusively through the maternal line. A single longhouse might shelter a woman’s family and those of her mother, sisters, and daughters—with the oldest woman being the honored matriarch. When a man married, he left his childhood hearth in the home of his mother to join the longhouse of his wife. Men dominated in Iroquois society, but they owed their positions of prominence to their mothers’ families.

40°N


40°N
72°W


Map 2.3 Iroquois Lands and European Trade
Centers, ca. 1590–1650
Interactive Map




 An Iroquois Canoe In frail but artfully constructed craft like this, the Iroquois traversed the abundant waters of their confederacy and traded with their neighbors, Indians as well as whites.

The Longhouse
 (reconstruction) The photo shows a modernday reconstruction of a Delaware Indian longhouse (almost identical in design and building materials to the Iroquois longhouses), at Historic Waterloo Village on Winakung Island in New Jersey. (The Iroquois conquered the Delawares in the late 1600s.) Bent saplings and sheets of elm bark made for sturdy, weathertight shelters. Longhouses were typically furnished with deerskin-covered bunks and shelves for storing baskets, pots, fur pelts, and corn.

 As if sharing one great longhouse, the ﬁve nations joined in the Iroquois Confederacy but kept their own separate ﬁ res. Although they celebrated together and shared a common policy toward outsiders, they remained essentially independent of one another. On the eastern ﬂank of the league, the Mohawks, known as the Keepers of the Eastern Fire, specialized as middlemen with European traders, whereas the outlying Senecas, the Keepers of the Western Fire, became fur suppliers. After banding together to end generations of violent warfare among themselves, the Five Nations vanquished their rivals, the neighboring Hurons, Eries, and Petuns. Some other tribes, such as the Tuscaroras from the Carolina region, sought peaceful absorption into the Iroquois Confederacy. The Iroquois further expanded their numbers by means of periodic “mourning wars,” whose objective was the large-scale adoption of captives and refugees. But the arrival of gun-toting Europeans threatened Iroquois supremacy and enmeshed the confederacy in a tangled web of diplomatic intrigues. Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, they allied alternately with the Eng lish against the French and vice versa, for a time success-

 fully working this perpetual rivalry to their own advantage. But when the American Revolution broke out, the confederacy could reach no consensus on which side to support. Each tribe was left to decide independently; most, though not all, sided with the British. The ultimate British defeat left the confederacy in tatters. Many Iroquois, especially the Mohawks, moved to new lands in British Canada; others were relegated to reservations in western New York. Reservation life proved unbearable for a proud people accustomed to domination over a vast territory. Morale sank; brawling, feuding, and alcoholism became rampant. Out of this morass arose a prophet, an Iroquois called Handsome Lake. In 1799 angelic ﬁgures clothed in traditional Iroquois garb appeared to Handsome Lake in a vision and warned him that the moral decline of his people must end if they were to endure. He awoke from his vision to warn his tribespeople to mend their ways. His socially oriented gospel inspired many Iroquois to forsake alcohol, to afﬁ rm family values, and to revive old Iroquois customs. Handsome Lake died in 1815, but his teachings, in the form of the Longhouse religion, survive to this day.





Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 CHRONOLOGY

 Elizabeth I becomes queen of Eng land

 ca. 1565–

 Eng lish crush Irish uprising



 Drake circumnavigates the globe



 Raleigh founds “lost colony” at Roanoke Island



 Eng land defeats Spanish Armada



 James I becomes king of Eng land



 Spain and Eng land sign peace treaty



 1640s

 Large-scale slave-labor system established in Eng lish West Indies



Second Anglo-Powhatan War




Act of Toleration in Maryland
 Charles I beheaded; Cromwell rules Eng land



 Charles II restored to Eng lish throne



 Barbados slave code adopted



 Carolina colony created

1711–


Tuscarora War in North Carolina


 Virginia colony founded at Jamestown



 Rolfe perfects tobacco culture in Virginia





 North Carolina formally separates from South Carolina

 First Anglo-Powhatan War ends



1715–


Yamasee War in South Carolina


 First Africans arrive in Jamestown Virginia House of Burgesses established





 Georgia colony founded

 Virginia becomes royal colony



 Maryland colony founded

KEY TERMS
Protestant Reformation (27) Roanoke Island (28) Spanish Armada (29) primogeniture (30) joint-stock company (30) charter (30) Jamestown (30) First Anglo-Powhatan War (32) Second Anglo-Powhatan War (33) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Act of Toleration (36) Barbados slave code (37) squatters (40) Tuscarora War (40) Yamasee Indians (40) buffer (41) Iroquois Confederacy (42) 
 Henry VIII Elizabeth I Sir Francis Drake Sir Walter Raleigh James I Captain John Smith Powhatan

Pocahontas
Lord De La Warr
John Rolfe
Lord Baltimore
Oliver Cromwell
James Oglethorpe
Hiawatha


To Learn More


To Learn More
Ira Berlin, Generations of Captivity: A History of African
American Slaves (2003)
———, Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of
Slavery in North America (1998)
Kathleen Brown, Good Wives, Nasty Wenches, and
Anxious Patriarchs: Gender, Race, and Power in Colonial
Virginia (1996)
Colin G. Calloway, New Worlds for All: Indians, Europeans,
 and the Remaking of America (1997) Ralph Davis, The Rise of the Atlantic Economies (1973) Jack P. Greene, Pursuits of Happiness: The Social Development of Early Modern British Colonies and the Formation of American Culture (1988) Peter Laslett, The World We Have Lost (1965) Edmund S. Morgan, American Slavery, American Freedom (1975)

David B. Quinn, England and the Discovery of America,
1481–1620 (1974)
 Daniel K. Richter, Facing East from Indian Country: A Native History of Early America (2003) Nancy Shoemaker, A Strange Likeness: Becoming Red and White in Eighteenth-Century North America (2004) Alan Taylor, American Colonies: The Settling of North America (2001) Camilla Townsend, Pocahontas and the Powhatan Dilemma (2004)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Settling the
Northern Colonies





1619–1700
 God hath sifted a nation that he might send Choice Grain into this Wilderness.

A


 lthough colonists both north and south were bound together by a common language and a common allegiance to Mother Eng land, they established different patterns of settlement, different economies, different political systems, and even different sets of values— deﬁ ning distinctive regional characteristics that would persist for generations. The promise of riches— especially from golden-leaved tobacco—drew the ﬁ rst settlers to the southern colonies. But to the north, in the fertile valleys of the middle Atlantic region and especially along the rocky shores of New Eng land, it was not worldly wealth but religious devotion that principally shaped the earliest settlements.

The Protestant Reformation
Produces Puritanism
 Little did the German friar Martin Luther suspect, when he nailed his protests against Catholic doctrines to the door of Wittenberg’s cathedral in 1517, that he was shaping the destiny of a yet unknown nation. Denounc-

 ing the authority of priests and popes, Luther declared that the Bible alone was the source of God’s word. He ignited a ﬁ re of religious reform (the “Protestant Reformation”) that licked its way across Europe for more than a century, dividing peoples, toppling sovereigns, and kindling the spiritual fervor of millions of men and women—some of whom helped to found America. The reforming ﬂame burned especially brightly in the bosom of John Calvin of Geneva. This somber and severe religious leader elaborated Martin Luther’s ideas in ways that profoundly affected the thought and character of generations of Americans yet unborn. Calvinism became the dominant theological credo not only of the New Eng land Puritans but of other American settlers as well, including the Scottish Presbyterians, French Huguenots, and communicants of the Dutch Reformed Church. Calvin spelled out his basic doctrine in a learned Latin tome of 1536, entitled Institutes of the Christian Religion. God, Calvin argued, was all-powerful and allgood. Humans, because of the corrupting effect of original sin, were weak and wicked. God was also all-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Plymouth Plantation


 knowing—and he knew who was going to heaven and who was going to hell. Since the ﬁ rst moment of creation, some souls—the elect—had been destined for eternal bliss and others for eternal torment. Good works could not save those whom predestination had marked for the infernal ﬁ res. But neither could the elect count on their predetermined salvation and lead lives of wild, immoral abandon. For one thing, no one could be certain of his or her status in the heavenly ledger. Gnawing doubts about their eternal fate plagued Calvinists. They constantly sought, in themselves and others, signs of conversion, or the receipt of God’s free gift of saving grace. Conversion was thought to be an intense, identiﬁable personal experience in which God revealed to the elect their heavenly destiny. Thereafter they were expected to lead “sanctiﬁed” lives, demonstrating by their holy behavior that they were among the “visible saints.” These doctrines swept into Eng land just as King Henry VIII was breaking his ties with the Roman Catholic Church in the 1530s, making himself the head of the Church of Eng land. Henry would have been content to retain Roman rituals and creeds, but his action powerfully stimulated some Eng lish religious reformers to undertake a total puriﬁcation of Eng lish Christianity. Many of these Puritans, as it happened, came from the commercially depressed woolen districts (see p. 30). Calvinism, with its message of stark but reassuring order in the divine plan, fed on this social unrest and provided spiritual comfort to the economically disadvantaged. As time went on, Puritans grew increasingly unhappy over the snail-like progress of the Protestant Reformation in Eng land. They burned with pious zeal to see the Church of Eng land wholly decatholicized. The most devout Puritans, including those who eventually settled New Eng land, believed that only “visible saints” (that is, persons who felt the stirrings of grace in their souls and could demonstrate its presence to their fellow Puritans) should be admitted to church membership. But the Church of Eng land enrolled all the king’s subjects, which meant that the “saints” had to share pews and communion rails with the “damned.” Appalled by this unholy fraternizing, a tiny group of dedicated Puritans, known as Separatists, vowed to break away entirely from the Church of Eng land. King James I, a shrewd Scotsman, was head of both the state and the church in Eng land from 1603 to 1625. He quickly perceived that if his subjects could defy him as their spiritual leader, they might one day defy him as



 their political leader (as in fact they would later defy and behead his son, Charles I). He therefore threatened to harass the more bothersome Separatists out of the land.

The Pilgrims End Their
Pilgrimage at Plymouth
 The most famous congregation of Separatists, ﬂeeing royal wrath, departed for Holland in 1608. During the ensuing twelve years of toil and poverty, they were increasingly distressed by the “Dutchiﬁcation” of their children. They longed to ﬁ nd a haven where they could live and die as Eng lish men and women—and as puriﬁed Protestants. America was the logical refuge, despite the early ordeals of Jamestown, and despite tales of New World cannibals roasting steaks from their white victims over open ﬁ res. A group of the Separatists in Holland, after negotiating with the Virginia Company, at length secured rights to settle under its jurisdiction. But their crowded Mayﬂower, sixty-ﬁve days at sea, missed its destination and arrived off the stony coast of New Eng land in 1620, with a total of 102 persons. One had died en route—an unusually short casualty list—and one had been born and appropriately named Oceanus. Fewer than half of the entire party were Separatists. Prominent among the nonbelongers was a peppery and stocky soldier of fortune, Captain Myles Standish, dubbed by one of his critics “Captain Shrimp.” He later rendered indispensable ser vice as an Indian ﬁghter and negotiator. The Pilgrims did not make their initial landing at Plymouth Rock, as commonly supposed, but undertook a number of preliminary surveys. They ﬁ nally chose for their site the shore of inhospitable Plymouth Bay. This area was outside the domain of the Virginia Company, and consequently the settlers became squatters. They were without legal right to the land and without speciﬁc authority to establish a government. Before disembarking, the Pilgrim leaders drew up and signed the brief Mayﬂower Compact. Although setting an invaluable precedent for later written constitutions, this document was not a constitution at all. It was a simple agreement to form a crude government and to submit to the will of the majority under the regulations agreed upon. The compact was signed by forty-one adult males, eleven of them with the exalted rank of “mister,” though not by the servants and two seamen. The pact was a promising step toward genuine



