Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


 trying to elbow their way into the American carrying trade. Thereafter all commerce ﬂowing to and from the colonies could be transported only in British (including colonial) vessels. Subsequent laws required that European goods destined for America ﬁ rst had to be landed in Britain, where tariff duties could be collected and British middlemen could take a slice of the proﬁts. Other laws stipulated that American merchants must ship certain “enumerated” products, notably tobacco, exclusively to Britain, even though prices might be better elsewhere. British policy also inﬂ icted a currency shortage on the colonies. Since the colonists regularly bought more from Britain than they sold there, the difference had to be made up in hard cash. Every year gold and silver coins, mostly earned in illicit trade with the Spanish and French West Indies, drained out of the colonies, creating an acute money shortage. To facilitate everyday purchases, the colonists resorted to butter, nails, pitch, and feathers for purposes of exchange. Currency issues came to a boil when dire ﬁ nancial need forced many of the colonies to issue paper money, which swiftly depreciated. British merchants and creditors squawked so loudly that Parliament prohibited the colonial legislatures from printing paper currency and from passing indulgent bankruptcy laws—practices that might harm British merchants. The Americans grumbled that their welfare was being sacriﬁced for the well-being of British commercial interests. The British crown also reserved the right to nullify any legislation passed by the colonial assemblies if such laws worked mischief with the mercantilist system. This royal veto was used rather sparingly—just 469 times in connection with 8,563 laws. But the colonists ﬁercely resented its very existence—another example of how principle could weigh more heavily than practice in fueling colonial grievances.

The Merits and Menace
 of Mercantilism In theory the British mercantile system seemed thoroughly selﬁsh and deliberately oppressive. But the truth is that until 1763, the various Navigation Laws imposed no intolerable burden, mainly because they were only loosely enforced. Enterprising colonial merchants learned early to disregard or evade troublesome restrictions. Some of the ﬁ rst American fortunes, like that of John Hancock, were amassed by wholesale smuggling.

Paul Revere, by John Singleton Copley, ca. 1768
 This painting of the famed silversmith-horseman challenged convention—but reﬂected the new democratic spirit of the age—by portraying an artisan in working clothes. Note how Copley depicted the serene conﬁdence of the master craftsman and Revere’s quiet pride in his work.

 Americans also reaped direct beneﬁts from the mercantile system. If the colonies existed for the beneﬁt of the mother country, it was hardly less true that Britain existed for the beneﬁt of the colonies. London paid liberal bounties to colonial producers of ship parts, over the protests of British competitors. Virginia tobacco planters enjoyed a monopoly in the British market, snufﬁ ng out the tiny British tobacco industry. The colonists also beneﬁted from the protection of the world’s mightiest navy and a strong, seasoned army of redcoats—all without a penny of cost. But even when painted in its rosiest colors, the mercantile system burdened the colonists with annoying liabilities. Mercantilism stiﬂed economic initiative and imposed a rankling dependency on British agents and creditors. Most grievously, many Americans simply found the mercantilist system debasing. They felt used, kept in a state of perpetual economic adolescence, and

The Stamp Act


Adam Smith (1723–1790), the Scottish “Father of
 Modern Economics,” frontally attacked mercantilism in 1776:

“


 To prohibit a great people, however, from making all that they can of every part of their own produce, or from employing their stock and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous to themselves, is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights of mankind.

”


 never allowed to come of age. As Benjamin Franklin wrote in 1775, We have an old mother that peevish is grown; She snubs us like children that scarce walk alone; She forgets we’re grown up and have sense of our own. Revolution broke out, as Theodore Roosevelt later remarked, because Britain failed to recognize an emerging nation when it saw one.

The Stamp Tax Uproar
 Victory-ﬂushed Britain emerged from the Seven Years’ War holding one of the biggest empires in the world— and also, less happily, the biggest debt, some £140 million, about half of which had been incurred defending the American colonies. To justify and ser vice that debt, British ofﬁcials now moved to redeﬁ ne their relationship with their North American colonies. Prime Minister George Grenville ﬁ rst aroused the resentment of the colonists in 1763 by ordering the British navy to begin strictly enforcing the Navigation Laws. He also secured from Parliament the so-called Sugar Act of 1764, the ﬁ rst law ever passed by that body for raising tax revenue in the colonies for the crown. Among various provisions, it increased the duty on foreign sugar imported from the West Indies. After bitter protests from the colonists, the duties were lowered substantially, and the agitation died down. But resentment was kept burning by the Quartering Act of 1765. This mea sure required certain colonies to provide food and quarters for British troops.



 Then in the same year, 1765, Grenville imposed the most odious mea sure of all: a stamp tax, to raise revenues to support the new military force. The Stamp Act mandated the use of stamped paper or the afﬁ xing of stamps, certifying payment of tax. Stamps were required on bills of sale for about ﬁfty trade items as well as on certain types of commercial and legal documents, including playing cards, pamphlets, newspapers, diplomas, bills of lading, and marriage licenses. Grenville regarded all of these mea sures as reasonable and just. He was simply asking the Americans to pay a fair share of the costs for their own defense, through taxes that were already familiar in Britain. In fact, the British people for two generations had endured a stamp tax far heavier than that passed for the colonies. Yet the Americans were angrily aroused at what they regarded as Grenville’s ﬁscal aggression. The new laws did not merely pinch their pocketbooks. Far more ominously, Grenville also seemed to be striking at the local liberties they had come to assume as a matter of right. Thus some colonial assemblies deﬁantly refused to comply with the Quartering Act, or voted only a fraction of the supplies that it called for. Worst of all, Grenville’s noxious legislation seemed to jeopardize the basic rights of the colonists as Englishmen. Both the Sugar Act and the Stamp Act provided for trying offenders in the hated admiralty courts, where juries were not allowed. The burden of proof was on the defendants, who were assumed to be guilty unless they could prove themselves innocent. Trial by jury and the precept of “innocent until proved guilty” were ancient privileges that British people every where, including the American colonists, held most dear. And why was a British army needed at all in the colonies, now that the French were expelled from the continent and Pontiac’s warriors crushed? Could its real purpose be to whip rebellious colonists into line?

 The Boston Gazette declared in 1765,

“


 A colonist cannot make a button, a horseshoe, nor a hobnail, but some snooty ironmonger or respectable buttonmaker of Britain shall bawl and squall that his honor’s worship is most egregiously maltreated, injured, cheated, and robbed by the rascally American republicans.

”




Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


A
Royal Stamp The hated Stamp Act of 1765 required stamps, certifying payment of tax, on all sorts of legal and commercial documents. This stamp was to be afﬁxed to insurance policies and probated wills. 
 Many Americans, weaned on radical Whig suspicion of all authority, began to sniff the strong scent of a conspiracy to strip them of their historic liberties. They lashed back violently, and the Stamp Act became the target that drew their most ferocious ﬁ re. Angry throats raised the cry, “No taxation without representation.” There was some irony in the slogan, because the seaports and tidewater towns that were most wrathful against the Stamp Act had long denied full representation to their own backcountry pioneers. But now the aggravated colonists took the high ground of principle. The Americans made a distinction between “legislation” and “taxation.” They conceded the right of

 English statesman Edmund Burke (1729–1797) warned in 1775,

“


 Young man, there is America—which at this day serves for little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men and uncouth manners; yet shall, before you taste of death, show itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world.

”


 Parliament to legislate about matters that affected the entire empire, including the regulation of trade. But they steadfastly denied the right of Parliament, in which no Americans were seated, to impose taxes on Americans. Only their own elected colonial legislatures, the Americans insisted, could legally tax them. Taxes levied by the distant British Parliament amounted to robbery, a piratical assault on the sacred rights of property. Grenville dismissed these American protests as hairsplitting absurdities. The power of Parliament was supreme and undivided, he asserted, and in any case the Americans were represented in Parliament. Elaborating the theory of “virtual representation,” Grenville claimed that every member of Parliament represented all British subjects, even those Americans in Boston or Charleston who had never voted for a member of Parliament. The Americans scoffed at the notion of virtual representation. And truthfully, they did not really want direct representation in Parliament, which might have seemed like a sensible compromise. If they had obtained it, any gouty member of the House of Commons could have proposed an oppressive tax bill for the colonies, and the outvoted American representatives, few in number, would have stood bereft of a principle with which to resist. Thus the principle of no taxation without representation was supremely important, and the colonists clung to it with tenacious consistency. When the British replied that the sovereign power of government could not be divided between “legislative” authority in London and “taxing” authority in the colonies, they forced the Americans to deny the authority of Parliament altogether and to begin to consider their own political independence. This chain of logic eventually led, link by link, to revolutionary consequences.

Forced Repeal of
 the Stamp Act Colonial outcries against the hated stamp tax took various forms. The most conspicuous assemblage was the Stamp Act Congress of 1765, which brought together in New York City twenty-seven distinguished delegates from nine colonies. After digniﬁed debate the members drew up a statement of their rights and grievances and beseeched the king and Parliament to repeal the repugnant legislation.

 Conﬂict over Taxes

 The Stamp Act Congress, which was largely ignored in Eng land, made little splash at the time in America. Its ripples, however, began to erode sectional suspicions, for it brought together around the same table leaders from the different and rival colonies. It was one more halting but signiﬁcant step toward intercolonial unity. More effective than the congress was the widespread adoption of nonimportation agreements against British goods. Woolen garments of homespun became fashionable, and the eating of lamb chops was discouraged so that the wool-bearing sheep would be allowed to mature. Nonimportation agreements were in fact a promising stride toward union; they spontaneously united the American people for the ﬁ rst time in common action. Mobilizing in support of nonimportation gave ordinary American men and women new opportunities to participate in colonial protests. Many people who had previously stood on the sidelines now signed petitions swearing to uphold the terms of the consumer boycotts. Groups of women assembled in public to hold spinning bees and make homespun cloth as a replacement for shunned British textiles. Such public deﬁance helped spread angry resistance throughout American colonial society. Sometimes violence accompanied colonial protests. Groups of ardent spirits, known as Sons of Liberty and Daughters of Liberty, took the law into their own hands. Crying “Liberty, Property, and No Stamps,” they enforced the nonimportation agreements against

 John Dickinson (1732–1808), a lawyer and popular essayist, advocated a middle-of-the-road response to the new British revenue acts of the 1760s that appealed to most colonists at the time:

“


 The constitutional modes of obtaining relief are those which I wish to see pursued on the present occasion. . . . We have an excellent prince, in whose good disposition we may conﬁde. . . . Let us behave like dutiful children who have received unmerited blows from a beloved parent. Let us complain to our parent; but let our complaint speak at the same time the language of afﬂiction and veneration.

”




 Protesting the Stamp Act Even common household wares in the 1760s testiﬁed to the colonists’ mounting rage against the Stamp Act. Many people in Britain sympathized with the Americans—and sought to proﬁt from their anger, as this English-made teapot demonstrates.

 violators, often with a generous coat of tar and feathers. Patriotic mobs ransacked the houses of unpopular ofﬁcials, conﬁscated their money, and hanged efﬁgies of stamp agents on liberty poles. Shaken by colonial commotion, the machinery for collecting the tax broke down. On that dismal day in 1765 when the new act was to go into effect, the stamp agents had all been forced to resign, and there was no one to sell the stamps. While ﬂags ﬂapped at half-mast, the law was openly and ﬂagrantly deﬁed—or, rather, nulliﬁed. Eng land was hard hit. America then bought about one-quarter of all British exports, and about one-half of British shipping was devoted to the American trade. Merchants, manufacturers, and shippers suffered from the colonial nonimportation agreements, and hundreds of laborers were thrown out of work. Loud demands converged on Parliament for repeal of the Stamp Act. But many of the members could not understand why 7.5 million Britons had to pay heavy taxes to protect the colonies, whereas some 2 million colonists refused to pay for only one-third of the cost of their own defense. After a stormy debate, Parliament in 1766 grudgingly repealed the Stamp Act. Grateful residents of New York erected a leaden statue to King George III. But American rejoicing was premature. Having withdrawn



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


The Townshend Tea Tax and
 the Boston “Massacre”

Public Punishment for the Excise Man, 1774
 This popular rendering of the punishment of Commissioner of Customs John Malcomb shows him tarred and feathered and forcibly “paid” with great quantities of tea. From the Liberty Tree in the background dangles the threat of hanging, all for attempting to collect duties in Boston.

 the Stamp Act, Parliament in virtually the same breath provocatively passed the Declaratory Act, reafﬁ rming Parliament’s right “to bind” the colonies “in all cases whatsoever.” The British government thereby drew its line in the sand. It deﬁ ned the constitutional principle it would not yield: absolute and unqualiﬁed sovereignty over its North American colonies. The colonists had already drawn their own battle line by making it clear that they wanted a mea sure of sovereignty of their own and would undertake drastic action to secure it. The stage was set for a continuing confrontation. Within a few years, that statue of King George would be melted into thousands of bullets to be ﬁred at his troops.

 Control of the British ministry was now seized by the gifted but erratic Charles (“Champagne Charley”) Townshend, a man who could deliver brilliant speeches in Parliament even while drunk. Rashly promising to pluck feathers from the colonial goose with a minimum of squawking, he persuaded Parliament in 1767 to pass the Townshend Acts. The most important of these new regulations was a light import duty on glass, white lead, paper, paint, and tea. Townshend, seizing on a dubious distinction between internal and external taxes, made this tax, unlike the stamp tax, an indirect customs duty payable at American ports. But to the increasingly restless colonists, this was a phantom distinction. For them the real difﬁculty remained taxes—in any form— without representation. Flushed with their recent victory over the stamp tax, the colonists were in a rebellious mood. The impost on tea was especially irksome, for an estimated 1 million people drank the refreshing brew twice a day. The new Townshend revenues, worse yet, were to be earmarked to pay the salaries of the royal governors and judges in America. From the standpoint of efﬁcient administration by London, this was a reform long overdue. But the ultrasuspicious Americans, who had beaten the royal governors into line by controlling the purse, regarded Townshend’s tax as another attempt to enchain them. Their worst fears took on greater reality when the London government, after passing the Townshend taxes, suspended the legislature of New York in 1767 for failure to comply with the Quartering Act. Nonimportation agreements, previously potent, were quickly revived against the Townshend Acts. But they proved less effective than those devised against

 Giving new meaning to the proverbial tempest in a teapot, a group of 126 Boston women signed an agreement, or “subscription list,” that announced,

“


 We the Daughters of those Patriots who have and now do appear for the public interest . . . do with Pleasure engage with them in denying ourselves the drinking of Foreign Tea, in hopes to frustrate a Plan that tends to deprive the whole Community of . . . all that is valuable in Life.

”


The Boston Massacre




 Two Views of the Boston Massacre, 1770 and 1856 Both of these prints of the Boston Massacre were art as well as propaganda. Paul Revere’s engraving (left) began circulating within three weeks of the event in March 1770, depicting not a clash of brawlers but armed soldiers taking aim at peaceful citizens. Absent also was any evidence of the mulatto ringleader, Crispus Attucks. Revere wanted his print to convince viewers of the indisputable justice of the colonists’ cause. By the mid-1850s, when the chromolithograph (right) circulated, it served a new political purpose. In the era of the abolitionist movement, freedman Crispus Attucks held center place in the print, which portrayed his death as an American martyr in the revolutionary struggle for freedom.

 the Stamp Act. The colonists, again enjoying prosperity, took the new tax less seriously than might have been expected, largely because it was light and indirect. They found, moreover, that they could secure smuggled tea at a cheap price, and consequently smugglers increased their activities, especially in Massachusetts. British ofﬁcials, faced with a breakdown of law and order, landed two regiments of troops in Boston in 1768. Many of the soldiers were drunken and profane characters. Liberty-loving colonists, resenting the presence of the red-coated “rufﬁans,” taunted the “bloody backs” unmercifully. A clash was inevitable. On the evening of March 5, 1770, a crowd of some sixty townspeople began taunting and throwing snowballs at a squad of ten redcoats. The Bostonians were still angry over the death of an eleven-year-old boy, shot ten days earlier during a protest against a merchant who had deﬁed the colonial boycott of British goods. Acting apparently without orders, but ner vous and provoked by the jeering crowd, the troops opened ﬁ re and killed or wounded eleven

 citizens, an event that became known as—the Boston Massacre. One of the ﬁrst to die was Crispus Attucks, described by contemporaries as a powerfully built runaway “mulatto” and a leader of the mob. Both sides were in some degree to blame, and in the subsequent trial (in which future president John Adams served as defense attorney for the soldiers), only two of the redcoats were found guilty of manslaughter. The soldiers were released after being branded on the hand.

The Seditious Committees
 of Correspondence By 1770 King George III, then only thirty-two years old, was strenuously attempting to assert the power of the British monarchy. He was a good man in his private morals, but he proved to be a bad ruler. Earnest, industrious, stubborn, and lustful for power, he surrounded himself with cooperative “yes men,” notably his corpulent prime minister, Lord North.



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


 Samuel Adams (1722–1803) A second cousin of John Adams, he contributed a potent pen and tongue to the American Revolution as a political agitator and organizer of rebellion. He was the leading spirit in hosting the Boston Tea Party. A failure in the brewing business, he was sent by Massachusetts to the First Continental Congress of 1774. He signed the Declaration of Independence and served in Congress until 1781.

 The ill-timed Townshend Acts had failed to produce revenue, though they did produce near-rebellion. Net proceeds from the tax in one year were a paltry £295, while in that same year Britain’s military costs in the colonies had mounted to £170,000. Nonimportation agreements, though feebly enforced, were pinching British manufacturers. The government of Lord North, bowing to various pressures, ﬁ nally persuaded Parliament to repeal the Townshend revenue duties. But the three-pence toll on tea, the tax the colonists found most offensive, was retained to keep alive the principle of Parliament’s right to tax the colonies. Flames of discontent in America continued to be fanned by numerous incidents, including the redoubled efforts of the British ofﬁcials to enforce the Nav igation Laws. Resistance was further kindled by a master propagandist and engineer of rebellion, Samuel

Portrait Traditionally Said to Be That of Abigail Adams
 (1744–1818) The wife of Revolutionary War leader and future president John Adams, she was a prominent Patriot in her own right. She was also among the ﬁrst Americans to see, however faintly, the implications of revolutionary ideas for changing the status of women.

 Adams of Boston, a cousin of John Adams. Unimpressive in appearance (his hands trembled), he lived and breathed only for politics. His friends had to buy him a presentable suit of clothes when he left Massachusetts on intercolonial business. Zealous, tenacious, and courageous, he was ultrasensitive to infractions of colonial rights. Cherishing a deep faith in the common people, he appealed effectively to what was called his “trained mob.” Samuel Adams’s signal contribution was to organize in Massachusetts the local committees of correspondence. After he had formed the ﬁrst one in Boston during 1772, some eighty towns in the colony speedily set up similar orga ni zations. Their chief function was to spread the spirit of resistance by exchanging letters and thus keep alive opposition to British policy. One critic referred to the committees as “the foulest, subtlest, and most venomous serpent ever issued from the egg of sedition.”

Uniting for Rebellion


 Intercolonial committees of correspondence were the next logical step. Virginia led the way in 1773 by creating such a body as a standing committee of the House of Burgesses. Within a short time, every colony had established a central committee through which it could exchange ideas and information with other colonies. These intercolonial groups were supremely signiﬁcant in stimulating and disseminating sentiment in favor of united action. They evolved directly into the ﬁ rst American congresses.

Tea Brewing in Boston
 Thus far—that is, by 1773—nothing had happened to make rebellion inevitable. Nonimportation was weakening. Increasing numbers of colonists were reluctantly paying the tea tax, because the legal tea was now cheaper than the smuggled tea, even cheaper than tea in Eng land. A new ogre entered the picture in 1773. The powerful British East India Company, overburdened with 17 million pounds of unsold tea, was facing bankruptcy. If it collapsed, the London government would lose heavily in tax revenue. The ministry therefore decided to assist the company by awarding it a complete monopoly of the American tea business. The giant corporation would now be able to sell the coveted leaves more cheaply than ever before, even with the three-pence tax tacked on. But many American tea drinkers, rather than rejoicing at the lower prices, cried foul. They saw this British move as a shabby attempt to trick the Americans, with the bait of cheaper tea, into swallowing the principle of the detested tax. For the determined Americans, principle remained far more important than price. If the British ofﬁcials insisted on the letter of the law, violence would certainly result. Fatefully, the British colonial authorities decided to enforce the law. Once more, the colonists rose up in wrath to defy it. Not a single one of the several thousand chests of tea shipped by the East India Company ever reached the hands of the consignees. In Philadelphia and New York, mass demonstrations forced the tea-bearing ships to return to Eng land with their cargo holds still full. At Annapolis, Marylanders burned both cargo and vessel, while proclaiming “Liberty and Independence or death in pursuit of it.” In Charleston, South Carolina, ofﬁcials seized the tea for nonpayment of duties after intimidated local merchants refused to accept delivery. (Ironically, the conﬁscated Charleston tea was later auctioned to raise money for the Revolutionary army.)



 Only in Boston did a British ofﬁcial stubbornly refuse to be cowed. Massachusetts governor Thomas Hutchinson had already felt the fury of the mob, when Stamp Act protesters had destroyed his home in 1765. This time he was determined not to budge. Ironically, Hutchinson agreed that the tea tax was unjust, but he believed even more strongly that the colonists had no right to ﬂout the law. Hutchinson infuriated Boston’s radicals when he ordered the tea ships not to clear Boston harbor until they had unloaded their cargoes. Sentiment against him was further inﬂamed when Hutchinson’s enemies published one of his private letters in which he declared that “an abridgement of what are called Eng lish liberties” was necessary for the preservation of law and order in the colonies—apparently conﬁ rming the darkest conspiracy theories of the American radicals. On December 16, 1773, roughly a hundred Bostonians, loosely disguised as Indians, boarded the docked ships, smashed open 342 chests of tea, and dumped their contents into the Atlantic, an action that came to be known as the Boston Tea Party. A crowd of several hundred watched approvingly from the shore as Boston harbor became a vast teapot. Donning Indian disguise provided protesters with a threatening image—and a convenient way of avoiding detection. Tea was the perfect symbol to rally around as almost every colonist, rich or poor, consumed this imported, caffeinated beverage.

 Ann Hulton (d. 1779?), a Loyalist, described colonial political divisions and her hopes and fears for her own future in a letter she sent to a friend in England in 1774:

“


 Those who are well disposed towards Government are termed Tories. They daily increase & have made some efforts to take the power out of the hands of the Patriots, but they are intimidated & overpowered by Numbers. . . . However I don’t despair of seeing Peace & tranquility in America, tho’ they talk very high & furious at present. They are all preparing their Arms & Ammunition & say if any of the Leaders are seized, they will make reprisals on the friends of Government.

”




Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


The Boston Tea Party,
December 16, 1773
 Crying “Boston harbor a teapot this night,” Sons of Liberty disguised as Indians hurled chests of tea into the sea to protest the tax on tea and to make sure that its cheap price did not prove an “invincible temptation” to the people.

 Reactions varied. All up and down the eastern seaboard, sympathetic colonists applauded. Referring to tea as “a badge of slavery,” they burned the hated leaves in solidarity with Boston. But conser vatives complained that the destruction of private property violated the law and threatened anarchy and the breakdown of civil decorum. Hutchinson, chastened and disgusted with the colonies, retreated to Britain, never to return. The British authorities, meanwhile, saw little alternative to whipping the upstart colonists into shape. The granting of some mea sure of home rule to the Americans might at this stage still have prevented rebellion, but few British politicians were willing to swallow their pride and take the high road. The perilous path they chose instead led only to reprisals, bitterness, and escalating conﬂ ict.

Parliament Passes the
“Intolerable Acts”
 An irate Parliament responded speedily to the Boston Tea Party with mea sures that brewed a revolution. By huge majorities in 1774, it passed a series of acts designed to chastise Boston in particular, Massachusetts in general. They were branded in America as “the massacre of American Liberty.” Most drastic of all was the Boston Port Act. It closed the tea-stained harbor until damages were paid and order could be ensured. By other “Intolerable Acts”—as they were called in America—many of the chartered rights of colonial Massachusetts were swept away. Re-

 strictions were likewise placed on the precious town meetings. Contrary to previous practice, enforcing ofﬁcials who killed colonists in the line of duty could now be sent to Britain for trial. There, suspicious Americans assumed, they would be likely to get off scotfree. Particularly intolerable to Bostonians was a new Quartering Act, which gave local authorities the power to lodge British soldiers anywhere, even in private homes. By a fateful coincidence, the “Intolerable Acts” were accompanied in 1774 by the Quebec Act. Passed at the same time, it was erroneously regarded in Eng lishspeaking America as part of the British reaction to the turbulence in Boston. Actually, the Quebec Act was a good law in bad company. For many years the British government had debated how it should administer the sixty thousand or so conquered French subjects in Canada, and it had ﬁ nally framed this farsighted and statesmanlike mea sure. The French were guaranteed their Catholic religion. They were also permitted to retain many of their old customs and institutions, which did not include a representative assembly or trial by jury in civil cases. In addition, the old boundaries of the province of Québec were now extended southward all the way to the Ohio River. The Quebec Act, from the viewpoint of the French Canadians, was a shrewd and conciliatory mea sure. If Britain had only shown as much foresight in dealing with its Eng lish-speaking colonies, it might not have lost them. But from the viewpoint of the American colonists as a whole, the Quebec Act was especially noxious. All



The Eve of Rebellion


100°W


90°W


80°W


70°W


60°W


60°N


50°W


Hu d s o n
Bay


N


°N




HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY NOVA SCOTIA

 Québec

ME. (MASS.)

 Montréal M iss

N.Y.


 ip iss

 pi

M


PENN. N.J.

R.


 ouri iss R.

 VA.

R


.


 Map 7.1 Québec Before and After 1774 Young Alexander Hamilton voiced the fears of many colonists when he warned that the Quebec Act of 1774 would introduce “priestly tyranny” into Canada, making that country another Spain or Portugal. “Does not your blood run cold,” he asked, “to think that an English Parliament should pass an act for the establishment of arbitrary power and Popery in such a country?”

 LOUISIANA

N.H.
 MASS.

 io Oh

R.I.
 CONN.

°N




ATLANTIC OCEAN

DEL. MD.





400 Km.


400 Mi.


 Québec before 1774 N.C.

 Québec after 1774, as envisioned by the Quebec Act

S.C.
GA. WEST FLORIDA

Proclamation Line of 1763
30°N


 Britain’s Thirteen Colonies Indian Reserve

Gu l f o f M e x i c o


EAST FLORIDA

 Other British territory Spanish territory

Interactive Map


 the other “Intolerable Acts” slapped directly at Massachusetts, but this one had a much wider range. By sustaining unrepresentative assemblies and denials of jury trials, it seemed to set a dangerous precedent in America. It alarmed land speculators, who were distressed to see the huge trans-Allegheny area snatched from their grasp (see Map 7.1). It aroused anti-Catholics, who were shocked by the extension of Roman Catholic jurisdiction southward into a huge region that had once been earmarked for Protestantism—a region about as large as the thirteen original colonies. One angry Protestant cried that there ought to be a “jubilee in hell” over this enormous gain for “Popery.”

Bloodshed
 American dissenters responded sympathetically to the plight of Massachusetts. It had put itself in the wrong by the violent destruction of the tea cargoes; now Britain had put itself in the wrong by brutal punishment

 that seemed far too cruel for the crime. Flags were ﬂown at half-mast throughout the colonies on the day that the Boston Port Act went into effect, and sister colonies rallied to send food to the stricken city. Rice was shipped even from faraway South Carolina. Most memorable of the responses to the “Intolerable Acts” was the summoning of the First Continental Congress in 1774. It was to meet in Philadelphia to consider ways of redressing colonial grievances. Twelve of the thirteen colonies, with Georgia alone missing, sent ﬁ fty-ﬁve well-respected men, among them Samuel Adams, John Adams, George Washington, and Patrick Henry. Intercolonial frictions were partially melted away by social activity after working hours; in ﬁ fty-four days George Washington dined at his own lodgings only nine times. The First Continental Congress deliberated for seven weeks, from September 5 to October 26, 1774. It was not a legislative but a consultative body—a convention rather than a congress. John Adams played a stellar role. Eloquently swaying his colleagues to a



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


A
View of the Town of Concord, ca. 1775 Redcoats here drill on the Concord Green, near where colonial militiamen would soon repel their advance on stores of rebel gunpowder. 
 revolutionary course, he helped defeat by the narrowest of margins a proposal by the moderates for a species of American home rule under British direction. After prolonged argument the Congress drew up several digniﬁed papers. These included a ringing Declaration of Rights, as well as solemn appeals to other British American colonies, to the king, and to the British people. The most signiﬁcant action of the Congress was the creation of The Association. Unlike previous nonimportation agreements, The Association called for a complete boycott of British goods: nonimportation, nonexportation, and nonconsumption. Yet it is important to note that the delegates were not yet calling for independence. They sought merely to repeal the offensive legislation and return to the happy days before parliamentary taxation. If colonial grievances were redressed, well and good; if not, the Congress was to meet again in May 1775. Resistance had not yet ripened into open rebellion. But the fatal drift toward war continued. Parliament rejected the Congress’s petitions. In America chickens squawked and tar kettles bubbled as violators of The Association were tarred and feathered. Muskets

 were gathered, men began to drill openly, and a clash seemed imminent. In April 1775 the British commander in Boston sent a detachment of troops to nearby Lexington and Concord. They were to seize stores of colonial gunpowder and also to bag the “rebel” ringleaders, Samuel Adams and John Hancock. At Lexington the colonial “Minute Men” refused to disperse rapidly enough, and shots were ﬁ red that killed eight Americans and wounded several more. The affair was more the “Lexington Massacre” than a battle. The redcoats pushed on to Concord, whence they were forced to retreat by the rough and ready Americans, whom Emerson immortalized: By the rude bridge that arched the ﬂood, Their ﬂag to April’s breeze unfurled, Here once the embattled farmers stood, And ﬁred the shot heard round the world.* The bewildered British, ﬁghting off murderous ﬁ re from militiamen crouched behind thick stone walls, ﬁ-

*Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Concord Hymn.”


 Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

The Military Balance Sheet


 nally regained the sanctuary of Boston. Licking their wounds, they could count about three hundred casualties, including some seventy killed. Britain now had a war on its hands.

Imperial Strength
 and Weakness Aroused Americans had brashly rebelled against a mighty empire (see “Thinking Globally: Imperial Rivalry and Colonial Revolt,” pp. 141–142). The population odds were about three to one against the rebels—some 7.5 million Britons to 2.5 million colonists. The odds in monetary wealth and naval power overwhelmingly favored the mother country. Britain then boasted a professional army of some ﬁ fty thousand men, as compared with the numerous but wretchedly trained American militia. George III, in addition, had the treasury to hire foreign soldiers, and some thirty thousand Germans—so-called Hessians— were ultimately employed. The British enrolled about ﬁ fty thousand American Loyalists and enlisted the services of many Indians, who though unreliable fairweather ﬁghters, inﬂamed long stretches of the frontier. One British ofﬁcer boasted that the war would offer no problems that could not be solved by an “experienced sheep herder.” The great conservative political theorist and champion of the American cause Edmund Burke made a stirring speech in Britain’s House of Commons in 1775, pleading in vain for reconciliation with the colonies:

“


 As long as you have the wisdom to keep the sovereign authority of this country as the sanctuary of liberty . . . they will turn their faces towards you. . . . Slavery they can have anywhere; freedom they can have from none but you. This is the commodity of price, of which you have the monopoly. This is the true Act of Navigation, which binds to you the commerce of the colonies, and through them secures to you the wealth of the world. Deny them this participation of freedom, and you break that sole bond which originally made, and must still preserve, the unity of the empire.

”




 Yet Britain was weaker than it seemed at ﬁ rst glance. Oppressed Ireland was a smoking volcano, and British troops had to be detached to watch it. France, bitter from its recent defeat, was awaiting an opportunity to stab Britain in the back. The London government was confused and inept. There was no William Pitt, “Organizer of Victory,” only the stubborn George III and his pliant Tory prime minister, Lord North. Many earnest and God-fearing Britons had no desire whatever to kill their American cousins. William Pitt withdrew a son from the army rather than see him thrust his sword into fellow Anglo-Saxons struggling for liberty. The Eng lish Whig factions, opposed to Lord North’s Tory wing, openly cheered American victories—at least at the outset. Aside from trying to embarrass the Tories politically, many Whigs believed that the battle for British freedom was being fought in America. If George III triumphed, his rule at home might become tyrannical. This outspoken sympathy in Britain, though plainly a minority voice, greatly encouraged the Americans. If they continued their resistance long enough, the Whigs might come into power and deal generously with them. Britain’s army in America had to operate under endless difﬁculties. The generals were second-rate; the soldiers, though on the whole capable, were brutally treated. There was one extreme case of eight hundred lashes on the bare back for striking an ofﬁcer. Provisions were often scarce, rancid, and wormy. On one occasion a supply of biscuits, captured some ﬁ fteen years earlier from the French, was softened by dropping cannonballs on them. Other handicaps loomed. The redcoats had to conquer the Americans; restoring the pre-1763 status quo would be a victory for the colonists. Britain was operating some 3,000 miles from its home base, and distance added greatly to the delays and uncertainties arising from storms and other mishaps. Military orders were issued in London that, when received months later, would not ﬁt the changing situation. America’s geographical expanse was enormous: roughly 1,000 by 600 miles. The united colonies had no urban nerve center, like France’s Paris, whose capture would cripple the country as a whole. British armies took every city of any size, yet like a boxer punching a feather pillow, they made little more than a dent in the entire country. The Americans wisely traded space for time. Benjamin Franklin calculated that during the prolonged campaign in which the redcoats captured Bunker Hill and killed some 150 Patriots, about 60,000 American babies were born.

THINKING GLOBALLY

Imperial Rivalry and Colonial Revolt


I


 n 1765 tax revolts exploded almost simultaneously in both Britain’s and Spain’s New World empires. In Boston the hated Stamp Act sparked riots and inspired a campaign to boycott British goods. At virtually the same moment in Quito (in present-day Ecuador), a two-mile-high Spanish colonial city nearly twice the size of Boston, surging crowds ransacked the local tax collector’s ofﬁce. Among other demands, they insisted that “pure” Spaniards leave Quito unless they had married into the native Creole (New World– born white) or indigenous Indian communities. Spanish ofﬁcials restored order by force of arms, but antitax agitation continued to smolder every where in Spanish America. “There is no American,” a Quito lawyer remarked, “who does not reject any novelty whatsoever in the management of taxation”—a sentiment that resonated as strongly in Philadelphia as in Mexico City. Things soon got worse. Madrid’s New World imperial authority was shaken to the core in 1781 when another tax revolt erupted in New Granada (present-day Colombia). By that time, the British colonials’ War of Independence in North America was in its ﬁfth year. Intensifying imperial rivalry fueled events on both the American continents. Until the mid-seventeenth century, the three great Old World powers—England, France, and

 Spain—had largely conﬁned their competition to struggles over boundaries and religious afﬁliation on the European continent. But after the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 brought a truce to the wars of religion that had racked Europe for decades (the Thirty Years’ War), great-power competition began to shift overseas. The faraway New World imperial outposts of Britain, Spain, and France now became pawns in a global struggle for mastery in Europe. The Seven Years’ War (1756–1763) ushered in a still more ferocious cycle of imperial conﬂict. Britain succeeded in expelling France from North America, but victory brought the burdens of managing vast new territories as well as the prospect of fresh confrontations with Native Americans threatened by westward expansion. Spain, France’s erstwhile ally, grew increasingly wary of the newly invigorated and ambitious British Empire, which threatened Spanish interests at sea and along the sketchy borderlands that separated the two powers’ imperial domains. As the risks and costs of imperial competition soared, London and Madrid adopted the same strategy: pressure the colonies to pay their share. New taxes and customs duties followed, along with more energetic efforts to collect them. To imperial ofﬁcials like Britain’s Prime Minister George Grenville or Madrid’s “visitor general” to New Spain, José Gálvez, such

 Tupac Amaru II A Peruvian national hero, Tupac Amaru II is memorialized to this day with his portrait on the nation’s currency.



 Couple with Child by Miguel Cabera This eighteenthcentury portrait of a Mexican family illustrates the common intermarriage of Europeans and Indians in the Spanish New World. The ethnic complexity of Spanish America kept colonists there from uniting against imperial authorities as successfully as their northern neighbors.

 reforms seemed not only reasonable but in tune with Enlightenment ideas about efﬁcient administration. To colonial subjects these new policies were an anathema, a ﬂagrant offense to their fundamental rights as colonial subjects. But why did revolts against these new imperial policies kindle a full-ﬂedged war for independence in the British colonies but not in Spanish America—at least not until Na-

 poleon’s invasion of Spain in 1808 hurled the Spanish Empire into tumult? The role of rich and powerful allies provides part of the answer. The North American rebels could count on Britain’s French and Spanish enemies to tender ﬁnancial as well as military support. Spanish American anticolonial rebels had no such allies in London or Paris, which saw little prospect of unraveling the Spanish Empire and were already fully engaged on opposite sides of the American War of Independence. The demographic composition of the two empires furnishes another part of the answer. Spanish America was badly riven by sharp ethnic and racial divisions. The Spanish court had long encouraged the relatively few Spaniards who settled in the New World to intermarry with the local inhabitants. By the eighteenth century, the Spanish colonies had become a complex, tension-ridden mosaic of European, Creole, mestizo, and Indian peoples and cultures. When in 1780 the self-proclaimed Incan royal descendant Tupac Amaru II rebelled against Spanish rule, he at ﬁrst attracted Creoles, but they bolted as the movement radicalized, and his rebellion was soon cruelly crushed. To be sure, the British North American colonists had their ethnic differences, too, but many fewer. They had nurtured a culture of exclusion, rejecting intermarriage with Indians and blacks and banishing Indians to the wilderness. And they faced no Indian threat on the scale of Tupac Amaru II’s uprising. Inherited political traditions also played different roles. British settlers enjoyed long-standing institutions of political representation. They had brought with them from the mother country devotion to individual rights and the privilege of legal assembly that, when revolution came, gave their cause the kind of legitimacy that comes from timehonored habits. It was precisely the violation of those rights and privileges that “taxation without representation” seemed to threaten. Spanish colonists had representative institutions, too, but in Spain’s much more autocratic imperial scheme, local assemblies lacked the authority, autonomy, and legitimacy they had come to enjoy in the British domains. North American colonists asserted their right to self-government on the basis of their historic rights as British subjects, a claim that was much more difﬁcult to make in the absolutist monarchy of the Spanish Empire.





Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


American Pluses and Minuses
 The revolutionaries were blessed with outstanding leadership. George Washington was a giant among men; Benjamin Franklin was a master among diplomats. Open foreign aid, theoretically possible from the start, eventually came from France. Numerous European ofﬁcers, many of them unemployed and impoverished, volunteered their swords for pay. In a class by himself was a wealthy young French nobleman, the Marquis de Lafayette. Fleeing from boredom, loving glory and ultimately liberty, the “French gamecock” was made a major general in the colonial army at age nineteen. His commission was largely a recognition of his family inﬂuence and political connections, but the ser vices of this teenage general in securing further aid from France were invaluable. Other conditions aided the Americans. They were ﬁghting defensively, with the odds, all things considered, favoring the defender. In agriculture, the colonies were mainly self-sustaining, like a kind of Robinson Crusoe’s island. The Americans also enjoyed the moral advantage that came from belief in a just cause. The historical odds were not impossible. Other peoples had triumphed in the face of greater obstacles: Greeks against Persians, Swiss against Austrians, Dutch against Spaniards. Yet the American rebels were badly orga nized for war. From the earliest days, they had been almost fatally lacking in unity, and the new nation lurched forward uncertainly like an uncoordinated centipede. Even the Continental Congress, which directed the conﬂ ict, was hardly more than a debating society, and it grew feebler as the struggle dragged on. “Their Congress now is quite disjoint’d,” gibed an Eng lish satirist, “Since Gibbits (gallows) [are] for them appointed.” The disorga nized colonists fought almost the entire war before adopting a written constitution—the Articles of Confederation—in 1781.

 General Washington’s (1732–1799) disgust with his countrymen is reﬂected in a diary entry for 1776:

“


 Chimney corner patriots abound; venality, corruption, prostitution of ofﬁce for selﬁsh ends, abuse of trust, perversion of funds from a national to a private use, and speculations upon the necessities of the times pervade all interests.

”


Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette (1757–1834),
 by Joseph Boze, 1790 This youthful French ofﬁcer gave to America not only military service but some $200,000 of his private funds. He returned to France after the American Revolution to play a conspicuous role in the French Revolution.

 Jealousy every where raised its hideous head. Individual states, proudly regarding themselves as sovereign, resented the attempts of Congress to exercise its ﬂ imsy powers. Sectional jealousy boiled up over the appointment of military leaders; some distrustful New Eng landers almost preferred British ofﬁcers to Americans from other sections. Economic difﬁculties were nearly insuperable. Metallic money had already been heavily drained away. A cautious Continental Congress, unwilling to raise anew the explosive issue of taxation, was forced to print “Continental” paper money in great amounts. As this currency poured from the presses, it depreciated until the expression “not worth a Continental” became current. One barber contemptuously papered his shop with the near-worthless dollars. The confusion proliferated when the individual states were compelled to issue depreciated paper money of their own.

The Rebel Army




 Inﬂation of the currency inevitably skyrocketed prices. Families of the soldiers at the ﬁghting front were hard hit, and hundreds of anxious husbands and fathers deserted. Debtors easily acquired handfuls of the quasi-worthless money and gleefully paid their debts “without mercy”—sometimes with the bayonets of the authorities to back them up.

A
Thin Line of Heroes  Basic military supplies in the colonies were dangerously scanty. While many families and towns did own ﬁ rearms—widespread militia ser vice meant men needed weapons for training—the colonists had long relied heavily on Britain for troops, armaments, and military subsidies during expensive wars against Indians, France, and Spain. The rebels were caught in an unavoidable trap: at the very moment that the supply of British funds and war materiel evaporated, the cost of home defense mounted. Sufﬁcient stores of gunpowder, cannon, and other armaments (let alone ships to transport them) could not be found. Among the reasons for the eventual alliance with France was the need for a reliable source of essential military supplies. Other shortages bedeviled the rebels. At Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, shivering American soldiers went without bread for three successive days in the cruel winter of 1777–1778. In one southern campaign, some men fainted for lack of food. Manufactured goods also were generally in short supply in agricultural America, and clothing and shoes were appallingly scarce. The path of the Patriot ﬁghting men was often marked by bloody snow. At frigid Valley Forge, during one anxious period, twenty-eight hundred men were barefooted or nearly naked. Woolens were desperately needed against the wintry blasts, and in general the only real uniform of the colonial army was uniform raggedness. During a grand parade at Valley Forge, some of the ofﬁcers appeared wrapped in woolen bedcovers. One Rhode Island unit was known as the “Ragged, Lousy, Naked Regiment.” American militiamen were numerous but also highly unreliable. Able-bodied American males—perhaps several hundred thousand of them—had received rudimentary training, and many of these recruits served for short terms in the rebel armies. But poorly trained plowboys could not stand up in the open ﬁeld against professional British troops advancing with bare bayonets. Many of these undisciplined warriors would, in the words of Washington, “ﬂy from their own shadows.”

 The Flutist, by Brazilla Lew This portrait is believed to be that of an African American ﬁfer in the Revolutionary War. Lew was a veteran of the Seven Years’ War who had marched to Ticonderoga and served in the army a full seven years as frontline soldier, ﬁfer, and drummer. In 1775, at the age of thirtytwo, he fought at Bunker Hill as an enlistee in the 27th Massachusetts Regiment. A resident of Chelmsford, Massachusetts, he was said to have taught all twelve of his children to play musical instruments.

 A few thousand regulars—perhaps seven or eight thousand at the war’s end—were ﬁ nally whipped into shape by stern drillmasters. Notable among them was an orga ni zational genius, the salty German Baron von Steuben. He spoke no Eng lish when he reached America, but he soon taught his men that bayonets were not for broiling beefsteaks over open ﬁ res. As they gained experience, these soldiers of the Continental line more than held their own against crack British troops. Blacks also fought and died for the American cause. Although many states initially barred them from militia ser vice, by war’s end more than ﬁve thousand blacks



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


 Enslaved blacks hoped that the Revolutionary crisis would make it possible for them to secure their own liberty. On the eve of the war in South Carolina, merchant Josiah Smith, Jr., noted such a rumor among the slaves:

“


 [Freedom] is their common Talk throughout the Province, and has occasioned impertinent behavior in many of them, insomuch that our Provincial Congress now sitting hath voted the immediate raising of Two Thousand Men Horse and food, to keep those mistaken creatures in awe.

”


 Despite such repressive measures, slave uprisings continued to plague the southern colonies through 1775 and 1776.

 had enlisted in the American armed forces. The largest contingents came from the northern states with substantial numbers of free blacks. Blacks fought at Trenton, Brandywine, Saratoga, and other important battles. Some, including Prince Whipple—later immortalized in Emanuel Leutze’s famous painting “Washington Crossing the Delaware” (see p. 158)—became military heroes. Others served as cooks, guides, spies, drivers, and road builders. African Americans also served on the British side. In November 1775 Lord Dunmore, royal governor of Virginia, issued a proclamation promising freedom for

 any enslaved black in Virginia who joined the British army. News of Dunmore’s decree traveled swiftly. Virginia and Maryland tightened slave patrols, but within one month, three hundred slaves had joined what came to be called “Lord Dunmore’s Ethiopian Regiment.” In time thousands of blacks ﬂed plantations for British promises of emancipation. When one of James Madison’s slaves was caught trying to escape to the British lines, Madison refused to punish him for “coveting that liberty” that white Americans proclaimed the “right & worthy pursuit of every human being.” At war’s end the British kept their word, to some at least, and evacuated as many as fourteen thousand “Black Loyalists” to Nova Scotia, Jamaica, and Eng land. Morale in the Revolutionary army was badly undermined by American proﬁteers. Putting proﬁts before patriotism, they sold to the British because the invader could pay in gold. Speculators forced prices sky-high, and some Bostonians made proﬁts of 50 to 200 percent on army garb while the American army was freezing at Valley Forge. Washington never had as many as twenty thousand effective troops in one place at one time, despite bounties of land and other inducements. Yet if the rebels had thrown themselves into the struggle with zeal, they could easily have raised many times that number. The brutal truth is that only a select minority of the American colonists attached themselves to the cause of independence with a spirit of selﬂess devotion. These were the dedicated souls who bore the burden of battle and the risks of defeat. Seldom have so few done so much for so many.

 CHRONOLOGY

 First Navigation Laws to control colonial commerce



 Board of Trade assumes governance of colonies





 British troops occupy Boston



Boston Massacre
 All Townshend Acts except tea tax repealed

 Seven Years’ War (French and Indian War) ends



 Committees of correspondence formed



Sugar Act






Quartering Act
Stamp Act
Stamp Act Congress


 British East India Company granted tea monopoly Governor Hutchinson’s actions provoke Boston Tea Party



“Intolerable Acts”
Quebec Act
First Continental Congress
 The Association boycotts British goods



Battles of Lexington and Concord




Declaratory Act




Townshend Acts
 New York legislature suspended by Parliament

To Learn More


KEY TERMS
republicanism (126) radical Whigs (127) mercantilism (127) Sugar Act (129) Quartering Act (129) stamp tax (129) admiralty courts (129) Stamp Act Congress (130) nonimportation agreements (131) Sons of Liberty (131) Daughters of Liberty (131) Declaratory Act (132) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Townshend Acts (132) Boston Massacre (133) committees of correspondence (134) Boston Tea Party (135) “Intolerable Acts” (136) Quebec Act (136) First Continental Congress (137) The Association (138) Lexington and Concord, Battles of (138) Valley Forge (140) 
John Hancock
George Grenville
Charles (“Champagne
Charley”) Townshend
Crispus Attucks
George III


Lord North
Samuel Adams
Thomas Hutchinson
Marquis de Lafayette
Baron von Steuben
Lord Dunmore


To Learn More
R. B.
Bernstein, Thomas Jefferson (2003) Timothy H. Breen, The Marketplace of Revolution: How
Consumer Politics Shaped American Independence (2004)
 David Hackett Fischer, Paul Revere’s Ride (1994) Sylvia R. Frey, Water from the Rock: Black Resistance in a Revolutionary Age (1991) Pauline Maier, From Resistance to Revolution: Colonial Radicals and the Development of American Opposition to Britain, 1765–1776 (1972) David McCullough, John Adams (2001) Robert Middlekauff, The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763–1789 (1982) Edmund S. Morgan and Helen M. Morgan, The Stamp Act Crisis (1953)

Joseph C. Morton, The American Revolution (2003)
 Ray Raphael, A People’s History of the American Revolution (2001) Richard Ryerson, The Revolution Is Now Begun: The Radical Committees of Philadelphia, 1765–1776 (1978) Walter Stahr, John Jay: Founding Father (2005) Alfred F. Young, The Shoemaker and the Tea Party (1999)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

America Secedes
 from the Empire




1775–1783
 These are the times that try men’s souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the ser vice of their country; but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. THOMAS PAINE, DECEMBER 1776

B


 loodshed at Lexington and Concord in April of 1775 was a clarion call to arms. About twenty thousand musket-bearing “Minute Men” swarmed around Boston, there to coop up the outnumbered British. The Second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia the next month, on May 10, 1775, and this time the full slate of thirteen colonies was represented. The conser vative element in Congress was still strong, despite the shooting in Massachusetts. There was still no welldeﬁ ned sentiment for independence—merely a desire to continue ﬁghting in the hope that the king and Parliament would consent to a redress of grievances. Congress hopefully drafted new appeals to the British people and king—appeals that were spurned. Anticipating a possible rebuff, the delegates also adopted mea sures to raise money and to create an army and a navy. The British and the Americans now teetered on the brink of all-out warfare.

Congress Drafts
George Washington
 Perhaps the most important single action of the Congress was to select George Washington, one of its members already in an ofﬁcer’s uniform, to head the hastily improvised army besieging Boston. This choice was made with considerable misgivings. The tall, powerfully built, digniﬁed Virginia planter, then forty-three, had never risen above the rank of a colonel in the militia. His largest command had numbered only twelve hundred men, and that had been some twenty years earlier. Falling short of true military genius, Washington would actually lose more pitched battles than he won. But the distinguished Virginian was gifted with outstanding powers of leadership and immense strength of character. He radiated patience, courage, self-discipline,

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Early Battles




 and a sense of justice. He was a great moral force rather than a great military mind—a symbol and a rallying point. People instinctively trusted him; they sensed that when he put himself at the head of a cause, he was prepared, if necessary, to go down with the ship. He insisted on serving without pay, though he kept a careful expense account amounting to more than $100,000. Later he sternly reprimanded his steward at Mount Vernon for providing the enemy, under duress, with supplies. He would have preferred instead to see the enemy put the torch to his mansion. The Continental Congress, though dimly perceiving Washington’s qualities of leadership, chose more wisely than it knew. His selection, in truth, was largely political. Americans in other sections, already jealous, were beginning to distrust the large New Eng land army being collected around Boston. Prudence suggested a commander from Virginia, the largest and most populous of the colonies. As a man of wealth, both by inheritance and by marriage, Washington could not be accused of being a fortune-seeker. As an aristocrat, he could be counted on by his peers to check “the excesses of the masses.”

Bunker Hill and
Hessian Hirelings
 The clash of arms continued on a strangely contradictory basis. On the one hand, the Americans were emphatically afﬁ rming their loyalty to the king and earnestly voicing their desire to patch up difﬁculties. On the other hand, they were raising armies and shooting down His Majesty’s soldiers. This curious war of inconsistency was fought for fourteen long months— from April 1775 to July 1776—before the fateful plunge into independence was taken. Gradually the tempo of warfare increased. In May 1775 a tiny American force under Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold surprised and captured the British garrisons at Ticonderoga and Crown Point, on the scenic lakes of upper New York. A priceless store of gunpowder and artillery for the siege of Boston was thus secured. In June 1775 the colonists seized a hill, now known as Bunker Hill (actually Breed’s Hill), from which they menaced the enemy in Boston. The British, instead of cutting off the retreat of their foes by ﬂanking them, blundered bloodily when they launched a frontal attack with three thousand men. Sharpshooting Americans, numbering ﬁ fteen hundred and strongly entrenched, mowed down the advancing redcoats with frightful

 Washington at Verplanck’s Point, New York, 1782, Reviewing the French Troops After the Victory at Yorktown, by John Trumbull, 1790 This noted American artist accentuated Washington’s already imposing height (six feet two inches) by showing him towering over his horse. Washington so appreciated this portrait of himself that he hung it in the dining room of his home at Mount Vernon, Virginia.

 slaughter. But the colonists’ scanty store of gunpowder ﬁnally gave out, and they were forced to abandon the hill in disorder. With two more such victories, remarked the French foreign minister, the British would have no army left in America. Even at this late date, in July 1775, the Continental Congress adopted the Olive Branch Petition, professing American loyalty to the crown and begging the king to prevent further hostilities. But following Bunker Hill, King George III slammed the door on all hope of reconciliation. In August 1775 he formally proclaimed the colonies in rebellion; the skirmishes were now outand-out treason, a hanging crime. The next month he widened the chasm when he sealed arrangements for



