Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 hero, Franklin Roosevelt, had championed the “forgotten man” against big business, Reagan championed the “common man” against big government. He condemned federal intervention in local affairs, favoritism for minorities, and the elitism of arrogant bureaucrats. He aimed especially to win over from the Democratic column working-class and lower-middle-class white voters by implying that the Democratic party had become the party of big government and the exclusive tool of its minority constituents. Though Reagan was no intellectual, he drew on the ideas of a small but inﬂuential group of thinkers known as “neoconser vatives.” Their ranks included Norman Podhoretz, editor of Commentary magazine, and Irving Kristol, editor of The Public Interest. Reacting against what they saw as the excesses of 1960s liberalism, the neoconser vatives championed free-market capitalism liberated from government restraints, and they took tough, harshly anti-Soviet positions in foreign policy. They also questioned liberal welfare programs and afﬁ rmative-action policies and called for the reassertion of traditional values of individualism and the centrality of the family. An actor-turned-politician, Reagan enjoyed enormous popularity with his crooked grin and aw-shucks manner. The son of a ne’er-do-well, impoverished Irish American father with a fondness for the bottle, he had grown up in a small Illinois town. Reagan got his start in life in the depressed 1930s as a sports announcer for an Iowa radio station. Good looks and a way with words landed him acting jobs in Hollywood, where he became a B-grade star in the 1940s. He dis-

 In a speech to the National Association of Evangelicals on March 8, 1983, President Ronald Reagan (1911–2004) deﬁned his stand on school prayer:

“


 The Declaration of Independence mentions the Supreme Being no less than four times. ‘In God We Trust’ is engraved on our coinage. The Supreme Court opens its proceedings with a religious invocation. And the Members of Congress open their sessions with a prayer. I just happen to believe the schoolchildren of the United States are entitled to the same privileges as Supreme Court Justices and Congressmen.

”


 President Ronald Reagan Older than any man previously elected to the presidency, Reagan displayed youthful vigor both on the campaign trail and in ofﬁce.

 played a ﬂair for politics as president of the Screen Actors Guild in the McCarthy era of the early 1950s, when he helped purge communists and other suspected “reds” from the ﬁ lm industry. In 1954 he became a spokesman for General Electric and began to abandon his New Dealish political views and increasingly to preach a conser vative, antigovernment line. Reagan’s growing skill at promoting the conservative cause inspired a group of wealthy Cal i fornia businessmen to help him launch his political career as governor of Cal i fornia from 1966 to 1974. By 1980 the Republican party was ready to challenge the Democrats’ hold on the White House. Bedeviled abroad and becalmed at home, Jimmy Carter’s administration struck many Americans as bungling



The Election of 1980


 and befuddled. Carter’s inability to control doubledigit inﬂation was especially damaging. Frustrated critics bellyached loudly about the Georgian’s alleged mismanagement of the nation’s affairs. Disaffection with Carter’s apparent ineptitude ran deep even in his own Democratic party, where an “ABC” (Anybody but Carter) movement gathered steam. The liberal wing of the party found its champion in Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, the last survivor of the assassin-plagued Kennedy brothers. He and Carter slugged it out in a series of bruising primary elections, while delighted Republicans decorously proceeded to name Reagan their presidential nominee. In the end Kennedy’s candidacy fell victim to the country’s conser vative mood and to lingering suspicions about a 1969 automobile accident on Chappaquiddick Island, Massachusetts, in which a young woman assistant was drowned when Kennedy’s car plunged off a bridge. A badly battered Carter, his party divided and in disarray, was left to do battle with Reagan. The Republican candidate proved to be a formidable campaigner. Using his professional acting skills to great advantage, Reagan attacked the incumbent’s fumbling per for mance in foreign policy and blasted the “big-government” philosophy of the Democratic party (a philosophy that Carter did not fully embrace). Galloping inﬂation, sky-high interest rates, and a faltering economy also put the incumbent president on the defensive. Carter countered ineffectively with charges that Reagan was a trigger-happy cold warrior who might push the country into nuclear war. Carter’s spotty record in ofﬁce was no defense against Reagan’s popular appeal. On election day the Republican rang up a spectacular victory, bagging over 51 percent of the popular vote, while 41 percent went to Carter. Reﬂecting a small but vocal protest against both candidates, nearly 7 percent of the electorate voted for liberal Republican congressman John Anderson, who ran as an independent. The electoral count stood at 489 for Reagan and 49 for Carter, making him the ﬁ rst elected president to be unseated by voters since Herbert Hoover in 1932 (see Map 40.1). Equally startling, the Republicans gained control of the Senate for the ﬁ rst time in twenty-six years. Leading Democratic liberals, including George McGovern, had been targeted for defeat by well-heeled New Right groups. They went down like dead timber in the conservative windstorm that swept the country. Carter showed dignity in defeat, delivering a thoughtful Farewell Address that stressed his efforts

WA MT

 OR

 ID

NV CA

 ND

 WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

NM TX

 IL

MI IN

 MO

 KY

 MS

 AL

PA WV

VA NC

 TN

AR LA

 OH

 GA

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 14 RI NJ CT 4 17 8 DE MD

 SC

 DC

 FL

 AK

 HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Reagan (Republican)




90.9%


43,899,248


50.8%




9.1%


35,481,435


41.0%


5,719,437


6.6%


Carter (Democrat)
Anderson (Independent)


Popular Vote


 Map 40.1 Presidential Election of 1980 (with electoral vote by state) This map graphically displays Reagan’s landslide victory over both Carter and Anderson. Interactive Map

 to scale down the deadly arms race, to promote human rights, and to protect the environment. In one of his last acts in ofﬁce, he signed a bill preserving some 100 million acres of Alaska land for national parks, forests, and wildlife refuges. An unusually intelligent, articulate, and well-meaning president, he had been hampered by his lack of managerial talent and had been badly buffeted by events beyond his control, such as the soaring price of oil, runaway inﬂation, and the galling insult of the hostages still held in Iran. Though unsuccessful in the White House, Carter earned much admiration in later years for his hu manitarian and human rights activities. He received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2002.

The Reagan Revolution
 Reagan’s arrival in Washington was triumphal. The Iranians contributed to the festive mood by releasing the hostages on Reagan’s Inauguration Day, January 20, 1981, after 444 days of captivity. The new president, a hale and hearty sixty-nineyear-old, was devoted to ﬁ scal ﬁtness and a leaner federal government. He sought nothing less than the dismantling of the welfare state and the reversal of



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 Coming Home After more than a year in captivity in Iran, these hostages were released on the very day of Ronald Reagan’s presidential inauguration.

 the political evolution of the preceding half-century. Assembling a conser vative cabinet of “the best and the rightest,” he took dead aim at what he regarded as the bloated federal budget. “Government is not the solution to our problem,” he declared. “Government is the problem.” Years of New Deal–style tax-and-spend programs, Reagan jested, had created a federal government that reminded him of the deﬁ nition of a baby as a creature who was all appetite at one end, with no sense of responsibility at the other. On his conser vative crusade for smaller government, less bureaucracy, and freer markets, Reagan found common cause with the new leader of America’s oldest ally, Great Britain. Conservative Margaret Thatcher became Britain’s ﬁ rst female prime minister in 1979. With a mandate to improve her nation’s economy, which had suffered through the 1970s as the United States had, she embarked on a mission to reduce the power of labor unions and government involvement in business, two of Reagan’s chief goals. The philosophic kinship between “Ronnie and Maggie,” as the

 press dubbed the two heads of state, went beyond economics. Emboldened by each other, they strengthened the Anglo-American alliance through muscular foreign policy against a number of foes, especially the Soviet bloc. Their common refrain was that free markets made free peoples and that shrinking government meant keeping their nations safer from communism. By the early 1980s, this antigovernment message found a receptive audience in the United States. In the two decades since 1960, federal spending had risen from about 18 percent of gross national product to nearly 23 percent. At the same time, the composition of the federal budget had been shifting from defense to entitlement programs, including Social Security and Medicare (see the chart in the Appendix). In 1973 the budget of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare surpassed that of the Department of Defense. Citizens increasingly balked at paying the bills for further extension of government “beneﬁts.” After four decades of advancing New Deal and Great Society programs, a strong countercurrent took hold. Californians staged a “tax revolt” in 1978 (known by its ofﬁcial ballot title of Proposition 13) that slashed property taxes and forced painful cuts in government services. The Cal i fornia “tax quake” jolted other state capitals and even rocked the pillars of Congress in faraway Washington, D.C. Ronald Reagan had ridden this political shock wave to presidential victory in 1980 and now proceeded to rattle the “welfare state” to its very foundations.

 The Triumph of the Right, 1980 Republican conservatives scored a double victory in 1980, winning control of both the White House and the Senate. Aided by conservative Democratic “boll weevils,” they also dominated the House of Representatives, and a new era of conservatism dawned in the nation’s capital.

“Reaganomics” and “Star Wars”


 Reagan pursued his smaller-government policies with near-religious zeal and remarkable effectiveness. He proposed a new federal budget that necessitated cuts of some $35 billion, mostly in social programs like food stamps and federally funded job-training centers. Reagan worked naturally in harness with the Republican majority in the Senate, but to get his way in the Democratic House, he undertook some oldfashioned politicking. He enterprisingly wooed a group of mostly southern conser vative Democrats (dubbed boll weevils), who abandoned their own party’s leadership to follow the president. The new president seemed strong and motivated, all the more so after a failed assassination attempt in March 1981 brought an outpouring of sympathy and support.

The Battle of the Budget
 Swept along on a tide of presidential popularity, Congress swallowed Reagan’s budget proposals. The new president’s triumph amazed political observers, especially defeated Democrats. He had descended upon Washington like an avenging angel of conservatism, kicking up a blinding whirlwind of political change. His impressive per for mance demonstrated the power of the presidency with a skill not seen since Lyndon Johnson’s day. Out the window went the textbooks that had concluded, largely on the basis of the stalemated 1970s, that the Oval Ofﬁce had been eclipsed by a powerful, uncontrollable Congress. Reagan hardly rested to savor the sweetness of his victory. The second part of his economic program called for substantial reductions in marginal tax rates over a period of three years. Many Democrats, the president quipped, had “never met a tax they didn’t hike.” Thanks largely to Reagan’s skill as a television performer and the continued defection of the “boll weevils” from the Democratic camp, the president again had his way. In late 1981 Congress approved a set of far-reaching tax reforms that lowered individual tax rates, reduced federal estate taxes, and created new tax-free savings plans for small investors. Reagan’s supply-side economics advisers assured him that the combination of budgetary discipline and tax reduction would stimulate new investment, boost productivity, foster dramatic economic growth, and eventually even reduce the federal deﬁcit. But at ﬁ rst “supply-side” economics seemed to be a beautiful theory mugged by a gang of brutal facts,



 as the economy slid into its deepest recession since the 1930s. Unemployment reached nearly 11 percent in 1982, businesses folded, and several bank failures jolted the nation’s entire ﬁnancial system. The automobile industry, once the brightest jewel in America’s industrial crown, turned in its dimmest performance in history. Battling against Japanese imports, major automakers reported losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars. Fuming and frustrated Democrats angrily charged that the president’s budget cuts slashed especially cruelly at the poor and the handicapped and that his tax cuts favored the well-to-do. In reality, the anti-inﬂationary “tight money” policies that led to the so-called “Reagan recession” of 1981–1982 had been launched by the Federal Reserve Board in 1979, on Carter’s watch. Ignoring the yawping pack of Democratic critics, President Reagan and his economic advisers serenely waited for their supply-side economic policies (Reaganomics) to produce the promised results. The supply-siders seemed to be vindicated when a healthy economic recovery ﬁ nally got under way in 1983. Yet the economy of the 1980s was not uniformly sound. For the ﬁ rst time in the twentieth century, income gaps widened between the richest and the poorest Americans. The poor got poorer and the very rich grew fabulously richer, while middle-class incomes largely stagnated. Symbolic of the new income stratiﬁcation was the emergence of “yuppies,” or young, urban professionals. Sporting Rolex watches and BMW sports cars, they made a near-religion out of conspicuous consumption. Though something of a stereotype and numbering only about 1.5 million people, yuppies showcased the values of materialism and the pursuit of wealth that came to symbolize the high-rolling 1980s. Some economists located the sources of the economic upturn neither in the president’s budget cuts and tax reforms nor in the go-get-’em avarice of the yuppies. It was massive military expenditures, they argued, that constituted the real foundation of 1980s prosperity. Reagan cascaded nearly $2 trillion dollars onto the Pentagon in the 1980s, asserting the need to close a “window of vulnerability” in the armaments race with the Soviet Union. Ironically, this conser vative president thereby plunged the government into a red-ink bath of deﬁcit spending that made the New Deal look downright stingy. Federal budget deﬁcits topped $100 billion in 1982, and the government’s books were nearly $200 billion out of balance in every subsequent year of the 1980s. Massive government borrowing to cover those deﬁcits kept interest rates high, and high interest rates in turn elevated the value



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 Wallﬂowers Reagan’s budget cuts fell almost exclusively on social programs, whereas military outlays increased substantially.

 of the dollar to record altitudes in the international money markets. The soaring dollar was good news for American tourists and buyers of foreign cars, but it dealt crippling blows to American exporters, as the American international trade deﬁcit reached a record $152 billion in 1987. The masters of international commerce and ﬁ nance for a generation after World War II, Americans suddenly became the world’s heaviest borrowers in the global economy of the 1980s.

 lin leaders would come to the bargaining table and sing Reagan’s tune. This strategy resembled a riverboat gambler’s ploy. It wagered the enormous sum of Reagan’s defense budgets on the hope that the other side would not call Washington’s bluff and initiate a new cycle of arms competition. Reagan played his trump card in this risky game in March 1983, when he announced his intention to pursue a high-technology missile-defense system called the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), popularly known as Star Wars. The plan called for orbiting battle stations in space that could ﬁ re laser beams or other forms of concentrated energy to vaporize intercontinental missiles on liftoff. Reagan described SDI as offering potential salvation from the nuclear nightmare by throwing an “astrodome” defense shield over American cities. Most scientists considered this an impossible goal. But the deeper logic of SDI lay in its ﬁt with Reagan’s overall Soviet strategy. By pitching the arms contest onto a stratospheric plane of high technology and astronomical expense, it would further force the Kremlin’s hand. Relations with the Soviets further nose-dived in late 1981, when the government of Poland, needled for over a year by a popular movement of workingpeople orga nized into a massive union called “Soli-

Reagan Renews the
Cold War
 Hard as nails toward the Soviet Union in his campaign speeches, Reagan saw no reason to soften up after he checked in at the White House. He claimed that the Soviets were “prepared to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat,” in pursuit of their goals of world conquest. He denounced the Soviet Union as the “focus of evil in the modern world.” Reagan believed in negotiating with the Soviets— but only from a position of overwhelming strength. Accordingly, his strategy for dealing with Moscow was simple: by enormously expanding U.S. military capabilities, he could threaten the Soviets with a fantastically expensive new round of the arms race. The American economy, theoretically, could better bear this new ﬁnancial burden than could the creaking Soviet system. Desperate to avoid economic ruin, Krem-

 Star Wars Fantasies President Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative (popularly known as Star Wars) evoked extravagant hopes for an impermeable defensive shield, but its daunting physical and engineering requirements also occasioned much ridicule in the scientiﬁc community.

 Reagan’s Foreign Policies

 darity,” clamped martial law on the troubled country. Reagan saw the heavy ﬁst of the Kremlin inside this Polish iron glove, and he imposed economic sanctions on Poland and the USSR alike. Dealing with the Soviet Union was additionally complicated by the inertia and ill health of the aging oligarchs in the Kremlin, three of whom died between late 1982 and early 1985. Relations grew even more tense when the Soviets, in September 1983, blasted from the skies a Korean passenger airliner that had inexplicably violated Soviet airspace. Hundreds of civilians, including many Americans, plummeted to their deaths in the frigid Sea of Okhotsk. By the end of 1983, all arms-control negotiations with the Soviets were broken off. The deepening chill of the Cold War was further felt in 1984, when USSR and Soviet-bloc athletes boycotted the Olympic Games in Los Angeles.

Troubles Abroad
 The volatile Middle Eastern pot continued to boil ominously. Israel badly strained its bonds of friendship with the United States by continuing to allow new settlements to be established in the occupied territory of the Jordan River’s West Bank (see Map 40.2). Israel further raised the stakes in the Middle East in June 1982 when it invaded neighboring Lebanon, seeking to suppress once and for all the guerrilla bases from which Palestinian ﬁghters harassed beleaguered Israel. The Palestinians were bloodily subdued, but Lebanon, already pulverized by years of episodic civil war, was plunged into armed chaos. President Reagan was obliged to send American troops to Lebanon in 1983 as part of an international peacekeeping force, but their presence did not bring peace. A suicide bomber crashed an explosives-laden truck into a United States Marine barracks on October 23, 1983, kill ing more than two hundred marines. President Reagan soon thereafter withdrew the remaining American troops, while miraculously suffering no political damage from this horrifying and humiliating attack. His mystiﬁed Democratic opponents began to call him the “Teﬂon president,” to whom nothing hurtful could stick. Central America, in the United States’ own backyard, also rumbled menacingly. A leftist revolution had deposed the long-time dictator of Nicaragua in 1979. President Carter had tried to ignore the hotly anti-American rhetoric of the revolutionaries, known as Sandinistas, and to establish good diplomatic relations with them. But cold warrior Reagan took their



 rhetoric at face value and hurled back at them some hot language of his own. He accused the Sandinistas of turning their country into a forward base for Soviet and Cuban military penetration of all of Central America. Brandishing photographs taken from high-ﬂying spy planes, administration spokespeople claimed that Nicaraguan leftists were shipping weapons to revolutionary forces in tiny El Salvador, torn by violence since a coup in 1979. Reagan sent military “advisers” to prop up the pro-American government of El Salvador. He also provided covert aid, including the CIA-engineered mining of harbors, to the rebel contras opposing the antiAmerican government of Nicaragua. Reagan ﬂexed his military muscles elsewhere in the turbulent Caribbean. In a dramatic display of American might, in October 1983 he dispatched a heavy-ﬁ repower invasion force to the island of Grenada, where a military coup had killed the prime minister and brought Marxists to power. Swiftly overrunning the tiny island and ousting the insurgents, American troops vividly demonstrated Reagan’s determination to assert the dominance of the United States in the Caribbean, just as Theodore Roosevelt had done (see Map 40.3).

Round Two for Reagan
 A conﬁdent Ronald Reagan, bolstered by a buoyant economy at home and by the popularity of his deﬁant posture abroad, met little opposition in his bid for a second White House term in 1984. His opponent was Democrat Walter Mondale, who made history by naming as his vice-presidential running mate Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro of New York. She was the ﬁ rst woman ever to appear on a major-party presidential ticket. But even this dramatic gesture could not salvage Mondale’s candidacy, which was fatally tainted by his ser vice as vice president in the deeply discredited Carter administration. On election day Reagan walked away with 525 electoral votes to Mondale’s 13, winning every where except in Mondale’s home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia. Reagan also overwhelmed Mondale in the popular vote— 52,609,797 to 36,450,613. Shrinking the federal government and reducing taxes had been the main objectives of Reagan’s ﬁrst term; foreign-policy issues dominated the news in his second term. The president soon found himself contending for the world’s attention with a charismatic new Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, installed as

T U R K EY


 n Se a

 ate

SY R I A

Tehran


Tel Aviv


Amman


Baghdad


I R AQ


 U.S. arms sales, 1980s, during Iran-Iraq War Iraq invades Kuwait, 1990 Second U.S.-Iraq War, 2003

 e R. Nil

Re


BAHRAIN
Riyadh 
 INDIA

 ian

Gu
 lf QATAR

Karachi


S


 tra Dubayy it of Hormuz Abu Dhabi Muscat

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

 Partner in U.S. efforts to eradicate al-Qaeda, 2001–

 a

30°E


 rs

Doha


SA U D I A R A B I A

Se


S U DA N


Pe
Manama


 d

Aswan
Dam


PA K I STA N
Quetta 
 U.S. and allies launch First U.S.-Iraq War, 1991

Kuwait


K U WA I T


Cancer


Kandahar


Basra


L I BYA


Tropic o
 f

Islamabad


Herat


30°N


J O R DA N
Cairo


EGY P T

 U.S. arms sales, 1955 –1978: $20.8 billion Shah overthrown, 1979 American hostages taken, 1979 –1981

 IRAN

Fallujah


ISRAEL 30°N

Tikrit


Damascus


L E BA N O N


A F G H A N I STA N


Kirkuk


 us R.

 nea

Mazar e
Sharif
Kabul


Ind


 rra

 CYPRUS

Sea


Crete


.


 ite

 sR

 ed

T U R K M E N I STA N


R.


 hr

 p

M


Tigris


Eu


 U.S. troops, 1958, 1983–1984

20°E


 ian

G R E EC E


 CHINA

 Soviet occupation, 1979–1989 U.S. aid to rebels, 1980s International and Northern Alliance forces defeat Taliban, 2001

 sp

ARMENIA AZERBAIJAN

Ankara


Athens


Ca


 GEORGIA

40°N


Mecca
 Jewish state after UN partition of Palestine, 1947

 Oil embargo, 1973 Source of 17% of U.S. oil imports in 1975 Largest buyer of U.S. arms, 1978

20°N


 OMAN

Arabian Sea


 Israel after War of 1948–1949 Area controlled by Israel after Six-Day War, 1967

40°E


 Israeli-occupied area after Yom Kippur War, 1973

Mediterranean
Sea


 YEMEN

70°E


50°E


Aden


SY R I A
Haifa 
Gulf


GOLAN HEIGHTS

Sea
 of Galilee Tel Aviv ISRAEL Jerusalem Gaza

WEST BANK

Port Said


60°E


Mukalla


Damascus


Jordan
R.


 By Egyptian-Israeli agreements of 1975 and 1979, Israel withdrew from the Sinai in 1982. In 1981 Israel annexed the Golan Heights. Through negotiations between Israel and the PLO, Jericho and the Gaza Strip were placed under Palestinian self-rule, and Israeli troops were withdrawn in 1994. In 1994 Israel and Jordan signed an agreement opening their borders and normalizing their relations.

Sana


L E BA N O N
Beirut


Amman


 de of A

 n

Socotra
(Yemen)


I N D I A N
O C E A N


10°N
32°E


 ETHIOPIA

Dead
Sea
J O R DA N


 U.S. troops assist in relief of famine, 1992–1993; U.S. troops withdrawn, 1994

Members of the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries
 (OPEC) Oil fields

SO M A L I A

Suez
Canal


EGY P T
Suez 
 fo fS ue z Sharm el-Sheikh

32°E


Mogadishu


Elath


Red Sea




500 Km.


500 Mi.


0° Equator
SA U D I ARABIA

N


28°E
36°E


 Map 40.2 The Middle East A combination of political instability and precious petroleum resources has made the region from Egypt to Afghanistan an “arc of crisis.”





 o f A qa b a

G ul


ARAB-ISRAELI CONFLICT

SINAI PENINSULA

G ul f


Nile R
.


Cairo


Interactive Map


Reagan and the Russians


 chairman of the Soviet Communist party in March 1985. Gorbachev was personable, energetic, imaginative, and committed to radical reforms in the Soviet Union. He announced two policies with remarkable, even revolutionary, implications. Glasnost, or “openness,” aimed to ventilate the secretive, repressive stuffiness of Soviet society by introducing free speech and a mea sure of political liberty. Perestroika, or “restructuring,” was intended to revive the moribund Soviet economy by adopting many of the free-market practices—such as the proﬁt motive and an end to subsidized prices—of the capitalist West. Both glasnost and perestroika required that the Soviet Union shrink the size of its enormous military machine and redirect its energies to the dismal civilian economy. That requirement, in turn, necessitated an end to the Cold War. Gorbachev accordingly made warm overtures to the West, including an announcement in April 1985 that the Soviet Union would cease to deploy intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) tar-

 geted at Western Europe, pending an agreement on their complete elimination. He pushed this goal when he met with Ronald Reagan at the ﬁ rst of four summit meetings, in Geneva in November 1985. A second summit meeting, in Reykjavik, Iceland, in October 1986, broke down when a furious Reagan stormed out, convinced that Gorbachev had come to end plans for the beloved SDI. But at a third summit, in Washington, D.C., in December 1987, the two leaders at last signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, banning all of these missiles from Europe. Reagan and Gorbachev capped their new friendship in May 1988 at a ﬁ nal summit in Moscow. There Reagan, who had entered ofﬁce condemning the “evil empire” of Soviet communism, warmly praised Gorbachev. Reagan, the consummate cold warrior, had been ﬂexible and savvy enough to seize a historic opportunity to join with the Soviet chief to bring the Cold War to a kind of conclusion. For this, history would give both leaders high marks.

 Map 40.3 Central America and the Caribbean This region, so important to the United States throughout its history, remained a hotbed of unrest through the last years of the Cold War and beyond. 100°W

UNITED STATES

90°W


80°W


 U.S. maintains prison for suspected terrorists despite international protests, 2003–.

 ida or

Fl


 of

H
A
M


S


A


 NAFTA links U.S., Canada, and Mexico Tropic of Cancer in free-trade zone, 1994. U.S. intervenes to save Mexican peso, 1995.

 its

CUBA
Guantánamo 
 Yucatán Peninsula Staging area for anti-Sandinista rebel army (Contras), organized and financed by U.S.

 BELIZE (1981)

 Radical leftist government overthrown by U.S. intervention, Oct. 1983.

VENEZUELA PANAMA

ST. VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
(1979) TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO (1962) 
 Flow of drugs to U.S. poses chronic problems.

 GUYANA (1966)

 Major economic expansion, 1980s, 1990s. Civilian rule restored, 1985. Reformer Luis da Silva elected president, 2002.

COLOMBIA
Panama Canal Treaties, 1978. U.S. invades Panama to capture Gen. Manuel Noriega, Dec. 1989. 
ST. LUCIA
(1979) BARBADOS (1966) 
 Populist Hugo Chávez elected president, 1988; survives coup, 2002; threatens oil boycott against U.S., 2007.

 U.S. territory achieved

(1974)


 U.S. finances guerrilla army fighting leftist Sandinista government, 1982–1988. Anti-Sandinista coalition wins 1990 election.

400 Mi.


 (1962) Year independence

 GRENADA

10°N


COSTA RICA

400 Km.


(1962)


Panama
Canal


PAC I F IC OC EAN

Guadeloupe (Fr.)
 DOMINICA (1978) Martinique (Fr.)

 JAMAICA

 Curaçao (Neth.)

EL SALVADOR



ST. KITTS AND NEVIS
(1983) ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA (1981) 
Caribbean Sea


 NICARAGUA



 HAITI

 HONDURAS

 Ongoing guerrilla activity and widespread poverty. Right-wing government and opposition leaders sign peace treaty, 1992.

Virgin Is.
Puerto Rico (Gr. Br.)
(U.S.)


DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Virgin Is. (U.S.)


 MEXICO

 GUATEMALA

N


 Military coup, 1991. U.S. invasion restores President Aristide, 1994. Aristide overthrown, 2004; U.S./U.N. peacekeeping forces intervene.

 BA

Stra


20°N


Interactive Map


AT L A N T I C O C E A N

Gulf of Mexico
 Migration of thousands of Cubans to U.S., 1980. Castro resignation foreshadows change, 2008.



70°W


BRAZIL 60°W



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


East Meets West
 President Reagan greets Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev at a summit meeting in Moscow in May 1988.

 Reagan made other decisive moves in foreign policy. His administration provided strong backing in February 1986 for Corazon Aquino’s ouster of dictator Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines. Reagan also ordered a lightning air raid against Libya in 1986, in retaliation for alleged Libyan sponsorship of terrorist attacks, including a bomb blast in a West Berlin discotheque that killed a U.S. ser viceman.

The Iran-Contra Imbroglio
 Two foreign-policy problems seemed insoluble to Reagan: the continuing captivity of a number of American hostages, seized by Muslim extremist groups in bleeding, battered Lebanon; and the continuing grip on power of the left-wing Sandinista government in Nicaragua. The president repeatedly requested that Congress provide military aid to the contra rebels ﬁghting against the Sandinista regime. Congress repeatedly refused, and the administration grew increasingly frustrated, even obsessed, in its search for a means to help the contras. Unknown to the American public, some Washington ofﬁcials saw a possible linkage between the two

 thorny problems of the Middle Eastern hostages and the Central American Sandinistas. In 1985 American diplomats secretly arranged arms sales to Iran, which was mired in a devastating territorial war with neighboring Iraq. In return, the Iranians helped obtain the release of at least one American hostage held by Middle Eastern terrorists. Meanwhile, the money Iran paid for the American weapons was diverted to the contras in Nicaragua. These actions brazenly violated a congressional ban on military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels—not to mention Reagan’s repeated vow that he would never negotiate with terrorists. Washington also continued to support Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein, to whom it sold weapons used against Iran. News of these secret dealings broke in November 1986 and ignited a ﬁ restorm of controversy. President Reagan claimed he was innocent of wrongdoing and ignorant of his subordinates’ activities. Reviving a refrain from the Watergate era, the public clamored to know “what the president knew and when he knew it.” Although Reagan was never found to have lied outright, a congressional committee condemned the “secrecy, deception, and disdain for the law” displayed by administration ofﬁcials and concluded that “if the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have.”

The Iran-Contra Scandal




Contra Rebel Troops Head for Battle
 These rebels were long-seasoned and battle-scarred veterans of Nicaragua’s civil war by the time this photograph was taken in 1987.

 The Iran-Contra affair cast a dark shadow over the Reagan record on foreign policy, tending to obscure the president’s outstanding achievement in establishing a new relationship with the Soviets. Out of the several Iran-Contra investigations, a picture emerged of Reagan as a lazy, perhaps even senile, president who napped through meetings and paid little or no attention to the details of policy. Reagan’s critics pounced on this portrait as proof that the movie-starturned-politician was a mental lightweight who had merely acted his way through the role of the presidency without really understanding the script. But despite these damaging revelations, Reagan remained among the most popular and beloved presidents in modern American history.

On March 4, 1987, President Ronald Reagan
 somewhat confusingly tried to explain his role (or lack of role) in the arms-for-hostages deal with Iran:

“


 A few months ago I told the American people I did not trade arms for hostages. My heart and my best intentions still tell me that is true, but the facts and the evidence tell me it is not.

”


 Reagan’s Economic Legacy Ronald Reagan had taken ofﬁce vowing to invigorate the American economy by rolling back government regulations, lowering taxes, and balancing the budget. He did ease many regulatory rules, and he pushed major tax reform bills through Congress in 1981 and 1986. But a balanced budget remained grotesquely out of reach. Supply-side economic theory had promised that lower taxes would actually increase government revenue because they would stimulate the economy as a whole. But, in fact, the combination of tax reduction and huge increases in military spending opened a vast “revenue hole” of $200 billion annual deﬁcits. In his eight years in ofﬁce, President Reagan added nearly $2 trillion to the national debt—more than all of his predecessors combined, including those who had fought protracted global wars (see Figure 40.1). The staggering deﬁcits of the Reagan years assuredly constituted a great economic failure. And because so much of the Reagan-era debt was ﬁnanced by foreign lenders, especially the Japa nese, the deﬁcits virtually guaranteed that future generations of Americans would either have to work harder than their parents, lower their standard of living, or both to pay their foreign creditors when the bills came due.



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992
 Billions of dollars 9,000 8,500 8,000 7,500 7,000 6,500 6,000 5,500 5,000

G. W. BUSH ELECTED 2001, SEPTEMBER 11TH ATTACK

4,000






CLINTON ELECTED

1,000


REAGAN ELECTED

1,500


VIETNAM WAR

2,000


 DEPRESSION

2,500


KOREAN WAR BREAKS

WORLD WAR II BREAKS

3,000


JAPAN SURRENDERS

3,500


INVASION OF IRAQ

4,500






























 Figure 40.1 The National Debt, 1930–2006 World War II provided the ﬁrst major boost to the national debt. But it was the policies of the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations, 1981–1993, that explosively expanded the debt to the $4 trillion level. By the 1990s, 14 percent of federal revenues went to interest payments on the debt. The budget surpluses created by the booming economy of the second Clinton administration (1997–2001) raised the prospect that the debt might be paid off. But the combination of the George W. Bush tax cuts and increased military spending sent the debt soaring again after 2001. (Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States and Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years; Ofﬁce of Management and Budget, “Mid-Session Review: Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal Year 2008.”)

 But if the deﬁcits represented an economic failure, they also constituted, strangely enough, a kind of political triumph. Among the paramount goals of Reagan’s political life was his ambition to slow the growth of government, and especially to block or even repeal the social programs launched in the era of Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society. By appearing to make new social spending both practically and politically impossible for the foreseeable future, the deﬁcits served exactly that purpose. They achieved, in short, Reagan’s highest political objective: the containment of the welfare state. Ronald Reagan thus ensured the long-term perpetuation of his dearest political values to a degree

 that few presidents have managed to achieve. For better or worse, the consequences of “Reaganomics” would be large and durable. Yet another legacy of the 1980s was a sharp reversal of a long-term trend toward a more equitable distribution of income and an increasing squeeze on the middle class. In the early 1990s, median household income (in 1993 dollars) actually declined, from about $33,500 in 1989 to about $31,000 in 1993 (see Figure 40.2). Whether that disturbing trend should be attributed to Reagan’s policies or to more deeply running economic currents remained controversial.

Religion and Politics


51.7


49.5


47.6


46.7


46.2
46.6


48.7


49.8


50.4


21.0


22.1


22.2








Highest 5%


44.1


18.5
16.5
4.2


3.8


1980 1990


3.7


3.6


3.4








 Lowest 20 percent

1980 1990








 Middle 60 percent

The Religious Right
 Religion pervaded American politics in the 1980s. Especially conspicuous was a coalition of conser vative, evangelical Christians known as the religious right. In 1979 the Reverend Jerry Falwell, an evangelical minister from Lynchburg, Virginia, founded a political orga ni zation called the Moral Majority. Falwell preached with great success against sexual permissiveness, abortion, feminism, and the spread of gay rights. In its ﬁ rst two years, the Moral Majority registered between 2 million and 3 million voters. Using radio, direct-mail marketing, and cable TV, “televangelists” reached huge audiences in the 1980s, collected millions of dollars, and became aggressive political advocates of conser vative causes. Members of the religious right were sometimes called “movement conser vatives,” a term that recalls the left-wing protest movements of the 1960s. In many ways the religious right of the 1980s was a reﬂection of, or answer to, sixties radicalism. Feminists in the 1960s declared that “the personal was political.” The religious right did the same. What had in the past been personal matters—gender roles, homosexuality, and prayer—became the organizing ground for a powerful political movement. Like advocates of multiculturalism and afﬁ rmative action, the religious right practiced a form of “identity politics.” But rather than deﬁ ning themselves as Latino voters or gay voters, they declared themselves Christian or pro-life voters.

1980 1990


 Highest 20 percent



Figure 40.2
Share of Income
Received by Families,
 by Quintile, 1980–2005 Since 1980 the incomes of the lowest 20 percent and the middle 60 percent have been shrinking, while the incomes of the highest 20 percent, and particularly the top 5 percent, have climbed steadily. (Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2008.)

 The New Right also mimicked the New Left in some of its tactics. If the left had consciousness-raising sessions, the right had prayer meetings. Adherents articulated their positions in a language of rights and entitlements, as in the “right-to-life” (or anti-abortion) movement. They even mirrored the tactics of civil

 The Moral Majority, 1981 Television evangelist and religious leader the Reverend Jerry Falwell mobilized his national Moral Majority organization in support of Ronald Reagan’s presidential campaign in 1980 and a conservative social agenda.



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 disobedience. Protesters in the 1960s blocked entrances to draft ofﬁces; protesters in the 1980s blocked entrances to abortion clinics. Several leaders of the religious right fell from grace in the latter part of the decade. One tearfully admitted to repeated trysts with prostitutes. Another went to prison following revelations of his own ﬁ nancial and sexual misconduct. But such scandals would not shake the faith of America’s conser vative Christians or diminish the new political clout of activist, evangelical religionists.

Conservatism in the Courts
 If the budget was Reagan’s chief weapon in the war against the welfare state, the courts became his principal instrument in the “cultural wars” demanded by the religious right. By the time he left ofﬁce, Reagan had appointed a near-majority of all sitting judges. Equally important, he had named three conser vativeminded justices to the U.S. Supreme Court. They included Sandra Day O’Connor, a brilliant, public-spirited Arizona judge. When she was sworn in on September 25, 1981, she became the ﬁ rst woman to ascend to the high bench in the Court’s nearly two-hundred-year history. Reaganism repudiated two great icons of the liberal political culture: afﬁ rmative action and abortion. The Court showed its newly conser vative colors in 1984, when it decreed, in a case involving Memphis ﬁ reﬁghters, that union rules about job seniority could outweigh afﬁ rmative-action concerns in guiding promotion policies in the city’s ﬁ re department. In two cases in 1989 (Ward’s Cove Packing v. Antonia and Martin v. Wilks), the Court made it more difﬁcult to prove that an employer practiced racial discrimination in hiring and made it easier for white males to argue that they were the victims of reverse discrimination by employers who followed afﬁ rmative-action practices. Congress passed legislation in 1991 that partially reversed the effects of those decisions. The contentious issue of abortion also reached the Court in 1989. In the case of Roe v. Wade in 1973, the Supreme Court had prohibited states from making laws that interfered with a woman’s right to an abortion during the early months of pregnancy. For nearly two decades, that decision had been the bedrock principle on which “pro-choice” advocates built their case for abortion rights. It had also provoked bitter criticism from Roman Catholics and various “right-to-life”

 The Justice Is a Lady, 1981 Herblock hails Sandra Day O’Connor’s appointment to the Supreme Court.

 groups, who wanted a virtually absolute ban on all abortions. In Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, the Court in July 1989 did not entirely overturn Roe, but it seriously compromised Roe’s protection of abortion rights. By approving a Missouri law that imposed certain restrictions on abortion, the Court signaled that it was inviting the states to legislate in an area in which Roe had previously forbidden them to legislate. The Court renewed that invitation in Planned Parenthood v. Casey in 1992, when it ruled that states could restrict access to abortion as long as they did not place an “undue burden” on the woman. Using this standard, the Court held that Pennsylvania could not compel a wife to notify her husband about an abortion but could require a minor child to notify parents, as well as other restrictions. Right-to-life advocates were at ﬁ rst delighted by the Webster decision. But the Court’s ruling also galva-

 Reagan's Legacy

Speaking to the National Association of
 Evangelicals, President Ronald Reagan said the following about abortion:

“


 More than a decade ago, a Supreme Court decision [Roe v. Wade, 1973] literally wiped off the books of ﬁfty states statutes protecting the rights of unborn children. Abortion on demand now takes the lives of up to 1½ million unborn children a year. Human life legislation ending this tragedy will some day pass the Congress, and you and I must never rest until it does. Unless and until it can be proven that the unborn child is not a living entity, then its right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness must be protected.

”


 nized pro-choice orga ni zations into a new militancy. Bruising, divisive battles loomed as state legislatures across the land confronted abortion. This painful cultural conﬂ ict over the unborn was also part of the Reagan era’s bequest to the future.

Referendum on
Reaganism in 1988
 Republicans lost control of the Senate in the off-year elections of November 1986. Hopes rose among Democrats that the “Reagan Revolution” might be showing signs of political vulnerability at last. The newly Democratic majority in the Senate ﬂexed its political muscles in 1987 when it rejected an ultraconservative nominee for the Supreme Court. Democrats also relished the prospect of making political hay out of both the Iran-Contra affair and disquieting signs of economic trouble. The “double mountain” of deﬁcits—the federal budget deﬁcit and the international trade deﬁcit—continued to grow ominously. Falling oil prices blighted the economy of the Southwest, slashing real estate values and undermining hundreds of savings and loan (S&L) institutions. The damage to the S&Ls was so massive that a federal rescue operation was eventually estimated to carry a price tag of well over $500 billion. Meanwhile, many American banks found themselves holding nearworthless loans they had unwisely foisted upon Third



 World countries, especially in Latin America. In 1984 it took federal assistance to save Continental Illinois Bank from a catastrophic failure. More banks and savings institutions were folding than at any time since the Great Depression of the 1930s. A wave of mergers, acquisitions, and leveraged buyouts washed over Wall Street, leaving many brokers and traders megarich and many companies saddled with megadebt. A cold spasm of fear struck the money markets on Black Monday, October 19, 1987, when the leading stock-market index plunged 508 points—the largest one-day decline in history to that point. This crash, said Newsweek magazine, heralded “the ﬁ nal collapse of the money culture . . . , the death knell of the 1980s.” But as Mark Twain famously commented about his own obituary, this announcement proved premature. Hoping to cash in on these ethical and economic anxieties, a pack of Democrats—dubbed the “Seven Dwarfs” by derisive Republicans—chased after their party’s 1988 presidential nomination. The handsome and charismatic Democratic front-runner, former Colorado senator Gary Hart, was forced to drop out of the race in May 1987 after charges of sexual misconduct. African American candidate Jesse Jackson, a rousing speechmaker who hoped to forge a “rainbow coalition” of minorities and the disadvantaged, campaigned energetically. But the Democratic nomination in the end went to the coolly cerebral governor of Massachusetts, Michael Dukakis. Republicans nominated Reagan’s vice president, George H. W. Bush, who ran largely on the Reagan record of tax cuts, strong defense policies, toughness on crime, opposition to abortion, and a long-running if hardly robust economic expansion. Dukakis made little headway exploiting the ethical and economic sore spots and came across to television

 Hollywood director Oliver Stone’s (b. 1946) ﬁlm Wall Street both romanticized and viliﬁed the business culture of the 1980s. The character of Gordon Gekko, inspired by real-life corporate raider Ivan Boesky, captured the spirit of the times:

“


 Ladies and gentlemen, greed is good. Greed works, greed is right. . . . Greed for life, money, love, knowledge, has marked the upward surge of mankind—and greed, mark my words, will save the malfunctioning corporation called the U.S.A.

”




Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 viewers as almost supernaturally devoid of emotion. On election day the voters gave him just 41,016,429 votes to 47,946,422 for Bush. The Electoral College count was 111 to 426.

George H. W. Bush and
 the End of the Cold War George Herbert Walker Bush was born with a silver ladle in his mouth. His father had served as a U.S. senator from Connecticut, and young George had enjoyed a ﬁ rst-rate education at Yale. After ser vice in World War II, he had amassed a modest fortune of his own in the oil business in Texas. His deepest commitment, however, was to public ser vice; he left the business world to serve brieﬂy as a congressman and then held various posts in several Republican administrations, including emissary to China, ambassador to the United Nations, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and vice president. He capped this long political career when he was inaugurated president in January 1989, promising to work for “a kinder, gentler America.” In the ﬁ rst months of the Bush administration, the communist world commanded the planet’s fascinated attention. Everywhere in the communist bloc, it seemed, the season of democracy had arrived. In China hundreds of thousands of prodemocracy demonstrators thronged through Beijing’s Tiananmen Square in the spring of 1989. They proudly ﬂourished a thirty-foot-high “Goddess of Democracy,”

Tiananmen Square,
Beijing, China, June 1989
 The Chinese communist state mobilized all its forces against students demonstrating for a more democratic China.

George Herbert Walker Bush (b. 1924) Campaigning,
 October 1988 Bush soundly defeated Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis in the November 1988 election.

 modeled on the Statue of Liberty, as a symbol of their aspirations. But in June of that year, China’s aging and autocratic rulers brutally crushed the prodemocracy movement. Tanks rolled over the crowds, and machinegunners killed hundreds of protesters. World opinion

 The USSR Dissolves



Fallen Idol
 Romanians toppled this statue of Vladimir Lenin in 1990, symbolically marking the collapse of the Marxian dream that had agitated the world for more than a century.

 roundly condemned the bloody suppression of the prodemocracy demonstrators. President Bush joined in the criticism. Yet despite angry demands in Congress for punitive restrictions on trade with China, the president insisted on maintaining normal relations with Beijing. Stunning changes also shook Eastern Europe. Long oppressed by puppet regimes propped up by Soviet guns, the region was revolutionized in just a few startling months in 1989. The Solidarity movement in Poland led the way when it toppled Poland’s communist government in August. With dizzying speed, communist regimes collapsed in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and even hyperrepressive Romania. In December 1989, jubilant Germans danced atop the hated Berlin Wall, symbol of the division of Germany and all of Europe into two armed and hostile camps. The wall itself soon came down, heralding the imminent end of the forty-ﬁve-year-long Cold War. Chunks of the wall’s concrete became instant collectors’ items—gray souvenirs of a grim episode in Europe’s history. With the approval of the victorious Allied powers of World War II, the two Germanys, divided since 1945, were at last reunited in October 1990. Most startling of all were the changes that rolled over the heartland of world communism, the Soviet Union itself. Mikhail Gorbachev’s policies of glasnost and perestroika had set in motion a groundswell that

 surged out of his control. Old-guard hard-liners, in a last-gasp effort to preserve the tottering communist system, attempted to dislodge Gorbachev with a military coup in August 1991. With the support of Boris Yeltsin, president of the Russian Republic (one of the several republics that composed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or USSR), Gorbachev foiled the plotters. But his days were numbered. In December 1991 Gorbachev resigned as Soviet president. He had become a leader without a country as the Soviet Union dissolved into its component parts, some ﬁ fteen republics loosely confederated in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), with Russia the most powerful state and Yeltsin the dominant leader. To varying degrees, all the new governments in the CIS repudiated communism and embraced democratic reforms and a free-market economy (see Map 40.4). These developments astonished the “experts,” who had long preached that the steely vise-grip of communist rule never could be peacefully broken. Yet suddenly and almost miraculously, the totalitarian tonnage of communist oppression had been rendered politically weightless. Most spectacularly, the demise of the Soviet Union wrote a deﬁ nitive ﬁ nish to the Cold War era. More than four decades of nail-biting tension between two nuclear superpowers, the Soviet Union and the United States, evaporated when the USSR dismantled itself. With the Soviet Union swept into the



20°W


0°


°N


20°E


40°E


 Communist regimes overthrown since 1989

Arctic


Circle


 SWEDEN

 Soviet Union, dissolved in 1991

 NORWAY

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 IRELAND

 DENMARK

UNITED KINGDOM

NETH. LUX.



UG RT PO

CZECH REP.

 ITALY

 SPAIN

 BELARUS

AUSTRIA SLOVAKIA HUNGARY

U K R AI NE


 ALBANIA

 BULGARIA

Black


Se


 a

 TUNISIA

 GEORGIA

GR EEC E

 CHECHNYA

U ZB EK I ST AN


CHINA T U R K MENI ST AN

 AZERBAIJAN

SLOVENIA CROATIA

SYR I A

Ad
 ri

 at ic

 SERBIA

Se


 NATO airwar against Serbia to protect Kosovo, 1994

 a

 MONTENEGRO

 AFGHANISTAN

I R AN


SAU D I AR AB I A

 EGYPT





 KUWAIT

500 Km.


 ia

 rs

Sea


F.Y.R.
 MACEDONIA

 JORDAN

Pe


 KOSOVO

 IRAQ

 ISRAEL

Red


 U.S. troops join NATO peacekeeping forces, Dec. 1995

 PAKISTAN

N


CYPRUS LEBANON

 BOSNIAHERZEGOVINA

 KYRGYZSTAN

 TAJIKISTAN

 ARMENIA

 TURKEY

Sea


 MALTA

 a

 ian

Se


 sp

 n

Aral
Sea


Ca


 nea

 KAZAKHSTAN

 Chechnya declares independence 1991; Russia attacks, 1994

 ROMANIA

 ALGERIA

 Gorbachev in power, 1985 –1991 Moscow coup fails; Boris Yeltsin declared president of Russia, 1990

 Czechoslovakia broke into Czech Republic and Slovakia in 1993 MOLDOVA

Mediterra


 RUSSIA

Moscow


Berlin


80°E


 Largest and most influential of the former Soviet republics after 1991

LATVIA LITHUANIA

 POLAND

 SWITZ.

 FRANCE

 AL

°N


 RUSSIA

 GERMANY

 BELG.

60°E


 ESTONIA

Elections, 1989


 Berlin Wall opened, Nov. 1989 German reunification, 1990

 Yugoslavia, dissolved in civil war, 1991–1992

F I NL AND


North
Sea


 n

500 Mi.


Map 40.4 The End of the Cold War Changed the Map of Europe


 dustbin of history and communism all but extinct, Bush spoke hopefully of a “new world order,” where democracy would reign and diplomacy would supersede weaponry. Some observers even saw in these developments “the end of history,” in the sense that democracy, victorious in its two-century-long struggle against foes on the left and right, had no ideological battles left to ﬁght. Exultant Americans joked that the USSR had become the “USS were.” But the disintegration of the Soviet Union was no laughing matter. Rankling questions remained. For example, who would honor armscontrol agreements with the United States? Which of the successor states of the former Soviet Union would take command of the formidable Soviet nuclear arsenal? (A partial answer was provided in early 1993, when President Bush, in one of his last ofﬁcial acts, signed the START II accord with Russian president Boris Yeltsin, committing both powers to reduce their long-range nuclear arsenals by two-thirds within ten years.)

Gu


 lf

Interactive Map


 In his state of the union address on January 31, 1990, President George H. W. Bush (b. 1924) declared,

“


 The events of the year just ended, the revolution of ’89, have been a chain reaction, changes so striking that it marks the beginning of a new era in the world’s affairs.

”


 Just six months later, speaking at Stanford University, Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev (b. 1931) said,

“


 The Cold War is now behind us. Let us not wrangle over who won it. It is in the common interest of our two countries and nations not to ﬁght this trend toward cooperation, but rather to promote it.

”


The End of the Cold War




The Agony of Yugoslavia, 1992
 These Bosnian refugees from the town of Jajce illustrate the plight of millions of Yugoslavians as their country slid into vicious interethnic battles in the wake of the Cold War’s conclusion.

 Throughout the former Soviet empire, waves of nationalistic fervor and long-suppressed ethnic and racial hatreds rolled across the vast land as communism’s roots were wrenched out. A particularly nasty conﬂ ict erupted in the Russian Caucasus in 1991, when the Chechnyan minority tried to declare their independence from Russia, prompting President Yeltsin to send in Russian troops. Ethnic warfare ﬂared in other disintegrating communist countries as well, notably in misery-drenched Yugoslavia, racked by vicious “ethnic cleansing” campaigns against various minorities. The end of the Cold War also proved a mixed blessing for the United States. For nearly half a century, the containment of Soviet communism had been the paramount goal of U.S. foreign policy. Indeed the Cold War era had been the only lengthy period in American history when the United States had consistently pursued an internationalist foreign policy. With the Soviet threat now canceled, would the United States revert to its traditional isolationism? What principles would guide American diplomacy now that “anticommunism” had lost its relevance? The Soviet-American rivalry, with its demands for high levels of military preparedness, had also deeply shaped and even invigorated the U.S. economy. Huge economic sectors such as aerospace were heavily sustained by military contracts. The economic cost of beating swords into plowshares became painfully apparent

 in 1991 when the Pentagon announced the closing of thirty-four military bases and canceled a $52 billion order for a navy attack plane. More closings and cancellations followed. Communities that had been drenched with Pentagon dollars now nearly dried up, especially in hard-hit southern California, where scores of defense plants shut their doors and unemployment soared. The problems of weaning the U.S. economy from its decades of dependence on defense spending tempered the euphoria of Americans as they welcomed the Cold War’s long-awaited ﬁ nale. Elsewhere in the world, democracy marched triumphantly forward. The white regime in South Africa took a giant step toward liberating that troubled land from its racist past when in 1990 it freed African leader Nelson Mandela, who had served twenty-seven years in prison for conspiring to overthrow the government. Four years later Mandela was elected South Africa’s president. Free elections in Nicaragua in February 1990 removed the leftist Sandinistas from power. Two years later peace came at last to war-ravaged El Salvador.

The Persian Gulf Crisis
 Sadly, the end of the Cold War did not mean the end of all wars. President Bush ﬂexed the United States’



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 still-intimidating military muscles in tiny Panama in December 1989, when he sent airborne troops to capture dictator and drug lord Manuel Noriega. Still more ominous events in the summer of 1990 severely tested Bush’s dream of a democratic and peaceful new world order. On August 2 Saddam Hussein, the brutal and ambitious ruler of Iraq, sent his armies to overrun Kuwait, a tiny, oil-rich desert sheikdom on Iraq’s southern frontier. Oil fueled Saddam’s aggression. Financially exhausted by its eight-year war with Iran, which had ended in a stalemate in 1988, Iraq needed Kuwait’s oil to pay its huge war bills. Saddam’s larger design was ironﬁsted control over the entire Persian Gulf region. With his hand thus ﬁ rmly clutching the world’s economic jugular vein, he dreamed of dictating the terms of oil supplies to the industrial nations, and perhaps of totally extinguishing the Arabs’ enemy, Israel. Ironically, the United States and its allies had helped supply Saddam with the tools of aggression. He was widely known to be a thug and assassin who intimidated his underlings by showing them the bodies of his executed adversaries hanging on meat hooks. But in the 1980s, American enmity for Islamicfundamentalist Iran was intense, and Saddam was at war with Iran. Assuming that “the enemy of my enemy is my friend,” American policymakers helped build Saddam’s military machine into a formidable force. On August 2, 1990, Saddam’s army roared into Kuwait. The speed and audacity of the invasion was stunning, but the world responded just as swiftly. The United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned the invasion on August 3 and demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraq’s troops. When an economic embargo failed to squeeze the Iraqis into compliance by November, the Security Council delivered an ultimatum to Saddam to leave Kuwait by January 15, 1991, or U.N. forces would “use all necessary means” to expel his troops. For perhaps the ﬁ rst time in the post–World War II era, the U.N. seemed to be fulﬁ lling its founders’ dreams that it could preserve international order by putting guns where its mouth was. It also put them where the world’s critical oil supply was. In a logistical operation of astonishing complexity, the United States spearheaded a massive international military deployment on the sandy Arabian Peninsula. As the January 15 deadline approached, some 539,000 U.S. soldiers, sailors, and pilots—many of them women and all of them members of the new, post-Vietnam, all-volunteer American military—

 swarmed into the Persian Gulf region. They were joined by nearly 270,000 troops, pilots, and sailors from twenty-eight other countries in the coalition opposed to Iraq. When all diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis failed, the U.S. Congress voted regretfully on January 12 to approve the use of force. On January 16 the time bomb of war ticked off its last beats. The United States and its U.N. allies unleashed a hellish air attack against Iraq. For thirty-seven days, warplanes pummeled targets in occupied Kuwait and in Iraq itself, in an awesome display of high-technology, precision-targeting modern warfare. Iraq responded to this pounding by launching several dozen “Scud” short-range ballistic missiles against military and civilian targets in Saudi Arabia and Israel. These missile attacks claimed several lives but did no signiﬁcant military damage. Yet if Iraq made but a feeble military response to the air campaign, the allied commander, the beefy and blunt American general Norman (“Stormin’ Norman”) Schwarzkopf, took nothing for granted. Saddam, who had threatened to wage “the mother of all battles,” had the capacity to inﬂict awful damage. Iraq had stockpiled tons of chemical and biological weapons, including poison gas and the means to spread epidemics of anthrax. Saddam’s tactics also included ecological warfare as he released a gigantic oil slick into the Persian Gulf to forestall amphibious assault and ignited hundreds of oil-well ﬁ res, whose smoky plumes shrouded the ground from aerial view. Faced with these horrifying tactics, Schwarzkopf’s strategy was starkly simple: soften the Iraqis with relentless bombing, then suffocate them on the ground with a tidal-wave rush of troops and armor. On February 23 the dreaded and long-awaited land war began. Dubbed Operation Desert Storm, it lasted only four days—the “hundred-hour war” (see Map 40.5). With lightning speed the U.N. forces penetrated deep into Iraq, outﬂanking the occupying forces in Kuwait and blocking the enemy’s ability either to retreat or to reinforce. Allied casualties were amazingly light, whereas much of Iraq’s remaining ﬁghting force was quickly destroyed or captured. On February 27 Saddam accepted a cease-ﬁ re, and Kuwait was liberated. Most Americans cheered the war’s rapid and enormously successful conclusion. Many people echoed President Bush’s sentiments when he declared, “By God, we’ve kicked the Vietnam Syndrome once and for all!” But when the smoke cleared, Saddam Hussein had survived to menace the world another day. America and its allies had agreed to the liberation of Ku-

Operation Desert Storm




The Highway of Death
 The allied coalition wreaked gruesome destruction on Iraqi forces ﬂeeing back to Iraq after their defeat in Kuwait in 1991.

 wait, but Bush, fearing that a full assault on Baghdad would cost many lives and much public support, stopped well short of overthrowing the tyrant Saddam. The perpetually troubled Middle East knew scarcely

 less trouble after Desert Storm had ceased to thunder, and the United States, for better or worse, found itself even more deeply ensnared in the region’s web of mortal hatreds and intractable conﬂ icts.

Map 40.5 Operation Desert Storm: The Ground War, February 23–27, 1991
30˚E


40˚E


50˚E


SOVIET U N I O N
Baku 
Yerevan


TU R KEY
Tigris 
I R AN
I R AQ
Basra


Nile


KU WA I T



Kuwait City


Tabuk


Hafar al Batin


Pe


Jubail
Dhahran


Se


 a

Riyadh


 rs



 ian

Gul


 f

BAH R AI N Q ATAR
Abu Doha Dhabi 
300 Km.


300 Mi.


 o f Ho

 uz

 d

Allied Central
Command


Medina


Khafji


King Khalid
Military City




 rm

Re


SA U D I A R A B IA

60˚E


N


Baghdad


Aqaba


SI N AI

EGY P T EGY P T

 Primary Scud missile target

 t

Damascus


Suez IS R AEL
Canal
JOR DAN

R.


Cairo


 Allied naval forces Tehran

L E BANON
Beirut 
Haifa
Tel Aviv
WEST BAN K
Amman GA Z A STR I P Jerusalem 30˚N 
 Main allied air base

 ate

 ai

 ean Sea

 Allied advances in ground war, Feb. 24–28, 1991

Str


 iterran

R.


SYR IA

C Y P R US


Mosul


 Major oil field

.


Med


Nicosia


 Kurdish refugees flee Iraq toward Turkey and Iran.

 sR

N. CYPRUS

Euphr


 Kurdish region

 ea pian S

Ankara


Incirlih


 Allied troop build-up, Aug. 1990–Feb. 1991

Cas


40˚N


Interactive Map


Gul


U N IT ED
AR AB EM I R AT ES

 f of Oman Muscat



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


Bush on the Home Front
 George H. W. Bush partly redeemed his pledge to work for a “kinder, gentler America” when he signed the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990, a landmark law prohibiting discrimination against the 43 million U.S. citizens with physical or mental disabilities. The president also signed a major water projects bill in 1992 that fundamentally reformed the distribution of subsidized federal water in the West. The bill put the interests of the environment ahead of agriculture, especially in Cal i fornia’s heavily irrigated Central Valley, and made much more water available to the West’s thirsty cities. The new president continued to aggravate the explosive “social issues” that had so divided Americans throughout the 1980s, especially the nettlesome questions of afﬁ rmative action and abortion. In 1990 Bush’s Department of Education challenged the legality of college scholarships targeted for racial minorities. Bush repeatedly threatened to veto civil rights legislation that would make it easier for employees to prove discrimination in hiring and promotion practices. (He grudgingly accepted a watered-down civil rights bill in 1991.) Most provocatively, in 1991 Bush nominated for the Supreme Court the conser vative African American jurist Clarence Thomas, a stern critic of afﬁ rmative action. Thomas’s nomination was loudly opposed by

Read My Nose
 When President Bush reneged on his 1988 campaign promise of “no new taxes,” he inﬂicted mortal political damage on his reelection campaign in 1992.

 liberal groups, including orga nized labor, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and the National Organization for Women (NOW). Reﬂecting irreconcilable divisions over afﬁ rmative action and abortion, the Senate Judiciary Committee concluded its hearings on the nomination with a divided 7–7 vote and forwarded the matter to the full Senate without a recommendation. Then, just days before the Senate was scheduled to vote in early October 1991, a press leak revealed that Anita Hill, a law professor at the University of Oklahoma, had accused Thomas of sexual harassment. The Senate Judiciary Committee was forced to reopen its hearings. For days a prurient American public sat glued to their television sets as Hill graphically detailed her charges of sexual improprieties and Thomas angrily responded. In the end, by a 52–48 vote, the Senate conﬁ rmed Thomas as the second African American ever to sit on the supreme bench (Thurgood Marshall was the ﬁ rst). While many Americans hailed Hill as a heroine for focusing the nation’s at tention on issues of sexual harassment, Thomas maintained that Hill’s widely publicized, unproved allegations amounted to “a high-tech lynching for uppity blacks who in any way deign to think for themselves, to do for themselves.” The furor over Thomas’s conﬁ rmation suggested that the social issues that had helped produce three Republican presidential victories in the 1980s were losing some of their electoral appeal. Many women, en-

Economic Troubles


 raged by the all-male judiciary committee’s behavior in the Thomas hearings, grew increasingly critical of the president’s uncompromising stand on abortion. A “gender gap” opened between the two political parties, as pro-choice women grew increasingly cool toward the strong anti-abortion stand of the Republicans. Still more damaging to President Bush’s political health was the economy, which sputtered and stalled almost from the outset of his administration. By 1992 the unemployment rate exceeded 7 percent. It approached 10 percent in the key state of Cal i fornia, rav-

 aged by defense cutbacks. The federal budget deﬁcit continued to mushroom cancerously, topping $250 billion in each of Bush’s years as president. In a desperate attempt to stop the hemorrhage of red ink, Bush agreed in 1990 to a budget increase that included $133 billion in new taxes. Bush’s 1990 tax and budget package added up to a political catastrophe. In his 1988 presidential campaign, Bush had belligerently declared, “Read my lips— no new taxes.” Now he had ﬂagrantly broken that campaign promise.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Reagan defeats Carter for presidency





 Iran releases American hostages “Reaganomics” spending and tax cuts passed Solidarity movement in Poland O’Connor appointed to Supreme Court (ﬁ rst woman justice)

 Fourth Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting in Moscow Bush defeats Dukakis for presidency



 Chinese government suppresses prodemocracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square Webster v. Reproductive Health Services Eastern European countries oust communist governments Berlin Wall torn down

1981–


 United States aids anti-leftist forces in Central America



 Recession hits U.S. economy Israel invades Lebanon



 Reagan announces SDI plan (Star Wars) U.S. marines killed in Beirut, Lebanon U.S. invasion of Grenada

 Iraq invades Kuwait East and West Germany unite Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)



Persian Gulf War
 Thomas appointed to Supreme Court Gorbachev survives coup attempt, resigns as Soviet president Soviet Union dissolves; republics form Commonwealth of Independent States



 Twenty-seventh Amendment (prohibiting congressional pay raises from taking effect until an election seats a new session of Congress) ratiﬁed Planned Parenthood v. Casey





 Reagan defeats Mondale for presidency Soviet Union boycotts Summer Olympics in Los Angeles



 Gorbachev comes to power in Soviet Union, announces glasnost and perestroika First Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting in Geneva



 Reagan administration backs Aquino in Philippines Iran-Contra affair revealed Second Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting in Reykjavik, Iceland



 Senate rejects Supreme Court nomination of Robert Bork U.S. naval escorts begin in Persian Gulf Stock market plunges 508 points Third Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting in Washington, D.C.; INF treaty signed





Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


KEY TERMS
Proposition 13 (1034) boll weevils (1035) supply-side economics (1035) Reaganomics (1035) Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) (1036) Sandinistas (1037) contras (1037) glasnost (1039) perestroika (1039) Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty (1039) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Iran-Contra affair (1041) Moral Majority (1043) Black Monday (1045) Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) (1047) Operation Desert Storm (1050) Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (1052) 
Ronald Reagan
Margaret Thatcher
Mikhail Gorbachev
Saddam Hussein
Jerry Falwell
Sandra Day O’Connor
George H. W. Bush


Boris Yeltsin
Nelson Mandela
Manuel Noriega
Norman (“Stormin’
Norman”)
Schwarzkopf
Clarence Thomas


Where Did Modern Conservatism Come From?


R


 onald Reagan’s election surprised many historians. Reﬂecting a liberal political outlook that is common among academic scholars, they were long accustomed to understanding American history as an inexorable, almost evolutionary, unfolding of liberal principles, including the quests for economic equality, social justice, and active government. That point of view animated the enormously popular writings of the so-called progressive historians, such as Charles and Mary Beard, earlier in the century (see “Varying Viewpoints: The Populists: Radicals or Reactionaries?” on p. 744). For the Beards, “conser vatives” were the rich, privileged elites bent on preserving their wealth and power and determined to keep government impotent, but doomed in the end to give way to the forces of liberal democracy. Even the “New Left” revisionists of the 1960s, while critical of the celebratory tone of their progressive forebears, were convinced that the deepest currents of American history ﬂowed leftward. But whether they were liberal or revisionist, most scholars writing in the ﬁ rst three post–World War II decades dismissed conservatism as an obsolete political creed. The revisionists were much more interested in decrying liberalism’s deﬁciencies than in analyzing conservatism’s strengths. Liberals and revision-

 ists alike abandoned the Beards’ image of powerful conser vative elites and offered instead a contemptuous portrait of conser vatives as fringe wackos— paranoid McCarthyites or racist demagogues who, in the words of the liberal critic Lionel Trilling, trafﬁcked only in “irritable mental gestures which seem to resemble ideas.” Such an outlook is conspicuous in books such as Daniel Bell’s The Radical Right (1963) and Richard Hofstadter’s The Paranoid Style in American Politics (1965). Yet what ﬂowed out of the turbulent decade of the 1960s was not a strengthened liberalism, but a revived conservatism. Ronald Reagan’s huge political success compelled a thorough reexamination of the tradition of American conservatism and the sources of its modern resurgence. Historians such as Leo Ribuffo and Alan Brinkley have argued that characters once dismissed as irrational crackpots or colorful irrelevancies—including religious fundamentalists and depression-era ﬁgures like Huey Long and Father Charles Coughlin— articulated values deeply rooted and widely shared in American culture. Those conser vative spokespersons, whatever their peculiarities, offered a vision of free individuals, minimal government, and autonomous local communities that harked back to many

To Learn More


 of the themes of “civic republicanism” in the era of young nationhood. But modern conservatism, however deep its roots, is also a product of the recent historical past. As scholars like Thomas Sugrue and Thomas Edsall have shown, the economic stagnation that set in af ter 1970 made many Americans insecure about their futures and receptive to new political doctrines. At the same time, as the commentator Kevin Phillips has stressed, “social issues,” with little or no apparent economic content, became increasingly prom inent, as movements for sexual liberation, legal abortion, and women’s rights sharply challenged traditional beliefs. Perhaps most important, the success of the civil rights movement thrust the perpet ually agonizing question of race relations to the very center of American political life. Finally, the failure of government policies in Vietnam, runaway inﬂation in the 1970s, and the disillusioning Watergate episode cast doubt on the legitimacy, the efﬁcacy, and even the morality of “big government.” Many modern conser vatives, including the pun-



 dit George Will, stress the deep historical roots of American conservatism. In their view, as Will once put it, it took sixteen years to count the ballots from the 1964 (Goldwater versus Johnson) election, and Goldwater won after all. But that argument is surely overstated. Goldwater ran against the legacy of the New Deal and was overwhelmingly defeated. Reagan ran against the consequences of the Great Society and won decisively. Many conser vatives, in short, apparently acknowledge the legitimacy of the New Deal and the stake that many middle-class Americans feel they have in its programs of Social Security, home mortgage subsidies, farm price supports, and similar policies. But they reject the philosophy of the Great Society, with its more focused attack on urban poverty and its vigorous support of afﬁ rmative action. Modern conservatism springs less from a repudiation of government per se and more from a disapproval of the particular priorities and strategies of the Great Society. The different historical fates of the New Deal and the Great Society suggest the key to the rise of modern conservatism.

To Learn More
Robert Collins, Transforming America: Politics and Culture
During the Reagan Years (2007)
Barbara Ehrenreich, The Worst Years of Our Lives: Irreverent
 Notes from a Decade of Greed (1990) Irving Kristol, Reﬂections of a Neoconservative (1983) Walter LaFeber, Inevitable Revolutions (2nd ed., 1993) William Martin, With God on Our Side: The Rise of the Religious Right in America (1996) Richard L. Pacelle, Jr., The Transformation of the Supreme Court’s Agenda: From the New Deal to the Reagan Administration (1991) Kevin Phillips, The Politics of Rich and Poor: Wealth and the American Electorate in the Reagan Aftermath (1990)

Paul C. Roberts, The Supply-Side Revolution (1984)
John W. Sloan, The Reagan Effect: Economics and
Presidential Leadership (1999)
David A. Stockman, The Triumph of Politics: Why the Reagan Revolution Failed (1986)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

America Confronts the
Post–Cold War Era





1992–2009
 There is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured with what is right in America.

T


 he collapse of the Soviet Union and the democratization of its client regimes in Eastern Europe ended the four-decade-old Cold War and left the United States the world’s sole remaining superpower. Americans welcomed these changes but seemed unsure how to exercise their unprecedented economic and military might in this new international framework. The culture wars that had started in the 1960s fed ferociously partisan political squabbles that distracted the nation from the urgent task of clearly deﬁ ning its role in the dawning age of globalization. In 2000 George W. Bush won a bitterly contested presidential election that left the nation more rancorously divided than ever, until the spectacular terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, called forth, at least temporarily, a resurgent sense of national unity. Bush responded to the 9/11 attacks by invading the terrorist haven of Afghanistan. Amidst roiling controversy over his claims that Iraq

 possessed weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and had ties to terrorists, Bush proceeded to invade Iraq as well. After the failure to ﬁ nd WMD and over four thousand American battle deaths in the prolonged Iraq War, a war-weary country, nostalgic for the prosperity and peace of the 1990s, made history by electing Barack Obama.

Bill Clinton: The First
Baby-Boomer President
 As the last decade of the twentieth century opened, the slumbering economy, the widening gender gap, and the rising anti-incumbent spirit spelled opportunity for Democrats, frozen out of the White House for all but four years since 1968. In a bruising round of primary elections, Governor William Jefferson (“Bill”) Clinton

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Clinton Elected


 of Arkansas weathered blistering accusations of womanizing and draft evasion to emerge as his party’s standard-bearer. Breaking with the tradition of a “balanced ticket,” he selected a fellow forty-something southern white male Protestant moderate, Senator Albert Gore of Tennessee, as his vice-presidential running mate. Clinton claimed to be a “new” Democrat, chastened by the party’s long exile in the political wilderness. With other centrist Democrats, he had formed the Democratic Leadership Council to point the party away from its traditional antibusiness, dovish, champion-ofthe-underdog orientation and toward progrowth, strong defense, and anticrime policies. Clinton campaigned especially vigorously on promises to stimulate the economy, reform the welfare system, and overhaul the nation’s health-care apparatus, which had grown into a scandalously expensive contraption that failed to provide medical coverage to nearly 40 million Americans. Trying to wring one more win out of the social issues that had underwritten two Reagan and one Bush presidential victories, the Republican convention in Houston in August 1992 emphasized “family values” and, as expected, nominated George Bush and Vice President J. Danforth Quayle for a second term. But Bush’s listless campaign and his penchant for spaghetti sentences set him sharply apart from his youthful rival, the super-energetic and phenomenally articulate Clinton. Bush claimed credit for ending the Cold War and trumpeted his leadership role in the Persian Gulf War. But pocketbook problems as the economy dipped into recession swayed more voters than pride in past foreign policy. The purchasing power of the average worker’s paycheck had actually declined during Bush’s presidency. At Clinton’s campaign headquarters, a simple sign reminded staffers of his principal campaign theme: “It’s the economy, stupid.” Reﬂecting pervasive economic unease and the virulence of the throw-thebums-out national mood, nearly 20 percent of voters cast their ballots for independent presidential candidate H. Ross Perot, a bantamweight, jug-eared Texas billionaire who harped incessantly on the problem of the federal deﬁcit and made a boast of the fact that he had never held any public ofﬁce. Perot’s colorful presence probably accounted for the record turnout on election day, when some 100 million voters—55 percent of those eligible—went to the polls. The ﬁ nal tally gave Clinton 44,909,889 popular votes and 370 votes in the Electoral College. He was the ﬁ rst baby boomer to ascend to the White



Presidential Campaign Debate, 1992 George Bush,
 Ross Perot, and Bill Clinton squared off at the University of Richmond (Virginia) on October 16, 1992. The telegenic Clinton handily dominated the televised debates, especially in the “talk-show” format used on this occasion.

 House, a distinction reﬂecting the electoral proﬁ le of the population, 70 percent of whom had been born after World War II. Bush polled some 39,104,545 popular votes and 168 electoral votes. Perot won no electoral votes but did gather 19,742,267 popular votes—the strongest showing for an independent or third-party candidate since Theodore Roosevelt ran on the Bull Moose ticket in 1912 (see Map 41.1). Democrats also racked up clear majorities in both houses of Congress, which seated near-record numbers of new members, including thirty-nine African Americans, nineteen Hispanic Americans, seven Asian Americans, one Native American, and forty-eight women. Carol MoseleyBraun of Illinois became the ﬁ rst African American woman elected to the U.S. Senate, where she joined ﬁve other women in the largest female contingent in the upper chamber to that point. Clinton also seized the



