Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


The Jeffersonian
“Revolution of 1800”
 Jefferson won by a majority of 73 electoral votes to 65 (see Map 11.1). In defeat, the colorless and presumably unpopular Adams polled more electoral strength than he had gained four years earlier—except for New York.

 VT 4 NH

NY PA DR-8/F-7

NORTHWEST TERR.

INDIANA TERRITORY

 MA

 CT

 NJ

 RI

DE VA

 KY

MD DR-5/F-5

NC R-13/F-4

TN SC MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

 GA

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Jefferson (Democratic-Republican)
Burr




53%
53%


Adams (Federalist)
Pinckney
Jay




47%
46%


 Map 11.1 Presidential Election of 1800 (with electoral vote by state) New York was the key state in this election, and Aaron Burr helped swing it away from the Federalists with tactics that anticipated the political “machines” of a later day. Federalists complained that Burr “travels every night from one meeting of Republicans to another, haranguing . . . them to the most zealous exertions. [He] can stoop so low as to visit every low tavern that may happen to be crowded with his dear fellow citizens.” But Burr proved that the price was worth it. “We have beat you,” Burr told kid-gloved Federalists after the election, “by superior Management.” Interactive Map

 The Empire State fell into the Jeffersonian basket, and with it the election, largely because Aaron Burr, a master wire-puller, turned New York to Jefferson by the narrowest of margins. The Virginian polled the bulk of his strength in the South and West, particularly in those states where universal white manhood suffrage had been adopted. Decisive in Jefferson’s victory was the three-ﬁ fths clause of the Constitution. By counting three-ﬁ fths of the slave population for the purposes of congressional and Electoral College representation, the Constitution gave white southern voters a bonus that helped Jefferson win the White House. Northern critics fumed that Jefferson was a “Negro President” and an illegitimate embodiment of the “slave power” that the southern states wielded in the nation. Jeffersonian joy was dampened by an unexpected deadlock. Through a technicality Jefferson, the presidential candidate, and Burr, his vice-presidential running mate, received the same number of electoral votes for the presidency. Under the Constitution the tie could be broken only by the House of Representatives (see Art. II, Sec. I, para. 2). This body was controlled for several more months by the lame-duck Federalists, who preferred Burr to the hated Jefferson.* Voting in the House moved slowly to a climax, as exhausted representatives snored in their seats. The agonizing deadlock was broken at last when a few Federalists, despairing of electing Burr and hoping for moderation from Jefferson, refrained from voting. The election then went to the rightful candidate. John Adams, as fate would have it, was the last Federalist president of the United States. His party sank slowly into political oblivion and ultimately disappeared completely in the days of Andrew Jackson. Jefferson later claimed that the election of 1800 was a “revolution” comparable to that of 1776, and historians have sometimes referred to the Revolution of 1800. But the election was no revolution in the sense of a massive popular upheaval or an upending of the political system. In truth, Jefferson had narrowly squeaked through to victory. A switch of some 250 votes in New York would have thrown the election to Adams. Jefferson meant that his election represented a return to what he considered the original spirit of the Revolution. In his eyes Hamilton and Adams had betrayed the ide-

 *A “lame duck” has been humorously deﬁ ned as a politician whose political goose has been cooked in the recent elections. The possibility of another such tie was removed by the Twelfth Amendment in 1804 (see the Appendix). Before then, each elector had two votes, with the second-place ﬁ nisher becoming vice president.

The Thomas Jefferson–Sally Hemings Controversy
 ebate over whether Thomas Jefferson had sexual relations with Sally Hemings, a slave at Monticello, began as early as 1802, when James Callender published the ﬁ rst accusations and Federalist newspapers gleefully broadcast them throughout the country. Two years later this print, titled “A Philosophic Cock,” attacked Jefferson by depicting him as a rooster and Hemings as a hen. The rooster, or cock, was also a symbol of Revolutionary France. Jefferson’s enemies sought to discredit him for personal indiscretions as well as radical sympathies. Although he resolutely denied having an affair with Hemings, the charge that at ﬁ rst seemed to be only a politically motivated defamation refused to go away. In the 1870s two new oral sources of evidence came to light. Madison Hemings, Sally’s next-to-last child, claimed that his mother had identiﬁed Jefferson as the father of all ﬁve of her children. Soon thereafter James Par-

D


 ton’s biography of Jefferson revealed that among Jefferson’s white descendants, it was said that his nephew had fathered all or most of Sally’s children. In the 1950s several large publishing projects on Jefferson’s life and writings uncovered new evidence and inspired renewed debate. Most convincing was Dumas Malone’s calculation that Jefferson had been present at Monticello nine months prior to the birth of each of Sally’s children. Speculation continued throughout the rest of the century, with little new evidence, until scientiﬁc advances made possible DNA testing of the remains of Jefferson’s white and possible black descendants to determine paternity. Two centuries after Callender ﬁ rst cast aspersions on Jefferson’s morality, cutting-edge science helped establish the high probability that Jefferson had fathered Sally’s youngest son and the likelihood that he was the father of all of her children.





Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


Mrs. Benjamin Tallmadge and Son Henry Floyd and Daughter Maria Jones; Colonel Benjamin Tallmadge and Son
 William Tallmadge, by Ralph Earl, 1790 The Tallmadges were among the leading citizens of Litchﬁeld, a Federalist stronghold in the heavily Federalist state of Connecticut. Colonel Benjamin Tallmadge served with distinction in the Revolutionary War, became a wealthy merchant and banker, and represented his state in Congress from 1801 to 1817. Mary Floyd Tallmadge, like her husband, came from a prominent Long Island family. The opulence of the Tallmadges’ clothing and surroundings in these paintings abundantly testiﬁes to the wealth, and the social pretensions, of the Federalist elite. Note the toy carriage near the feet of the Tallmadge daughter— a replica of the actual, and elegant, carriage owned by the Tallmadge family.

A
Philadelphia woman wrote her sister-in-law about the pride she felt on the occasion of Thomas Jefferson’s inauguration as third president of the United States in 1801: 
“


 I have this morning witnessed one of the most interesting scenes a free people can ever witness. The changes of administration, which in every government and in every age have most generally been epochs of confusion, villainy and bloodshed, in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction, or disorder.

”


 als of 1776 and 1787. Jefferson’s mission, as he saw it, was to restore the republican experiment, to check the growth of government power, and to halt the decay of virtue that had set in under Federalist rule. No less “revolutionary” was the peaceful and orderly transfer of power on the basis of an election whose results all parties accepted. This was a remarkable achievement for a raw young nation, especially after all the partisan bitterness that had agitated the country during Adams’s presidency. It was particularly remarkable in that age; comparable successions would not take place in Britain for another generation. After a decade of division and doubt, Americans could take justiﬁable pride in the vigor of their experiment in democracy.

Jefferson as President


Responsibility Breeds
Moderation
 “Long Tom” Jefferson was inaugurated president on March 4, 1801, in the swampy village of Washington, the crude new national capital. Tall (six feet two and a half inches), with large hands and feet, red hair (“the Red Fox”), and prominent cheekbones and chin, he was an arresting ﬁgure. Having spent ﬁve years as U.S. minister to France (1784–1789), he was ﬂuent in French and a sophisticated, cosmopolitan “citizen of the world,” yet he never lost the common touch. Believing that the customary pomp did not beﬁt his democratic ideals, he spurned a horse-drawn coach and strode by foot to the Capitol from his boardinghouse. Jefferson’s inaugural address, beautifully phrased, was a classic statement of democratic principles. “The will of the majority is in all cases to prevail,” Jefferson declared. But, he added, “that will to be rightful must be reasonable; the minority possess their equal rights, which equal law must protect, and to violate would be oppression.” Seeking to allay Federalist fears of a bullin-the-china-closet overturn, Jefferson ingratiatingly intoned, “We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.” As for foreign affairs, he pledged “honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none.” With its rustic setting, Washington lent itself admirably to the simplicity and frugality of the Jeffersonian Republicans. In this respect it contrasted sharply with the elegant at mosphere of Federalist Philadelphia, the former temporary capital. Extending democratic principles to etiquette, Jefferson established the rule of pell-mell at ofﬁcial dinners—that is, seating without regard to rank. The resplendent British minister, who had enjoyed precedence among the pro-British Federalists, was insulted. As president, Jefferson could be shockingly unconventional. He would receive callers in sloppy attire— once in a dressing gown and heel-less slippers. He

 President John F. Kennedy (1917–1963) once greeted a large group of Nobel Prize winners as

“


 the most extraordinary collection of talent, of human knowledge, that has ever been gathered together at the White House, with the possible exception of when Thomas Jefferson dined alone.

”




 started the precedent, unbroken until Woodrow Wilson’s presidency 112 years later, of sending messages to Congress to be read by a clerk. Personal appearances, in the Federalist manner, suggested too strongly a monarchical speech from the throne. Besides, Jefferson was painfully conscious of his weak voice and unimpressive platform presence. As if compelled by an evil twin, Jefferson was forced to reverse many of the political principles he had so vigorously championed. There were in fact two Thomas Jeffersons. One was the scholarly private citizen, who philosophized in his study. The other was the harassed public ofﬁcial, who made the disturbing discovery that bookish theories worked out differently in the noisy arena of practical politics. The open-minded Virginian was therefore consistently inconsistent; it is easy to quote one Jefferson to refute the other.

 Jefferson Inaugural Pitcher, 1801 This memento from the election of 1800 immortalized President Thomas Jefferson’s words, “We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists,” which turned out to be more hopeful than true. Jefferson was portrayed in the plain attire he favored, shunning the sartorial pretensions affected by many Federalists, such as the elegantly dressed Tallmadges shown on p. 228.



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 Jefferson’s Cabinet at Monticello Jefferson’s study gave physical evidence of his fondness for ideas and inventions. He attached candles to his chair for light, read from a revolving book stand, and surrounded himself with an astronomical clock and an achromatic telescope through which he observed the eclipse of the sun in 1811. On the table is a polygraph, invented in London and promoted by Charles Willson Peale in Philadelphia. Jefferson used it to make copies of the letters he penned.

 Jeffersonians watched the Federalist appointees grow old in ofﬁce and grumbled that “few die, none resign.” Jefferson quickly proved an able politician. He was especially effective in the informal at mosphere of a dinner party. There he wooed congressional representatives while personally pouring imported wines and serving the tasty dishes of his French cook. In part Jefferson had to rely on his personal charm because his party was so weak-jointed. Denied the power to dispense patronage, the Democratic-Republicans could not build a loyal political following. Opposition to the Federalists was the chief glue holding them together, and as the Federalists faded, so did DemocraticRepublican unity. The era of well-developed, welldisciplined political parties still lay in the future.

 The triumph of Thomas Jefferson’s DemocraticRepublicans and the eviction of the Federalists marked the ﬁ rst party overturn in American history. The vanquished naturally feared that the victors would grab all the spoils of ofﬁce for themselves. But Jefferson, in keeping with his conciliatory inaugural address, showed unexpected moderation. To the dismay of his ofﬁceseeking friends, the new president dismissed few public servants for political reasons. Patronage-hungry

 The toleration of Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) was reﬂected in his inaugural address:

“


 If there be any among us who would wish to dissolve this Union or to change its republican form, let them stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.

”


Jeffersonian Restraint
 At the outset Jefferson was determined to undo the Federalist abuses begotten by the anti-French hysteria. The hated Alien and Sedition Acts had already expired. The incoming president speedily pardoned the “martyrs” who were serving sentences under the Sedition Act, and the government remitted many ﬁ nes. Shortly after the Congress met, the Jeffersonians enacted the new naturalization law of 1802. This act reduced the unreasonable requirement of fourteen years of residence to the previous and more reasonable requirement of ﬁve years. Jefferson actually kicked away only one substantial prop of the Hamiltonian system. He hated the excise tax, which bred bureaucrats and bore heavily on his farmer following, and he early persuaded Congress to repeal it. His devotion to principle thus cost the federal government about a million dollars a year in urgently needed revenue. Swiss-born and French-accented Albert Gallatin, “Watchdog of the Treasury,” proved to be as able a sec-

John Marshall and the Supreme Court




 retary of the Treasury as Hamilton. Gallatin agreed with Jefferson that a national debt was a bane rather than a blessing and by strict economy succeeded in reducing it substantially while balancing the budget. Except for excising the excise tax, the Jeffersonians left the Hamiltonian framework essentially intact. They did not tamper with the Federalist programs for funding the national debt at par and assuming the Revolutionary War debts of the states. They launched no attack on the Bank of the United States, nor did they repeal the mildly protective Federalist tariff. In later years they embraced Federalism to such a degree as to recharter a bigger bank and to boost the protective tariff to higher levels. Paradoxically, Jefferson’s moderation thus further cemented the gains of the “Revolution of 1800.” By shrewdly absorbing the major Federalist programs, Jefferson showed that a change of regime need not be disastrous for the defeated group. His restraint pointed the way toward the two-party system that was later to become a characteristic feature of American politics.

The “Dead Clutch”
 of the Judiciary The “deathbed” Judiciary Act of 1801 was one of the last important laws passed by the expiring Federalist Congress. It created sixteen new federal judgeships and other judicial ofﬁces. President Adams remained at his desk until nine o’clock in the evening of his last day in ofﬁce, supposedly signing the commissions of the Federalist “midnight judges.” (Actually only three commissions were signed on his last day.) This Federalist-sponsored Judiciary Act, though a long-overdue reform, aroused bitter resentment. “Packing” these lifetime posts with anti-Jeffersonian partisans was, in Republican eyes, a brazen attempt by the ousted party to entrench itself in one of the three powerful branches of government. Jeffersonians condemned the last-minute appointees in violent language, denouncing the trickery of the Federalists as open deﬁance of the people’s will, expressed emphatically at the polls. The newly elected Republican Congress bestirred itself to repeal the Judiciary Act of 1801 the year after its passage. Jeffersonians thus swept sixteen benches from under the recently seated “midnight judges.” Jeffersonians likewise had their knives sharpened for the scalp of Chief Justice John Marshall, whom Adams had appointed to the Supreme Court (as a fourth choice) in

John Marshall on Assuming the Chief Justiceship, 1801
 Depicted here as a young man, Marshall was destined to serve on the Supreme Court for thirty-four years and deeply molded constitutional law. Born in a log cabin on the Virginia frontier, he attended law lectures for just a few weeks at the College of William and Mary— his only formal education. Yet Marshall would go on to prove himself a brilliant chief justice. One admiring lawyer wrote of him, “His black eyes . . . possess an irradiating spirit, which proclaims the imperial powers of the mind that sits enthroned therein.”

 the dying days of his term. The strong-willed Marshall, with his rasping voice and steel-trap mind, was a cousin of Thomas Jefferson. Marshall’s formal legal schooling had lasted only six weeks, but he dominated the Supreme Court with his powerful intellect and commanding personality. He shaped the American legal tradition more profoundly than any other single ﬁgure. Marshall had served at Valley Forge during the Revolution. While suffering there from cold and hunger, he had been painfully impressed with the drawbacks of feeble central authority. The experience made him a lifelong Federalist, committed above all else to strengthening the power of the federal government. States’ rights Jeffersonians condemned the crafty



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 judge’s “twistiﬁcations,” but Marshall pushed ahead inﬂexibly on his Federalist course. He served for about thirty days under a Federalist administration and thirty-four years under the administrations of Jefferson and subsequent presidents. The Federalist party died out, but Marshall lived on, handing down Federalist decisions serenely for many more years. For over three decades, the ghost of Alexander Hamilton spoke through the lanky, black-robed judge. One of the “midnight judges” of 1801 presented John Marshall with a historic opportunity. He was obscure William Marbury, whom President Adams had named a justice of the peace for the District of Columbia. When Marbury learned that his commission was being shelved by the new secretary of state, James Madison, he sued for its delivery. Chief Justice Marshall knew that his Jeffersonian rivals, entrenched in the executive branch, would hardly spring forward to enforce

 In his decision in Marbury v. Madison, Chief Justice John Marshall (1755–1835) vigorously asserted his view that the Constitution embodied a “higher” law than ordinary legislation and that the Court must interpret the Constitution:

“


 The Constitution is either a superior paramount law, unchangeable by ordinary means, or it is on a level with ordinary legislative acts, and like other acts, is alterable when the legislature shall please to alter it. “If the former part of the alternative be true, then a legislative act contrary to the constitution is not law; if the latter part be true, then written constitutions are absurd attempts, on the part of the people, to limit a power in its own nature illimitable. . . . “It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. . . . “If, then, the courts are to regard the Constitution, and the Constitution is superior to any ordinary act of the legislature, the Constitution, and not such ordinary act, must govern the case to which they are both applicable.

”


 a writ to deliver the commission to his fellow Federalist Marbury. He therefore dismissed Marbury’s suit, avoiding a direct political showdown. But the wily Marshall snatched a victory from the jaws of this judicial defeat. In explaining his ruling, Marshall said that the part of the Judiciary Act of 1789 on which Marbury tried to base his appeal was unconstitutional. The act had attempted to assign to the Supreme Court powers that the Constitution had not foreseen. In this self-denying opinion, Marshall greatly magniﬁed the authority of the Court—and slapped at the Jeffersonians. Until the case of Marbury v. Madison (1803), controversy had clouded the question of who had the ﬁ nal authority to determine the meaning of the Constitution. Jefferson in the Kentucky resolutions (1798) had tried to allot that right to the individual states. But now his cousin on the Court had cleverly promoted the contrary principle of “judicial review”— the idea that the Supreme Court alone had the last word on the question of constitutionality. In this landmark case, Marshall inserted the keystone into the arch that supports the tremendous power of the Supreme Court in American life.* Marshall’s decision regarding Marbury spurred the Jeffersonians to seek revenge. Jefferson urged the impeachment of an arrogant and tart-tongued Supreme Court justice, Samuel Chase, who was so unpopular that Republicans named vicious dogs after him. Early in 1804 impeachment charges against Chase were voted by the House of Representatives, which then passed the question of guilt or innocence on to the Senate. The indictment by the House was based on “high crimes, and misdemeanors,” as speciﬁed in the Constitution.† Yet the evidence was plain that the intemperate judge had not been guilty of “high crimes,” but only of unrestrained partisanship and a big mouth. The Senate failed to muster enough votes to convict and remove Chase. The precedent thus established was fortunate. From that day to this, no really serious attempt has been made to reshape the Supreme Court by the impeachment weapon. Jefferson’s ill-advised attempt at “judge breaking” was a reassuring victory for the independence of the judiciary and for the separation of powers among the three branches of the federal government.

 *The next invalidation of a federal law by the Supreme Court came ﬁ fty-four years later, with the explosive Dred Scott decision (see pp. 445–446). †For impeachment, see Art. I, Sec. II, para. 5; Art. I, Sec. III, paras. 6, 7; Art. II, Sec. IV in the Appendix.

War Against the Barbary States


 of Tripoli, dissatisﬁed with his share of protection money, informally declared war on the United States by cutting down the ﬂagstaff of the American consulate. A gauntlet was thus thrown squarely into the face of Jefferson—the noninterventionist, the paciﬁst, the critic of a big-ship navy, and the political foe of Federalist shippers. He reluctantly rose to the challenge by dispatching the infant navy to the “shores of Tripoli,” as related in the song of the U.S. Marine Corps. After four

Jefferson, a Reluctant Warrior
 One of Jefferson’s ﬁ rst actions as president was to reduce the military establishment to a mere police force of twenty-ﬁve hundred ofﬁcers and men. Critics called it penny-pinching, but Jefferson’s reluctance to invest in soldiers and ships was less about money than about republican ideals. Among his fondest hopes for America was that it might transcend the bloody wars and entangling alliances of Europe. The United States would set an example for the world, forswearing military force and winning friends through “peaceful coercion.” Also, the Republicans distrusted large standing armies as standing invitations to dictatorship. Navies were less to be feared, as they could not march inland and endanger liberties. Still, the farm-loving Jeffersonians saw little point in building a ﬂeet that might only embroil the Republic in costly and corrupting wars far from America’s shores. But harsh realities forced Jefferson’s principles to bend. Pirates of the North African Barbary States (see Map 11.2) had long made a national industry of blackmailing and plundering merchant ships that ventured into the Mediterranean. Preceding Federalist administrations, in fact, had been forced to buy protection. At the time of the French crisis of 1798, when Americans were shouting, “Millions for defense but not one cent for tribute,” twenty-six barrels of blackmail dollars were being shipped to piratical Algiers. War across the Atlantic was not part of the Jeffersonian vision—but neither was paying tribute to a pack of pirate states. The showdown came in 1801. The pasha

Map 11.2 The Barbary States
 of North Africa and the Burning of the Frigate Philadelphia, 1804 The Tripolitan pirates had captured the U.S. ship Philadelphia (see p. 216) and were preparing to use it against the Americans. In a daring exploit that ensured his lasting fame, twenty-four-yearold U.S. naval ofﬁcer Stephen Decatur slipped into the harbor of Tripoli and burned the frigate to the waterline, denying it to the pirates.

ATLAN TIC OCEAN

 FRANCE

40°


N


 PORTUGAL

KINGDOM OF ITALY

SPA I N

OT KINGDOM OF NAPLES

Algiers


M OROCCO A LGERI A



500 Km.


 TO

 MA

N


 EM

 PIR

E


Tunis


 TUNISIA 500 Mi.

Med
Tripoli


 iterr

 anean Sea Cairo

The Barbary States
 Major battle

30°N


EGYP T

TRI POLI 10°E

Interactive Map


AU STRI AN EM PI RE

N






20°E


30°E


40°E




Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 years of intermittent ﬁghting, marked by spine-tingling exploits, Jefferson succeeded in extorting a treaty of peace from Tripoli in 1805. It was secured at the bargain price of only $60,000—a sum representing ransom payments for captured Americans. Small gunboats, which the navy had used with some success in the Tripolitan War, fascinated Jefferson. Pledged to tax reduction, he advocated a large number of little coastal craft—“Jeffs” or the “mosquito ﬂeet,” as they were contemptuously called. He believed these fast but frail vessels would prove valuable in guarding American shores and need not embroil the Republic in diplomatic incidents on the high seas. About two hundred tiny gunboats were constructed, democratically in small shipyards where votes could be made for Jefferson. Often mounting only one unwieldy gun, they were sometimes more of a menace to the crew than to the prospective enemy. During a hurricane and tidal wave at Savannah, Georgia, one of them was deposited eight miles inland in a cornﬁeld, to the derisive glee of the Federalists. They drank toasts to American gunboats as the best in the world—on land.

The Louisiana Godsend
 A secret pact, fraught with peril for America, was signed in 1800. Napoleon Bonaparte induced the king of Spain to cede to France, for attractive considerations, the immense trans-Mississippi region of Louisiana, which included the New Orleans area. Rumors of the transfer were partially conﬁ rmed in 1802, when the Spaniards at New Orleans withdrew the right of deposit guaranteed America by Pinckney’s Treaty of 1795 (see p. 213). Deposit (warehouse) privileges were vital to frontier farmers who ﬂoated their produce down the Mississippi to its mouth, there to await oceangoing vessels. A roar of anger rolled up the mighty river and into its tributary valleys. American pioneers talked wildly of descending upon New Orleans, riﬂes in hand. Had they done so, the nation probably would have been engulfed in war with both Spain and France. Thomas Jefferson, both paciﬁst and antientanglement, was again on the griddle. Louisiana in the senile grip of Spain posed no real threat; America could seize the territory when the time was ripe. But Louisiana in the iron ﬁst of Napoleon, the preeminent military genius of his age, foreshadowed a dark and blood-drenched future. The United States would probably have to ﬁght to dislodge him; and because it alone

 was not strong enough to defeat his armies, it would have to seek allies, contrary to the deepening antialliance policy. Hoping to quiet the clamor of the West, Jefferson moved decisively. Early in 1803 he sent James Monroe to Paris to join forces with the regular minister there, Robert R. Livingston. The two envoys were instructed to buy New Orleans and as much land to its east as they could get for a maximum of $10 million. If these proposals should fail and the situation became critical, negotiations were to be opened with Britain for an alliance. “The day that France takes possession of New Orleans,” Jefferson wrote, “we must marry ourselves to the British ﬂeet and nation.” That remark dramatically demonstrated Jefferson’s dilemma. Though a passionate hater of war and an enemy of entangling alliances, he was proposing to make an alliance with his old foe, Britain, against his old friend, France, in order to secure New Orleans. At this critical juncture, Napoleon suddenly decided to sell all of Louisiana and abandon his dream of a New World empire. Two developments prompted his change of mind. First, he had failed in his efforts to reconquer the sugar-rich island of Santo Domingo (Haiti), for which Louisiana was to serve as a source of foodstuffs. Rebellious enslaved Africans, inspired by the French Revolution’s promises of equality, and ably led by the gifted Toussaint L’Ouverture (“The Opener”), had struck for their freedom in 1791. Their revolt was ultimately broken. But then the island’s second line of defense—mosquitoes carrying yellow fever—had swept away thousands of crack French troops. Santo Domingo could not be had, except perhaps at a staggering cost; hence there was no need for Louisiana’s food supplies. “Damn sugar, damn coffee, damn colonies!” burst out Napoleon. Second, Bonaparte was about to end the twenty-month lull in his deadly conﬂ ict with Britain. Because the British controlled the seas, he feared that he might be forced to make them a gift of Louisiana. Rather than drive America into the arms of Britain by attempting to hold the area, he decided to sell the huge wilderness to the Americans and pocket the money for his schemes nearer home. Napoleon hoped that the United States, strengthened by Louisiana, would one day be a military and naval power that would thwart the ambitions of the lordly British in the New World. The predicaments of France in Europe were again paving the way for America’s diplomatic successes. Events now unrolled dizzily. The American minister, Robert Livingston, pending the arrival of Monroe, was busily negotiating in Paris for a window on the Gulf

The Louisiana Purchase




 Toussaint L’Ouverture (ca. 1743–1803) A self-educated ex-slave and military genius, L’Ouverture was ﬁnally betrayed by the French, who imprisoned him in a chilly dungeon in France, where he coughed his life away. Indirectly, he did much to set up the sale of Louisiana to the United States. His slave rebellion in Haiti also (brieﬂy) established the ﬁrst black government in the New World, striking fear into the hearts of slaveowners throughout the Western Hemisphere.

 of Mexico at New Orleans. Suddenly, out of a clear sky, the French foreign minister asked him how much he would give for all of Louisiana. Scarcely able to believe his ears (he was partially deaf anyhow), Livingston nervously entered upon the negotiations. After about a week of haggling, while the fate of North America trembled in the balance, treaties were signed on April 30, 1803, ceding Louisiana to the United States for about $15 million. When news of the bargain reached America, Jefferson was startled. He had authorized his envoys to offer not more than $10 million for New Orleans and as much to the east in the Floridas as they could get. Instead they had signed three treaties that pledged $15 million for New Orleans, plus an im mea surable tract entirely to the west—an area that would more than double the size of the United States. They had bought a wilderness to get a city.

 Once again the two Jeffersons wrestled with each other: the theorist and former strict constructionist versus the democratic visionary. Where in his beloved Constitution was the president authorized to negotiate treaties incorporating a huge new expanse into the union—an expanse containing tens of thousands of Indian, French, Spanish, and black inhabitants? There was no such clause. Yet Jefferson also perceived that the vast domain now within his reach could form a sprawling “empire of liberty” that would ensure the health and long life of America’s experiment in democracy. Conscience-stricken, Jefferson privately proposed that a constitutional amendment be passed. But his friends pointed out in alarm that in the interval Napoleon, for whom thought was action, might suddenly withdraw the offer. So Jefferson shamefacedly submitted the treaties to the Senate, while admitting to his associates that the purchase was unconstitutional. The senators were less ﬁ nicky than Jefferson. Reﬂecting enthusiastic public support, they registered their prompt approval of the transaction. Land-hungry Americans were not disposed to split constitutional hairs when confronted with perhaps the most magnificent real estate bargain in history—828,000 square miles at about three cents an acre.

 In accepting the Louisiana Purchase, Jefferson thus compromised with conscience in a private letter:

“


 It is the case of a guardian, investing the money of his ward in purchasing an important adjacent territory; and saying to him when of age, I did this for your good; I pretend to no right to bind you; you may disavow me, and I must get out of the scrape as I can; I thought it my duty to risk myself for you.

”




Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


Louisiana in the Long View
 Jefferson’s bargain with Napoleon was epochal. Overnight he had avoided a possible rupture with France and the consequent entangling alliance with Eng land. With the Louisiana Purchase, America secured at one bloodless stroke the western half of the richest river valley in the world and further laid the foundations of a future major power. The ideal of a great agrarian republic, as envisioned by Jefferson, could now be realized in the vast “Valley of Democracy.” At the same time, the transfer established valuable precedents for future expansion: the acquisition of foreign territory and peoples by purchase and their incorporation into the Union not as vassal states but on a basis of equal membership. This was imperialism with a new and democratic face, as French Louisianans learned when the Washington government agreed to accept their legal code based on French civil law, rather than Eng lish common law. To this day Louisiana state law, uniquely in the American system, retains vestiges of its French origins. Indian peoples within the purchase area would not prove so fortunate. The purchase also contributed to making operational the isolationist principles of Washington’s Farewell Address. Avoiding entangling alliances had been only an ideal to be pursued, rather than a realistic policy, so long as America had potentially hostile and powerful neighbors. By removing virtually the last remnant of signiﬁcant European power from the North American continent, the United States was now at liberty to disengage almost entirely from the ancient system of Old World rivalries. The enormous extent of the new area was more fully unveiled by a series of explorations under Jefferson’s direction. In the spring of 1804, Jefferson sent his personal secretary, Meriwether Lewis, and a young army ofﬁcer named William Clark to explore the northern part of the Louisiana Purchase. Lewis and Clark’s Corps of Discovery ascended the “Great Muddy” (Missouri River) from St. Louis and spent the winter of 1804–1805 with the Mandan Indians in present-day North Dakota. Then, aided by the Shoshone woman Sacajawea, the thirty-three adventurers (one had died from illness in Iowa, the group’s only casualty) struggled across the northern prairies and through the Rockies, ﬁ nally descending the Columbia River to the Paciﬁc coast. Lewis and Clark’s two-and-one-half-year expedition yielded a rich harvest of scientiﬁc observations,

 Meriwether Lewis Lewis is portrayed in this painting as he looked on his return from the great expedition through the Louisiana Purchase and the West.

 maps, knowledge of the Indians in the region, and hairraising wilderness adventure stories. On the Great Plains, they marveled at the “immense herds of buffalo, elk, deer, and antelope feeding in one common and boundless pasture.” Lewis was lucky to come back alive. When he and three other men left the expedition to explore the Marias River in present-day western Montana, a band of teenage Blackfoot Indians, armed with crude muskets by British fur-traders operating out of Canada, stole their horses. Lewis foolishly pursued the horse thieves on foot. He shot one marauder through the belly, but the Indian returned the ﬁ re. “Being bareheaded,” Lewis later wrote, “I felt the wind of his bullet

The Lewis and Clark Expedition




 Gifts from the Great White Chief Among the objectives of the Lewis and Clark expedition was to establish good relations with the Indians in the newly acquired Louisiana Purchase. The American explorers presented all chiefs with copies of these medals, showing President Jefferson on one side and the hands of an Indian and a white man clasped in “peace and friendship” under a crossed “peace pipe” and hatchet on the other. All chiefs also received an American ﬂag and a military uniform jacket, hat, and feather.

 Other explorers also pushed into the uncharted West. Zebulon M. Pike trekked to the headwaters of the Mississippi River in 1805–1806. The next year Pike ventured into the southern portion of Louisiana Territory, where he sighted the Colorado peak that bears his name. Chinook Indians, ca. 1805 William Clark served as the artist and cartographer of the Lewis and Clark expedition. Here he sketched the skull-molding practice that inspired Lewis and Clark to call these Indians “Flatheads.” These people were distinct from the present-day Flathead Indians of Montana, who got their name from the French.

 very distinctly.” After kill ing another Blackfoot and hanging one of the expedition’s “peace and friendship” medals around the dead man’s neck as a warning to other Indians, Lewis and his terriﬁed companions beat it out of the Marias country to rejoin the main party on the Missouri River. The explorers also demonstrated the viability of an overland trail to the Paciﬁc. Down the dusty track thousands of missionaries, fur-traders, and pioneering settlers would wend their way in the ensuing decades, bolstering America’s claim to the Oregon Country.

The Aaron Burr Conspiracies
 In the long run, the Louisiana Purchase greatly expanded the fortunes of the United States and the power of the federal government. In the short term, the vast expanse of territory and the feeble reach of the government obliged to control it raised fears of secession and foreign intrigue (see Map 11.3). Aaron Burr, Jefferson’s ﬁ rst-term vice president, played no small part in provoking—and justifying— such fears. Dropped from the cabinet in Jefferson’s second term, Burr joined with a group of Federalist extremists to plot the secession of New Eng land and New York. Alexander Hamilton, though no friend of Jefferson, exposed and foiled the conspiracy. Incensed, Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel. Hamilton deplored the practice of dueling, by that date illegal in several states, but felt his honor was at stake. He met Burr’s challenge at the appointed hour but refused to ﬁ re. Burr killed

120°W


110°W


 EA

Gila


R.


 ns

 as

R.


Red R.


 NEW

SPAIN
Ri 
R.


 an

 de



San
Antonio


6–








Gu lf o f
 M exic o

400 Km.


SPANISH FLORIDA

400 Mi.


 Map 11.3 Exploring the Louisiana Purchase and the West Seeking to avert friction with France by purchasing all of Louisiana, Jefferson bought trouble because of the vagueness of the boundaries. Among the disputants were Spain in the Floridas, Spain and Mexico in the Southwest, and Great Britain in Canada.

 Hamilton with one shot. Burr’s pistol blew the brightest brain out of the Federalist party and destroyed its one remaining hope of effective leadership. His political career as dead as Hamilton’s, Burr turned his disunionist plottings to the trans-Mississippi West. There he struck up an allegiance with General James Wilkinson, the unscrupulous military governor of Louisiana Territory and a sometime secret agent in the pay of the Spanish crown. Burr’s schemes are still shrouded in mystery, but he and Wilkinson apparently planned to separate the western part of the United States from the East and expand their new confederacy with invasions of Spanish-controlled Mexico and Florida. In the fall of 1806, Burr and sixty followers ﬂoated in ﬂatboats down the Mississippi River to meet Wilkinson’s army at Natchez. But when the general learned that Jefferson had gotten wind of the plot, he betrayed Burr and ﬂed to New Orleans. Burr was arrested and tried for treason. In what seemed to the Jeffersonians to be bias in favor of the accused, Chief Justice John Marshall, strictly hewing



N


Original United States
 by Treaty of 1783 Louisiana Purchase, 1803

New Orleans




DEL. MD.

S.C.


Nacogdoches




N.J.
Philadelphia


N.C.


 GA.

Gr


Pike


Chihuahua


 ee

 o

El Paso


 TENN.

 ss

MISS. TERR.

N
30°N


 KY.

R.


LOUISIANA PURCHASE

 ip pi

 OC

Santa
Fé


1805–180 6


 ka

Pike
Taos


 siss

 do

Mis


 ra

Ar


 IC

Colo


St.
R.
Louis Ohio


R.


Santa Barbara
San Diego


 i

Monterey


OHIO
Washington, D.C. VA. 
 OC



 ur

San Francisco


 CALIFORNIA

R.


Pikes Peak


 PA.

Baltimore


INDIANA TERR.

R.I.
 CONN.

C


–18


R.




Misso


P l at te


 MASS.

 TI



4–




 PACIF

Sacrame


N.Y.
MICH. TERR.

 AN

 ke

 EAN

VT. N.H.

 e

 e R.

Pi


 nn

 Clark’s Return



 ak

 k Clar is and

 to R.

60°W


ME. (MASS.)

Le w


Sn


 n

70°W


 TL

 Lewis’s Return

OREGON COUNTRY

40°N


80°W


Te


 bia

90°W


A


R.


C ol u


 m

100°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 British territory Spanish territory Oregon Country (disputed) Fort Mission

Interactive Map


 to the Constitution, insisted that a guilty verdict required proof of overt acts of treason, not merely treasonous intentions (see Art. III, Sec. III). Burr was acquitted and ﬂed to Europe, where he urged Napoleon to make peace with Britain and launch a joint invasion of America. Burr’s insurrectionary brashness demonstrated that it was one thing for the United States to purchase large expanses of western territory but quite another for it to govern them effectively.

A
Precarious Neutrality  Jefferson was triumphantly reelected in 1804, with 162 electoral votes to only 14 votes for his Federalist opponent. But the laurels of Jefferson’s ﬁ rst administration soon withered under the blasts of the new storm that broke in Europe. After unloading Louisiana in 1803, Napoleon deliberately provoked a renewal of his war with Britain—an awesome conﬂ ict that raged on for eleven long years.

America and the Napoleonic Wars




Intercourse or Impartial
 Dealings, 1809 A cartoon by “Peter Pencil” shows Jefferson being victimized by both Britain (left) and France (right).

 For two years a maritime United States—the number one neutral carrier since 1793—enjoyed juicy commercial pickings. But a setback came in 1805. At the Bat tle of Trafalgar, one-eyed Horatio Lord Nelson achieved immortality by smashing the combined French and Spanish ﬂeets off the coast of Spain, thereby ensuring Britain’s supremacy on the seas. At the Battle of Austerlitz in Austria—the Battle of the Three Emperors—Napoleon crushed the combined Austrian and Russian armies, thereby ensuring his mastery of the land. Like the tiger and the shark, France and Britain now reigned supreme in their chosen elements. Unable to hurt each other directly, the two antagonists were forced to strike indirect blows. Britain ruled the waves and waived the rules. The London government, beginning in 1806, issued a series of Orders in Council. These edicts closed the European ports under French control to foreign shipping, including American, unless the vessels ﬁ rst stopped at a British port. Napoleon struck back, ordering the seizure of all merchant ships, including American, that entered British ports. There was no way to trade with either nation without facing the other’s guns. American vessels were,

 quite literally, caught between the Devil and the deep blue sea. Even more galling to American pride than the seizure of wooden ships was the seizure of ﬂesh-andblood American seamen. Impressment—the forcible enlistment of sailors—was a crude form of conscription that the British, among others, had employed for over four centuries. Clubs and stretchers (for men knocked unconscious) were standard equipment of press gangs from His Majesty’s man-hungry ships. Some six thousand bona ﬁde U.S. citizens were impressed by the “piratical man-stealers” of Britain from 1808 to 1811 alone. A number of these luckless souls died or were killed in His Majesty’s ser vice, leaving their kinfolk and friends bereaved and embittered. Britain’s determination was spectacularly highlighted in 1807, in what came to be known as the Chesapeake affair. A royal frigate overhauled a U.S. frigate, the Chesapeake, about ten miles off the coast of Virginia. The British captain bluntly demanded the surrender of four alleged deserters. London had never claimed the right to seize sailors from a foreign warship, and the American commander, though totally



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 unprepared to ﬁght, refused the request. The British warship thereupon ﬁ red three devastating broadsides at close range, kill ing three Americans and wounding eighteen. Four deserters were dragged away, and the bloody hulk called the Chesapeake limped back to port. Britain was clearly in the wrong, as the London Foreign Ofﬁce admitted. But London’s contrition availed little; a roar of national wrath went up from infuriated Americans. Jefferson, the peace lover, could easily have had war if he had wanted it.

The Hated Embargo
 National honor would not permit a slavish submission to British and French mistreatment. Yet a large-scale foreign war was contrary to the settled policy of the new Republic—and in addition it would be futile. The navy was weak, thanks largely to Jefferson’s antinavalism, and the army was even weaker. A disastrous defeat would not improve America’s plight.

 The warring nations in Europe depended heavily upon the United States for raw materials and foodstuffs. In his eager search for an alternative to war, Jefferson seized upon this essential fact. He reasoned that if America voluntarily cut off its exports, the offending powers would be forced to bow, hat in hand, and agree to respect its rights. Responding to the presidential lash, Congress hastily passed the Embargo Act late in 1807. This rigorous law forbade the export of all goods from the United States, whether in American or foreign ships. More than just a compromise between submission and shooting, the embargo embodied Jefferson’s idea of “peaceful coercion.” If it worked, the embargo would vindicate the rights of neutral nations and point to a new way of conducting foreign affairs. If it failed, Jefferson feared the Republic would perish, subjugated to the European powers or sucked into their ferocious war. The American economy staggered under the effect of the embargo long before Britain or France began to bend. Forests of dead masts gradually ﬁ lled New Eng-

 The Prairie Dog Sickened at the Sting of the Hornet, 1806 In this anti-Jefferson satire criticizing his negotiations for the purchase of West Florida in 1804, Napoleon, in the form of a hornet, stings Jefferson and makes him “cough up” $2 million in gold coins— the amount of the secret appropriation that Jefferson sought from Congress. The negotiations eventually failed.

The Embargo


Launching of the Ship Fame, by George Ropes, Jr., 1802
 shipyards like this one, stirring bitter resentment.

 land’s once-bustling harbors; docks that had once rumbled were deserted (except for illegal trade); and soup kitchens cared for some of the hungry unemployed. Jeffersonian Republicans probably hurt the commerce of New Eng land, which they avowedly were trying to protect, far more than Britain and France together were doing. Farmers of the South and West, the strongholds of Jefferson, suffered no less disastrously than New Eng land. They were alarmed by the mounting piles of unexportable cotton, grain, and tobacco. Jefferson seemed to be waging war on his fellow citizens rather than on the offending foreign powers.

A
Federalist circular in Massachusetts against the embargo cried out, 
“


 Let every man who holds the name of America dear to him, stretch forth his hands and put this accursed thing, this Embargo from him. Be resolute, act like sons of liberty, of God, and your country; nerve your arm with vengeance against the Despot [Jefferson] who would wrest the inestimable germ of your Independence from you—and you shall be Conquerors!!!

”




 Jefferson’s embargo throttled thriving New England

 An enormous illicit trade mushroomed in 1808, especially along the Canadian border, where bands of armed Americans on loaded rafts overawed or overpowered federal agents. Irate citizens cynically transposed the letters of “Embargo” to read “O Grab Me,” “Go Bar ’Em,” and “Mobrage,” while heartily cursing the “Dambargo.” Jefferson nonetheless induced Congress to pass iron-toothed enforcing legislation. It was so inquisitorial and tyrannical as to cause some Americans to think more kindly of George III, whom Jefferson had berated in the Declaration of Independence. One indignant New Hampshirite denounced the president with this ditty: Our ships all in motion, Once whiten’d the ocean; They sail’d and return’d with a Cargo; Now doom’d to decay They are fallen a prey, To Jefferson, worms, and EMBARGO. The embargo even had the effect of reviving the moribund Federalist party. Gaining new converts, its leaders hurled their nulliﬁcation of the embargo into the teeth of the “Virginia lordlings” in Washington. In 1804 the discredited Federalists had polled only 14 electoral votes out of 176; in 1808, the embargo year, the ﬁgure rose to 47 out of 175. New Eng land seethed with



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 Rivals for the presidency, and for the soul of the young Republic, Thomas Jefferson and John Adams died on the same day—the Fourth of July, 1826— ﬁfty years to the day after both men had signed the Declaration of Independence. Adams’s last words were

“


”


 Thomas Jefferson still survives.

 But he was wrong, for three hours earlier, Jefferson had drawn his last breath.

 talk of secession, and Jefferson later admitted that he felt the foundations of government tremble under his feet. An alarmed Congress, yielding to the storm of public anger, ﬁ nally repealed the embargo on March 1, 1809, three days before Jefferson’s retirement. A halfloaf substitute was provided by the Non-Intercourse Act. This measure formally reopened trade with all the nations of the world, except the two most important, Britain and France. Though thus watered down, economic coercion continued to be the policy of the Jeffersonians from 1809 to 1812, when the nation ﬁ nally plunged into war. Why did the embargo, Jefferson’s most daring act of statesmanship, collapse after ﬁ fteen dismal months? First of all, he underestimated the bulldog determination of the British, as others have, and overestimated the dependence of both belligerents on America’s trade. Bumper grain crops blessed the British Isles during these years, and the revolutionary Latin American republics unexpectedly threw open their ports for compensating commerce. With most of Europe under his control, Napoleon could afford to tighten his belt and go without American trade. The French continued to seize American ships and steal their cargoes, while their emperor mocked the United States by claiming that he was simply helping them enforce the embargo. More critically, perhaps, Jefferson miscalculated the unpopularity of such a self-crucifying weapon and the difﬁculty of enforcing it. The hated embargo was not continued long enough or tightly enough to achieve the desired results—and a leaky embargo was perhaps more costly than none at all. Curiously enough, New Eng land plucked a new prosperity from the ugly jaws of the embargo. With shipping tied up and imported goods scarce, the resourceful Yankees reopened old factories and erected new ones. The real foundations of modern America’s

 industrial might were laid behind the protective wall of the embargo, followed by nonintercourse and the War of 1812. Jefferson, the avowed critic of factories, may have unwittingly done more for American manufacturing than Alexander Hamilton, industry’s outspoken friend.

 Madison’s Gamble Following Washington’s precedent, Jefferson left the presidency after two terms, happy to escape what he called the “splendid misery” of the highest ofﬁce in the land. He strongly favored the nomination and election of a kindred spirit as his successor—his friend and fellow Virginian, the quiet, intellectual, and unassuming James Madison. Madison took the presidential oath on March 4, 1809, as the awesome conﬂict in Europe was roaring to its climax. The scholarly Madison was small of stature, light of weight, bald of head, and weak of voice. Despite a distinguished career as a legislator, he was crippled as president by factions within his party and his cabinet. Unable to dominate Congress as Jefferson had done, Madison often found himself holding the bag for risky foreign policies not of his own making. The Non-Intercourse Act of 1809—a watered-down version of Jefferson’s embargo aimed solely at Britain and France—was due to expire in 1810. To Madison’s dismay, Congress dismantled the embargo completely with a bargaining mea sure known as Macon’s Bill No. 2. While reopening American trade with all the world, Macon’s Bill dangled what Congress hoped was an attractive lure. If either Britain or France repealed its commercial restrictions, America would restore its embargo against the nonrepealing nation. To Madison the bill was a shameful capitulation. It practically admitted that the United States could not survive without one of the belligerents as a commercial ally, but it left determination of who that ally would be to the potentates of London and Paris. The crafty Napoleon saw his chance. Since 1806 Britain had justiﬁed its Orders in Council as retaliation for Napoleon’s actions—implying, without promising outright, that trade restrictions would be lifted if the French decrees disappeared. Now the French held out the same half-promise. In August 1810 word came from Napoleon’s foreign minister that the French decrees might be repealed if Britain also lifted its Orders in Council. The minister’s message was deliberately ambiguous. Napoleon had no intention of permitting unrestricted trade between America and Britain. Rather,

President James Madison




 Britain and France Divide Up the World, 1805 The great-power rivalry symbolized here by British prime minister William Pitt and French emperor Napoleon wreathed the planet in years of warfare. When it ended with Napoleon’s ﬁnal defeat in 1815, Britain was the unchallenged mistress of the world’s oceans.

 he hoped to maneuver the United States into resuming its embargo against the British, thus creating a partial blockade against his enemy that he would not have to raise a ﬁ nger to enforce. Madison knew better than to trust Napoleon, but he gambled that the threat of seeing the United States trade exclusively with France would lead the British to repeal their restrictions—and vice versa. Closing his

 Insisted the editor of Niles’ Weekly Register (June 27, 1812),

“


 The injuries received from France do not lessen the enormity of those heaped upon us by England. . . . In this ‘straight betwixt two’ we had an unquestionable right to select our enemy. We have given the preference to Great Britain . . . on account of her more ﬂagrant wrongs.

”


 eyes to the emperor’s obvious subterfuge, he accepted the French offer as evidence of repeal. The terms of Macon’s Bill gave the British three months to live up to their implied promise by revoking the Orders in Council and reopening the Atlantic to neutral trade. They did not. In ﬁ rm control of the seas, London saw little need to bargain. As long as the war with Napoleon went on, they decided, America could trade exclusively with the British Empire—or with nobody at all. Madison’s gamble failed. The president saw no choice but to reestablish the embargo against Britain alone—a decision that he knew meant the end of American neutrality and that he feared was the ﬁ nal step toward war.

Tecumseh and the Prophet
 Not all of Madison’s party was reluctant to ﬁght. The complexion of the Twelfth Congress, which met late in 1811, differed markedly from that of its predecessor. Recent elections had swept away many of the older



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


The Battle of the Thames,
1813 Here the Shawnee
 leader Tecumseh stood his ground against the superior American force and died. A gifted organizer and military chieftain, he had denounced the tribal custom of torturing prisoners and opposed the practice of allowing any one tribe to sell land that, he believed, belonged to all Indians.

 “submission men” and replaced them with young hotheads, many from the South and West. Dubbed war hawks by their Federalist opponents, the newcomers were indeed on ﬁ re for a new war with the old enemy. The war hawks were weary of hearing how their fathers had “whipped” the British single-handedly, and they detested the manhandling of American sailors and the British Orders in Council that dammed the ﬂow of American trade, especially western farm products headed for Europe. Western war hawks also yearned to wipe out a renewed Indian threat to the pioneer settlers who were streaming into the trans-Allegheny wilderness. As this

 When the war hawks won control of the House of Representatives, they elevated to the Speakership thirty-four-year-old Henry Clay of Kentucky (1777– 1852), the eloquent and magnetic “Harry of the West.” Clamoring for war, he thundered,

“


 I prefer the troubled sea of war, demanded by the honor and independence of this country, with all its calamities and desolation, to the tranquil and putrescent pool of ignominious peace.

”


 white ﬂood washed through the green forests, more and more Indians were pushed toward the setting sun. Two remarkable Shawnee brothers, Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa, known to non-Indians as “the Prophet,” concluded that the time had come to stem this onrushing tide. They began to weld together a far-ﬂung confederacy of all the tribes east of the Mississippi, inspiring a vibrant movement of Indian unity and cultural renewal. Their followers gave up textile clothing for traditional buckskin garments. Their warriors forswore alcohol, the better to ﬁght a last-ditch battle with the “paleface” invaders. Rejecting whites’ concept of “ownership,” Tecumseh urged his supporters never to cede land to whites unless all Indians agreed. Meanwhile, frontiersmen and their war-hawk spokesmen in Congress became convinced that British “scalp buyers” in Canada were nourishing the Indians’ growing strength. In the fall of 1811, William Henry

 In a speech at Vincennes, Indiana Territory, Tecumseh (1768?–1813) said,

“


 Sell a country! Why not sell the air, the clouds, and the great sea, as well as the earth? Did not the Great Spirit make them all for the use of his children?

”


Crushing the Indians in the Old Northwest


 William Henry Harrison (1773–1841), Indian ﬁghter and later president, called Tecumseh

“


 one of those uncommon geniuses who spring up occasionally to produce revolutions and overturn the established order of things. If it were not for the vicinity of the United States, he would perhaps be founder of an Empire that would rival in glory that of Mexico or Peru.

”


 Harrison, governor of Indiana Territory, gathered an army and advanced on Tecumseh’s headquarters at the junction of the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers in present-day Indiana. Tecumseh was absent, recruiting supporters in the South, but the Prophet attacked Harrison’s army—foolishly, in Tecumseh’s eyes—with a small force of Shawnees. The Shawnees were routed and their settlement burned. The Battle of Tippecanoe made Harrison a national hero. It also discredited the Prophet and drove Tecumseh into an alliance with the British. When America’s war with Britain came, Tecumseh fought ﬁercely for the redcoats until his death in 1813 at the Battle of the Thames. With him perished the dream of an Indian confederacy.



 Mr. Madison’s War By the spring of 1812, Madison believed war with Britain to be inevitable. The British arming of hostile Indians pushed him toward this decision, as did the whoops of the war hawks in his own party. People like Representative Felix Grundy of Tennessee, three of whose brothers had been killed in clashes with Indians, cried that there was only one way to remove the menace of the Indians: wipe out their Canadian base. “On to Canada, on to Canada” was the war hawks’ chant. Southern expansionists, less vocal, cast a covetous eye on Florida, then weakly held by Britain’s ally Spain. Above all, Madison turned to war to restore conﬁdence in the republican experiment. For ﬁve years the Republicans had tried to steer between the warring European powers, to set a course between submission and battle. Theirs had been a noble vision, but it had brought them only international derision and internal strife. Madison and the Republicans came to believe that only a vigorous assertion of American rights could demonstrate the viability of American nationhood— and of democracy as a form of government. If America could not ﬁght to protect itself, its experiment in republicanism would be discredited in the eyes of a scofﬁ ng world. One prominent Republican called the war a test “to determine whether the republican system adopted by the people is imbecile and transient, or whether it

The Present State of Our Country
 Partisan disunity over the War of 1812 threatened the nation’s very existence. The prowar Jeffersonian at the left is attacking the pillar of federalism; the antiwar Federalist at the right is trying to pull down democracy. The spirit of Washington warns that the country’s welfare depends on all three pillars, including republicanism.



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 has force and duration worthy of the enterprise.” Thus, not for the last time, did war fever and democratic idealism make common cause. Madison asked Congress to declare war on June 1, 1812. Congress obliged him two weeks later—the ﬁ rst of just ﬁve times in all of American history that Congress has formally exercised its constitutional power to declare war (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 11). The vote in the House was 79 to 49 for war, in the Senate 19 to 13. The close tally revealed deep divisions over the wisdom of ﬁghting. The split was both sectional and partisan. Support for war came from the South and West, but also from Republicans in populous middle states such as Pennsylvania and Virginia. Federalists in both North and South damned the conﬂ ict, but their stronghold was New Eng land, which greeted the declaration of war with mufﬂed bells, ﬂags at half-mast, and public fasting. Why should seafaring New Eng land oppose the war for a free sea? The answer is that pro-British Federalists in the Northeast sympathized with Britain and resented the Republicans’ sympathy with Napoleon, whom they regarded as the “Corsican butcher” and the “anti-Christ of the age.” The Federalists also opposed

 the acquisition of Canada, which would merely add more agrarian states from the wild Northwest. This, in turn, would increase the voting strength of the Jeffersonian Republicans. The bitterness of New Eng land Federalists against “Mr. Madison’s War” led them to treason or near-treason. They were determined, wrote one Republican versiﬁer, To rule the nation if they could, But see it damned if others should. New Eng land gold holders probably lent more dollars to the British Exchequer than to the federal Treasury. Federalist farmers sent huge quantities of supplies and foodstuffs to Canada, enabling British armies to invade New York. New Eng land governors stubbornly refused to permit their militias to serve outside their own states. In a sense America had to ﬁght two enemies simultaneously: old Eng land and New Eng land. Thus perilously divided, the barely United States plunged into armed conﬂ ict against Britain, then the world’s most powerful empire. No sober American could have much reasonable hope of victory, but by 1812 the Jeffersonian Republicans saw no other choice.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Peace treaty with Tripoli Battle of Trafalgar Battle of Austerlitz

1805–


 Pike’s explorations

Judiciary Act of 1801


1801–


 Naval war with Tripoli



 Burr treason trial



 Revised naturalization law Judiciary Act of 1801 repealed

 Chesapeake affair Embargo Act





 Madison elected president

Marbury v. Madison
Louisiana Purchase




 Non-Intercourse Act replaces Embargo Act



 Macon’s Bill No. 2 Napoleon announces (falsely) repeal of blockade decrees Madison reestablishes nonimportation against Britain



Battle of Tippecanoe




 United States declares war on Britain



 Toussaint L’Ouverture launches Haitian Revolution



 Jefferson defeats Adams for presidency





 Haiti emerges as ﬁ rst independent black republic Jefferson reelected president Impeachment of Justice Chase

1804–


 Lewis and Clark expedition

To Learn More


KEY TERMS
Revolution of 1800 (226) patronage (230) Judiciary Act of 1801 (231) midnight judges (231) Marbury v. Madison (232) Tripolitan War (234) Louisiana Purchase (236) Corps of Discovery (236) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Orders in Council (239) impressment (239) Chesapeake affair (239) Embargo Act (240) Non-Intercourse Act (242) Macon’s Bill No. 2 (242) war hawks (244) Tippecanoe, Battle of (244) 
Thomas Jefferson
Sally Hemings
Albert Gallatin
John Marshall
Samuel Chase
Napoleon Bonaparte
Robert R. Livingston
Toussaint L’Ouverture


Meriwether Lewis
William Clark
Aaron Burr
James Madison
Tecumseh
 Tenskwatawa (“the Prophet”)

To Learn More
Catherine Allgor, Parlor Politics (2000)
Stephen E. Ambrose, Undaunted Courage (1996)
Joseph Ellis, American Sphinx: The Character of Thomas
Jefferson (1997)
John Ferling, Adams vs. Jefferson: The Tumultuous Election
 of 1800 (2004) Thomas Fleming, The Louisiana Purchase (2003) Donald R. Hickey, Don’t Give Up the Ship! Myths of the War of 1812 (2006) Peter P. Hill, Napoleon’s Troublesome Americans: FrancoAmerican Relations, 1804–1815 (2005) Donald Jackson, Thomas Jefferson and the Stony Mountain: Exploring the West from Monticello (1981)

Jon Kukla, A Wilderness So Immense (2003)
Marshall Smelser, The Democratic Republic, 1801–1815
(1968)
Anthony Wallace, Jefferson and the Indians (1999)
Gary Wills, Negro President: Thomas Jefferson and the Slave
Power (2003)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Second War
 for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism




1812–1824
 The American continents . . . are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European powers.

T


 he War of 1812 was an especially divisive and illfought war. There was no burning national anger, as there had been in 1807 following the Chesapeake outrage. The supreme lesson of the conﬂ ict was the folly of leading a divided and apathetic people into war. And yet, despite the unimpressive military outcome and even less decisive negotiated peace, Americans came out of the war with a renewed sense of nationhood. For the next dozen years, an awakened spirit of nationalism would inspire activities ranging from protecting manufacturing to building roads to defending the authority of the federal government over the states.

 On to Canada over Land and Lakes On the eve of the War of 1812, the regular army was ill-trained, ill-disciplined, and widely scattered. It had to be supplemented by the even more poorly trained militias, which were sometimes distinguished by their speed of foot in leaving the battleﬁeld. Some of the ranking generals were semisenile heirlooms from the Revolutionary War, rusting on their laurels and lacking in vigor and vision.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



 The Contest over Canada



 Constitution and Guerrière, 1812 The Guerrière was heavily outweighed and outgunned, yet its British captain eagerly—and foolishly—sought combat. His ship was destroyed. Historian Henry Adams later concluded that this duel “raised the United States in one half hour to the rank of a ﬁrst-class Power in the world.” The buckler on the sword from the USS Constitution commemorates the famous battle. Today the Constitution, berthed in Boston harbor, remains the oldest actively commissioned ship in the U.S. Navy.

 Canada became an important battleground in the War of 1812 because British forces were weakest there (see Map 12.1). A successful American offensive might have quashed British inﬂuence among the Indians and garnered new land for settlers. But the Americans’ offensive strategy was poorly conceived. Had the Americans captured Montreal, the center of population and transportation, every thing to the west might have died, just as the leaves of a tree wither when the trunk is girdled. But instead of laying ax to the trunk, the Americans frittered away their strength in the three-pronged invasion of 1812. The trio of invading forces that set out from Detroit, Niagara, and Lake Champlain were all beaten back shortly after they had crossed the Canadian border. By contrast, the British and Canadians displayed energy from the outset. Early in the war, they captured the American fort of Michilimackinac, which commanded the upper Great Lakes and the Indianinhabited area to the south and west. Their brilliant defensive operations were led by the inspired British general Isaac Brock and assisted (in the American camp) by “General Mud” and “General Confusion.” When several American land invasions of Canada were again hurled back in 1813, Americans looked for

 success on the water. Man for man and ship for ship, the American navy did much better than the army. In comparison to British ships, American craft on the whole were more skillfully handled, had better gunners, and were manned by non-press-gang crews who were burning to avenge numerous indignities. Similarly, the American frigates, notably the Constitution (“Old Ironsides”), had thicker sides, heavier ﬁ repower, and larger crews, of which one sailor in six was a free black. Control of the Great Lakes was vital, and an energetic American naval ofﬁcer, Oliver Hazard Perry, managed to build a ﬂeet of green-timbered ships on the shores of Lake Erie, manned by even greener seamen. When he captured a British ﬂeet in a furious engagement on the lake, he reported to his superior, “We have met the enemy and they are ours.” Perry’s victory and his slogan infused new life into the drooping American cause. Forced to withdraw from Detroit and Fort Malden, the retreating redcoats were overtaken by General Harrison’s army and beaten at the Battle of the Thames in October 1813. Despite these successes, the Americans by late 1814, far from invading Canada, were grimly defending their own soil against the invading British. Napoleon’s



