Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 spurted up to 192,556 miles, or more than that for all of Europe combined, and much of the new trackage ran west of the Mississippi (see Figure 24.1). Transcontinental railroad building was so costly and risky as to require government subsidies, as it had

 in many other industrializing nations. Everywhere, the construction of railway systems promised greater national unity and economic growth. The extension of rails into thinly populated regions was unproﬁtable until the areas could be built up, and private promoters

CONTINENT AND COUNTRY TOTAL WORLD

595,767


Total North and
South America
United States


317,925
259,687


Canada


21,624


Brazil


9,300


Mexico


8,600


Argentina


8,255


Other Americas


10,459


Total Europe


220,261


Germany


41,793


France


36,348


Great Britain


32,088


Russia


30,140


Austria-Hungary


26,501


Italy


13,063


Spain


9,860


Sweden


7,910


Other Europe


22,558


Total Asia


31,024


British Empire


25,488


Japan


1,460


China 200
Other Asia


3,876


Total Australia


17,922


Total Africa


8,635


Algeria and Tunis


3,094


Cape Colony


2,873


Egypt


1,541


Other Africa


1,127


50,000


100,000


150,000


200,000


250,000


300,000


350,000


600,000


 Railroad track built in kilometers, 1889

Figure 24.1 Railroads Worldwide, 1889*
 *Another calculation of railway track per 10,000 inhabitants in 1904 revealed that the United States was still far out in front, with 26.4 miles of track compared to 15.2 miles for the second-place country, Sweden. Much farther behind were the major western European nations of France (7.3), Germany (6.1), and Great Britain and Ireland (5.4). [Source: Slason Thompson, Railway Statistics of the United States of America for the Year Ending June 30, 1906, Compared with the Ofﬁcial Reports of 1905 and Recent Statistics of Foreign Railways (1907).] Source: Henry Poor, Poor’s Manual of the Railroads of the United States for 1891 (1891).



The Railroad Age


 were unwilling to suffer heavy initial losses. Congress, impressed by arguments pleading military and postal needs, began to advance liberal loans to two favored cross-continent companies in 1862 and added enormous donations of acreage paralleling the tracks. All told, Washington rewarded the railroads with 155,504,994 acres, and the western states contributed 49 million more—a total area larger than Texas (see Map 24.1). Grasping railroads tied up even more land than this for a number of years. Land grants to railroads were made in broad belts along the proposed route. Within these belts the railroads were allowed to choose alternate mile-square sections in checkerboard fashion. But until they determined the precise location of their tracks and decided which sections were the choicest selections, the railroads withheld all the land from other users. President Grover Cleveland put an end to this foot-dragging practice in 1887 and threw open to

 settlement the still-unclaimed public portions of the land-grant areas. Noisy criticism, especially in later years, was leveled at the “giveaway” of so valuable a birthright to greedy corporations. But the government did receive beneﬁcial returns, including long-term preferential rates for postal ser vice and military trafﬁc. Granting land was also a “cheap” way to subsidize a muchdesired transportation system, because it avoided new taxes for direct cash grants. The railroads could turn the land into gold by using it as collateral for loans from private bankers or, later, by selling it. This they often did, at an average price of $3 an acre. Critics were also prone to overlook the fact that the land did not have even that relatively modest value until the railroads had ribboned it with steel. Frontier villages touched by the magic wand of the iron rail became ﬂourishing cities; those that were

 Map 24.1 Federal Land Grants to Railroads The heavy red lines indicate areas within which the railroads might be given speciﬁc parcels of land. As shown in the inset, land was reserved in belts of various widths on either side of a railroad’s right of way. Until the railroad selected the individual mile-square sections it chose to possess, all such sections within the belt were withdrawn from eligibility for settlement. The “time zones” were introduced in 1883 (see p. 572), and their boundaries have since been adjusted. Interactive Map

Central
Time


C a n a d i a n Pa c i f i c R
R


 MONT.

CANADA MINN.

N. DAK.

N o r t h e r n Pa c i f i c R R


M


WYOMING
Pa 
 cif

 ic R R

NEVADA CALIF.

PAC I F IC OCEAN

Salt Lake
City
UTAH TERR.

 uth

ARIZ. TERR.

 e r n Pa c i fic R R

120°W


&


Atlant ic &
Pa c i f i c R R


So


 NEB.

 pe

Sa


 a nt

L. E


 IND.

ILL.
Fe R R 
 KANS.

 ka

INDIAN TERR.

Pe


St. Louis


 nn s

 y lva

 MO.

R
 nia R

 h

N. MEX. TERR.
El Paso 
Ne


 w

 TENN.

L.
 io ntar

 r Yo

 kC

 n er

Ra


 ilw

PA.
Pittsburgh 
 VA.

 ay

S.C.


Savannah


 ALA.

30°N


 One square mile granted to railroad

New Orleans


M EXICO

 FLA.

Gulf of Mexico


100°W


 Primary federal land grants to railroads





400 Km.


90°W


80°W


N


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 LA.

 Right of way: 100 yards wide

Boston
MASS. R.I. CONN. 40°N
New York N.J. Philadelphia 70°W DEL. MD. Washington, D.C. 
N.C.


 TEXAS

 One square mile held by government or sold

N.H.


R
 ral R ent

 GA.

 MISS.

PATTERN OF LAND GRANTS

N.Y.


 W.VA.

 KY.

 ARK.

 rie

 OHIO

 IOWA

Kansas City


O


Hamilton


Chicago


 c RR

Denver
 COLO.

 n T o

Los Angeles


U n i o n Pa c i f i


Atchiso


C


San
Francisco


 al entr

Toronto


L.
Michigan 

S. DAK.

 ME.

 VT.

I


L. on
 r Hu

 WIS.

 IDAHO

 Montréal

Ottawa


.
 CH

 OREGON

60°W


 Québec

 pe L. Su rior

Duluth


50°N


 ut

Seattle
 WASH.

Eastern
Time


So


Tacoma


Mountain
Time


Pacific
Time


Vancouver




400 Mi.




Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 bypassed often withered away and became “ghost towns.” Little wonder that communities fought one another for the privilege of playing host to the railroads. Ambitious towns customarily held out monetary and other attractions to the builders, who sometimes blackmailed them into contributing more generously.

Spanning the Continent
 with Rails Deadlock in the 1850s over the proposed transcontinental railroad was broken when the South seceded, leaving the ﬁeld to the North. In 1862, the year after the guns ﬁ rst spoke at Fort Sumter, Congress made provision for starting the long-awaited line. One weighty argument for action was the urgency of bolstering the Union, already disrupted, by binding the Paciﬁc Coast—especially gold-rich Cal i fornia—more securely to the rest of the Republic. The Union Paciﬁc Railroad—note the word Union— was thus commissioned by Congress to thrust westward from Omaha, Nebraska. For each mile of track constructed, the company was granted 20 square miles of land, alternating in 640-acre sections on either side of the track. For each mile the builders were also to receive a generous federal loan, ranging from $16,000 on

Snow Sheds on the Central
 Paciﬁc Railroad in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, by Joseph H. Becker, ca. 1869 Formidable obstacles of climate and terrain confronted the builders of the Central Paciﬁc Railroad in the mountainous heights of California. Note the Chinese laborers in the foreground.

 the ﬂat prairie land to $48,000 for mountainous country. The laying of rails began in earnest after the Civil War ended in 1865, and with juicy loans and land grants available, the “groundhog” promoters made all possible haste. Insiders of the Crédit Mobilier construction company reaped fabulous proﬁts. They slyly pocketed $73 million for some $50 million worth of breakneck construction, spending small change to bribe congressmen to look the other way. Sweaty construction gangs, containing many Irish “Paddies” (Patricks) who had fought in the Union armies, worked at a frantic pace. On one record-breaking day, a sledge-and-shovel army of some ﬁve thousand men laid ten miles of track. A favorite song went like this: Then drill, my Paddies, drill; Drill, my heroes, drill; Drill all day, No sugar in your tay [tea] Workin’ on the U.P. Railway. When hostile Indians attacked in futile efforts to protect what once rightfully had been their land, the laborers would drop their picks and seize their riﬂes. Scores of people—railroad workers and Indians—lost their lives as the rails stretched ever westward. At rail’s end, workers tried their best to ﬁ nd relaxation and conviviality in

Railroads Span the Nation


 Promoting the Union Paciﬁc Railroad, 1869

 their tented towns, known as “hells on wheels,” often teeming with as many as ten thousand men and a sprinkling of painted prostitutes and performers. Rail laying at the Cal i fornia end was undertaken by the Central Paciﬁc Railroad. This line pushed boldly eastward from boomtown Sacramento, over and through the towering, snow-clogged Sierra Nevada. Four farseeing men—the so-called Big Four—were the chief ﬁnancial backers of the enterprise. The quartet included the heavyset, enterprising ex-governor Leland Stanford of Cal i fornia, who had useful political connections, and the burly, energetic Collis P. Huntington, an adept lobbyist. The Big Four cleverly operated through two construction companies, and although they walked away with tens of millions in proﬁts, they kept their hands relatively clean by not becoming involved in the bribing of congressmen. The Central Paciﬁc, which was granted the same princely subsidies as the Union Paciﬁc, had the same



 incentive to haste. Some ten thousand Chinese laborers, sweating from dawn to dusk under their basket hats, proved to be cheap, efﬁcient, and expendable (hundreds lost their lives in premature explosions and other mishaps). The towering Sierra Nevada presented a formidable barrier, and the nerves of the Big Four were strained when their workers could chip only a few inches a day tunneling through solid rock, while the Union Paciﬁc was sledgehammering westward across the open plains. A “wedding of the rails” was ﬁ nally consummated near Ogden, Utah, in 1869, as two locomotives— “facing on a single track, half a world behind each back”— gently kissed cowcatchers. The colorful ceremony included the breaking of champagne bottles and the driv ing of a last ceremonial (golden) spike, with ex-governor Stanford clumsily wielding a silver maul. In all, the Union Paciﬁc built 1,086 miles, the Central Paciﬁc 689 miles. Completion of the transcontinental line—a magniﬁcent engineering feat for that day—was one of America’s most impressive peacetime undertakings. It welded the West Coast more ﬁ rmly to the Union and facilitated a ﬂourishing trade with Asia. It penetrated the arid barrier of the deserts, paving the way for the phenomenal growth of the Great West. Americans compared this electrifying achievement with the Declaration of Independence and the emancipation of the slaves; jubilant Philadelphians again rang the cracked bell of Independence Hall.

Binding the Country
 with Railroad Ties With the westward trail now blazed, four other transcontinental lines were completed before the century’s end. None of them secured monetary loans from the federal government, as did the Union Paciﬁc and the Central Paciﬁc. But all of them except the Great Northern received generous grants of land. The Northern Paciﬁc Railroad, stretching from Lake Superior to Puget Sound, reached its terminus in 1883. The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe, stretching through the southwestern deserts to Cal i fornia, was completed in 1884. The Southern Paciﬁc ribboned from New Orleans to San Francisco and was consolidated in the same year. The last spike of the last of the ﬁve transcontinental railroads of the nineteenth century was hammered home in 1893. The Great Northern, which ran from



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 The Union Paciﬁc and the Central Paciﬁc Link at Promontory Point, Utah, May 10, 1869 Railroad ﬁnanciers, dignitaries, spectators, and Chinese (Central Paciﬁc) and Irish (Union Paciﬁc) work gangs witnessed the historic joining that created the nation’s ﬁrst transcontinental railroad. After the two locomotives chugged within a few feet of each other, Central Paciﬁc chief and former California governor Leland Stanford tapped a golden spike into a prepared hole on the last tie with a silver-plated maul. The golden spike was whisked away to be preserved for posterity at the Stanford University Museum, but the iron one that replaced it was hardly ordinary. It was wired to a Union Paciﬁc telegraph line, while a copper plate on the maul was connected to a Central Paciﬁc wire. When they touched, they closed a telegraphic circuit that sent the news to cities all over the country.

 Duluth to Seattle north of the Northern Paciﬁc, was the creation of a far-visioned Canadian American, James J. Hill, a bearlike man who was probably the greatest railroad builder of all. His enterprise was so soundly orga nized that it rode through later ﬁ nancial storms with ﬂying colors. Yet the romance of the rails was not without its sordid side. Pioneer builders were often guilty of gross overoptimism. Avidly seeking land bounties and pushing into areas that lacked enough potential population to support a railroad, they sometimes laid down rails that led “from nowhere to nothing.” When prosperity failed to smile upon their coming, they went into bankruptcy, carrying down with them the savings of trusting investors. Many of the large railroads in the post–Civil War decades passed through seemingly endless bankruptcies, mergers, or reorga ni zations.

 In 1892 James Baird Weaver (1833–1912), nominee of the Populists, wrote regarding the railroad magnates,

“


 In their delirium of greed the managers of our transportation systems disregard both private right and the public welfare. Today they will combine and bankrupt their weak rivals, and by the expenditure of a triﬂing sum possess themselves of properties which cost the outlay of millions. Tomorrow they will capitalize their booty for ﬁve times the cost, issue their bonds, and proceed to levy tariffs upon the people to pay dividends upon the fraud.

”


Railroad Revolutions


Railroad Consolidation
 and Mechanization The success of the western lines was facilitated by welding together and expanding the older eastern networks, notably the New York Central. The genius in this enterprise was “Commodore” Cornelius Vanderbilt— burly, boisterous, white-whiskered. Having made his millions in steamboating, he daringly turned, in his late sixties, to a new career in railroading. Though illeducated, ungrammatical, coarse, and ruthless, he was clear-visioned. Offering superior railway ser vice at lower rates, he amassed a fortune of $100 million. His name is perhaps best remembered through his contribution of $1 million to the founding of Vanderbilt University in Tennessee. Two signiﬁcant new improvements proved a boon to the railroads. One was the steel rail, which Vanderbilt helped popularize when he replaced the old iron tracks of the New York Central with the tougher metal.

 Traveling First Class This sumptuously appointed Pullman Palace Car offered its prosperous passengers the comforts of home while they were far away from it.



 Steel was safer and more economical because it could bear a heavier load. A standard gauge of track width likewise came into wide use during the postwar years, thus eliminating the expense and inconvenience of numerous changes from one line to another. Other reﬁ nements played a vital role in railroading. The Westinghouse air brake, generally adopted in the 1870s, was a marvelous contribution to efﬁciency and safety. The Pullman Palace Cars, advertised as “gorgeous traveling hotels,” were introduced on a considerable scale in the 1860s. Alarmists condemned them as “wheeled torture chambers” and potential funeral pyres, for the wooden cars were equipped with swaying kerosene lamps. Appalling accidents continued to be almost daily tragedies, despite safety devices like the telegraph (“talking wires”), double-tracking, and (later) the block signal.

Revolution by Railways
 The metallic ﬁ ngers of the railroads intimately touched countless phases of American life. For the ﬁ rst time, a sprawling nation became united in a physical sense, bound with ribs of iron and steel. The railroads emerged as the nation’s biggest business, employing more people than any other industry and gobbling up nearly 20 percent of investment dollars from foreign and domestic investors alike. More than any other single factor, the railroad network spurred the amazing economic growth of the post–Civil War years. By stitching North America together from ocean to ocean, the pufﬁ ng locomotives opened up the West with its wealth of resources. Trains hauled raw materials to factories and sped them back as ﬁ nished goods for sale across the continent, making the United States the largest integrated national market in the world. The forging of the rails themselves generated the largest single source of orders for the adolescent steel industry. The screeching iron horse especially stimulated mining and agriculture in the West. It took farmers out to their land, carried the fruits of their toil to market, and brought them their manufactured necessities. Clusters of farm settlements paralleled the railroads, just as earlier they had followed the rivers. Railways were a boon for cities and played a leading role in the great cityward movement of the last decades of the century. The iron monsters could carry food to enormous concentrations of people and at the same time ensure them a livelihood by providing both raw materials and markets.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 Railroad companies also stimulated the mighty stream of immigration. Seeking settlers to whom their land grants might be sold at a proﬁt, they advertised seductively in Europe and sometimes offered to transport the newcomers free to their farms. The land also felt the impact of the railroad—especially the broad, ecologically fragile midsection of the continent that Thomas Jefferson had purchased from France in 1803. Settlers following the railroads plowed up the tallgrass prairies of Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, and Nebraska and planted well-drained, rectangular cornﬁelds. On the shortgrass prairies of the high plains in the Dakotas and Montana, range-fed cattle rapidly displaced the buffalo, which were hunted to nearextinction. The white pine forests of Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota disappeared into lumber that was rushed by rail to prairie farmers, who used it to build houses and fences. Time itself was bent to the railroads’ needs. Until the 1880s every town in the United States had its own “local” time, dictated by the sun’s position. When it was noon in Chicago, it was 11:50 a.m. in St. Louis and 12:18 p.m. in Detroit. For railroad operators worried about keeping schedules and avoiding wrecks, this patchwork of local times was a nightmare. Thus on November 18, 1883, the major rail lines decreed that the continent would henceforth be divided into four “time zones.” Most communities quickly adopted railroad “standard” time. Finally, the railroad, more than any other single factor, was the maker of millionaires. A raw new aristocracy, consisting of “lords of the rail,” replaced the old southern “lords of the lash.” The multiwebbed lines became the playthings of Wall Street, and colossal wealth was amassed by stock speculators and railroad wreckers.

Wrongdoing in
Railroading
 Corruption lurks nearby when fabulous fortunes can materialize overnight. The ﬂeecings administered by the railroad construction companies, such as the Crédit Mobilier, were but the ﬁ rst of the bunco games that the railroad promoters learned to play. Methods soon became more reﬁ ned, as fast-ﬁ ngered ﬁ nanciers executed multimillion-dollar maneuvers beneath the noses of a bedazzled public. Jay Gould was the most adept of these ringmasters of rapacity. For nearly thirty years, he boomed and busted the stocks of the Erie, the Kansas

William H. Vanderbilt, Robber Baron This 1885
 cartoon takes aim at Vanderbilt’s notorious comment, “The public be damned!”

 Paciﬁc, the Union Paciﬁc, and the Texas and Paciﬁc in an incredible circus of speculative skullduggery. One of the favorite devices of the moguls of manipulation was “stock watering.” The term originally referred to the practice of making cattle thirsty by feeding them salt and then having them bloat themselves with water before they were weighed in for sale. Using a variation of this technique, railroad stock promoters grossly inﬂated their claims about a given line’s assets and proﬁtability and sold stocks and bonds far in excess of the railroad’s actual value. “Promoters’ proﬁts” were often the tail that wagged the iron horse itself. Railroad managers were forced to charge extortionate rates and wage ruthless competitive battles in order to pay off the exaggerated ﬁ nancial obligations with which they were saddled. The public interest was frequently trampled underfoot as the railroad titans waged their brutal wars. Crusty old Cornelius Vanderbilt, when told that the law stood in his way, reportedly exclaimed, “Law! What do I care about the law? Hain’t I got the power?” On another occasion he supposedly threatened some associates: “I won’t sue you, for the law is too slow. I’ll ruin you.” His son, William H. Vanderbilt, when asked in 1883 about the discontinuance of a fast mail train, reportedly snorted, “The public be damned!”

Reforms in Railroading


 While abusing the public, the railroaders blandly bought and sold people in public life. They bribed judges and legislatures, employed arm-twisting lobbyists, and elected their own “creatures” to high ofﬁce. They showered free passes on journalists and politicians in profusion. One railroad man noted in 1885 that in the West “no man who has money, or ofﬁcial position, or inﬂuence thinks he ought to pay anything for riding on a railroad.” Railroad kings were, for a time, virtual industrial monarchs. As manipulators of a huge natural monopoly, they exercised more direct control over the lives of more people than did the president of the United States—and their terms were not limited to four years. They increasingly shunned the crude bloodletting of cutthroat competition and began to cooperate with one another to rule the railroad dominion. Sorely pressed to show at least some returns on their bloated investments, they entered into defensive alliances to protect precious proﬁts. The earliest form of combination was the “pool”— an agreement to divide the business in a given area and share the proﬁts. Other rail barons granted secret rebates or kickbacks to powerful shippers in return for steady and assured trafﬁc. Often they slashed their rates on competing lines, but they more than made up the difference on noncompeting ones, where they might actually charge more for a short haul than for a long one. As a result, small farmers usually paid the highest rates, while large customers got the best deals.

Government Bridles
 the Iron Horse It was neither healthy nor politically acceptable that so many people should be at the mercy of so few. Impoverished farmers, especially in the Midwest, began to wonder if the nation had not escaped from the slavery power only to fall into the hands of the money power, as represented by the railroad plutocracy. But the American people, usually quick to respond to political injustice, were slow to combat economic injustice. Dedicated to free enterprise and to the principle that competition is the soul of trade, they cherished a traditionally keen pride in progress. They remembered that Jefferson’s ideals were hostile to government interference with business. Above all, there shimmered the “American dream”: the hope that in a catch-as-catch-can economic system, anyone might become a millionaire.



 The depression of the 1870s goaded the farmers into protesting against being “railroaded” into bankruptcy. Under pressure from organized agrarian groups like the Grange (Patrons of Husbandry), many midwestern legislatures tried to regulate the railroad monopoly. The scattered state efforts screeched to a halt in 1886. The Supreme Court, in the famed Wabash, St. Louis & Paciﬁc Railroad Company v. Illinois case, decreed that individual states had no power to regulate interstate commerce. If the mechanical monster were to be corralled, the federal government would have to do the job. Stiff-necked President Cleveland did not look kindly on effective regulation. But Congress ignored his grumbling indifference and passed the epochal Interstate Commerce Act in 1887. It prohibited rebates and pools and required the railroads to publish their rates openly. It also forbade unfair discrimination against shippers and outlawed charging more for a short haul than for a long one over the same line. Most important, it set up the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to administer and enforce the new legislation. Despite acclaim, the Interstate Commerce Act emphatically did not represent a popular victory over corporate wealth. One of the leading corporation lawyers of the day, Richard Olney, shrewdly noted that the new commission “can be made of great use to the railroads. It satisﬁes the popular clamor for a government supervision of railroads, at the same time that such supervision is almost entirely nominal. . . . The part of wisdom is not to destroy the Commission, but to utilize it.” What the new legislation did do was to provide an orderly forum where competing business interests could resolve their conﬂ icts in peaceable ways. The country could now avoid ruinous rate wars among the railroads and outraged, “conﬁ scatory” attacks on the lines by pitchfork-prodded state legislatures. This was a modest accomplishment but by no means an unimportant one. The Interstate Commerce Act tended to stabilize, not revolutionize, the existing business system. Yet the act still ranks as a red-letter law. It was the ﬁ rst large-scale attempt by Washington to regulate business in the interest of society at large. It heralded the arrival of a series of independent regulatory commissions in the next century, which would irrevocably commit the government to the daunting task of monitoring and guiding the private economy. It



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 foreshadowed the doom of freewheeling, buccaneering business practices and served full notice that there was a public interest in private enterprise that the government was bound to protect.

Miracles of Mechanization
 Postwar industrial expansion, partly a result of the railroad network, rapidly began to assume mammoth proportions. When Lincoln was elected in 1860, the Republic ranked only fourth among the manufacturing nations of the world. By 1894 it had bounded into ﬁ rst place. Why the sudden upsurge? Liquid capital, previously scarce, was now becoming abundant. The word millionaire had not been coined until the 1840s, and in 1861 only a handful of individuals were eligible for this class. But the Civil War, partly through proﬁteering, created immense fortunes, and these accumulations could now be combined with borrowings from foreign capitalists. Investors from abroad loaned more money to the United States in the postwar period than any country had previously received. Unlike in other countries, in America they mostly put the money into private hands, not public coffers. Investors primarily from Britain, but also from France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Switzerland, sometimes owned all or part of an American business. Other times they simply lent their money to the thousands of European companies set up to manage investment in U.S. industry. Either way, Europeans were usually content to let Americans run the business— until hard times hit and they demanded more say over company operations or government economic policies. Innovations in transportation fueled growth, too, by bringing the nation’s amazingly abundant natural resources—particularly coal, oil, and iron—to the factory door. A shipping system through the Great Lakes carried the rich iron deposits in the Mesabi Range of Minnesota to Chicago and Cleveland for reﬁ ning. This priceless bonanza, where mountains of red-rusted ore could be scooped up by steam shovels, ultimately became a cornerstone of a vast steel empire. Copper, bauxite, and zinc made similar journeys from mine to manufacture. The sheer size of the American market encouraged innovators to invent mass-production methods. With cheap transportation crisscrossing the nation and an ever-larger population able and eager to consume, any-

 one who could make an appealing new product available for a good price in large quantities—and ﬁgure out how to market it—thrived. Industrialists continued to reﬁ ne the pre–Civil War “American System” of using specialized machinery to make interchangeable parts, culminating in 1913 with Henry Ford’s fully developed moving assembly line for his Model T (see pp. 256–257 and 782–783). The captains of industry had a major incentive to invent machines: they made it possible to replace expensive skilled labor with unskilled workers, now cheap and plentiful as a result of massive immigration. Steel, the keystone industry, was built largely on the sweat of low-priced immigrant labor from eastern and southern Europe, working in two 12-hour shifts, seven days a week. Just as industry served as a hothouse of invention, brilliant ideas gave rise to whole new lines of business. Between 1860 and 1890, some 440,000 patents were issued. Business operations were facilitated by machines such as the cash register, the stock ticker, and the typewriter (“literary piano”), while the refrigerator car, the electric dynamo, and the electric railway speeded urbanization. One of the most ingenious inventions was the telephone, introduced by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876. America was suddenly turned into a nation of “telephoniacs,” as a gigantic communications network was built on his invention. The social impact of the telephone further expanded when it lured “number please” women away from the stove to the switchboard. Telephone boys were at ﬁ rst employed as operators, but their profanity shocked patrons. The most versatile inventor of all was Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931), who as a boy had been considered so dull-witted that he was taken out of school. His

 Regarding the exploitation of immigrant labor, Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882) wrote in 1860,

“


 The German and Irish millions, like the Negro, have a great deal of guano in their destiny. They are ferried over the Atlantic, and carted over America, to ditch and to drudge, to make corn cheap, and then to lie down prematurely to make a spot of green grass on the prairie.

”


The Rise of the Trusts




Thomas Alva Edison in His Lab, 1888 Edison was
 dubbed the “Wizard of Menlo Park,” New Jersey, where he lived and established the ﬁrst major industrial research laboratory. Edison was not only an ingenious inventor; he also ﬁgured out how to apply the principles of mass production to his inventions. Phonographs, telephones, telegraphs, incandescent electric lighting, ﬂuoroscopes, kinetoscopes, and many more technological wonders spread throughout the world following their development in Edison’s lab.

 severe deafness enabled him to concentrate without distraction. Edison was a gifted tinkerer and a tireless worker, not a pure scientist. “Genius,” he said, “is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration.” Wondrous devices poured out of his “invention factory” in New Jersey—the phonograph, the mimeograph, the dictaphone, and the moving picture. He is probably best known for his perfection in 1879 of the electric lightbulb, which turned night into day and transformed ancient human habits as well. People had previously slept an average of nine hours a night; now they slept just a bit more than seven.

The Trust Titan Emerges
 Despite pious protests to the contrary, competition was the bugbear of most business leaders of the day. Tycoons like Andrew Carnegie, the steel king; John D. Rockefeller, the oil baron; and J. Pierpont Morgan, the bankers’ banker, exercised their genius in devising ways to circumvent competition. Carnegie integrated every phase of his steel-making operation. His miners scratched the ore from the earth in the Mesabi Range; Carnegie ships ﬂoated it across the Great Lakes;

 Carnegie railroads delivered it to the blast furnaces at Pittsburgh. When the molten metal ﬁnally poured from the glowing crucibles into the waiting ingot molds, no other hands but those in Carnegie’s employ had touched the product. Carnegie thus pioneered the creative entrepreneurial tactic of vertical integration, combining into one orga ni zation all phases of manufacturing from mining to marketing. His goal was to improve efﬁciency by making supplies more reliable, controlling the quality of the product at all stages of production, and eliminating middlemen’s fees. Less justiﬁable on grounds of efﬁciency was the technique of horizontal integration, which simply meant allying with competitors to monopolize a given market. Rockefeller was a master of this stratagem. He perfected a device for controlling bothersome rivals— the trust. Stockholders in various smaller oil companies assigned their stock to the board of directors of his Standard Oil Company, formed in 1870. It then consolidated and concerted the operations of the previously competing enterprises. “Let us prey” was said to be Rockefeller’s unwritten motto. Ruthlessly wielding vast power, Standard Oil soon cornered virtually the entire world petroleum market. Weaker competitors, left out of the trust agreement, were forced to the wall. Rockefeller’s stunning success inspired many imitators, and the word trust came to be generally used to describe any large-scale business combination. The imperial Morgan devised still other schemes for eliminating “wasteful” competition. The depression of the 1890s drove into his welcoming arms many bleeding businesspeople, wounded by cutthroat competition. His prescribed remedy was to consolidate rival enterprises and to ensure future harmony by placing ofﬁcers of his own banking syndicate on their various boards of directors. These came to be known as interlocking directorates.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


The Octopus, 1904
 This cartoon visually captures a feeling of widespread resentment against Standard Oil as a powerful, sprawling “octopus” whose tentacles controlled all branches of government.

The Supremacy of Steel
 “Steel is king!” might well have been the exultant war cry of the new industrialized generation. The mighty metal ultimately held together the new steel civilization, from skyscrapers to coal scuttles, while providing it with food, shelter, and transportation. Steel making, notably rails for railroads, typiﬁed the dominance of “heavy industry,” which concentrated on making “capital goods,” as distinct from the production of “consumer goods” such as clothes and shoes. Now taken for granted, steel was a scarce commodity in the wood-and-brick America of Abraham Lincoln. Considerable iron went into railroad rails and bridges, but steel was expensive and was used largely for products like cutlery. The early iron horse snorted exclusively (and dangerously) over iron rails. When in the 1870s “Commodore” Vanderbilt of the New York Central began to use steel rails, he was forced to import them from Britain. Yet within an amazing twenty years, the United States had outdistanced all foreign competitors and was pouring out more than one-third of the world’s supply of steel. By 1900 America was producing as much as Britain and Germany combined. What wrought the transformation? Chieﬂy the invention in the 1850s of a method of making cheap steel—the Bessemer process. It was named after a derided British inventor, although an American had stumbled on it a few years earlier. William Kelly, a Ken-

 tucky manufacturer of iron kettles, discovered that cold air blown on red-hot iron caused the metal to become white-hot by igniting the carbon and thus eliminating impurities. He tried to apply the new “air boiling” technique to his own product, but his customers decried “Kelly’s fool steel,” and his business declined. Gradually the Bessemer-Kelly process won acceptance, and these two “crazy men” ultimately made possible the present steel civilization.

Carnegie and Other
Sultans of Steel
 Kingpin among steelmasters was Andrew Carnegie, an undersized, charming Scotsman. As a towheaded lad of thirteen, he was brought to America by his impoverished parents in 1848 and got a job as a bobbin boy at $1.20 a week. Mounting the ladder of success so fast that he was said to have scorched the rungs, he forged ahead by working hard, doing the extra chore, cheerfully assuming responsibility, and smoothly cultivating inﬂuential people. After accumulating some capital, Carnegie entered the steel business in the Pittsburgh area. A gifted organizer and administrator, he succeeded by picking high-class associates and by eliminating many middlemen. Although inclined to be tough-ﬁ sted in business, he was not a monopolist and disliked monopolistic trusts. His remarkable orga ni zation was a partnership

Captains of Industry




 Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919) wrote in 1889,

“


 The man who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth, which was his to administer during life, will pass away ‘unwept, unhonored, and unsung,’ no matter to what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with him. Of such as these the public verdict will then be: ‘The man who dies thus rich dies disgraced.’

”


J. P.
Morgan (1837–1913) As the most inﬂuential banker of his day, Morgan symbolized to many people the power and arrogance of “ﬁnance capitalism.” The chronic skin disorder on his nose inspired the taunt “Johnny Morgan’s nasal organ has a purple hue.” 
 that involved, at its maximum, about forty “Pittsburgh millionaires.” By 1900 he was producing one-fourth of the nation’s Bessemer steel, and the partners in these pre–income tax days were dividing proﬁts of $40 million a year as their take-home pay, with the “Napoleon of the Smokestacks” himself receiving a cool $25 million. Into the picture now stepped the ﬁ nancial giant of the age, J. Pierpont Morgan. “Jupiter” Morgan had made a legendary reputation for himself and his Wall Street banking house by ﬁ nancing the reorga ni zation of railroads, insurance companies, and banks. An impressive ﬁgure of a man, with massive shoulders, shaggy brows, piercing eyes, and a bulbous, acne-cursed red nose, he had established an enviable reputation for integrity. He did not believe that “money power” was dangerous, except when in dangerous hands—and he did not regard his own hands as dangerous. The force of circumstances brought Morgan and Carnegie into collision. By 1900 the canny little Scotsman, weary of turning steel into gold, was eager to sell his holdings. Morgan had meanwhile plunged heavily into the manufacture of steel pipe tubing. Carnegie, cleverly threatening to invade the same business, was ready to ruin his rival if he did not receive his price. The

 steelmaster’s agents haggled with the imperious Morgan for eight agonizing hours, and the ﬁ nancier ﬁ nally agreed to buy out Carnegie for over $400 million. Fearing that he would die “disgraced” with so much wealth, Carnegie dedicated the remaining years of his life to giving away money for public libraries, pensions for professors, and other such philanthropic purposes—in all disposing of about $350 million. Morgan moved rapidly to expand his new industrial empire. He took the Carnegie holdings, added others, “watered” the stock liberally, and in 1901 launched the enlarged United States Steel Corporation. Capitalized at $1.4 billion, it was America’s ﬁ rst billion-dollar corporation—a larger sum than the total estimated wealth of the nation in 1800. The Industrial Revolution, with its hot Bessemer breath, had come into its own.

Rockefeller Grows an
American Beauty Rose
 The sudden emergence of the oil industry was one of the most striking developments of the years during and after the Civil War. Traces of oil found on streams had earlier been bottled for back-rub and other patent medicines, but not until 1859 did the ﬁ rst well in Pennsylvania—“Drake’s Folly”—pour out its liquid “black gold.” Almost overnight an industry was born that was to take more wealth from the earth than all of the gold extracted by the forty-niners and their western successors. Kerosene, derived from petroleum, was the ﬁ rst major product of the infant oil industry. Burned from a cotton wick in a glass chimney lamp, kerosene produced a much brighter ﬂame than whale oil. The oil business boomed; by the 1870s kerosene was America’s fourth most valuable export. Whaling, in contrast, the lifeblood of ocean-roaming New Eng landers since



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


Washington as Seen by the Trusts, 1900
 “What a funny little government,” John D. Rockefeller observes in this satirical cartoon. His own wealth and power are presumed to dwarf the resources of the federal government.

 before the days of Moby Dick, swiftly became a sick industry. But what technology gives, technology takes away. By 1885, 250,000 of Thomas Edison’s electric lightbulbs were in use; ﬁ fteen years later, perhaps 15 million. The new electric industry rendered kerosene obsolete just as kerosene had rendered whale oil obsolete. Only in rural America and overseas did a market continue for oil-ﬁ red lamps. Oil might thus have remained a modest, even a shrinking, industry but for yet another turn of the technological tide—the invention of the automobile. By 1900 the gasoline-burning internal combustion engine had clearly bested its rivals, steam and electricity, as the superior means of automobile propulsion. As the century of the automobile dawned, the oil business got a new, long-lasting, and hugely proﬁtable lease on life. John D. Rockefeller—lanky, shrewd, ambitious, abstemious (he neither drank, smoked, nor swore)—came to dominate the oil industry. Born to a family of precarious income, he became a successful businessman at age nineteen. One upward stride led to another, and in 1870 he orga nized the Standard Oil Company of Ohio, nucleus of the great trust formed in 1882. Locating his reﬁ neries in Cleveland, he sought to eliminate the middlemen and squeeze out competitors. Pious and parsimonious, Rockefeller ﬂourished in an era of completely free enterprise. So-called piratical practices were employed by “corsairs of ﬁ nance,” and business ethics were distressingly low. Rockefeller, op-

 erating “just to the windward of the law,” pursued a policy of rule or ruin. “Sell all the oil that is sold in your district” was the hard-boiled order that went out to his local agents. By 1877 Rockefeller controlled 95 percent of all the oil reﬁ neries in the country. Rockefeller—“Reckafellow,” as Carnegie had once called him—showed little mercy. A kind of primitive savagery prevailed in the jungle world of big business, where only the ﬁttest survived. Or so Rockefeller believed. His son later explained that the giant American Beauty rose could be produced “only by sacriﬁcing the early buds that grew up around it.” His father pinched off the small buds with complete ruthlessness. Employing spies and extorting secret rebates from the railroads, he even forced the lines to pay him rebates on the freight bills of his competitors! Rockefeller thought he was simply obeying a law of nature. “The time was ripe” for aggressive consolidation, he later reﬂected. “It had to come, though all we saw at the moment was the need to save ourselves from wasteful conditions. . . . The day of combination is here to stay. Individualism has gone, never to return.” On the other side of the ledger, Rockefeller’s oil monopoly did turn out a superior product at a relatively cheap price. It achieved important economies, both at home and abroad, by its large-scale methods of production and distribution. This, in truth, was the tale of the other trusts as well. The efﬁcient use of expensive machinery called for bigness, and consolidation proved more proﬁtable than ruinous price wars.

A
Philosophy for Plutocracy 



Robber Barons Cyrus Field,
Jay Gould, Cornelius
Vanderbilt, and Russell Sage
 Kept Aﬂoat on the Broken Backs of America’s Workingmen, 1883

 Other trusts blossomed along with the American Beauty of oil. These included the sugar trust, the tobacco trust, the leather trust, and the harvester trust, which amalgamated some two hundred competitors. The meat industry arose on the backs of bawling western herds, and meat kings like Gustavus F. Swift and Philip Armour took their place among the new royalty. Wealth was coming to dominate the commonwealth. These untrustworthy trusts, and the “pirates” who captained them, were disturbingly new. They eclipsed an older American aristocracy of modestly successful merchants and professionals. An arrogant class of “new rich” was now elbowing aside the patrician families in the mad scramble for power and prestige. Not surprisingly, the ranks of the antitrust crusaders were frequently spearheaded by the “best men”—genteel old-family do-gooders who were not radicals but conser vative defenders of their own vanishing inﬂuence.

The Gospel of Wealth
 Monarchs of yore invoked the divine right of kings, and America’s industrial plutocrats took a somewhat similar stance. Some candidly credited heavenly help. “Godliness is in league with riches,” preached the Episcopal bishop of Massachusetts, and hardﬁ sted

 John D. Rockefeller piously acknowledged that “the good Lord gave me my money.” Steel baron Andrew Carnegie agreed that the wealthy, entrusted with society’s riches, had to prove themselves morally responsible according to a “Gospel of Wealth.” But most defenders of wide-open capitalism relied more heavily on the survival-of-the-ﬁttest theories of Eng lish philosopher Herbert Spencer and Yale professor William Graham Sumner. Later mislabeled Social Darwinists, these theorists argued that individuals won their stations in life by competing on the basis of their natural talents. The wealthy and powerful had simply demonstrated greater abilities than the poor. Spencer and Sumner owed less to Eng lish evolutionary naturalist Charles Darwin, who stressed the adaptation of organisms, than to British laissez-faire economists David Ricardo and Thomas Malthus. In fact, Spencer, not Darwin, coined the phrase “survival of the ﬁttest.” “The millionaires are a product of natural selection,” Sumner declared. In 1883 he asked, “What do social classes owe each other?” then answered his own question: nothing. Some Social Darwinists later applied this theory to explain why some nations were more powerful than others or had the right to dominate “lesser peoples,” often deﬁ ned by race. Self-justiﬁcation by the wealthy inevitably involved contempt for the poor. Many of the rich, especially the



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 newly rich, had pulled themselves up by their own bootstraps; hence they concluded that those who stayed poor must be lazy and lacking in enterprise. The Reverend Russell Conwell of Philadelphia became rich by delivering his lecture “Acres of Diamonds” thousands of times. In it he charged, “There is not a poor person in the United States who was not made poor by his own shortcomings.” Such attitudes were a formidable roadblock to social reform. Plutocracy, like the earlier slavocracy, took its stand ﬁ rmly on the Constitution. The clause that gave Congress sole jurisdiction over interstate commerce was a godsend to the monopolists; their high-priced lawyers used it time and again to thwart controls by the state legislatures. Giant trusts likewise sought refuge behind the Fourteenth Amendment, which had been originally designed to protect the rights of the ex-slaves as persons. The courts ingeniously interpreted a corporation to be a legal “person” and decreed that, as such, it could not be deprived of its property by a state without “due process of law” (see Amendment XIV, para. 1 in the Appendix). There is some questionable evidence that slippery corporation lawyers deliberately inserted this loophole when the Fourteenth Amendment was being fashioned in 1866.

 Great industrialists likewise sought to incorporate in “easy states,” like New Jersey, where the restrictions on big business were mild or nonexistent. For example, the Southern Paciﬁc Railroad, with much of its trackage in Cal i fornia, was incorporated in Kentucky.

Government Tackles
 the Trust Evil At long last the masses of the people began to mobilize against monopoly. They ﬁ rst tried to control the trusts through state legislation, as they had earlier attempted to curb the railroads. Failing here, as before, they were forced to appeal to Congress. After prolonged pulling and hauling, the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890 was ﬁ nally signed into law. The Sherman Act ﬂatly forbade combinations in restraint of trade, without any distinction between “good” trusts and “bad” trusts. Bigness, not badness, was the sin. The law proved ineffective, largely because it had only baby teeth or no teeth at all, and because it contained legal loopholes through which clever corporation lawyers could wriggle. But it was unexpectedly effective in one respect. Contrary to its original intent,

 The New Rich and the New Immigrants A well-to-do family plays chess at its parlor table (left), while a tenement family does “piecework” around its kitchen table—shelling nuts for commercial use (right). The young working girl seems to be “snitching” some nuts for herself. The apparently growing gulf between the rich and the poor deeply worried reformers in the late nineteenth century. They feared that democracy could not survive in the face of such gross inequality.

Industry in the South


 Industrial millionaires were condemned in the Populist platform of 1892:

“


 The fruits of the toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a few . . . and the possessors of these, in turn despise the Republic and endanger liberty. From the same proliﬁc womb of governmental injustice we breed the two great classes— tramps and millionaires.

”


 it was used to curb labor unions or labor combinations that were deemed to be restraining trade. Early prosecutions of the trusts by the Justice Department under the Sherman Act of 1890, as it turned out, were neither vigorous nor successful. The decisions in seven of the ﬁ rst eight cases presented by the attorney general were adverse to the government. More new trusts were formed in the 1890s under President McKinley than during any other like period. Not until 1914 were the paper jaws of the Sherman Act ﬁtted with reasonably sharp teeth. Until then, there was some question whether the government would control the trusts or the trusts the government.



 But the iron grip of monopolistic corporations was being threatened. A revolutionary new principle had been written into the law books by the Sherman AntiTrust Act of 1890, as well as by the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887. Private greed should henceforth be subordinated to public need.

The South in the
Age of Industry
 The industrial tidal wave that washed over the North after the Civil War caused only feeble ripples in the backwater of the South. As late as 1900, the South still produced a smaller percentage of the nation’s manufactured goods than it had before the Civil War. The plantation system had degenerated into a pattern of absentee landownership. White and black sharecroppers now tilled the soil for a share of the crop, or they became tenants, in bondage to their landlords, who controlled needed credit and supplies. Southern agriculture received a welcome boost in the 1880s, when machine-made cigarettes replaced the roll-your-own variety and tobacco consumption shot up. James Buchanan Duke took full advantage of the new technology to mass-produce the dainty “cofﬁ n nails.” In 1890, in what was becoming a familiar pattern, he absorbed his main competitors into the American Tobacco Company. The cigarette czar later showed

A
Virginia Tobacco Factory, ca. 1880  The employment of women and children was a common practice in latenineteenth-century American industry, north as well as south.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 Yet formidable obstacles lay in the path of southern industrialization. One was the paper barrier of regional rate-setting systems imposed by the northerndominated railroad interests. Railroads gave preferential rates to manufactured goods moving southward from the North, but in the opposite direction they discriminated in favor of southern raw materials. The net effect was to keep the South in a kind of servitude to the Northeast—as a supplier of raw materials to the manufacturing metropolis, unable to develop a substantial industrial base of its own. A bitter example of this economic discrimination against the South was the “Pittsburgh plus” pricing system in the steel industry. Rich deposits of coal and iron ore near Birmingham, Alabama, worked by lowwage southern labor, should have given steel manufacturers there a competitive edge, especially in southern markets. But the steel lords of Pittsburgh brought pressure to bear on the compliant railroads. As a result, Birmingham steel, no matter where it was delivered, was charged a ﬁctional fee, as if it had been shipped from Pittsburgh. This stunting of the South’s natural economic advantages throttled the growth of the Birmingham steel industry. In manufacturing cotton textiles, the South fared considerably better. Southerners had long resented shipping their ﬁber to New Eng land, and now their cry was “Bring the mills to the cotton.” Beginning about 1880, northern capitalists began to erect cotton mills in the South, largely in response to tax beneﬁts and the prospect of cheap and nonunionized labor (see Figure 24.2 and Figure 24.3).

 Henry W. Grady (1851–1889), editor of the Atlanta Constitution, urged the new South to industrialize. In a Boston speech in 1889, he described the burial in Georgia of a Confederate veteran:

“


 The South didn’t furnish a thing on earth for that funeral but the corpse and the hole in the ground. . . . They buried him in a New York coat and a Boston pair of shoes and a pair of breeches from Chicago and a shirt from Cincinnati, leaving him nothing to carry into the next world with him to remind him of the country in which he lived, and for which he fought for four years, but the chill of blood in his veins and the marrow in his bones.

”


 such generosity to Trinity College, near his birthplace in Durham, North Carolina, that the trustees gratefully changed its name to Duke University. Industrialists tried to coax the agricultural South out of the ﬁelds and into the factories, but with only modest success. The region remained overwhelmingly rural. Prominent among the boosters of a “new South” was silver-tongued Henry W. Grady, editor of the Atlanta Constitution. He tirelessly exhorted the exConfederates to become “Georgia Yankees” and outplay the North at the commercial and industrial game.

SPINDLES IN COTTON STATES
(by thousands) 
SPINDLES IN NEW ENGLAND
(by thousands) 
8,632


Figure 24.2 Cotton Manufacturing
Moves South, 1880–1980
 Textile manufacturing usually looms large in the early stages of industrial development. In the later stages, it gives way to higher-technology businesses. This trend can be seen here, both in the migration of textile manufacturing to the southern United States and in the decline in the number of spindles in the United States as a whole since the 1930s, as developing Third World countries became major textile producers.



10,934




13,171




15,735




18,287




11,351


5,279
3,739


1,570
4,368
10,494
15,231
18,586




17,641




17,673




16,795


Daily Life in Industrial America
 World cotton production, 1903 (Bales of approx. 500 lbs, in thousands) Other 5% (801)



The Impact of the
New Industrial Revolution
 on America

China 7% (1,200)
Russia 2% (342)
Egypt 7% (1,168)


India 19%
(3,367)


America 60%
(10,758)


Total: 17,636


Figure 24.3 World Cotton Production, 1903 Cotton
 manufacturing grew in the United States in the early twentieth century, and raw cotton production reached higher levels than anywhere else in the world. Source: John A. Todd, The World’s Cotton Crops (London: A. & C. Black, 1915), 395–396.

 The textile mills proved to be a mixed blessing to the economically blighted South. They slowly wove an industrial thread into the fabric of southern life, but at a considerable human cost. Cheap labor was the South’s major attraction for potential investors, and keeping labor cheap became almost a religion among southern industrialists. The mills took root in the chronically depressed Piedmont region of southern Appalachia and came to dominate utterly the communities in which they were located. Rural southerners—virtually all of them white, for blacks were excluded from all but the most menial jobs in the mills—poured out of the hills and hollows to seek employment in the hastily erected company mill towns. Entire families—often derided as “hillbillies” or “lintheads”—worked from dawn to dusk amid the whirring spindles. They were paid at half the rate of their northern counterparts and often received their compensation in the form of credit at a company store, to which they were habitually in debt. But despite their depressed working conditions and poor pay, many southerners saw employment in the mills as a salvation, the ﬁ rst steady jobs and wages they had ever known. With many mills anxious to tap the cheap labor of women and children, mill work often offered destitute farm-fugitive families their only chance to remain together.

 Economic miracles wrought during the decades after the Civil War enormously increased the wealth of the Republic. The standard of living rose sharply, and wellfed American workers enjoyed more physical com forts than their counterparts in any other industrial nation. Urban centers mushroomed as the insatiable factories demanded more American labor and as immigrants swarmed like honeybees to the new jobs (see Map 24.2 and “Makers of America: The Poles,” pp. 776–777). Early Jeffersonian ideals were withering before the smudgy blasts from the smokestacks. As agriculture declined in relation to manufacturing, America could no longer aspire to be a nation of small freehold farms. Jefferson’s concepts of free enterprise, with neither help nor hindrance from Washington, were being thrown out the factory window. Tariffs had already provided assistance, but the long arm of federal authority was now committed to decades of corporation curbing and “trust-busting.” Older ways of life also wilted in the heat of the factory furnaces. The very concept of time was revolutionized. Rural American migrants and peasant European immigrants, used to living by the languid clock of nature, now had to regiment their lives by the factory whistle. The seemingly arbitrary discipline of industrial labor did not come easily and sometimes had to be forcibly taught. One large corporation simultaneously instructed its Polish immigrant workers in the Eng lish language and in the obligations of factory work schedules: I hear the whistle. I must hurry. I hear the ﬁve-minute whistle. It is time to go into the shop. . . . I change my clothes and get ready to work. The starting whistle blows. I eat my lunch. It is forbidden to eat until then. . . . I work until the whistle blows to quit. I leave my place nice and clean. I put all my clothes in the locker. I must go home. Probably no single group was more profoundly affected by the new industrial age than women. Propelled into industry by recent inventions, chieﬂy the typewriter and the telephone switchboard, millions of

Ag Cu


MONTANA TERRITORY

Au


Au
 Ag NEVADA

C
Cu
Cu


Au
CALIFORNIA
Ag 
UTAH TERRITORY

C
COLORADO
Au Ag Cu 
O
O


PAC I F IC OCEAN

O


ARIZONA TERRITORY

Cu Cu Cu
Au
Ag


Cu


120°W


NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

30°N


O
O
O


110°W


 Products manufactured in 20 largest cities

O
TEXAS O

M EXICO

O


 MISS.

O
O


Fe
 ALABAMA

N.H.


Rochester
N.Y.
Buffalo


 CONN.

 OCEAN





400 Km.


 FLORIDA

O


100°W


 MASS.

O




400 Mi.


Gulf of Mexico
90°W


N


80°W


 Natural resources

 Iron and steel

Ag


Silver


O


 Oil (petroleum)

 Printing and publishing

Au


Gold


Pb


Lead


 Slaughtering and meatpacking

C


Coal


Textiles


Cu


Copper


 Mixed or other

Fe


Iron ore


Timber Timber


20°N


 States with 25% or more of employees in manufacturing

 Map 24.2 American Industry in 1900 By the end of the nineteenth century, once-rural America boasted the world’s largest industrial output—a development with enormous consequences for politics, diplomacy, and family life.

 stenographers and “hello girls” discovered new economic and social opportunities. The “Gibson Girl,” a magazine image of an independent and athletic “new woman” created in the 1890s by the artist Charles Dana Gibson, became the romantic ideal of the age. For middle-class women, careers often meant delayed marriages and smaller families. Most women workers, however, toiled neither for independence nor for glamour, but out of economic necessity. They faced the same long hours and dangerous working conditions as did their mates and brothers, and they earned less, as wages for “women’s jobs” were usually set below those for men’s.

 Women Canning Shrimp, 1893 Long hours, low pay, and wretched working conditions were the common fate of women who labored not for “pin money,” but to help support their families. The “family wage” for the workingman was more a hope than a reality.

 VT.

Ontario


 GEORGIA

LOUISIANA O

O


 Food, beverage, and tobacco processing

MICH.
Detroit 
C


O


O


 Flour milling Foundry and machine shop products

 WISCONSIN

O


Clothing
 XXX

L


Boston
Providence
R.I.
O
 e Milwaukee Eri C New York L. O IOWA Chicago PA. Cleveland Brooklyn N.J. C NEBRASKA O Pittsburgh Philadelphia IND. C C OHIO C C DEL. ILLINOIS Cincinnati C 70°W MD. C C C W. Baltimore VA. KANSAS VA. C C St. Louis C C Louisville C C O C MISSOURI KY. C N.C. O C TENNESSEE O INDIAN ARKANSAS AT L A N T I C S.C. TERRITORY Minneapolis

 XXX

WYOMING TERRITORY

 MAINE

L.
Newark 

 n uro

Au


40°N


San
Francisco


DAKOTA TERRITORY

IDAHO TERRITORY

Jersey City


 p L. Su erior Fe Cu Timber Timb Fe MINN. er

.H


Tim
 be r

 OREGON

 CANADA

L.
Michigan 

Tim
 be r

WASHINGTON TERRITORY
Ag Pb Cu 
Interactive Map


Examining the Evidence




The Photography of Lewis W. Hine
 he pell-mell onrush of industrialization after the Civil War spawned countless human abuses, few more objectionable than the employment of children, often in hazardous jobs. For decades reformers tried to arouse public outrage against child labor, and they made signiﬁcant headway at last with the help of photography—especially the photographs of Lewis W. Hine (1874–1940). A native of Wisconsin, Hine in 1908 became the staff photographer for the National Child Labor Committee, an orga ni zation committed to ending child labor. This 1909 photo of young “doffers,” whose job it was to remove fully wound bobbins from textile spinning machines, is typical of Hine’s work. He shows the boys climbing dangerously on the whirling mechanism, and his own caption for the photo names the mill—“Bibb Mill No. 1, Macon, Georgia”—but not the boys, as if to underline the impersonal, dehumanizing nature of their work and the speciﬁc responsibilities of their employer. His other subjects included child workers on Colorado beet farms, in Pennsylvania coal mines and Gulf Coast ﬁsh canneries, and in the glass, tobacco, and garment trades. Hine’s images contributed heavily to the eventual success of the campaign to end child labor in the New Deal era. He is also celebrated as one of the fathers of documentary photography. Why might Hine’s graphic im-

T


 The clattering machine age likewise accentuated class division. “Industrial buccaneers” ﬂaunted bloated fortunes, and their rags-to-riches spouses displayed glittering diamonds. Such extravagances evoked bitter criticism. Some of it was envious, but much of it rose from a small but increasingly vocal group of socialists and other radicals, many of whom were recent European immigrants. The existence of an oligarchy of money was amply demonstrated by the fact that in 1900 about one-tenth of the people owned nine-tenths of the nation’s wealth.

 ages have succeeded in stirring public opinion more powerfully than factual and statistical demonstrations of the evil of child labor? Given Hine’s own reform objectives, can his photographs—or any socalled documentary images—be taken at face value as literal, accurate information about the past?

 A nation of farmers and independent producers was becoming a nation of wage earners. In 1860 half of all workers were self-employed; by the century’s end, two of every three working Americans depended on wages. Real wages were rising, and times were good for workers who were working. But with dependence on wages came vulnerability to the swings of the economy and the whims of the employer. The fear of unemployment was never distant. A breadwinner’s illness could mean catastrophe for an entire family. Nothing more sharply deﬁned the growing difference between



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 can products radiated out all over the world—notably the ﬁve-gallon kerosene can of the Standard Oil Company. The ﬂag follows trade, and empire tends to follow the ﬂag—a harsh lesson that America was soon to learn.

In Unions There Is Strength


Gibson Girl, 1899 Illustrator Charles Dana Gibson
 created a sensation with his drawings of healthy, athletic, young women. The image of the “Gibson Girl” inspired new standards of female fashion as the twentieth century opened, and came to symbolize women’s growing independence and assertiveness.

 working-class and middle-class conditions of life than the precariousness of the laborer’s lot. Reformers struggled to introduce a mea sure of security—job and wage protection, and provision for temporary unemployment—into the lives of the working class. Finally, strong pressures for foreign trade developed as the tireless industrial machine threatened to saturate the domestic market. Aided by developments like the laying of a transatlantic telegraph in 1866 and the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, international trade became ever faster, cheaper, and easier. Ameri-

 The sweat of the laborer lubricated the vast new industrial machine. Yet the wage workers did not share proportionately with their employers in the beneﬁts of the age of big business. The worker, suggestive of the Roman galley slave, was becoming a lever-puller in a giant mechanism. Individual originality and creativity were being stiﬂed, and less value than ever before was being placed on manual skills. Before the Civil War, the worker might have toiled in a small plant whose owner hailed the employee in the morning by ﬁ rst name and inquired after the family’s health. But now the factory hand was employed by a corporation—depersonalized, bodiless, soulless, and often conscienceless. The directors knew the worker not, and in fairness to their stockholders, they were not inclined to engage in large-scale private philanthropy. New machines displaced employees, and though in the long run more jobs were created than destroyed, in the short run the manual worker was often hard hit. A glutted labor market, moreover, severely handicapped wage earners. Employers could take advantage of the vast new railroad network and bring in unemployed workers, from the four corners of the country and beyond, to beat down high wage levels. During the 1880s and 1890s, several hundred thousand unskilled workers a year poured into the country from Europe, creating a labor market more favorable to the boss than the worker. Individual workers were powerless to battle singlehandedly against giant industry. Forced to organize and ﬁght for basic rights, they found the dice heavily loaded against them. The corporation could dispense with the individual worker much more easily than the worker could dispense with the corporation. Employers could pool vast wealth through thousands of stockholders, retain high-priced lawyers, buy up the local press, and put pressure on the politicians. They could import strikebreakers (“scabs”) and employ thugs to beat up labor organizers. In 1886 Jay Gould reputedly boasted, “I can hire one-half of the working class to kill the other half.”

Embattled Labor Unions




 of blackened coal miners were born in a company house, nurtured by a (high-priced) company store, and buried in a company graveyard—prematurely dead. The middle-class public, annoyed by recurrent strikes, grew deaf to the outcry of the worker. American wages were perhaps the highest in the world, although a dollar a day for pick-and-shovel labor does not now seem excessive. Carnegie and Rockefeller had battled their way to the top, and the view was common that the laborer could do likewise. Somehow the strike seemed like a foreign importation—socialistic and hence unpatriotic. Big business might combine into trusts to raise prices, but the worker must not combine into unions to raise wages. Unemployment seemed to be an act of God, who somehow would take care of the laborer.

Labor Limps Along


Breaker Boys at South Pittson, Pennsylvania, 1911
 Photographer Lewis Hine captured the grimness of these mine helpers’ lives. For hours they sat on benches above a moving belt, breathing coal dust deep into their lungs and kicking large pieces of coal with their feet, breaking the lumps to uniform size for shipment. Photographs like this one became icons of the reform crusade against child labor, a campaign that succeeded only with the passage of the Fair Labor Standards Act in 1938.

 Corporations had still other weapons in their arsenals. They could call upon the federal courts—presided over by well-fed and conser vative judges—to issue injunctions ordering the strikers to cease striking. If deﬁance and disorder ensued, the company could request the state and federal authorities to bring in troops. Employers could lock their doors against rebellious workers—a procedure called the “lockout”—and then starve them into submission. They could compel them to sign “ironclad oaths” or “yellow-dog contracts,” both of which were solemn agreements not to join a labor union. They could put the names of agitators on a “black list” and circulate it among fellow employers. A corporation might even own the “company town,” with its high-priced grocery stores and “easy” credit. Often the worker sank into perpetual debt—a status that strongly resembled serfdom. Countless thousands

 Labor unions, which had been few and disorga nized in 1861, were given a strong boost by the Civil War. This bloody conﬂ ict, with its drain on human resources, put more of a premium on labor; and the mounting cost of living provided an urgent incentive to unionization. By 1872 there were several hundred thousand orga nized workers and thirty-two national unions, representing such crafts as bricklayers, typesetters, and shoemakers. The National Labor Union, orga nized in 1866, represented a giant bootstride by workers. One of the earliest national-scale unions to organize in the Americas or Europe, it aimed to unify workers across locales and trades to challenge their ever more powerful bosses. The union lasted six years and attracted the impressive total of some 600,000 members, including the skilled, unskilled, and farmers, though in keeping with the times, it excluded the Chinese and made only nominal efforts to include women and blacks. Black workers orga nized their own Colored National Labor Union as an adjunct, but their support for the Republican party and the persistent racism of white unionists prevented the two national unions from working together. The National Labor Union agitated for the arbitration of industrial disputes and the eight-hour workday, winning the latter for government workers. But the devastating depression of the 1870s dealt it a knockout blow. Labor was generally rocked back on its heels during the tumultuous years of the depression, but it never completely toppled. Wage reductions in 1877 touched off such disruptive strikes on the railroads that nothing short of federal troops could restore order.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 The Strike, by Robert Koehler, 1886 Scenes like this were becoming more typical of American life in the late nineteenth century as industrialism advanced spectacularly and sometimes ruthlessly. Here Koehler (1850–1917) shows an entire community of men, women, and children—many of them apparently immigrant newcomers— challenging the power of the “boss.” The scene is tense but orderly, though violence seems to be imminent as one striker reaches for a rock.

 A new organization—the Knights of Labor—seized the torch dropped by the defunct National Labor Union (see “Makers of America: The Knights of Labor,” pp. 590–591). Ofﬁcially known as the Noble and Holy Order of the Knights of Labor, it began inauspiciously in 1869 as a secret society, with a private ritual, passwords, and a special handshake. Secrecy, which continued until 1881, would forestall possible reprisals by employers. The Knights of Labor, like the National Labor Union, sought to include all workers in “one big union.” Their slogan was “An injury to one is the concern of all.” A welcome mat was rolled out for the skilled and unskilled, for men and women, for whites and blacks, some ninety thousand of whom joined. The Knights barred only “nonproducers”—liquor dealers, professional gamblers, lawyers, bankers, and stockbrokers. Setting up broad goals, the embattled Knights refused to thrust their lance into politics. Instead they

 campaigned for economic and social reform, including producers’ cooperatives and codes for safety and health. Voicing the war cry “Labor is the only creator of values and capital,” they frowned upon industrial warfare while fostering industrial arbitration. The ordinary workday was then ten hours or more, and the Knights waged a determined campaign for the eighthour stint. A favorite song of these years ran, Hurrah, hurrah, for labor, it is mustering all its powers, And shall march along to victory with the banner of eight hours. Under the eloquent but often erratic leadership of Terence V. Powderly, an Irish American of nimble wit and ﬂuent tongue, the Knights won a number of strikes for the eight-hour day. When the Knights staged a successful strike against Jay Gould’s Wabash Railroad in 1885, membership mushroomed to about three-quarters of a million workers.

The AF of L


Unhorsing the Knights
 of Labor Despite their outward success, the Knights were riding for a fall. They became involved in a number of May Day strikes in 1886, about half of which failed. A focal point was Chicago, home to about eighty thousand Knights. The city was also honeycombed with a few hundred anarchists, many of them foreign-born, who were advocating a violent overthrow of the American government. Tensions rapidly built up to the bloody Haymarket Square episode. Labor disorders had broken out, and on May 4, 1886, the Chicago police advanced on a meeting called to protest alleged brutalities by the authorities. Suddenly a dynamite bomb was thrown that killed or injured several dozen people, including police. Hysteria swept the Windy City. Eight anarchists were rounded up, although nobody proved that they had anything to do directly with the bomb. But the judge and jury held that since they had preached incendiary doctrines, they could be charged with conspiracy. Five were sentenced to death, one of whom committed suicide, and the other three were given stiff prison terms. Agitation for clemency mounted. In 1892, some six years later, John P. Altgeld, a German-born Democrat of strong liberal tendencies, was elected governor of Illinois. After studying the Haymarket case exhaustively, he pardoned the three survivors. Violent abuse was showered on him by conser vatives, unstinted praise by those who thought the men innocent. He was defeated for reelection and died a few years later in relative obscurity, “The Eagle Forgotten.” Whatever the merits of the case, Altgeld displayed courage in opposing what he regarded as a gross injustice. The Haymarket Square bomb helped blow the props from under the Knights of Labor. They were associated in the public mind, though mistakenly, with the anarchists. The eight-hour movement suffered correspondingly, and subsequent strikes by the Knights met with scant success. Another fatal handicap of the Knights was their inclusion of both skilled and unskilled workers. Unskilled labor could easily be replaced by strikebreaking “scabs.” High-class craft unionists, who enjoyed a semimonopoly of skills, could not readily be supplanted and hence enjoyed a superior bargaining position. They ﬁnally wearied of sacriﬁcing this advantage



 on the altar of solidarity with their unskilled coworkers and sought refuge in a federation of exclusively skilled craft unions—the American Federation of Labor. The desertion of the skilled craft unionists dealt the Knights a body blow. By the 1890s they had melted away to 100,000 members, and these gradually fused with other protest groups of that decade.

The AF of L to the Fore
 The elitist American Federation of Labor, born in 1886, was largely the brainchild of squat, square-jawed Samuel Gompers. This colorful Jewish cigar maker, born in a London tenement and removed from school at age ten, was brought to America when thirteen. Taking his turn at reading informative literature to fellow cigar makers in New York, he was pressed into overtime ser vice because of his strong voice. Rising spectacularly in the labor ranks, he was elected president of the American Federation of Labor every year except one from 1886 to 1924. Signiﬁcantly, the American Federation of Labor was just what it called itself—a federation. It consisted of an association of self-governing national unions, each of which kept its independence, with the AF of L unifying overall strategy. No individual laborer could join the central orga ni zation. Gompers adopted a down-to-earth approach, softpedaling attempts to engineer sweeping social reform. A bitter foe of socialism, he shunned politics for economic strategies and goals. Gompers had no quarrel with capitalism, but he demanded a fairer share for labor. All he wanted, he said, was “more.” Promoting what he called a “pure and simple” unionism, he sought better wages, hours, and working conditions. Unlike the somewhat utopian Knights of Labor, he was not concerned with the sweet by-and-by, but with the bitter here and now. A major goal of Gompers was the “trade agreement” authorizing the closed shop—or all-union labor. His chief weapons were the walkout and the boycott, enforced by “We don’t patronize” signs. The stronger craft unions of the federation, by pooling funds, were able to amass a war chest that would enable them to ride out prolonged strikes. The AF of L thus established itself on solid but narrow foundations. Although attempting to speak for all workers, it fell far short of being representative of them. Composed of skilled craftsmen, like the carpenters and the bricklayers, it was willing to let unskilled

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The Knights The Great Africanof Labor American Migration 
I


 t was 1875. The young worker was guided into a room, where his blindfold was removed. Surrounding him were a dozen men, their faces covered by hoods. One of the masked ﬁgures solemnly asked three questions: “Do you believe in God?” “Do you gain your bread by the sweat of your brow?” “Are you willing to take a solemn vow, binding you to secrecy, obedience, and mutual assistance?” Yes, came the reply. The men doffed their hoods and joined hands in a circle. Their leader, the Master Workman, declared, “On behalf of the toiling millions of earth, I welcome you to this Sanctuary, dedicated to the ser vice of God, by serving humanity.” Then the entire group burst into song: Storm the fort, ye Knights of Labor, Battle for your cause; Equal rights for every neighbor, Down with tyrant laws! The carefully staged pageantry then drew to a close. The worker was now a full-ﬂedged member of the Knights of Labor. He had just joined a loose-knit orga ni zation of some 100,000 working people, soon to swell to nearly a million after the Knights led several successful strikes in the 1880s. The ﬁ rst women Knights joined in 1881, when an all-female local was established in the shoe trade in Philadelphia, and one in ten members was a woman by 1885. Women were organizers, too. Fiery Mary Harris (“Mother”) Jones got her start agitating for the Knights in the Illinois coalﬁelds. The ﬁ rst all-black local was founded among coal miners in Ottumwa, Iowa. The Knights preached tolerance and the solidarity of all working men and women, and they meant it, but even their inclusionary spirit had its limits. Chinese workers were barred from joining, and the Knights vigorously supported the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. They also championed the Contract Labor Law of 1885, which aimed to restrain competition from low-wage immigrant workers—though immigrants, especially the Irish, were themselves disproportionately represented among the Knights’ membership. Terence V. Powderly, born to Irish immigrant parents in Carbondale, Pennsylvania, in 1849, became the Grand Master Workman of the Knights in 1879. Slightly



 built, with mild blue eyes behind glasses, he had dropped out of school at age thirteen to take a job guarding railroad track switches and rose to mayor of Scranton, Pennsylvania, in the 1870s. In 1894 he became a lawyer—despite the fact that the Knights excluded lawyers from membership. A complex, colorful, and sometimes cynical man, he denounced the “multimillionaires [for] laying the foundation for their colossal fortunes on the bodies and souls of living men.” In the eyes of Powderly and his Knights, only the economic and political independence of American workers could preserve republican traditions and institutions from corruption by monopolists and other “parasites.” Powderly denounced “wage-slavery” and dedicated the Knights to achieving the “cooperative commonwealth.” Shunning socialism, which advocated government ownership of the means of production, Powderly urged laborers to save enough from their wages to purchase mines, factories, railroads, and stores. They would thereby create a kind of toilers’ utopia; because labor would own and operate those enterprises, workers

“Mother Jones”


Machinist Frank J. Ferrell, Black Delegate of District
Assembly No. 49, Introducing General Master Workman
Terence Powderly to the Tenth Annual Convention of the
Knights of Labor, Held in Richmond, Virginia, 1886


 themselves would be owner-producers, and the conﬂ ict between labor and capital would evaporate. The Knights actually did operate a few businesses, including coal mines in Indiana, but all eventually failed.

 Powderly’s vision of the cooperative commonwealth reﬂected the persistent dream of many nineteenth-century American workers that they would all one day become producers. As expectant capitalists, they lacked “class consciousness”—that is, a sense of themselves as a permanent working class that must organize to coax what beneﬁts it could out of the capitalist system. Samuel Gompers, by contrast, accepted the framework of American capitalism, and his American Federation of Labor sought to work within that framework, not to overturn it. Gompers’s conser vative strategy, not Powderly’s utopian dream, eventually carried the day. The swift decline of the Knights in the 1890s underscored the obsolescence of their unrealistic, even naive, view that a bygone age of independent producers could be restored. Yet the Knights’ commitment to unifying all workers in one union—regardless of race, gender, ethnicity, or skill level—provided a blueprint for the eventual success of similarly committed unions like the Congress of Industrial Organizations in the 1930s.

Women Delegates to the 1886
Convention of the Knights of Labor






Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 Samuel Gompers (1850–1924) Gompers (second from the right in the ﬁrst row), shown here marching in a labor demonstration in Washington, D.C., in 1919, once declared, “Show me the country in which there are no strikes and I’ll show you that country in which there is no liberty.”

 laborers, including women and especially blacks, fend for themselves. Though hard-pressed by big industry, the federation was basically nonpolitical. But it did attempt to persuade members to reward friends and punish foes at the polls. The AF of L weathered the panic of 1893 reasonably well, and by 1900 it could boast a membership of 500,000. Critics referred to it, with questionable accuracy, as “the labor trust.” Labor disorders continued, peppering the years from 1881 to 1900 with a total of over 23,000 strikes. These disturbances involved 6,610,000 workers, with a total loss to both employers and employees of $450 million. The strikers lost about half their strikes and won or compromised the remainder. Perhaps the gravest weakness of orga nized labor was that it still embraced only a small minority of all working people—about 3 percent in 1900.

 But attitudes toward labor had begun to change perceptibly by 1900. The public was beginning to concede the right of workers to organize, to bargain collectively, and to strike. As a sign of the times, Labor Day was made a legal holiday by act of Congress in 1894. A few enlightened industrialists had come to perceive the wisdom of avoiding costly economic warfare by bargaining with the unions and signing agreements. But the vast majority of employers continued to ﬁght orga nized labor, which achieved its grudging gains only after recurrent strikes and frequent reverses. Nothing was handed to it on a silver platter. Management still held the whip hand, and several trouble-fraught decades were to pass before labor was to gain a position of relative equality with capital. If the age of big business had dawned, the age of big labor was still some distance over the horizon.

Varying Viewpoints




 CHRONOLOGY

 Congress authorizes transcontinental railroad



 Edison invents electric light



 National Labor Union orga nized First working transatlantic telegraph cable





 Haymarket Square bombing Wabash case American Federation of Labor formed

 Transcontinental railroad joined near Ogden, Utah Knights of Labor orga nized Suez Canal completed



Interstate Commerce Act




Sherman Anti-Trust Act




 United States Steel Corporation formed



 Standard Oil Company orga nized



 Bell invents telephone

KEY TERMS
Wabash, St. Louis & Paciﬁc Railroad Company v. Illinois (573) Interstate Commerce Act (573) vertical integration (575) horizontal integration (575) trust (575) interlocking directorates (575) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Standard Oil Company (578) Social Darwinists (579) Sherman Anti-Trust Act (580) National Labor Union (587) Knights of Labor (588) Haymarket Square (589) American Federation of Labor (589) closed shop (589) 
Cornelius Vanderbilt
Alexander Graham Bell
Thomas Alva Edison


Andrew Carnegie
John D. Rockefeller
Samuel Gompers


Industrialization: Boon or Blight?


T


 he capitalists who forged an industrial America in the late nineteenth century were once called captains of industry—a respectful title that bespoke the awe due their wondrous material accomplishments. But these economic innovators have never been universally admired. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, when the entire industrial order they had created seemed to have collapsed utterly, it was fashionable to speak of them as robber barons—a term

 implying scorn for their high-handed methods. This sneer often issued from the lips and pens of leftist critics like Matthew Josephson, who sympathized with the working classes that were allegedly brutalized by the factory system. Criticism has also come from writers nostalgic for a preindustrial past. These critics believe that industrialization stripped away the traditions, values, and pride of native farmers and immigrant craftspeople.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 Conceding that economic development elevated the material standard of living for working Americans, this interpretation contends that the Industrial Revolution diminished their spiritual “quality of life.” Accordingly, historians like Herbert Gutman and David Montgomery portray labor’s struggle for control of the workplace as the central drama of industrial expansion. Nevertheless, even these historians concede that class-based protest has never been as powerful a force in the United States as in certain European countries. Many historians believe that this is so because greater social mobility in America dampened class tensions. The French observer Alexis de Tocqueville noted in the 1830s that America had few huge inherited fortunes and that most of its wealthy men were self-made. For two centuries a majority of Americans have believed that greater opportunity distinguished the New World from the Old. In the 1960s historians led by Stephan Thernstrom began to test this long-standing belief. Look ing at such factors as occupation, wealth, and geographic mobility, they tried to gauge the nature and extent of social mobility in the United States. Most of these historians concluded that although relatively few Americans made rags-to-riches leaps like those heralded in the Horatio Alger stories, large numbers experienced small improvements in their economic and social status. Few sons of laborers became corporate tycoons, but many more became line bosses and

 white-collar clerks. These studies also have found that race and ethnicity often affected one’s chances for success. For instance, the children and grandchildren of Jewish immigrants tended to rise faster in the professions than Americans of Italian and Irish descent. Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, blacks lagged far behind other groups in almost every category. In recent years such studies have been criticized by certain historians who point out the difﬁculties involved in deﬁ ning social status. For instance, some white-collar clerical workers received lower wages than manual laborers did. Were they higher or lower on the social scale? Furthermore, James Henretta has pointed out that different groups deﬁ ned success differently: whereas Jewish immigrants often struggled to give their sons professional educations, the Irish put more emphasis on acquiring land and the Italians on building small family-run businesses. Meanwhile, leftist historians such as Michael Katz have argued that the degree of social mobility in America has been overrated. These historians argue that industrial capitalism created two classes: a working class that sold its labor, and a business class that controlled resources and bought labor. Although most Americans took small steps upward, they generally remained within the class in which they began. Thus, these historians argue, the inequality of a capitalistic class system persisted in America’s seemingly ﬂuid society.

To Learn More
Edward L. Ayers, The Promise of the New South: Life After
Reconstruction (1992)
David H. Bain, Empire Express: Building the First
Transcontinental Railroad (1999)
Sven Beckert, The Monied Metropolis: New York City and
 the Consolidation of the American Bourgeoisie, 1850–1896 (2001) Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business (1978) James Green, Death in the Haymarket: A Story of Chicago, the First Labor Movement, and the Bombing That Divided Gilded Age America (2006) Richard Hofstadter, Social Darwinism in American Thought, 1860–1915 (rev. ed., 1955) Tera W. Hunter, To ’Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women’s Lives and Labors After the Civil War (1997)

 Alice Kessler-Harris, Out to Work: A History of WageEarning Women in the United States (1982) David Montgomery, The Fall of the House of Labor: The Workplace, the State, and American Labor Activism, 1865–1925 (1987) Daniel T. Rodgers, The Work Ethic in Industrial America, 1850–1920 (1978)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

America Moves
 to the City




1865–1900
 What shall we do with our great cities? What will our great cities do with us . . . ? [T]he question . . . does not concern the city alone. The whole country is affected . . . by the condition of its great cities.

B


 orn in the country, America moved to the city in the decades following the Civil War. By the year 1900, the United States’ upsurging population nearly doubled from its level of some 40 million souls enumerated in the census of 1870. Yet in the very same period, the population of American cities tripled. By the end of the nineteenth century, four out of ten Americans were city dwellers, in striking contrast to the rustic population of stagecoach days. This cityward drift affected not only the United States but the entire industrializing world. European peasants, pushed off the land in part by competition from cheap American foodstuffs, were pulled into cities—in both Europe and America—by the new lure of industrial jobs. A revolution in American agriculture thus fed the industrial and urban revolutions in Europe, as well as in the United States.

The Urban Frontier
 The growth of American metropolises was spectacular. In 1860 no city in the United States could boast a million inhabitants; by 1890 New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia had vaulted past the million mark. By 1900 New York, with some 3.5 million people, was the secondlargest city in the world, outranked only by London. Throughout the world, cities were exploding. London, Paris, Berlin, Tokyo, Moscow, Mexico City, Calcutta, and Shanghai all doubled or tripled in size between 1850 and 1900. The population of Buenos Aires multiplied by more than ten (see Map 25.1). American cities grew both up and out. The cloudbrushing skyscraper allowed more people and workplaces to be packed onto a parcel of land. Appearing

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





