Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Government for Sale This 1924
 cartoon satirizing the corruption of the Harding administration shows the sale of the Capitol, the White House, and even the Washington Monument.

 Commerce Commission, to single out one agency, came to be dominated by men who were personally sympathetic to the managers of the railroads. Harding reactionaries might well have boasted, “We care not what laws the Democrats pass as long as we are permitted to administer them.” Big industrialists, striving to reduce the rigors of competition, now had a free hand to set up trade associations. Cement manufacturers, for example, would use these agencies to agree upon standardization of products, publicity campaigns, and a united front in dealing with the railroads and labor. Although many of these associations ran counter to the spirit of existing antitrust legislation, their formation was encouraged by Secretary Hoover. His sense of engineering efﬁciency led him to condemn the waste resulting from cutthroat competition, and his commitment to voluntary cooperation led him to urge businesses to regulate themselves rather than be regulated by big government.

The Aftermath of War
 Wartime government controls on the economy were swiftly dismantled. The War Industries Board disappeared with almost indecent haste. With its passing, progressive hopes for more government regulation of big business evaporated. Washington likewise returned the railroads to private management in 1920. Reformers had hoped that wartime government operation of the lines might lead

 to their permanent nationalization. Instead Congress passed the Esch-Cummins Transportation Act of 1920, which encouraged private consolidation of the railroads and pledged the Interstate Commerce Commission to guarantee their proﬁtability. The new philosophy was not to save the country from the railroads, as in the days of the Populists, but to save the railroads for the country. The federal government also tried to pull up anchor and get out of the shipping business. The Merchant Marine Act of 1920 authorized the Shipping Board, which controlled about ﬁ fteen hundred vessels, to dispose of much of the hastily built wartime ﬂeet at bargain-basement prices. The board operated the remaining vessels without conspicuous success. Under the La Follette Seaman’s Act of 1915, American shipping could not thrive in competition with foreigners, who all too often provided their crews with wretched food and starvation wages. Labor, suddenly deprived of its wartime crutch of friendly government support, limped along badly in the postwar decade. A bloody strike in the steel industry was ruthlessly broken in 1919, partly by exploiting ethnic and racial divisions among the steelworkers and partly by branding the strikers as dangerous “reds.” The Railway Labor Board, a successor body to the wartime labor boards, ordered a wage cut of 12 percent in 1922, provoking a two-month strike. It ended when Attorney General Daugherty, who fully shared Harding’s big-business bias, clamped on the strikers one of the most sweeping injunctions in American history. Unions wilted in this hostile political environ-

The Transition to Peace


 ment, and membership shriveled by nearly 30 percent between 1920 and 1930. Needy veterans were among the few nonbusiness groups to reap lasting gains from the war. Congress in 1921 generously created the Veterans Bureau, authorized to operate hospitals and provide vocational rehabilitation for the disabled. Veterans quickly orga nized into pressure groups. The American Legion had been founded in Paris in 1919 by Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. Legionnaires met periodically to renew old hardships and let off steam in good-natured horseplay. The legion soon became distinguished for its militant patriotism, rock-ribbed conservatism, and zealous antiradicalism. The legion also became notorious for its aggressive lobbying for veterans’ beneﬁts. The chief grievance of the former “doughboys” was monetary—they wanted their “dough.” The former ser vicemen demanded “adjusted compensation” to make up for the wages they had “lost” when they turned in their factory overalls for military uniforms during the Great War. Critics denounced this demand as a holdup “bonus,” but the millions of veterans deployed heavy political artillery. They browbeat Congress into passing a bonus bill in 1922, which Harding promptly vetoed. Re-forming their lines, the repulsed veterans gathered for a ﬁ nal attack. In 1924 Congress again hoisted the white ﬂag and passed the Adjusted Compensation Act. It gave every former soldier a paid-up insurance policy due in twenty years—adding about $3.5 billion to the total cost of the war. Penny-pinching Calvin Coolidge sternly vetoed the measure, but Congress overrode him, leaving the veterans with their loot.

 America Seeks Beneﬁts Without Burdens Making peace with the fallen foe was the most pressing problem left on Harding’s doorstep. The United States, having rejected the Treaty of Versailles, was still technically at war with Germany, Austria, and Hungary nearly three years after the armistice. Peace was ﬁ nally achieved by lone-wolf tactics. In July 1921 Congress passed a simple joint resolution that declared the war ofﬁcially ended. Isolation was enthroned in Washington. The Harding administration, with the Senate “irreconcilables” holding a hatchet over its head, continued to regard the League of Nations as a thing unclean. Harding at ﬁ rst refused even to support the League’s world health



 “I Sympathize Deeply with You, Madam, but I Cannot Associate with You,” 1923 President Harding’s secretary of state, Charles Evans Hughes, broke the news to a desperate, war-tattered Europe that America was going, and staying, home.

 program. But the new world body was much too important to be completely ignored. “Unofﬁcial observers” were sent to its seat in Geneva, Switzerland, to hang around like detectives shadowing a suspected criminal. Harding could not completely turn his back on the outside world, especially the Middle East, where a sharp rivalry developed between America and Britain for oil-drilling concessions. Remembering that the Allies had ﬂoated to victory on a ﬂood of oil, experts recognized that liquid “black gold” would be as necessary as blood in the battles of tomorrow. Secretary Hughes eventually secured for American oil companies the right to share in the exploitation of the sandy region’s oil riches. Disarmament was one international issue on which Harding, after much indecision, ﬁ nally seized the initiative. He was prodded by businesspeople unwilling to dig deeper into their pockets for money to ﬁ nance the ambitious naval building program started during the war. A deadly contest was shaping up with Britain and Japan, which watched with alarm as the



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Battleships


Aircraft Carrier
Tonnage


Battleship Tonnage


U.S.




525,000


135,000


Britain




525,000


135,000


Japan




France




175,000


60,000


Italy




175,000


60,000


315,000


81,000


Figure 32.1 Limits Imposed by Washington Conference, 1921–1922
 The pledge of the British and Americans to refrain from fortifying their Far Eastern possessions, while Japan was allowed to fortify its possessions, was the key to the naval-limitation treaty. The United States and Great Britain thus won a temporary victory but later paid a horrendous price when they had to dislodge the well-entrenched Japanese from the Paciﬁc in World War II.

 oceans ﬁ lled with American vessels. Britain still commanded the world’s largest navy, but the clatter of American riveters proclaimed that the United States would soon overtake it. Public agitation in America, fed by these worries, brought about the headline-making Washington “Disarmament” Conference in 1921–1922. Invitations went to all the major naval powers—except Bolshevik Russia, whose government the United States refused ofﬁcially to recognize. The double agenda included naval disarmament and the situation in the Far East. At the outset Secretary Hughes startled the delegates, who were expecting the usual diplomatic fencestraddling, with a comprehensive, concrete plan for declaring a ten-year “holiday” on the construction of battleships and even for scrapping some of the huge dreadnoughts already built. He proposed that the scaled-down navies of America and Britain should enjoy parity in battleships and aircraft carriers, with Japan on the small end of a 5:5:3 ratio. This arrangement sounded to the sensitive Japa nese ambassador like “Rolls-Royce, Rolls-Royce, Ford.” Complex bargaining followed in the wake of Hughes’s proposals. The Five-Power Naval Treaty of 1922 embodied Hughes’s ideas on ship ratios, but only after face-saving compensation was offered to the insecure Japa nese (see Figure 32.1). The British and Americans both conceded that they would refrain from fortifying their Far Eastern possessions, including the Philippines. The Japa nese were not subjected to such restraints in their possessions. In addition, a Four-Power Treaty replaced the twenty-year-old Anglo-

 Japa nese alliance. The new pact bound Britain, Japan, France, and the United States to preserve the status quo in the Paciﬁc—another concession to the jumpy Japa nese. Finally, the Washington Conference gave chaotic China—“the Sick Man of the Far East”—a shot in the arm with the Nine-Power Treaty of 1922, whose signatories agreed to nail wide-open the Open Door in China. When the ﬁ nal gavel banged, the Hardingites boasted with much fanfare—and some justiﬁcation— of their globe-shaking achievement in disarmament. But their satisfaction was somewhat illusory. No restrictions had been placed on small warships, and the other powers churned ahead with the construction of cruisers, destroyers, and submarines, while pennypinching Uncle Sam lagged dangerously behind. Congress also pointedly declared that it was making no commitment to the use of armed force or any kind of joint action when it ratiﬁed the Four-Power Treaty. These reservations, in effect, rendered the treaty a dead letter. Ominously, the American people seemed content to rely for their security on words and wishful thinking rather than on weapons and hardheaded realism. A similar sentimentalism welled up later in the decade, when Americans clamored for the “outlawry of war.” The conviction spread that if quarreling nations would only take the pledge to foreswear war as an instrument of national policy, swords could be beaten into plowshares. Calvin Coolidge’s secretary of state, Frank B. Kellogg, who later won the Nobel Peace Prize for his role, was lukewarm about the idea.

Raising the Protective Tariff


 But after petitions bearing more than 2 million signatures cascaded into Washington, he signed with the French foreign minister in 1928 the famed KelloggBriand Pact. Ofﬁcially known as the Pact of Paris, it was ultimately ratiﬁed by sixty-two nations. This new parchment peace was delusory in the extreme. Defensive wars were still permitted, and what scheming aggressor could not cook up an excuse of self-defense? Lacking both muscles and teeth, the pact was a diplomatic derelict—and virtually useless in a showdown. Yet it accurately—and dangerously— reﬂected the American mind in the 1920s, which was all too willing to be lulled into a false sense of security. This mood took even deeper hold in the ostrichlike neutralism of the 1930s.

Hiking the Tariff Higher
 A comparable lack of realism afﬂicted foreign economic policy in the 1920s. Businesspeople, shortsightedly obsessed with the dazzling prospects in the prosperous home market, sought to keep that market to themselves by ﬂ inging up insurmountable tariff walls around the United States. They were spurred into action by their fear of a ﬂood of cheap goods from recovering Europe, especially during the brief but sharp recession of 1920–1921. In 1922 Congress passed the comprehensive Fordney-McCumber Tariff Law. Glib lobbyists once more descended upon Washington and helped boost schedules from the average of 27 percent under Wilson’s Underwood Tariff of 1913 to an average of 38.5 percent, which was almost as high as Taft’s Payne-Aldrich Tariff of 1909. (See the Appendix.) Duties on farm produce were increased, and the principle was proclaimed that the general rates were designed to equalize the cost of American and foreign production. A promising degree of ﬂexibility was introduced for the ﬁ rst time, when the president was authorized, with the advice of the fact-ﬁ nding Tariff Commission, to reduce or increase duties by as much as 50 percent. Presidents Harding and Coolidge, true to their bigindustry sympathies, were far more friendly to tariff increases than to reductions. In six years they authorized thirty-two upward changes, including on their list vital commodities like dairy products, chemicals, and pig iron. During the same period, the White House ordered only ﬁve reductions. These included mill feed and such triﬂ ing items as bobwhite quail, paintbrush handles, phenol, and cresylic acid.



 The high-tariff course thus charted by the Republican regimes set off an ominous chain reaction. European producers felt the squeeze, for the American tariff walls prolonged their postwar chaos. An impoverished Europe needed to sell its manufactured goods to the United States, particularly if it hoped to achieve economic recovery and to pay its huge war debt to Washington. America needed to give foreign nations a chance to make a proﬁt from it so that they could buy its manufactured articles and repay debts. International trade, Americans were slow to learn, is a twoway street. In general, they could not sell to others in quantity unless they bought from them in quantity— or lent them more U.S. dollars. Erecting tariff walls was a game that two could play. The American example spurred European nations, throughout the feverish 1920s, to pile up higher barriers themselves. These artiﬁcial obstacles were doubly bad: they hurt not only American-made goods but the products of European countries as well. The whole vicious circle further deepened the international economic distress, providing one more rung on the ladder by which Adolf Hitler scrambled to power.

The Stench of Scandal
 The loose morality and get-rich-quickism of the Harding era manifested themselves spectacularly in a series of scandals. Early in 1923 Colonel Charles R. Forbes, onetime deserter from the army, was caught with his hand in the till and resigned as head of the Veterans Bureau. An appointee of the gullible Harding, he and his accomplices looted the government to the tune of about $200 million, chieﬂy in connection with the building of veterans’ hospitals. He was sentenced to two years in a federal penitentiary. Most shocking of all was the Teapot Dome scandal, an affair that involved priceless naval oil reserves at Teapot Dome (Wyoming) and Elk Hills (Cal i fornia). In 1921 the slippery secretary of the interior, Albert B. Fall, induced his careless colleague, the secretary of the navy, to transfer these valuable properties to the Interior Department. Harding indiscreetly signed the secret order. Fall then quietly leased the lands to oilmen Harry F. Sinclair and Edward L. Doheny, but not until he had received a bribe (“loan”) of $100,000 from Doheny and about three times that amount in all from Sinclair.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 released after a jury twice failed to agree. During the trial Daugherty hid behind the trousers of the nowdead Harding by implying that persistent probing might uncover crookedness in the White House. Harding was mercifully spared the full revelation of these iniquities, though his worst suspicions were aroused. While news of the scandals was beginning to break, he embarked upon a speechmaking tour across the country all the way to Alaska. On the return trip, he died in San Francisco, on August 2, 1923, of pneumonia and thrombosis. His death may have been hastened by a broken heart resulting from the disloyalty of designing friends. Mourning millions, not yet fully aware of the graft in Washington, expressed genuine sorrow. The brutal fact is that Harding was not a strong enough man for the presidency—as he himself privately admitted. Such was his weakness that he tolerated people and conditions that subjected the Republic to its worst disgrace since the days of President Grant. Washington Ofﬁcials Trying to Outpace the Teapot Dome Scandal, ca. 1922

“Silent Cal” Coolidge
 Teapot Dome, no tempest in a teapot, ﬁ nally came to a whistling boil. Details of the crooked transaction gradually began to leak out in March 1923, two years after Harding took ofﬁce. Fall, Sinclair, and Doheny were indicted the next year, but the case dragged through the courts until 1929. Finally Fall was found guilty of taking a bribe and was sentenced to one year in jail. By a curious quirk of justice, the two bribe givers were acquitted while the bribe taker was convicted, although Sinclair served several months in jail for having “shadowed” jurors and for refusing to testify before a Senate committee. The oily smudge from Teapot Dome polluted the prestige of the Washington government. Right-thinking citizens wondered what was going on when public ofﬁcials could sell out the nation’s vital resources, especially those reserved for the U.S. Navy. The acquittal of Sinclair and Doheny undermined faith in the courts, while giving further currency to the cynical sayings “You can’t put a million dollars in jail” and “In America everyone is assumed guilty until proven rich.” Still more scandals erupted. Persistent reports as to the underhanded doings of Attorney General Daugherty prompted a Senate investigation in 1924 of the illegal sale of pardons and liquor permits. Forced to resign, the accused ofﬁcial was tried in 1927 but was

 News of Harding’s death was sped to Vice President Coolidge, then visiting at his father’s New Eng land farmhouse. By the light of two kerosene lamps, the elder Coolidge, a justice of the peace, used the old family Bible to administer the presidential oath to his son. This homespun setting was symbolic of Coolidge. Quite unlike Harding, the stern-faced Vermonter, with his thin nose and tightly set lips, embodied the New Eng land virtues of honesty, morality, industry, and frugality. As a youth, his father reported, he seemed to get more sap out of a maple tree than did any of the other boys. Practicing a rigid economy in both money and words, “Silent Cal” came to be known in Washington conversational circles for his brilliant ﬂashes of silence. His dour, serious visage prompted the acid observation that he had been “weaned on a pickle.” Coolidge seemed to be a crystallization of the commonplace. Painfully shy, he was blessed with only mediocre powers of leadership. He would occasionally display a dry wit in private, but his speeches, delivered in a nasal New Eng land twang, were invariably boring. A staunch apostle of the status quo, he was no knight in armor riding forth to tilt at wrongs. His only horse, in fact, was an electric-powered steed on which he took his exercise. True to Republican philosophy, he became the “high priest of the great god Business.”

“Cautious Cal” Coolidge




Calvin Coolidge, Gentleman
 Angler Coolidge “was a real conservative, a fundamentalist in religion, in the economic and social order, and in ﬁshing,” said his successor, Herbert Hoover, who had a ﬂy ﬁsherman’s disdain for Coolidge’s bait-ﬁshing tactics— and for his predecessor’s laissezfaire politics as well.

 Cash Register Chorus Business croons its appreciation of “Coolidge prosperity.”

 He believed that “the man who builds a factory builds a temple” and that “the man who works there worships there.” The hands-off temperament of “Cautious Cal” Coolidge suited the times perfectly. His thrifty nature caused him to sympathize fully with Secretary of the Treasury Mellon’s efforts to reduce both taxes and debts. No foe of industrial bigness, he let business have its head. “Coolidge luck” held during his ﬁve and a half prosperity-blessed years. Ever a proﬁ le in caution, Coolidge slowly gave the Harding regime a badly needed moral fumigation. Teapot Dome had scalded the Republican party badly, but so transparently honest was the vinegary Vermonter that the scandalous oil did not rub off on him. The public, though at ﬁ rst shocked by the scandal, quickly simmered down, and an alarming tendency developed in certain quarters to excuse some of the wrongdoers on the grounds that “they had gotten away with it.” Some critics even condemned the government prosecutors for continuing to rock the boat. America’s moral sensibility was evidently being dulled by prosperity.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Frustrated Farmers
 Sun-bronzed farmers were caught squarely in a boomor-bust cycle in the postwar decade. While the ﬁghting had raged, they had raked in money hand over gnarled ﬁst; by the spring of 1920, the price of wheat had shot up to an incredible $3 a bushel. But peace brought an end to government-guaranteed high prices and to massive purchases by other nations, as foreign production reentered the stream of world commerce. Machines also threatened to plow the farmers under an avalanche of their own overabundant crops. The gasoline-engine tractor was working a revolution on American farms. This steel mule was to cultivation and sowing what the McCormick reaper was to harvesting. Blue-denimed farmers no longer had to plod after the horse-drawn plow with high-footed gait. They could sit erect on their chugging mechanized chariots and turn under and harrow many acres in a single day. They could grow bigger crops on larger areas, using fewer horses and hired hands. The wartime boom had encouraged them to bring vast new tracts under cultivation, especially in the “wheat belt” of the upper Midwest. But such improved efﬁciency and expanded agricultural acreage helped to pile up more pricedampening surpluses. A withering depression swept through agricultural districts in the 1920s, when one farm in four was sold for debt or taxes. As a plaintive song of the period ran,

Mechanizing Agriculture
 Just as the automobile replaced the horse on city streets, so did the gas-engine tractor replace horses and mules on the nation’s farms in the 1920s. American farmers owned ten times more tractors in 1930 than they did in 1920. The smoke-belching tractors bolstered productivity but also increased the farmers’ debt burden, as the Great Depression made tragically clear.

 No use talkin’, any man’s beat, With ’leven-cent cotton and forty-cent meat. Schemes abounded for bringing relief to the hardpressed farmers. A bipartisan “farm bloc” from the agricultural states coalesced in Congress in 1921 and succeeded in driv ing through some helpful laws. Noteworthy was the Capper-Volstead Act, which exempted farmers’ marketing cooperatives from antitrust prosecution. The farm bloc’s favorite proposal was the McNary-Haugen Bill, pushed energetically from 1924 to 1928. It sought to keep agricultural prices high by authorizing the government to buy up surpluses and sell them abroad. Government losses were to be made up by a special tax on the farmers. Congress twice passed the bill, but frugal Coolidge twice vetoed it. Farm prices stayed down, and farmers’ political temperatures stayed high, reaching a fever pitch in the election of 1924.

A
Three-Way Race for  the White House in 1924 Self-satisﬁed Republicans, chanting “Keep Cool and Keep Coolidge,” nominated “Silent Cal” for the presidency at their convention in Cleveland in the simmering summer of 1924. Squabbling Democrats had more difﬁculty choosing a candidate when they met in New York’s sweltering Madison Square Garden. Reﬂecting



Farmers and Reformers


 many of the cultural tensions of the decade, the party was hopelessly split between “wets” and “drys,” urbanites and farmers, Fundamentalists and Modernists, northern liberals and southern stand-patters, immigrants and old-stock Americans. In one symptomatic spasm of discord, the conventioneers failed by just one vote to pass a resolution condemning the Ku Klux Klan. Deadlocked for an unprecedented 102 ballots, the convention at last turned wearily, sweatily, and unenthusiastically to John W. Davis. A wealthy corporation lawyer connected with the Wall Street banking house of J. P. Morgan and Company, the polished nominee was no less conservative than cautious Calvin Coolidge. The ﬁeld was now wide-open for a liberal candidate. The white-pompadoured Senator Robert (“Fighting Bob”) La Follette from Wisconsin, perennial aspirant to the presidency and now sixty-nine years of age, sprang forward to lead a new Progressive party. He gained the endorsement of the American Federation of Labor and

 enjoyed the support of the shrinking Socialist party, but his major constituency was made up of the pricepinched farmers. La Follette’s new Progressive party, ﬁelding only a presidential ticket, with no candidates for local ofﬁce, was a head without a body. It proved to be only a shadow of the robust Progressive coalition of prewar days. Its platform called for government ownership of railroads and relief for farmers, lashed out at monopoly and antilabor injunctions, and urged a constitutional amendment to limit the Supreme Court’s power to invalidate laws passed by Congress. La Follette turned in a respectable showing, polling nearly 5 million votes. But “Cautious Cal” and the oil-smeared Republicans slipped easily back into ofﬁce, overwhelming Davis, 15,718,211 to 8,385,283. The electoral count stood at 382 for Coolidge, 136 for Davis, and 13 for La Follette, all from his home state of Wisconsin (see Map 32.1). As the so-called conscience of the callous 1920s, La Follette injected a badly needed

 Map 32.1 Presidential Election of 1924 (showing popular vote by county) Note the concentration of La Follette’s votes in the old Populist strongholds of the Midwest and the mountain states. His ticket did especially well in the grainInteractive Map growing districts battered by the postwar slump in agricultural prices. WASH.

N.H.
VT. R-4

R-7


MONT. R-4

 ME.

R-4


N. DAK.

R-6


R-5


 OREGON

 MINN.

R-5


 MASS.

R-12


 IDAHO

S. DAK.

R-4


 WISC.

R-5


 WYO.

P-13


R-3


R-13


R-8


R-4


ILL. R-29

COLO. R-6

KANSAS R-10

ARIZ. R-3

R.I.
R-5


 IOWA

 NEBR.

R-13


MICH. PA.

 UTAH

 CALIF.

R-45


R-15


NEV. R-3

R-18


N.Y.


 OKLA.

N. MEX.

D-10


R-3


IND. R-15

R-38


 OHIO

MD. R-8

N.C.
D-12


D-12


S.C.


 ARK.

D-9


D-9


MISS. D-10

D-20


 VA.

D-12


R-13


 TENN.

 TEXAS

R-14
R-3


W.VA. KY.

R-18


N.J. R-7


 DEL.

R-24


R-8


 MO.

 CONN.

ALA. D-12

 GA.

D-14


 LA.

D-10


FLA. D-6

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Coolidge (Republican)




72%


15,718,211


54.0%


Davis (Democrat)




26%


8,385,283


28.8%




2%


4,831,289


16.6%


La Follette (Progressive)


 No returns, unsettled, etc.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 liberal tonic into a decade drugged on prosperity. But times were too good for too many for his reforming message to carry the day.

Foreign-Policy Flounderings
 Isolation continued to reign in the Coolidge era. Despite presidential proddings, the Senate proved unwilling to allow America to adhere to the World Court—the judicial arm of the still-suspect League of Nations. Coolidge only halfheartedly—and unsuccessfully— pursued further naval disarmament after the loudly trumpeted agreements worked out at the Washington Conference in 1922. A glaring exception to the United States’ inwardlooking indifference to the outside world was the armed interventionism in the Caribbean and Central America. American troops were withdrawn (after an eightyear stay) from the Dominican Republic in 1924, but they remained in Haiti from 1914 to 1934. President Coolidge in 1925 brieﬂy removed American bayonets from troubled Nicaragua, where they had glinted intermittently since 1909, but in 1926 he sent them back, ﬁve thousand strong, and they stayed until 1933. American oil companies clamored for a military expedition to Mexico in 1926 when the Mexican government began to assert its sovereignty over oil resources. Coolidge kept cool and defused the Mexican crisis with some skillful diplomatic negotiating. But his mailed-ﬁst tactics elsewhere bred sore resentments south of the Rio Grande, where angry critics loudly assailed “yanqui imperialism.”

 Overshadowing all other foreign-policy problems in the 1920s was the knotty issue of international debts, a complicated tangle of private loans, Allied war debts, and German reparations payments (see Figure 32.2). Almost overnight, World War I had reversed the international ﬁ nancial position of the United States. In 1914 America had been a debtor nation to the sum of about $4 billion; by 1922 it had become a creditor nation to the sum of about $16 billion. The almighty dollar rivaled the pound sterling as the ﬁ nancial giant of the world. American investors loaned some $10 billion to foreigners in the 1920s, though even this huge river of money could not fully reﬂoat the war-shelled world economy. Americans, bewitched by lucrative investment opportunities in their domestic economy, did not lend nearly so large a fraction of their national income overseas as had the British in the prewar period. The key knot in the debt tangle was the $10 billion that the U.S. Treasury had loaned to the Allies during and immediately after the war. Uncle Sam held their IOUs—and he wanted to be paid. The Allies, in turn, protested that the demand for repayment was grossly unfair. The French and the British pointed out, with much justice, that they had held up a wall of ﬂesh and bone against the common foe until America the Unready had ﬁ nally entered the fray. America, they argued, should write off its loans as war costs, just as the Allies had been tragically forced to write off the lives of millions of young men. The debtors also complained that the real effect of their borrowed dollars had been to fuel the boom in the already roaring wartime economy in America, where nearly all their purchases had been made. And the ﬁ nal straw, protested the Europe-

U.S. INVESTORS

Figure 32.2 Aspects of the
 Financial Merry-go-round, 1921–1933 Great Britain, with a debt of over $4 billion owed to the U.S. Treasury, had a huge stake in proposals for inter-Allied debt cancellation, but France’s stake was even larger. Less prosperous than Britain in the 1920s and more battered by the war, which had been fought on its soil, France owed nearly $3.5 billion to the United States and additional billions to Britain.

WALL STREET BANKERS

Private
 $ loans

 GERMANY

Reparations Reparations
Debt
 payments

U.S. TREASURY

Allied war
 debt payments

GREAT BRITAIN

 Allied war debt payments

 FRANCE

The War Debts Tangle




 ans, was that America’s postwar tariff walls made it almost impossible for them to sell their goods to earn the dollars to pay their debts.

Unraveling the Debt Knot
 America’s tightﬁsted insistence on getting its money back helped to harden the hearts of the Allies against conquered Germany. The French and the British demanded that the Germans make enormous reparations payments, totaling some $32 billion, as compensation for war-inﬂ icted damages. The Allies hoped to settle their debts to the United States with the money received from Germany. The French, seeking to extort lagging reparations payments, sent troops into Germany’s industrialized Ruhr Valley in 1923. Berlin responded by permitting its currency to inﬂate astronomically. At one point in October 1923, a loaf of bread cost 480 million marks, or about $120 million in preinﬂation money. German society teetered on the brink of mad anarchy, and the whole international house of ﬁ nancial cards threatened to ﬂutter down in colossal chaos. Sensible statesmen now urged that war debts and reparations alike be drastically scaled down or even canceled outright. But to Americans such proposals smacked of “welshing” on a debt. “We went across, but they won’t come across,” cried a prominent politician. Scroogelike, Calvin Coolidge turned aside suggestions of debt cancellation with a typically terse question: “They hired the money, didn’t they?” The Washington administration proved especially unrealistic in its dogged insistence that there was no connection whatever between debts and reparations. Reality ﬁ nally dawned in the Dawes Plan of 1924. Negotiated largely by Charles Dawes, about to be nominated as Coolidge’s running mate, it rescheduled German reparations payments and opened the way for further American private loans to Germany. The whole ﬁ nancial cycle now became still more complicated, as U.S. bankers loaned money to Germany, Germany paid reparations to France and Britain, and the former Allies paid war debts to the United States. Clearly the source of this monetary merry-go-round was the ﬂowing well of American credit. When that well dried up after the great crash in 1929, the jungle of international ﬁ nance quickly turned into a desert. President Herbert Hoover declared a one-year debt moratorium in 1931, and before long all the debtors had defaulted— except “honest little Finland,” which struggled along

Harmony in Europe, 1932


 making payments until the last of its debt was discharged in 1976. The United States never did get its money, but it harvested a bumper crop of ill will. Irate French crowds on occasion attacked American tourists, and throughout Europe Uncle Sam was caricatured as Uncle Shylock, greedily whetting his knife for the last pound of Allied ﬂesh. The bad taste left in American mouths by the whole sorry episode contributed powerfully to the storm-cellar neutrality legislation passed by Congress in the 1930s.

The Triumph of
Herbert Hoover, 1928
 Poker-faced Calvin Coolidge, the tight-lipped “Sphinx of the Potomac,” bowed out of the 1928 presidential race when he announced, “I do not choose to run.” His logical successor was super-Secretary (of Commerce) Herbert Hoover, unpopular with the political bosses but the much-admired darling of the masses, who asked, “Hoo but Hoover?” He was nominated on a platform that clucked contentedly over both prosperity and prohibition.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 Still-squabbling Democrats nominated Alfred E. Smith, four-time governor of New York and one of the most colorful personalities in American politics. He was a wisecracking, glad-handing liberal who suffered from several fatal political handicaps. “Al(cohol)” Smith was soakingly and drippingly “wet” at a time when the country was still devoted to the “noble experiment” of prohibition. To a nation that had only recently moved to the city, native New Yorker Smith seemed too abrasively urban. He was a Roman Catholic in an overwhelmingly Protestant—and unfortunately prejudiced—land. Many dry, rural, and Fundamentalist Democrats gagged on his candidacy, and they saddled the wet Smith with a dry running mate and a dry platform. Jauntily sporting a brown derby and a big cigar, Smith, “the Happy Warrior,” tried to carry alcohol on one shoulder and water on the other. But his effort was doomed from the start. Radio ﬁgured prominently in this campaign for the ﬁ rst time, and it helped Hoover more than Smith. The New Yorker had more personal sparkle, but he could not project it through the radio (which in his Lower East Side twang he pronounced “radd-dee-o,” grating on the ears of many listeners). Iowa-born Hoover, with his double-breasted dignity, came out of the microphone better than he went in. Decrying un-American “socialism” and preaching “rugged individualism,” he sounded both grassrootish and statesmanlike. Chubby-faced, ruddy-complexioned Herbert Hoover, with his painfully high starched collar, was a living example of the American success story and an intriguing mixture of two centuries. As a poor orphan boy who had worked his way through Stanford University, he had absorbed the nineteenth-century copybook maxims of industry, thrift, and self-reliance. As a fabulously successful mining engineer and a brilliant businessman, he had honed to a high degree the efﬁciency doctrines of the progressive era. A small-town boy from Iowa and Oregon, he had traveled and worked abroad extensively. Long years of self-imposed exile had deepened his determination, abundantly supported by national tradition, to avoid foreign entanglements. His experiences abroad had further strengthened his faith in American individualism, free enterprise, and small government. With his unshaken dignity and Quaker restraint, Hoover was a far cry from the typical backslapping politician. Though a citizen of the world and laden with international honors, he was quite shy, standofﬁsh, and stiff. Personally colorless in public, he had been accustomed during much of his life to giving orders to

 Herbert Hoover on the Road “Whistle-stop” campaigns, with candidates speaking from the rear platforms of trains, were a standard feature of American politics before the advent of television. Herbert Hoover here greets a crowd in Newark, New Jersey, during the 1928 campaign.

 subordinates and not to soliciting votes. Never before elected to public ofﬁce, he was thin-skinned in the face of criticism, and he did not adapt readily to the necessary give-and-take of political accommodation. His real power lay in his integrity, his humanitarianism, his passion for assembling the facts, his efﬁciency, his talents for administration, and his ability to inspire loyalty in close associates. They called him “the Chief.” As beﬁtted America’s newly mechanized civilization, Hoover was the ideal businessperson’s candidate. A self-made millionaire, he recoiled from anything suggesting socialism, paternalism, or “planned economy.” Yet as secretary of commerce, he had exhibited some progressive instincts. He endorsed labor unions and supported federal regulation of the new radio

Hoover Trounces Smith


 broadcasting industry. He even ﬂ irted for a time with the idea of government-owned radio, similar to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). As bands blared Smith’s theme song, “The Sidewalks of New York,” the campaign sank into the sewers beneath the sidewalks. Despite the best efforts of Hoover and Smith, below-the-belt tactics were employed to a disgusting degree by lower-level campaigners. Religious bigotry raised its hideous head over Smith’s Catholicism. An irresponsible whispering campaign claimed that “A Vote for Al Smith Is a Vote for the Pope” and that the White House, under Smith, would become a branch of the Vatican—complete with “Rum, Romanism, and Ruin.” Hoover’s attempts to quash such rumors were in vain. The proverbially solid South—“100 percent American” and a stronghold of Protestant Ku Klux Klanism—shied away from “city slicker” Al Smith. It might have accepted a Catholic, or a wet, or the descendant of Irish grandparents, or an urbanite. But a concoction of Catholicism, wettism, foreignism, and liberal-

WA MT

OR ID NV CA

 ND

 WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

 NM

 IL

 LA

 TX

MI IN

 MO

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 4 NH MA NY 4 18 RI PA NJ CT 5 14 7

 GA

DE MD

 SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Hoover (Republican)




83.6%


21,391,381


58.7%




16.4%


15,016,443


41.2%


Smith (Democrat)


 Map 32.2 Presidential Election of 1928 (with electoral vote by state) Smith, despite his defeat, managed to poll almost as many votes as the victorious Coolidge had in 1924. By attracting to the party an immense urban or “sidewalk” vote, the breezy New Yorker foreshadowed Roosevelt’s New Deal victory in 1932, when the Democrats patched together the solid South and the urban North. A cruel joke had the Catholic Smith cabling the Pope a single word after the election: “Unpack.” Interactive Map



 ism brewed on the sidewalks of New York was too bitter a dose for southern stomachs. Smith’s theme song was a constant and rasping reminder that his upbringing had not been convincingly American. Hoover triumphed in a landslide. He bagged 21,391,993 popular votes to 15,016,169 for his embittered opponent, while rolling up an electoral count of 444 to 87. A huge Republican majority was returned to the House of Representatives. Tens of thousands of dry southern Democrats—“Hoovercrats”—rebelled against Al Smith, and Hoover proved to be the ﬁ rst Republican candidate in ﬁ fty-two years, except for Harding’s Tennessee victory in 1920, to carry a state that had seceded. He swept ﬁve states of the former Confederacy, as well as all of the Border States (see Map 32.2).

 President Hoover’s First Moves Prosperity in the late 1920s smiled broadly as the Hoover years began. Soaring stocks on the bull market continued to defy the laws of ﬁ nancial gravitation. But two immense groups of citizens were not getting their share of the riches ﬂowing from the national cornucopia: the unorga nized wage earners and especially the disorga nized farmers. Hoover’s administration, in line with its philosophy of promoting self-help, responded to the outcry of the wounded farmers with legislative aspirin. The Agricultural Marketing Act, passed by Congress in June 1929, was designed to help the farmers help themselves, largely through producers’ cooperatives. It set up the Federal Farm Board, with a revolving fund of half a billion dollars at its disposal. Money was lent generously to farm orga ni zations seeking to buy, sell, and store agricultural surpluses. In 1930 the Farm Board itself created both the Grain Stabilization Corporation and the Cotton Stabilization Corporation. The prime goal was to bolster sagging prices by buying up surpluses. But the two agencies were soon suffocated by an avalanche of farm produce, as wheat dropped to ﬁ fty-seven cents a bushel and cotton to ﬁve cents a pound. Farmers had meanwhile clutched at the tariff as a possible straw to help keep their heads above the waters of ﬁ nancial ruin. During the recent presidential campaign, Hoover, an amateur in politics, had been stampeded into a politically unwise pledge. He had promised to call Congress into special session to



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 consider agricultural relief and, speciﬁcally, to bring about “limited” changes in the tariff. These hope-giving assurances no doubt won many votes for Hoover in the midwestern farm belt. The Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930 followed the wellworn pattern of Washington horse trading. It started out in the House as a fairly reasonable protective mea sure, designed to assist the farmers. But by the time the high-pressure lobbyists had pushed it through the Senate, it had acquired about a thousand amendments. It thus turned out to be the highest protective tariff in the nation’s peacetime history. The average duty on nonfree goods was raised from 38.5 percent, as established by the Fordney-McCumber Act of 1922, to nearly 60 percent. To angered foreigners, the Hawley-Smoot Tariff was a blow below the trade belt. It seemed like a declaration of economic warfare on the entire outside world. It reversed a promising worldwide trend toward reasonable tariffs and widened the yawning trade gaps. It plunged both America and other nations deeper into the terrible depression that had already begun. It increased international ﬁ nancial chaos and forced the United States further into the bog of economic isolationism. And economic isolationism, both at home and abroad, was playing directly into the hands of a hate-ﬁ lled German demagogue, Adolf Hitler.

Pride Goes Before a
 Fall The great crash of 1929 humbled many a high-ﬂying investor. The desperate curbside seller of this brandnew Chrysler Model 75 paid $1,550 for it just months before.

The Great Crash Ends
 the Golden Twenties When Herbert Hoover conﬁdently took the presidential oath on March 4, 1929, there were few black clouds on the economic horizon. The “long boom” seemed endless, with the painful exception of the debt-blanketed farm belt. America’s productive colossus—stimulated by the automobile, radio, movies, and other new industries—was roaring along at a dizzy speed that suggested a permanent plateau of prosperity. Few people sensed that it might smother its own ﬁ res by pouring out too much. The speculative bubble was actually near the bursting point. Prices on the stock exchange continued to spiral upward and create a fool’s paradise of paper profits, despite Hoover’s early but fruitless efforts to curb speculation through the Federal Reserve Board. A few prophets of disaster were bold enough to sound warnings but were drowned out by the mad chatter of the ticker-tape machine. A catastrophic crash came in October 1929. It was partially triggered by the British, who raised their interest rates in an effort to bring back capital lured abroad by American investments. Foreign investors and wary domestic speculators began to dump their

The Depression Descends






NEW DEAL RECOVERY















FDR'S ELECTION



 DEPRESSION

BULL MARKET



 CRASH







 “insecurities,” and an orgy of selling followed. Tension built up to the panicky Black Tuesday of October 29, 1929, when 16,410,030 shares of stocks were sold in a save-who-may scramble. Wall Street became a wailing wall as gloom and doom replaced boom, and suicides increased alarmingly. A “sick joke” of the time had hotel room clerks ask registrants, “For sleeping or jumping?” Losses, even in blue-chip securities, were unbelievable. By the end of 1929—two months after the ini-



Figure 32.3 Index of Common Stock Prices
(1926 = 100)


 tial crash—stockholders had lost $40 billion in paper values, or more than the total cost of World War I to the United States (see Figure 32.3). The stock-market collapse heralded a business depression, at home and abroad, that was the most prolonged and prostrating in American or world experience. No other industrialized nation suffered so severe a setback. By the end of 1930, more than 4 million workers in the United States were jobless; two years later the ﬁgure had about tripled. Hungry and

The Unemployed, by John Langley
 Howard, 1937 In this painting Howard soberly evokes the dispirited state of millions of unemployed Americans during the depression.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 despairing workers pounded pavements in search of nonexistent jobs (“We’re ﬁring, not hiring”). Where employees were not discharged, wages and salaries were often slashed. A current jingle ran, Mellon pulled the whistle, Hoover rang the bell Wall Street gave the signal And the country went to hell. The misery and gloom were incalculable, as forests of dead chimneys stood stark against the sky. Over ﬁve thousand banks collapsed in the ﬁ rst three years of the depression, carrying down with them the life savings of tens of thousands of ordinary citizens. Countless thousands of honest, hard-working people lost their homes and farms to the forecloser’s hammer. Breadlines formed, soup kitchens dispensed food, and apple sellers stood shivering on street corners trying to peddle their wares for ﬁve cents. Families felt the stress, as jobless fathers nursed their guilt and shame at not being able to provide for their households. Breadless breadwinners often blamed themselves for their plight, despite abundant evidence that the economic system, not individual initiative, had broken down. Mothers meanwhile nursed fewer babies, as hard times reached even into the nation’s bedrooms, precipitating a decade-long dearth of births. As cash registers gathered cobwebs, the song “My God, How the Money Rolls In” was replaced with “Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?”

Hooked on the
Horn of Plenty
 What caused the Great Depression? One basic explanation is overproduction by both farm and factory. Ironically, the depression of the 1930s was one of abundance, not want. It was the “great glut” or the “plague of plenty.” The nation’s ability to produce goods had clearly outrun its capacity to consume or pay for them. Too much money was going into the hands of a few wealthy people, who in turn invested it in factories and other agencies of production. Not enough was going into salaries and wages, where revitalizing purchasing power could be more quickly felt. Other maladies were at work. Overexpansion of credit through installment-plan buying overstimulated production. Paying on so-called easy terms caused many consumers to dive in beyond their depth. Normal technological unemployment, resulting from new

 The Depression spectacle of want in the shadow of surplus moved an observer to write in Current History (1932),

“


 We still pray to be given each day our daily bread. Yet there is too much bread, too much wheat and corn, meat and oil and almost every commodity required by man for his subsistence and material happiness. We are not able to purchase the abundance that modern methods of agriculture, mining and manufacture make available in such bountiful quantities. Why is mankind being asked to go hungry and cold and poverty stricken in the midst of plenty?

”


 laborsaving machines, also added its burden to the abnormal unemployment of the “threadbare thirties. This already bleak picture was further darkened by economic anemia abroad. Britain and the Continent had never fully recovered from the upheaval of World War I. Depression in America was given a further downward push by a chain-reaction ﬁnancial collapse in Europe, following the failure in 1931 of a prominent Vienna banking house. A drying up of international trade, moreover, had been hastened by the shortsighted Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930. European uncertainties over reparations, war debts, and defaults on loans owed to America caused tensions that reacted unfavorably on the United States. Many of these conditions had been created or worsened by Uncle Sam’s own narrow-visioned policies, but it was now too late to unscramble the omelet. As if man-made disasters were not enough, a terrible drought scorched the Mississippi Valley in 1930. Thousands of farms were sold at auction for taxes, though in some cases kind neighbors would intimidate prospective buyers, bid one cent, and return the property to its original owner. Farm tenancy or rental— a species of peonage—was spreading at an alarming rate among both whites and blacks. By 1930 the depression had become a national calamity. Through no fault of their own, a host of industrious citizens had lost every thing. They wanted to work—but there was no work. The insidious effect of all this dazed despair on the nation’s spirit was incalculable and long-lasting. America’s “uniqueness” no longer seemed so unique or its Manifest Destiny

Hoover and the Depression




“Hooverville” in Seattle, 1934
 In the early years of the depression, desperate, homeless people constructed shacks out of scavenged materials. These shantytowns sprang up in cities across the country.

 so manifest. Hitherto the people had grappled with storms, trees, stones, and other physical obstacles. But the depression was a bafﬂ ing wraith they could not grasp. Initiative and self-respect were stiﬂed, as panhandlers begged for food or “charity soup.” In extreme cases “ragged individualists” slept under “Hoover blankets” (old newspapers), fought over the contents of garbage cans, or cooked their ﬁ ndings in old oil drums in tin-and-paper shantytowns cynically named Hoovervilles. The very foundations of America’s social and political structure trembled.

Rugged Times for
Rugged Individualists
 Hoover’s exalted reputation as a wonder-worker and efﬁciency engineer crashed about as dismally as the stock market. He doubtless would have shone in the prosperity-drenched Coolidge years, when he had foreseen the abolition of poverty and poor-houses. But damming the Great Depression proved to be a task beyond his engineering talents. The perplexed president was impaled on the horns of a cruel dilemma. As a deservedly famed humanitarian, he was profoundly distressed by the widespread misery about him. Yet as a “rugged individualist,” deeply rooted in an earlier era of free enterprise, he shrank from the heresy of government handouts. Convinced

 that industry, thrift, and self-reliance were the virtues that had made America great, President Hoover feared that a government doling out doles would weaken, perhaps destroy, the national ﬁber. As the depression nightmare steadily worsened, relief by local government agencies broke down. Hoover was ﬁ nally forced to turn reluctantly from his doctrine of log-cabin individualism and accept the proposition that the welfare of the people in a nationwide catastrophe is a direct concern of the national government.

 Wall Streeter Martin Devries, observing President Herbert Hoover’s struggle to keep his footing as the tidal wave of the Great Depression washed over him, decided he was a good man stuck in the wrong place, at the wrong time:

“


 Hoover happened to be in a bad spot. The Depression came on, and there he was. If Jesus Christ had been there, he’d have had the same problem. It’s too bad for poor old Herbie that he happened to be there. This was a world-wide Depression. It wasn’t Hoover’s fault. In 1932, . . . a monkey could have been elected against him, no question about it.

”




Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Home Relief Station, by
Louis Ribak, 1935–1936
 Destitute and despairing, millions of hard-working Americans like these had to endure the degradation and humiliation of going on relief as the pall of depression descended over the land.

 The president at last worked out a compromise between the old hands-off philosophy and the “souldestroying” direct dole then being used in Eng land. He would assist the hard-pressed railroads, banks, and rural credit corporations, in the hope that if ﬁ nancial health were restored at the top of the economic pyramid, unemployment would be relieved at the bottom on a trickle-down basis. Partisan critics sneered at the “Great Humanitar-

 Herbert Hoover (1874–1964) spoke approvingly in a campaign speech in 1928 of “the American system of Rugged Individualism.” In 1930 he referred to Cleveland’s 1887 veto of a bill to appropriate seed grain for the drought-stricken farmers of Texas:

“


 I do not believe that the power and duty of the General Government ought to be extended to the relief of individual suffering. . . . The lesson should be constantly enforced that though the people support the Government the Government should not support the people.

”


 ian”—he who had fed the faraway Belgians but would not use federal funds to feed needy Americans. Hostile commentators remarked that he was willing to lend government money to the big bankers, who allegedly had plunged the country into the mess. He would likewise lend money to agricultural orga ni zations to feed pigs—but not people. Pigs, the cynics of the time noted, had no character to undermine. Much of this criticism was unfair. Although continued suffering seemed to mock the effectiveness of Hoover’s mea sures, his efforts probably prevented a more serious collapse than did occur. And his expenditures for relief, revolutionary for that day, paved the path for the enormous federal outlays of his New Deal successor, Franklin Roosevelt. Hoover proved that the old bootstrap-pulling techniques would no longer work in a crisis of this magnitude, especially when people lacked boots.

Hoover Battles the
Great Depression
 President Hoover, in line with his “trickle-down” philosophy, at last recommended that Congress vote im-

Lampooning Hoover, 1932
 he pages of The American Pageant are ﬁ lled with political cartoons that provide pungent commentary on historical events. With one image rather than many words, a cartoonist can convey a point of view much the way an editorial writer does. This cartoon appeared in the Washington Daily News on July 25, 1932, three and a half months before Republican president Hoover lost the presidential election to his Democratic challenger, Franklin D. Roosevelt. The cartoonist foretells Hoover’s defeat in November and departure from the White House the following March (not January, as at present) and expresses his support for the Home Loan Bank Bill. With this proposal Hoover sought to come to the aid of home mortgage lenders in order to forestall them from foreclosing on homeowners. The cartoonist jokes that Hoover supported this bill because he identiﬁed with homeowners about to lose their homes, but he also cleverly insinuates that Hoover’s bank-

T


 ing reform was motivated by electoral opportunism. Surely Hoover sought to win public support in return for his new banking program as he battled for reelection, but the Home Loan Bank Bill also reﬂected Hoover’s growing recognition that the federal government had to take direct action to remedy ﬂaws that had precipitated the crisis of the Great Depression. As Hoover later recorded in his memoirs, “All this seems dull economics, but the poignant American drama revolving around the loss of the old homestead had a million repetitions straight from life, not because of the designing villain but because of a fault in our ﬁ nancial system.” How does the cartoonist use caricature to make his point? What accounts for the political cartoon’s special power? Are there limitations to this genre? Find another cartoon in this book and subject it to similar analysis.





Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 mense sums for useful public works. Though at heart an antispender, he secured from Congress appropriations totaling $2.25 billion for such projects. Most imposing of the public enterprises was the gigantic Hoover Dam on the Colorado River. Voted by Congress in the days of Coolidge, it was begun in 1930 under Hoover and completed in 1936 under Roosevelt. It succeeded in creating a huge man-made lake for purposes of irrigation, ﬂood control, and electric power. But Hoover sternly fought all schemes that he regarded as “socialistic.” Conspicuous among them was the Muscle Shoals Bill, designed to dam the Tennessee River and ultimately embraced by Franklin Roosevelt’s Tennessee Valley Authority. Hoover emphatically vetoed this mea sure, primarily because he opposed the government’s selling electricity in competition with its own citizens in private companies. Early in 1932 Congress, responding to Hoover’s belated appeal, established the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC). With an initial working capital of half a billion dollars, this agency became a government lending bank. It was designed to provide indirect relief by assisting insurance companies, banks, agricultural orga ni zations, railroads, and even hard-pressed state and local governments. But to preserve individualism and character, there would be no loans to individuals from this “billion-dollar soup kitchen.” “Pump-priming” loans by the RFC were no doubt of widespread beneﬁt, though the orga ni zation was established many months too late for maximum usefulness. Projects that it supported were largely selfliquidating, and the government as a banker actually proﬁted to the tune of many millions of dollars. Giant corporations so obviously beneﬁted from this assistance that the RFC was dubbed—rather unfairly—“the millionaires’ dole.” The irony is that the thrifty and individualistic Hoover had sponsored the project, though with initial reluctance. It actually had a strong New Dealish ﬂavor. Hoover’s administration also provided some indirect beneﬁts for labor. After stormy debate, Congress passed the Norris–La Guardia Anti-Injunction Act in 1932, and Hoover signed it. The mea sure outlawed “yellow-dog” (antiunion) contracts and forbade the federal courts to issue injunctions to restrain strikes, boycotts, and peaceful picketing. The truth is that Herbert Hoover, despite criticism of his “heartlessness,” did inaugurate a signiﬁcant new policy. In previous panics the masses had been forced to “sweat it out.” Slow though Hoover was to

 abandon this nineteenth-century bias, by the end of his term he had started down the road toward government assistance for needy citizens—a road that Franklin Roosevelt would travel much farther. Hoover’s woes were increased by a hostile Congress. At critical times during his ﬁ rst two years, the Republican majority proved highly uncooperative. Friction worsened during his last two years. A depressioncursed electorate, rebelling in the congressional elections of 1930, so reduced the Republican majority that Democrats controlled the new House and almost controlled the Senate. Insurgent Republicans could—and did—combine with opposition Democrats to harass Hoover. Some of the president’s troubles were deliberately manufactured by Congress, which, in his words, “played politics with human misery.”

Routing the Bonus Army
 in Washington Many veterans of World War I were numbered among the hard-hit victims of the depression. Industry had secured a “bonus”—though a dubious one—in the Hawley-Smoot Tariff. So the thoughts of the former soldiers naturally turned to what the government owed them for their ser vices in 1917–1918, when they had “saved” democracy. A drive developed for the premature payment of the deferred bonus voted by Congress in 1924 and payable in 1945. Thousands of impoverished veterans, both of war and of unemployment, were now prepared to move on Washington, there to demand of Congress the immediate payment of their entire bonus. The “Bonus Expeditionary Force” (BEF), which mustered about twenty thousand souls, converged on the capital in the summer of 1932. These supplicants promptly set up unsanitary public camps and erected shacks on vacant lots—a gigantic “Hooverville.” They thus created a menace to the public health, while attempting to intimidate Congress by their presence in force. After the pending bonus bill had failed in Congress by a narrow margin, Hoover arranged to pay the return fare of about six thousand bonus marchers. The rest refused to decamp, though ordered to do so. Following riots that cost two lives, Hoover responded to the demands of the Washington authorities by ordering the army to evacuate the unwanted guests. Although Hoover charged that the Bonus Army was led by riffraff and reds, in fact only a sprinkling of

Bonus Army on the March




 The Bonus Army in Washington, D.C., 1932 World War I veterans from Muncie, Indiana, were among many contingents to set up camp in the capital during the summer of 1932, determined to remain there until they received full payment of their promised bonuses.

 them were former convicts and communist agitators. The eviction was carried out by General Douglas MacArthur with bayonets and tear gas, and with far more severity than Hoover had planned. A few of the former soldiers were injured as the torch was put to their pathetic shanties in the inglorious “Battle of Anacostia Flats.” An eleven-month-old “bonus baby” allegedly died from exposure to tear gas. This brutal episode brought down additional abuse on the once-popular Hoover, who by now was the most loudly booed man in the country. The Democrats, not content with Hoover’s vulnerable record, employed professional “smear” artists to drive him from ofﬁce. Cynics sneered that the “Great Engineer” had in a few months “ditched, drained, and damned the country.” The existing panic was unfairly branded “the Hoover depression.” In truth, Hoover had been oversold as a wizard, and the public grumbled when his magician’s wand failed to produce rabbits. The time was ripening for the Democratic party—and Franklin D. Roosevelt— to cash in on Hoover’s calamities.

 Japa nese Militarists Attack China The Great Depression, which brewed enough distress at home, added immensely to difﬁculties abroad. Militaristic Japan stole the Far Eastern spotlight. In September 1931 the Japa nese imperialists, noting that the Western world was badly mired in a depression, lunged into Manchuria. Alleging provocation, they rapidly overran the coveted Chinese province and proceeded to bolt shut the Open Door in the conquered area. America had a strong sentimental stake in China but few signiﬁcant economic interests. In fact, American commercial ties with Japan far outweighed those with China. Yet most Americans were stunned by this act of naked aggression. It ﬂagrantly violated the League of Nations covenant, as well as various other international agreements solemnly signed by Tokyo, not to mention the American sense of fair play. Indignant Americans, though by no means a majority, urged



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Japanese Aggression in
Manchuria This American
 cartoon lambastes Japan for disregarding international treaty agreements when it seized Manchuria in 1931. The next year the Japanese would set up the puppet state of Manchukuo.

 strong mea sures ranging from boycotts to blockades. Possibly a tight blockade by the League, backed by the United States, would have brought Japan sharply to book. But the League was handicapped in taking twoﬁsted action by the nonmembership of the United States. Washington ﬂatly rebuffed initial attempts in 1931 to secure American cooperation in applying economic pressure on Japan. Washington and Secretary

 Hoover later wrote of his differences with Secretary of State Stimson over economic boycotts,

“


 I was soon to realize that my able Secretary was at times more of a warrior than a diplomat. To him the phrase ‘economic sanctions’ was the magic wand of force by which all peace could be summoned from the vasty deep. . . . Ever since Versailles I had held that ‘economic sanctions’ meant war when applied to any large nation.

”


 of State Henry L. Stimson in the end decided to ﬁ re only paper bullets at the Japa nese aggressors. The socalled Stimson doctrine, proclaimed in 1932, declared that the United States would not recognize any territorial acquisitions achieved by force. Righteous indignation—or a preach-and-run policy—would substitute for solid initiatives. This verbal slap on the wrist from America did not deter the march of the Japa nese militarists. Smarting under a Chinese boycott, they bombed Shanghai in 1932, with shocking losses to civilians. Outraged Americans launched informal boycotts of Japa nese goods, chieﬂy dime-store knickknacks. But there was no real sentiment for armed intervention among a depressionridden people, who remained strongly isolationist during the 1930s. In a broad sense, collective security died and World War II was born in 1931 on the windswept plains of Manchuria. The League members had the economic and naval power to halt Japan but lacked the courage to act. One reason—though not the only one—was that they could not count on America’s support. Even so, the Republic came closer to stepping into the chill waters of internationalism than American prophets would have dared to predict in the early 1920s.

 Relations with Southern Neighbors

Hoover Pioneers the
Good Neighbor Policy
 Hoover’s arrival in the White House brought a more hopeful turn to relations with America’s southern neighbors. The new president was deeply interested in the often-troubled nations below the Rio Grande. Shortly after his election in 1928, he had undertaken a goodwill tour of Latin America—on a U.S. battleship. World depression softened an age-old aggressive attitude in the United States toward weak Latin neighbors. Following the stock-market collapse of 1929, Americans had less money to invest abroad. As millions of dollars’ worth of investments in Latin America went sour, many Yankees felt as though they were more preyed upon than preying. So-called economic



 imperialism became much less popular in the United States than it had been in the golden twenties. As an advocate of international goodwill, Hoover strove to abandon the interventionist twist given to the Monroe Doctrine by Theodore Roosevelt. In 1932 he negotiated a new treaty with the French-speaking Republic of Haiti, and this pact, later supplanted by an executive agreement, provided for the complete withdrawal of American platoons by 1934. Further pleasing omens came early in 1933, when the last marine “leathernecks” sailed away from Nicaragua after an almost continuous stay of some twenty years. Herbert Hoover, the engineer in politics, thus happily engineered the foundation stones of the Good Neighbor policy. Upon them rose an imposing ediﬁce in the days of his successor, Franklin Roosevelt.

 CHRONOLOGY

 American Legion founded Chicago race riot



Esch-Cummins Transportation Act
Merchant Marine Act




 Veterans Bureau created Capper-Volstead Act



 Five-Power Naval Treaty signed Four-Power and Nine-Power Treaties on the Far East Fordney-McCumber Tariff Law



 Adkins v. Children’s Hospital Teapot Dome scandal Harding dies; Coolidge assumes presidency



 Adjusted Compensation Act for veterans Dawes Plan for international ﬁ nance U.S. troops leave Dominican Republic Coolidge wins three-way presidential election



 U.S. troops occupy Nicaragua



Kellogg-Briand Pact
 Hoover defeats Smith for presidency Hoover makes goodwill tour of Latin America



 Agricultural Marketing Act sets up Federal Farm Board Stock-market crash



Hawley-Smoot Tariff




 Japa nese invade Manchuria



 Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) established Norris–La Guardia Anti-Injunction Act “Bonus Army” dispersed from Washington, D.C.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


KEY TERMS
Adkins v. Children’s Hospital (799) Nine-Power Treaty (802) Kellogg-Briand Pact (803) Fordney-McCumber Tariff Law (803) Teapot Dome scandal (803) McNary-Haugen Bill (806) Dawes Plan (809) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Agricultural Marketing Act (811) Hawley-Smoot Tariff (812) Black Tuesday (813) Hoovervilles (815) Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) (818) Norris–La Guardia AntiInjunction Act (818) Bonus Army (818) 
Warren G. Harding
Albert B. Fall
Calvin Coolidge
John W. Davis


Robert M. (“Fighting
Bob”) La Follette
Albert E. Smith


To Learn More
Michael A. Bernstein, The Great Depression: Delayed
Recovery and Economic Change in America, 1929–1939
(1987)
John D. Hicks, Republican Ascendancy, 1921–1933 (1960)
 Robert McElvaine, The Great Depression: America, 1929– 1941 (rev. ed., 1993) Burl Noggle, Into the Twenties: The United States from Armistice to Normalcy (1974) Emily Rosenberg, Financial Missionaries to the World: The Politics and Culture of Dollar Diplomacy, 1900–1930 (1999) Peter Temin, Did Monetary Factors Cause the Great Depression? (1976)

Joan Hoff Wilson, American Business and Foreign Policy,
1920–1933 (1971)
———, Herbert Hoover, Forgotten Progressive (1975)
Robert H. Zieger, American Workers, American Unions,
1920–1985 (1986)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Great Depression
 and the New Deal




1933–1939
 The country needs and . . . demands bold, persistent experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it. If it fails, admit it frankly and try another. But above all, try something. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, CAMPAIGN SPEECH, 1932

V


 oters were in an ugly mood as the presidential campaign of 1932 neared. Countless factory chimneys remained ominously cold, while more than 11 million unemployed workers and their families sank ever deeper into the pit of poverty. Herbert Hoover may have won the 1928 election by promising “a chicken in every pot,” but three years later that chicken seemed to have laid a discharge slip in every pay envelope. Hoover, sick at heart, was renominated by the Republican convention in Chicago without great enthusiasm. The platform indulged in extravagant praise of Republican antidepression policies, while halfheartedly promising to repeal national prohibition and return control of liquor to the states. The rising star of the Democratic ﬁ rmament was Governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt of New York, a ﬁ fth cousin of Theodore Roosevelt. Like the Rough Rider, he had been born to a wealthy New York family, had graduated from Harvard, had been elected as a

 kid-gloved politician to the New York legislature, had served as governor of the Empire State, had been nominated for the vice presidency (though not elected), and had served capably as assistant secretary of the navy. Although both men were master politicians, adept with the colorful phrase, TR was pugnacious and confrontational, while FDR was suave and conciliatory—qualities that appealed strongly to a people traumatized by one of the greatest crises in American history.

FDR:
Politician in a Wheelchair Infantile paralysis, while putting steel braces on Franklin Roosevelt’s legs, put additional steel into his soul. Until 1921, when the dread disease struck, young Roosevelt— tall (six feet two inches), athletic, and handsome— 
 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





