Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 To galvanize the country, Wilson would have to proclaim more gloriﬁed aims. Radiating the spiritual fervor of his Presbyterian ancestors, he declared the supremely ambitious goal of a crusade “to make the world safe for democracy.” Brandishing the sword of righteousness, Wilson virtually hypnotized the nation with his lofty ideals. He contrasted the selﬁsh war aims of the other belligerents, Allied and enemy alike, with America’s shining altruism. America, he preached, did not ﬁght for the sake of riches or territorial conquest. The Republic sought only to shape an international order in which democracy could ﬂourish without fear of power-crazed autocrats and militarists. In Wilsonian idealism the personality of the president and the necessities of history were perfectly matched. The high-minded Wilson genuinely believed in the principles he so eloquently intoned—especially that the modern world could not afford the kind of hyper-destructive war that advanced industrial states were now capable of waging. In this, Wilson’s vision was prophetic. In any case, probably no other appeal could have successfully converted the American people from their historic hostility to involvement in European squabbles. Americans, it seemed, could be either isolationists or crusaders, but nothing in between. Wilson’s appeal worked—perhaps too well. Holding aloft the torch of idealism, the president ﬁ red up the public mind to a fever pitch. “Force, force to the utmost, force without stint or limit,” he cried, while the country responded less elegantly with “Hang the kaiser.” Lost on the gale was Wilson’s earlier plea for “peace without victory.”

 Wilson’s Fourteen Potent Points Wilson quickly came to be recognized as the moral leader of the Allied cause. He scaled a summit of inspiring oratory on January 8, 1918, when he delivered his famed Fourteen Points Address to an enthusiastic Congress. Although one of his primary purposes was to keep reeling Russia in the war, Wilson’s vision inspired all the drooping Allies to make mightier efforts and demoralized the enemy governments by holding out alluring promises to their dissatisﬁed minorities. The ﬁ rst ﬁve of the Fourteen Points were broad in scope. (1) A proposal to abolish secret treaties pleased liberals of all countries. (2) Freedom of the seas appealed to the Germans, as well as to Americans who distrusted British sea power. (3) A removal of economic

 barriers among nations had long been the goal of liberal internationalists every where. (4) A reduction of armament burdens was gratifying to taxpayers in all countries. (5) An adjustment of colonial claims in the interests of both native peoples and the colonizers was reassuring to the anti-imperialists. Indeed Wilson’s pronouncement about colonies was potentially revolutionary. It helped to delegitimize the old empires and opened the road to eventual national independence for millions of “subject peoples.” Other points among the fourteen proved to be no less seductive. They held out the hope of independence (“self-determination”) to oppressed minority groups, such as the Poles, millions of whom lay under the heel of Germany and Austria-Hungary. The capstone point, number fourteen, foreshadowed the League of Nations—an international orga ni zation that Wilson dreamed would provide a system of collective security. Wilson earnestly prayed that this new scheme would effectively guarantee the political independence and territorial integrity of all countries, whether large or small. Yet Wilson’s appealing points, though raising hopes the world over, were not every where applauded. Certain leaders of the Allied nations, with an eye to territorial booty, were less than enthusiastic. Hard-nosed Republicans at home grumbled, and some of them openly mocked the “fourteen commandments” of “God Almighty Wilson.”

Creel Manipulates Minds
 Mobilizing people’s minds for war, both in America and abroad, was an urgent task facing the Washington authorities. For this purpose the Committee on Public Information was created. It was headed by a youngish journalist, George Creel, who, though outspoken and tactless, was gifted with zeal and imagination. His job was to sell America on the war and sell the world on Wilsonian war aims. The Creel orga ni zation, employing some 150,000 workers at home and overseas, proved that words were indeed weapons. It sent out an army of 75,000 “fourminute men”—often longer-winded than that—who delivered countless speeches containing much “patriotic pep.” Creel’s propaganda took varied forms. Posters were splashed on billboards in the “Battle of the Fences,” as artists “rallied to the colors.” Millions of leaﬂets and pamphlets, which contained the most pungent Wilson-

The War for the American Mind




 Anti-German Propaganda The government relied extensively on emotional appeals and hate propaganda to rally support for the First World War, which most Americans regarded as a distant “European” affair. This poster used gendered imagery to evoke the brutal German violation of Belgian neutrality in August 1914.

 Patriotic Persuasion Worried about the public’s enthusiasm for the war, the government employed all the arts of psychology and propaganda to sustain the martial spirit. The prewar song “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a Soldier” was changed to “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a Slacker,” which in turn inspired the cruel parody “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a Sausage.”

 isms, were showered like confetti upon the world. Propaganda booklets with red-white-and-blue covers were printed by the millions. Hang-the-kaiser movies, carrying such titles as The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin and To Hell with the Kaiser, revealed the helmeted “Hun” at his bloodiest. Armwaving conductors by the thousands led huge audiences in songs that poured scorn on the enemy and gloriﬁed the “boys” in uniform. The entire nation, catching the frenzied spirit of a religious revival, burst into song. This was undoubtedly

 America’s singingest war. Most memorable was George M. Cohan’s spine-tingling “Over There”: Over there, over there Send the word, send the word over there, That the Yanks are coming, the Yanks are coming The drums rum-tumming ev’rywhere. Creel typiﬁed American war mobilization, which relied more on aroused passion and voluntary compliance than on formal laws. But he oversold the ideals of Wilson and led the world to expect too much. When



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 the president proved to be a mortal and not a god, the resulting disillusionment both at home and abroad was disastrous.

Enforcing Loyalty and
 Stiﬂing Dissent German Americans numbered over 8 million, counting those with at least one parent foreign-born, out of a total population of 100 million. On the whole they proved to be dependably loyal to the United States. Yet rumormongers were quick to spread tales of spying and sabotage; even triﬂ ing epidemics of diarrhea were blamed on German agents. A few German Americans were tarred, feathered, and beaten; in one extreme case a German Socialist in Illinois was lynched by a drunken mob. As emotion mounted, hysterical hatred of Germans and things Germanic swept the nation. Orchestras found it unsafe to present German-composed music, like that of Wagner or Beethoven. German books were removed from library shelves, and German classes were canceled in high schools and colleges. Sauerkraut became “liberty cabbage,” hamburger “liberty steak.” Even beer became suspect, as patriotic Americans fretted over the loyalty of breweries with names like Schlitz and Pabst. Both the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 reﬂected current fears about Germans and antiwar Americans. Especially visible among the nineteen

Socialist Leader Eugene V. Debs
Addresses an Antiwar Rally in
 1918 For his denunciation of World War I, Debs was convicted under the Espionage Act of 1917 and sent to federal prison. In his courtroom speech defending himself against charges of disloyalty, he passionately declared, “While there is a lower class, I am in it; while there is a criminal element, I am of it; while there is a soul in prison, I am not free.” He ran as a presidential candidate in 1920 while still incarcerated in his cell and received nearly a million votes.

 hundred prosecutions pursued under these laws were antiwar Socialists and members of the radical Industrial Workers of the World (IWW). Kingpin Socialist Eugene V. Debs was convicted under the Espionage Act in 1918 and sentenced to ten years in a federal penitentiary. IWW leader William D. (“Big Bill”) Haywood and ninety-nine associates were similarly convicted. Virtually any criticism of the government could be censored and punished. Some critics claimed the new laws were bending, if not breaking, the First Amendment. But in Schenck v. United States (1919), the Supreme Court afﬁ rmed their legality, arguing that freedom of speech could be revoked when such speech posed a “clear and present danger” to the nation. These prosecutions form an ugly chapter in the history of American civil liberty. With the dawn of peace, presidential pardons were rather freely granted, including President Harding’s to Eugene Debs in 1921. Yet a few victims lingered behind bars into the 1930s.

 The Nation’s Factories Go to War Victory was no foregone conclusion, especially since the Republic, despite ample warning, was caught ﬂatfootedly unready for its leap into global war. The paciﬁstic Wilson had only belatedly backed some mild preparedness mea sures beginning in 1915, including the creation of a civilian Council of National Defense to study problems of economic mobilization. He had

Wartime Workers


 also launched a shipbuilding program (as much to capture the belligerents’ war-disrupted foreign trade as to anticipate America’s possible entry into the war) and endorsed a modest beeﬁ ng-up of the army, which with 100,000 regulars then ranked about ﬁ fteenth among the armies of the world, in the same category with Persia’s. It would take a herculean effort to marshal America’s daunting but disorga nized resources and throw them into the ﬁeld quickly enough to bolster the Allied war effort. Towering obstacles confronted economic mobilizers. Sheer ignorance was among the biggest roadblocks. No one knew precisely how much steel or explosive powder the country was capable of producing. Old ideas also proved to be liabilities, as traditional fears of big government hamstrung efforts to orchestrate the economy from Washington. States’ rights Democrats and businesspeople alike balked at federal economic controls, even though the embattled nation could ill afford the freewheeling, hit-or-miss chaos of the peacetime economy. Late in the war, and after some bruising political battles, Wilson succeeded in imposing some order on this economic confusion. In March 1918 he appointed lone-eagle stock speculator Bernard Baruch to head the War Industries Board. Although the War Industries Board had only feeble formal powers, it set a precedent for the federal government to take a central role in economic planning in moments of crisis. It was disbanded just days after the armistice, and Americans returned to their preference for laissez-faire and a weak central government. But in the midst of the Great Depression of the 1930s, policymakers would look back to World War I agencies like this one as models.

Workers in Wartime
 Spurred by the slogan “Labor Will Win the War,” American workers sweated their way to victory. In part they were driven by the War Department’s “work or ﬁght” rule of 1918, which threatened any unemployed male with being immediately drafted—a powerful discouragement to go on strike. But for the most part, government tried to treat labor fairly. The National War Labor Board, chaired by former president Taft, exerted itself to head off labor disputes that might hamper the war effort. While pressing employers to grant concessions to labor, including high wages and the eight-hour day, the board stopped short of supporting labor’s most im-



Suppressing the Steel Strike: Pittsburgh, 1919
 The big steel producers ferociously resisted the unionization of their industry. In Pittsburgh compliant local ofﬁcials bent to the steel makers’ will and issued an order banning all outdoor meetings of strikers. This mounted policeman enforced the order with a ﬂailing billy club. The steelworkers’ strike eventually failed, leaving the steel industry un-unionized until the New Deal championed labor’s cause in the depression decade of the 1930s.

 portant demand: a government guarantee of the right to organize into unions. Fortunately for the Allied cause, Samuel Gompers and his American Federation of Labor (AF of L) loyally supported the war, though some smaller and more radical labor orga ni zations, including the Industrial Workers of the World, did not. The IWW, known as the “Wobblies” and sometimes derided as the “I Won’t Works,” engineered some of the most damaging industrial sabotage, and not without reason. As transient laborers in such industries as fruit and lumber, the Wobblies were victims of some of the shabbiest working conditions in the country. When they protested, many were viciously beaten, arrested, or run out of town. Mainstream labor’s loyalty was rewarded. At war’s end, the AF of L had more than doubled its membership, to over 3 million, and in the most heavily unionized sectors—coal mining, manufacturing, and



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 American strikebreakers to keep the mills running. After bitter confrontations that left more than a dozen workers dead, the steel strike collapsed, a grievous setback that crippled the union movement for more than a decade. The black workers who entered the steel mills in 1919 were but a fraction of the tens of thousands of southern blacks drawn to the North in wartime by the magnet of war-industry employment. These migrants made up the small-scale beginnings of a great northward African American trek that would eventually grow to massive proportions. Their sudden appearance in previously all-white areas sometimes sparked interracial violence. An explosive riot in East St. Louis, Missouri, in July 1917 left nine whites and at least forty blacks dead. An equally gruesome race riot ripped through Chicago. The wartime Windy City was taut with racial tension as a growing black population expanded into white working-class neighborhoods and as African Americans found jobs as strikebreakers in meatpacking plants. Triggered by an incident at a bathing beach in July 1919, a reign of terror descended on the city for nearly two weeks. Black and white gangs roamed Chicago’s streets, eventually kill ing ﬁ fteen whites and twenty-three blacks. Chicago Race Riot, 1919 The policeman apparently arrived too late to spare this victim from being pelted by stones from an angry mob.

 transportation—real wages (after adjusting for inﬂation) had risen more than 20 percent over prewar levels. A new day seemed to be dawning for the longstruggling union movement. Yet labor harbored grievances. Recognition of the right to organize still eluded labor’s grasp. Wartime inﬂation—prices more than doubled between 1914 and 1920—threatened to eclipse wage gains. Not even the call of patriotism and Wilsonian idealism could defuse all labor disputes. Some six thousand strikes, several stained by blood, broke out in the war years. In 1919 the greatest strike in American history rocked the steel industry. More than a quarter of a million steelworkers walked off their jobs in a bid to force their employers to recognize their right to organize and bargain collectively. The steel companies resisted mercilessly. They refused to negotiate with union representatives and brought in thirty thousand African

Suffering Until Suffrage
 Women also heeded the call of patriotism and opportunity. Thousands of female workers ﬂooded into factories and ﬁelds, taking up jobs vacated by men who left the assembly line for the frontline. But the war split the women’s movement deeply. Many progressive-era feminists were paciﬁsts, inclined to oppose the participation both of America in the war and women in the war effort. This group found a voice in the National Woman’s party, led by Quaker activist Alice Paul, which demonstrated against “Kaiser Wilson” with marches and hunger strikes. But the larger part of the suffrage movement, represented by the National American Woman Suffrage Association, supported Wilson’s war. Leaders echoed Wilson’s justiﬁcation for ﬁghting by arguing that women must take part in the war effort to earn a role in shaping the peace. The ﬁght for democracy abroad was women’s best hope for winning true democracy at home. War mobilization gave new momentum to the suffrage ﬁght. Impressed by women’s war work, President

Suffrage for Women


 Wilson endorsed woman suffrage as “a vitally necessary war mea sure.” In 1917 New York voted for suffrage at the state level; Michigan, Oklahoma, and South Dakota followed. The next year, governments in Great Britain, Austria, Hungary, and Germany extended the suffrage to women. Not long after, the United States followed suit. In 1920, more than seventy years after the ﬁ rst calls for suffrage at Seneca Falls, the Nineteenth Amendment was ratiﬁed, giving all American women the right to vote. (See the Appendix and Table 30.1.) Despite political victory, women’s wartime economic gains proved ﬂeeting. Although a permanent Women’s Bureau did emerge after the war in the Department of Labor to protect women in the workplace, most women workers soon gave up their war jobs. Meanwhile, Congress afﬁ rmed its support for women in their traditional role as mothers when it passed the Sheppard-Towner Maternity Act of 1921, providing federally ﬁ nanced instruction in maternal and infant



 In an open address to Congress in 1917, suffragist Carrie Chapman Catt (1859–1947) capitalized on the idealism of the day and invoked the founding principles of American democracy in arguing the case for women’s right to vote:

“


 How can our nation escape the logic it has never failed to follow, when its last unenfranchised class calls for the vote? Behold our Uncle Sam ﬂoating the banner with one hand, ‘Taxation without representation is tyranny,’ and with the other seizing the billions of dollars paid in taxes by women to whom he refuses ‘representation.’ . . . Is there a single man who can justify such inequality of treatment, such outrageous discrimination? Not one.

 In the Trenches U.S. Army nurses worked on the frontlines in France in 1918. The war also opened many opportunities for women’s work on the home front, but the conﬂict ended too soon for many women to secure a permanent foothold in occupations traditionally dominated by men.

”




Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


Suffragists Picket the White House, 1917
 Militant feminists sometimes handcuffed themselves to the White House fence to dramatize their appeal for the vote to the president.

 Table 30.1 A Chronology of Women’s Right to Vote in National Elections in Selected Nations



New Zealand
 Australia (white women only until Aborigines included in 1962) Finland Denmark, Iceland Austria, Canada (women of British and French extraction only until 1950), Germany, Hungary, Poland, Russian Federation, United Kingdom (only women who were married, householders, or university graduates age 30 or over until 1928) Netherlands, Sweden United States, Czechoslovakia Mongolia South Africa (whites only until 1994), Turkey Spain (but women lost the vote under the dictator Francisco Franco, 1936–1976) Brazil, Cuba France Italy, Japan Yugoslavia Argentina, Mexico, Pakistan Israel, South Korea China, Syrian Arab Republic Haiti, India Greece, Lebanon Egypt Iran Afghanistan (revoked under Taliban rule, 1996–2001) Switzerland Jordan Kuwait

 [Sources: Caroline Daley and Melanie Nolan, eds., Suffrage and Beyond: International Feminist Perspectives (1994); http://www.ipu.org/english/ issues/wmndocs/suffrage.htm; About.com, Women’s History, International Woman Suffrage Timeline, http://womenshistory.about .com/od/suffrage/a/intl_timeline.htm.]

 health care. In doing so, it also expanded the responsibility of the federal government for family welfare. Feminists continued to ﬂex their political muscle in the postwar decade, pressing for more laws to protect women in the workplace and prohibit child labor. Complete success often eluded them in those crusades, but the developments of the World War I era nevertheless foreshadowed a future when women’s wage-labor and political power would reshape the American way of life.

Forging a War Economy
 Mobilization relied as much on the heated emotions of patriotism as on the cool majesty of the laws. The largely voluntary character of economic war orga ni zation testiﬁed to ocean-insulated America’s safe distance from the ﬁghting—as well as to the still-modest scale of government powers in the progressive-era Republic. But as the war wore on, government took greater command of the nation’s resources to secure an Allied victory. As the larder of democracy, America had to feed itself and its allies. By a happy inspiration, the man chosen to head the Food Administration was the Quaker-humanitarian Herbert C. Hoover. He was already considered a hero because he had successfully led a massive charitable drive to feed the starving people of war-racked Belgium. In common with other American war administrators, Hoover preferred to rely on voluntary compliance rather than on compulsory edicts. He deliberately rejected issuing ration cards, a practice used in Europe. Instead he waged a whirlwind propaganda campaign through posters, billboards, newspapers, pulpits, and

Doughboys in France


 movies. To save food for export, Hoover proclaimed wheatless Wednesdays and meatless Tuesdays—all on a voluntary basis. Even children, when eating apples, were urged to be “patriotic to the core.” The country soon broke out in a rash of vegetable “victory gardens,” as perspiring patriots hoed their way to victory in backyards and vacant lots. Congress severely restricted the use of foodstuffs for manufacturing alcoholic beverages, and the war-spawned spirit of self-denial helped accelerate the wave of prohibition that was sweeping the country. Many leading brewers were German-descended, and this taint made the drive against alcohol all the more popular. The reformers’ dream of a saloonless nation was ﬁ nally



 achieved—temporarily—in 1919 with the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment, prohibiting all alcoholic drinks. Thanks to the fervent patriotic wartime spirit, Hoover’s voluntary approach worked. Farm production increased by one-fourth, and food exports to the Allies tripled in volume. Hoover’s methods were widely imitated in other war agencies. The Fuel Administration exhorted Americans to save fuel with “heat less Mondays,” “lightless nights,” and “gasless Sundays.” The Treasury Department sponsored huge parades and invoked slogans like “Halt the Hun” to promote four great Liberty Loan drives, followed by a Victory Loan campaign in 1919. Together these efforts netted the then-fantastic sum of about $21 billion, or twothirds of the current cost of the war to the United States. The remainder was raised by increased taxes, which, unlike the loan subscriptions, were obligatory. (The ultimate bill, including interest and veterans’ beneﬁts, mounted to some $112 billion.) Pressures of various kinds, patriotic and otherwise, were used to sell bonds. The unfortunate German American who could not display a Liberty Bond button might ﬁ nd his or her house bedaubed with yellow paint. A number of reluctant investors in war bonds were roughly handled. In at least one instance, a man signed for a bond with a rope around his neck. Despite the Wilson administration’s preference for voluntary means of mobilizing the economy, over the course of the war it expanded the federal government in size and power. The War Industries Board issued production quotas, allocated raw materials, and set prices for government purchases. Following indescribable trafﬁc snarls in late 1917, Washington took over the railroads. Time itself came under Uncle Sam’s control when the entire country was ordered to observe daylight saving time to extend the workday and save on fuel.

Making Plowboys
 into Doughboys

 Food for Thought Wartime agencies ﬂooded the country with posters like this in 1917–1918, exhorting women on the home front to “grow their own” and thus ease the pressure on food supplies.

 Most citizens, at the outset, did not dream of sending a mighty force to France. As far as ﬁghting went, America would use its navy to uphold freedom of the seas. It would continue to ship war materials to the Allies and supply them with loans, which ﬁ nally totaled nearly $10 billion. But in April and May of 1917, the European associates laid their cards on the table. They confessed that they were scraping the bottom not only of their money chests but, more ominously, of



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 their manpower barrels. A huge American army would have to be raised, trained, and transported, or the whole western front would collapse. Conscription was the only answer to the need for raising an immense army with all possible speed. Wilson disliked a draft, as did many other Americans with Civil War memories, but he eventually accepted and eloquently supported conscription as a disagreeable and temporary necessity. The proposed draft bill immediately ran into a barrage of criticism in Congress. A congressman from Missouri, deploring compulsion, cried out in protest that there was “precious little difference between a conscript and a convict.” Prophets of doom predicted that on draft-registration day, the streets would run red with blood. At length Congress—six weeks after declaring war—grudgingly got around to passing conscription. The draft act required the registration of all males between the ages of eighteen and forty-ﬁve. No “draft dodger” could purchase his exemption or hire a substitute, as in the days of the Civil War, though the law exempted men in key industries, such as shipbuilding.

 Ignoring grisly tales of the agonies of trench warfare, many young American men saw an opportunity for adventure and seized it. Author John Dos Passos (1896–1970) recollected how he felt going off to war in 1917:

“


 We had spent our boyhood in the afterglow of the peaceful nineteenth century. . . . What was war like? We wanted to see with our own eyes. We ﬂocked into the volunteer services. I respected the conscientious objectors, and occasionally felt I should take that course myself, but hell, I wanted to see the show.

”


 The draft machinery, on the whole, worked effectively. Registration day proved to be a day of patriotic pilgrimages to ﬂag-draped registration centers, and the sign-up saw no shedding of blood, as some had gloomily predicted. Despite precautions, some 337,000 “slackers” escaped the draft, and about 4,000 conscientious objectors were excused. Within a few frantic months, the army grew to over 4 million men. For the ﬁ rst time, women were admitted to the armed forces; some 11,000 to the navy and 269 to the marines. African Americans also served in the armed forces, though in strictly segregated units and usually under white ofﬁcers. Reﬂecting racial attitudes of the time, military authorities hesitated to train black men for combat, and the majority of black soldiers were assigned to “construction battalions” or put to work unloading ships. Recruits were supposed to receive six months of training in America and two more months overseas. But so great was the urgency that many doughboys were swept swiftly into battle scarcely knowing how to handle a riﬂe, much less a bayonet.

Fighting in France—Belatedly


Miracles in Shipbuilding


 Russia’s collapse underscored the need for haste. The communistic Bolsheviks, after seizing power late in 1917, ultimately withdrew their beaten country from the “capitalistic” war early in 1918. This sudden defection released hundreds of thousands of battle-tested Germans from the eastern front facing Russia for the western front in France, where, for the ﬁ rst time in the



Stopping the German Juggernaut


 war, they were developing a dangerous superiority in manpower. Berlin’s calculations as to American tardiness were surprisingly accurate. Germany had counted on knocking out Britain six months after the declaration of unlimited submarine warfare, long before America could get into the struggle. No really effective American ﬁghting force reached France until about a year after Congress declared war. Berlin had also reckoned on the inability of the Americans to transport their army, assuming that they were able to raise one. Here again the German predictions were not far from the mark, as shipping shortages plagued the Allies. Nevertheless, France gradually began to bustle with American doughboys (see Map 30.1). The ﬁ rst trainees to reach the front were used as replacements in the Allied armies and were generally deployed in quiet sectors with the British and French. The newcomers soon made friends with the French girls—or tried to—and one of the most sung-about women in history was the fabled “Mademoiselle from Armentières.” One of the printable stanzas ran, She was true to me, she was true to you, She was true to the whole damn army, too.

 Battling Venereal Disease The American military waged a half-hearted war on rampant venereal disease. 0º

Interactive Map


 ver

 FLA

 ND

E


 s Ly

Ypres


 ra

N ETH .


 tR eld Brussels Sch .

Do


 it

 of

RS R

.


Dover


St


B ELGI U M

.
 se R M eu

So
 m m

 eR

.


Somme
Offensive


Amiens
Cantigny
May 28, 1918
 in e

Central Powers
 Neutral nations German spring offensive, 1918

Aisne-Marne
Offensive


GE R M A N Y

 ne R. Ais

Verdun
Feb. 21–Dec. 18, 1916


Belleau Wood


R.
June 6–25, 1918 

Versailles


Allied Powers


 se Mo

 LUX .

Sedan


Paris
M


 e R. ar n

 Château-Thierry May 31– June 4, 1918

 LO

Meuse-Argonne
Sept. 26–
Nov. 11, 1918
Second Battle
 of the Marne July 18– Aug. 6, 1918 F R ANCE

 RR

AI N

E


St. Mihiel
Sept. 12–16, 1918


A L S AC E


50Nº


 lle

Eng lis h
Cha n n el


R.


Lys
Offensive


Se


Map 30.1 Major U.S.
Operations in France, 1918
 One doughboy recorded in his diary his baptism of ﬁre at St. Mihiel: “Hiked through dark woods. No lights allowed, guided by holding on the pack of the man ahead. Stumbled through underbrush for about half mile into an open ﬁeld where we waited in soaking rain until about 10:00 P.M. We then started on our hike to the St. Mihiel front, arriving on the crest of a hill at 1:00 A.M. I saw a sight which I shall never forget. It was the zero hour and in one instant the entire front as far as the eye could reach in either direction was a sheet of ﬂame, while the heavy artillery made the earth quake.”

5Eº


GR EAT B R I TA I N

N


 American offensive

 Stabilized front, 1914–1917

Armistice Line, Nov. 11, 1918


Farthest German
 advance, July 18, 1918

 Deadlocked battle

 Allied victory





100 Km.


S WIT Z .




100 Mi.




Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 Not surprisingly, American soldiers suffered from high rates of venereal disease, which the army only contributed to by avoiding the subject. American operations were not conﬁ ned solely to France; small detachments fought in Belgium, Italy, and notably Russia. The United States, hoping to keep stores of munitions from falling into German hands when Bolshevik Russia quit ﬁghting, contributed some 5,000 troops to an Allied invasion of northern Russia at Archangel. Wilson likewise sent nearly 10,000 troops to Siberia as part of an Allied expedition, which included more than 70,000 Japa nese. Major American purposes were to prevent Japan from getting a stranglehold on Siberia, to rescue some 45,000 marooned Czechoslovak troops, and to snatch military supplies from Bolshevik control. Sharp ﬁghting at Archangel and in Siberia involved casualties on both sides, including several hundred Americans. The Bolsheviks long resented these “capitalistic” interventions, which they regarded as high-handed efforts to suffocate their infant communist revolution in its cradle.

America Helps Hammer
 the “Hun” The dreaded German drive on the western front exploded in the spring of 1918. Spearheaded by about half a million troops, the enemy rolled forward with terrifying momentum. So dire was the peril that the

 Allied nations for the ﬁ rst time united under a supreme commander, the quiet French marshal Foch, whose axiom was “To make war is to attack.” Until then the Allies had been ﬁghting imperfectly coordinated actions. At last the ill-trained “Yanks” were coming—and not a moment too soon. Late in May 1918, the German juggernaut, smashing to within forty miles of Paris, threatened to knock out France. Newly arrived American troops, numbering fewer than thirty thousand, were thrown into the breach at Château-Thierry, right in the teeth of the German advance. This was a historic moment—the ﬁ rst signiﬁcant engagement of American troops in a European war. Battle-fatigued French soldiers watched incredulously as the roads ﬁ lled with endless truckloads of American doughboys, singing New World songs at the top of their voices, a seemingly inexhaustible ﬂood of fresh and gleaming youth. With their arrival it was clear that a new American giant had arisen in the West to replace the dying Russian titan in the East. American weight in the scales was now being felt on both sides of the conﬂ ict (see Figure 30.1). By July 1918 the awesome German drive had spent its force, and keyed-up American men participated in a Foch counteroffensive in the Second Battle of the Marne. This engagement marked the beginning of a German withdrawal that was never effectively reversed. In September 1918 nine American divisions (about 243,000 men) joined four French divisions to push the Germans

 Gassed, by John Singer Sargent The noted artist captures the horror of trench warfare in World War I. The enemy was often distant and unseen, and death came impersonally from gas or artillery ﬁre. American troops, entering the line only in the war’s ﬁnal days, were only brieﬂy exposed to this kind of brutal ﬁghting.

 “Mademoiselle from Armentières” ome familiar songs, such as Julia Ward Howe’s stirring Civil War–era melody “Battle Hymn of the Republic,” were penned by known composers and have well-established scores and lyrics. But many ballads have no speciﬁc author. Songwriters may ﬁt new verses to known tunes, but the songs essentially grow out of the soil of popular culture and take on a life of their own. “Yankee Doodle Dandy,” for example, originated during the seventeenthcentury Eng lish Civil War, was adapted by the American revolutionaries more than a century later, and was parodied by Southerners during the American Civil War:

S


 Yankee Doodle had a mind To whip the Southern “traitors,” Because they didn’t choose to live On codﬁsh and potaters. “Stagger Lee,” or “Stagolee,” a blues ballad supposedly based on a murder in Memphis in the 1930s, has been played in countless renditions, with its homicidal subject variously portrayed as a ruthless badman or a civil rights hero. This process of accretion and adaptation can furnish valuable clues to historians about changing sentiments and sensibilities, just as the ballads themselves give expression to feelings not always evident in the of ﬁcial record. Folklorist Alan Lomax spent a lifetime tracking down American ballads, documenting layers of life and experience not usually excavated by traditional scholars. In the case of the First World War’s most notorious song, “Mademoiselle from Armentières” (or “Hinky Dinky, Parley-Voo?”), he compiled from various sources more than six hundred soldier-authored stanzas, some of which are reproduced here (others he delicately described as “not mailable”). What fresh—and irreverent—perspectives do they reveal about the soldier’seye view of military life?

 Mademoiselle from Armentières, She hadn’t been kissed in forty years. She might have been young for all we knew, When Napoleon ﬂopped at Waterloo. . . . You’ll never get your Croix de Guerre, If you never wash your underwear. . . . The French, they are a funny race, They ﬁght with their feet and save their face. The cootie [louse] is the national bug of France. The cootie’s found all over France, No matter where you hang your pants. . . . Oh, the seventy-seventh went over the top, A sous lieutenant, a Jew, and a Wop. . . . The ofﬁcers get all the steak, And all we get is the belly-ache. The general got a Croix de Guerre, The son-of-a-gun was never there. . . . There’s many and many a married man, Wants to go back to France again. ’Twas a hell of a war as we recall, But still ’twas better than none at all.

 Source: Excerpt from John A. Lomax and Alan Lomax, American Ballads and Folk Songs, pp. 560. Courtesy of the Alan Lomax Archive





Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 upon their crumbling lines from balloons, shells, and rockets.

MEN KILLED IN BATTLE
Russia 
1,700,000


Germany


1,600,000


France


1,385,000


British Empire


900,000


Austria


800,000
462,000
53,000


Italy
United States


Figure 30.1 Approximate Comparative Losses in
World War I


 from the St. Mihiel salient, a German dagger in France’s ﬂank. The Americans, dissatisﬁed with merely bolstering the British and French, had meanwhile been demanding a separate army. General John J. (“Black Jack”) Pershing was ﬁ nally assigned a front of eighty-ﬁve miles, stretching northwestward from the Swiss border to meet the French lines. As part of the last mighty Allied assault, involving several million men, Pershing’s army undertook the Meuse-Argonne offensive, from September 26 to November 11, 1918. One objective was to cut the German railroad lines feeding the western front. This battle, the most gargantuan thus far in American history, lasted forty-seven days and engaged 1.2 million American troops. With especially heavy ﬁghting in the rugged Argonne Forest, the killed and wounded mounted to 120,000, or 10 percent of the Americans involved. The slow progress and severe losses from machine guns resulted in part from inadequate training, in part from dashing open-ﬁeld tactics, with the bayonet liberally employed. Tennessee-bred Alvin C. York, a member of an antiwar religious sect, became a hero when he single-handedly killed 20 Germans and captured 132 more. Victory was in sight—and fortunately so. The slowly advancing American armies in France were eating up their supplies so rapidly that they were in grave danger of running short. But the battered Germans were ready to stagger out of the trenches and cry “Kamerad” (Comrade). Their allies were deserting them, the British blockade was causing critical food shortages, and the sledgehammer blows of the Allies pummeled them relentlessly. Propaganda leaﬂets, containing seductive Wilsonian promises, rained down

The Fourteen Points
Disarm Germany
 Berlin was now ready to hoist the white ﬂag. Warned of imminent defeat by the generals, it turned to the presumably softhearted Wilson in October 1918, seeking a peace based on the Fourteen Points. In stern responses the president made it clear that the kaiser must be thrown overboard before an armistice could be negotiated. War-weary Germans, whom Wilson had been trying to turn against their “military masters,” took the hint. The kaiser was forced to ﬂee to Holland, where he lived out his remaining twenty-three years, “unwept, unhonored, and unhung.” The exhausted Germans were through. They laid down their arms at eleven o’clock on the eleventh day of the eleventh month of 1918, and an eerie, numbing silence fell over the western front. War-taut America burst into a delirium of around-the-clock rejoicing, as the war to end wars had ended. But the costs exceeded comprehension: nearly 9 million soldiers had died, and

 German “Repentance,” 1918 A prophetic reﬂection of the view that the failure to smash Germany completely would lead to another world war.

Wilson the Peacemaker


 Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919) favored the Germans’ unconditional surrender. Referring to Wilson’s practice of drafting diplomatic notes on his own typewriter, Roosevelt telegraphed several senators (October 24, 1918),

“


 Let us dictate peace by the hammering guns and not chat about peace to the accompaniment of clicking typewriters. The language of the fourteen points and the subsequent statements explaining or qualifying them are thoroughly mischievous.

”


 more than 20 million had suffered grievous wounds. To make matters worse, some 30 million people perished in a worldwide inﬂuenza pandemic in 1918–1919. Over 550,000 Americans—more than ten times the number of U.S. combat casualties—died from the ﬂu. The United States’ main contributions to the ultimate victory had been foodstuffs, munitions, credits, oil for this ﬁ rst mechanized war, and manpower—but not battleﬁeld victories. The Yanks fought only two ma-



 jor battles, at St. Mihiel and the Meuse-Argonne, both in the last two months of the four-year war, and they were still grinding away in the Meuse-Argonne, well short of their objectives, when the war ended. It was the prospect of endless U.S. troop reserves, rather than America’s actual military per for mance, that eventually demoralized the Germans. Ironically enough, General Pershing in some ways depended more on the Allies than they depended on him. His army purchased more of its supplies in Europe than it shipped from the United States. Fewer than ﬁve hundred of Pershing’s artillery pieces were of American manufacture. Virtually all of his aircraft were provided by the British and French. Britain and France transported a majority of the doughboys to Europe. The United States, in short, was no arsenal of democracy in this war; that role awaited it in the next global conﬂ ict, two decades later.

Wilson Steps Down
 from Olympus Woodrow Wilson had helped to win the war. What part would he now play in shaping the peace? Expectations ran extravagantly high. As the ﬁghting in Europe crashed to a close, the American president towered at the peak of his popularity and power. In lonely huts in the mountains of Italy, candles burned before posterportraits of the revered American prophet. In Poland starry-eyed university students would meet in the streets, clasp hands, and utter only one word: “Wilson.” No other man had ever occupied so dizzy a pinnacle as moral leader of the world. Wilson also had behind him the prestige of victory and the economic resources of the mightiest nation on earth. But at this

 Home from the War, 1919 Most black troops in World War I were denied combat duty and served as laborers and stevedores, but this wounded veteran had seen some tough ﬁghting—though in a segregated unit, the 369th Colored Infantry Regiment, also known as the “Hellﬁghters of Harlem.” Segregation followed black servicemen even into death. When Congress appropriated money in 1930 to send “Gold Star Mothers” to visit the graves of their slain soldier-sons in France, it provided for separate ships, hotels, and trains for African American women. Several black mothers, preferring “to remain at home and retain our honor and self-respect,” reluctantly refused to make the trip.



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 fateful moment, his sureness of touch deserted him, and he began to make a series of tragic fumbles. Under the slogan “Politics Is Adjourned,” partisan political strife had been kept below the surface during the war crisis. Hoping to strengthen his hand at the Paris peace table, Wilson broke the truce by personally appealing for a Democratic victory in the congressional elections of November 1918. But the maneuver backﬁ red when voters instead returned a narrow Republican majority to Congress. Having staked his reputation on the outcome, Wilson went to Paris as a diminished leader. Unlike all the parliamentary statesmen at the table, he did not command a legislative majority at home. Wilson’s decision to go in person to Paris to help make the peace infuriated Republicans. At that time no president had traveled to Europe, and Wilson’s journey looked to his critics like ﬂamboyant grandstanding. He further rufﬂed Republican feathers when he snubbed the Senate in assembling his peace delegation and neglected to include a single Republican senator in his ofﬁcial party. The logical choice was the new chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, slender and aristocratically bewhiskered Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, a Harvard Ph.D. But including Lodge would have been problematic for the president. The senator’s mind, quipped one critic, was like the soil of his native New Eng land: “naturally barren but highly cultivated.” Wilson loathed him, and the feeling was hotly reciprocated. An accomplished author, Lodge had been known as the “scholar in poli-

Wilson in Dover, England,
 1919 Hailed by many Europeans in early 1919 as the savior of the Western world, Wilson was a fallen idol only a few months later, when Americans repudiated the peace treaty he had helped to craft.

 tics” until Wilson came on the scene. The two men were at daggers drawn, personally and politically.

An Idealist Amid
 the Imperialists Woodrow Wilson, the great prophet arisen in the West, received tumultuous welcomes from the masses of France, Eng land, and Italy late in 1918 and early in 1919. They saw in his idealism the promise of a better world. But the statesmen of France and Italy were careful to keep the new messiah at arm’s length from worshipful crowds. He might so arouse the people as to prompt them to overthrow their leaders and upset ﬁ nespun imperialistic plans. The Paris Conference of great and small nations fell into the hands of an inner clique, known as the Big Four. Wilson, representing the richest and freshest great power, more or less occupied the driver’s seat. He was joined by genial Premier Vittorio Orlando of Italy and brilliant Prime Minister David Lloyd George of Britain. Perhaps the most realistic of the quartet was cynical, hard-bitten Premier Georges Clemenceau of France, the seventy-eight-year-old “organizer of victory” known as “the Tiger.” Speed was urgent when the conference opened on January 18, 1919. Europe seemed to be slipping into anarchy; the red tide of communism was licking westward from Bolshevist Russia.

The Treaty of Versailles




 The English science ﬁction writer H. G. Wells (1866– 1946), soon a strong proponent of the League of Nations, spoke for many Europeans when he praised Woodrow Wilson in 1917:

“


 In all the world there is no outstanding ﬁgure to which the world will listen, there is no man audible in all the world, in Japan as well as Germany and Rome as well as Boston—except the President of the United States.

”


 Wilson’s ultimate goal was a world parliament to be known as the League of Nations, but he ﬁ rst bent his energies to preventing any vengeful parceling out of the former colonies and protectorates of the vanquished powers. (He was less attentive to the fate of colonies belonging to the victorious French and English.) Wilson tried to force through a compromise between naked imperialism and Wilsonian idealism. The victors would not take possession of the conquered territory outright, but would receive it as trustees of the League of Nations. Strategic Syria, for example, was awarded to France, and oil-rich Iraq went to Britain. In practice this half-loaf solution was little more than the old prewar colonialism, thinly disguised, although in the decades to come, anticolonial independence movements would wield the Wilsonian ideal of selfdetermination against their imperial occupiers. Meanwhile, Wilson had been serving as midwife for the League of Nations, which he envisioned as containing an assembly with seats for all nations and a council to be controlled by the great powers. He gained a signal victory over the skeptical Old World diplomats in February 1919, when they agreed to make the League Covenant, Wilson’s brainchild, an integral part of the ﬁ nal peace treaty. At one point he spoke with such ardor for his plan that even the hard-boiled newspaper reporters forgot to take notes.

Hammering Out the Treaty
 Domestic duties now required Wilson to make a quick trip to America, where ugly storms were brewing in the Senate. Certain Republican senators, Lodge in the lead, were sharpening their knives for Wilson. To them the League was either a useless “sewing circle” or

Pilgrim Landing in America, 1919


 an overpotent “super-state.” Their hard core was composed of a dozen or so militant isolationists, led by Senators William Borah of Idaho and Hiram Johnson of Cal i fornia, who were known as irreconcilables or “the Battalion of Death.” Thirty-nine Republican senators or senatorselect—enough to defeat the treaty—proclaimed that the Senate would not approve the League of Nations in its existing imperfect form. These difﬁculties delighted Wilson’s Allied adversaries in Paris. They were now in a stronger bargaining position because Wilson would have to beg them for changes in the covenant that would safeguard the Monroe Doctrine and other American interests dear to the senators. As soon as Wilson was back in Paris, the hardheaded Clemenceau pressed French demands for the German-inhabited Rhineland and the Saar Valley, a rich coal area. Faced with ﬁerce Wilsonian opposition to this violation of self-determination, France settled for a compromise whereby the Saar basin would remain under the League of Nations for ﬁ fteen years, and



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 then a popular vote would determine its fate.* In exchange for dropping its demands for the Rhineland, France got the Security Treaty, in which both Britain and America pledged to come to its aid in the event of another German invasion. The French later felt betrayed when this pact was quickly pigeonholed by the U.S. Senate, which shied away from all entangling alliances. Wilson’s next battle was with Italy over Fiume, a valuable seaport inhabited by both Italians and Yugoslavs. When Italy demanded Fiume, Wilson insisted that the seaport go to Yugoslavia and appealed over the heads of Italy’s leaders to the country’s masses. The maneuver fell ﬂat. The Italian delegates went home in a huff, while the Italian masses turned savagely against Wilson. Another crucial struggle was with Japan over China’s Shandong (Shantung) Peninsula and the German islands in the Paciﬁc, which the Japa nese had seized during the war. Japan was conceded the strategic Paciﬁc islands under a League of Nations mandate,† but Wilson staunchly opposed Japa nese control of Shandong as a violation of self-determination for its 30 million Chinese residents. But when the Japa nese threatened to walk out, Wilson reluctantly accepted a compromise whereby Japan kept Germany’s economic holdings in Shandong and pledged to return the peninsula to China at a later date. The Chinese were outraged by this imperialistic solution, while Clemenceau jeered that Wilson “talked like Jesus Christ and acted like Lloyd George.”

The Peace Treaty That
Bred a New War
 A completed Treaty of Versailles, after more weeks of wrangling, was handed to the Germans in June 1919— almost literally on the point of a bayonet. Excluded from the settlement negotiations at Paris, Germany had capitulated in the hope that it would be granted a peace based on the Fourteen Points. A careful analysis of the treaty shows that only about four of the twenty-three original Wilsonian points and subse-

 *The Saar population voted overwhelmingly to rejoin Germany in 1935. †In due time the Japa nese illegally fortiﬁed these islands—the Marshalls, Marianas, and Carolines—and used them as bases against the United States in World War II.

 quent principles were fully honored. Vengeance, not reconciliation, was the treaty’s dominant tone. Loud and bitter cries of betrayal burst from German throats—charges that Adolf Hitler would soon reiterate during his meteoric rise to power. Wilson, of course, was guilty of no conscious betrayal. But the Allied powers were torn by conﬂ icting aims, many of them sanctioned by secret treaties. There had to be compromise at Paris, or there would be no agreement. Faced with hard realities, Wilson was forced to compromise away some of his less cherished Fourteen Points in order to salvage the more precious League of Nations. He was much like the mother who had to throw her sickly younger children to the pursuing wolves to save her sturdy ﬁ rstborn. A troubled Wilson was not happy with the results. Greeted a few months earlier with frenzied acclaim in Europe, he was now a fallen idol, condemned alike by disillusioned liberals and frustrated imperialists. He was keenly aware of some of the injustices that had been forced into the treaty. But he was hoping that the League of Nations—a potent League with America as a leader—would iron out the inequities. Yet the loudly condemned treaty had much to commend it. Not least among its merits was its liberation of millions of minority peoples, such as the Poles, from the yoke of imperial dynasties. Wilson’s disappointments and his critics to the contrary, the settlement was almost certainly a fairer one because he had gone to Paris.

The Domestic Parade
 of Prejudice Returning for the second and ﬁ nal time to America, Wilson sailed straight into a political typhoon. Isolationists raised a whirlwind of protest against the treaty, especially against Wilson’s commitment to usher the United States into his newfangled League of Nations. Invoking the revered advice of Washington and Jefferson, they wanted no part of any “entangling alliance.” Nor were the isolationists Wilson’s only problem. Critics showered the Treaty of Versailles with abuse from all sides. Rabid Hun-haters, regarding the pact as not harsh enough, voiced their discontent. Principled liberals, like the editors of the New York Nation, thought it too harsh—and a gross betrayal to boot. German Americans, Italian Americans, and others whom Wilson termed “hyphenated Americans” were aroused be-

 The Defeat of Wilson's Treaty

 Contentious Nuptials Woodrow Wilson’s visionary effort to end more than a century of American aloofness from world affairs met vigorous opposition from traditional isolationists, especially in the U.S. Senate. Senators eventually refused to ratify the Versailles Treaty, shattering Wilson’s dream of making the United States a more engaged international actor.

 cause the peace settlement was not sufﬁciently favorable to their native lands. Irish Americans, traditional twisters of the British lion’s tail, also denounced the League. They felt that with the additional votes of the ﬁve overseas British dominions, it gave Britain undue inﬂuence, and they feared that it could be used to force the United States to crush any rising for Irish independence. Crowds of Irish American zealots hissed and booed Wilson’s name.

 Wilson’s Tour and Collapse (1919) Despite mounting discontent, the president had reason to feel optimistic. When he brought home the treaty, with the “Wilson League” ﬁ rmly riveted in as



 Part I, a strong majority of the people still seemed favorable. At this time—early July 1919—Senator Lodge had no real hope of defeating the Treaty of Versailles. His strategy was merely to amend it in such a way as to “Americanize,” “Republicanize,” or “senatorialize” it. The Republicans could then claim political credit for the changes. Lodge effectively used delay to muddle and divide public opinion. He read the entire 264-page treaty aloud in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and held protracted hearings in which people of various nationalities aired their grievances. Wilson fretted increasingly as the hot summer of 1919 wore on. The bulky pact was bogged down in the Senate, while the nation was drifting into confusion and apathy. He therefore decided to take his case to the country in a spectacular speechmaking tour. He would appeal over the heads of the Senate to the sovereign people—as he often had in the past. The strenuous barnstorming campaign was undertaken in the face of protests by physicians and friends. Wilson had never been robust; he had entered the White House nearly seven years before with a stomach pump and with headache pills for his neuritis. His frail body had begun to sag under the strain of partisan strife, a global war, and a stressful peace conference. But he declared that he was willing to die, like the soldiers he had sent into battle, for the sake of the new world order. The presidential tour, begun in September 1919, got off to a rather lame start. The Midwest received Wilson lukewarmly, partly because of strong German American inﬂuence. Trailing after him like bloodhounds came two “irreconcilable” senators, Borah and Johnson, who spoke in the same cities a few days later. Hat-tossing crowds answered their attacks on Wilson, crying, “Impeach him, impeach him!” But the reception was different in the Rocky Mountain region and on the Paciﬁc Coast. These areas, which had elected Wilson in 1916, welcomed him with heartwarming outbursts. The high point—and the breaking point—of the return trip was at Pueblo, Colorado, September 25, 1919. Wilson, with tears coursing down his cheeks, pleaded for the League of Nations as the only real hope of preventing future wars. That night he collapsed from physical and ner vous exhaustion. Wilson was whisked back in the “funeral train” to Washington, where several days later a stroke paralyzed one side of his body. During the next few weeks, he lay in a darkened room in the White House, as much a victim of the war as the unknown soldier



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 buried at Arlington. For more than seven months, he did not meet with his cabinet.

Defeat Through Deadlock
 Senator Lodge, coldly calculating, was now at the helm. After failing to amend the treaty outright, he ﬁ nally came up with fourteen formal reservations to it—a sardonic slap at Wilson’s Fourteen Points. These safeguards reserved the rights of the United States under the Monroe Doctrine and the Constitution and otherwise sought to protect American sovereignty. Senator Lodge and other critics were especially alarmed by Article X of the League because it morally bound the United States to aid any member victimized by external aggression. A jealous Congress wanted to reserve for itself the constitutional war-declaring power. Wilson, hating Lodge, saw red at the mere suggestion of the Lodge reservations. He was quite willing to accept somewhat similar reservations sponsored by his faithful Democratic followers, but he insisted that the Lodge reservations “emasculated” the entire pact. Although too feeble to lead, Wilson was still strong enough to obstruct. When the day ﬁ nally came for the voting in the Senate, he sent word to all true Democrats to vote against the treaty with the odious Lodge reservations attached. Wilson hoped that when these were cleared away, the path would be open for ratiﬁcation without reservations or with only some mild Democratic ones. Loyal Democrats in the Senate, on November 19, 1919, blindly did Wilson’s bidding. Combining with the “irreconcilables,” mostly Republicans, they rejected the treaty with the Lodge reservations appended, 55 to 39. The nation was too deeply shocked to accept the verdict as ﬁ nal. About four-ﬁ fths of the senators professed to favor the treaty, with or without reservations, yet a simple majority could not agree on a single proposition. So strong was public indignation that the Senate was forced to act a second time. In March 1920 the treaty was brought up again, with the Lodge reservations tacked on. There was only one possible path to success. Unless the Senate approved the pact with the reservations, the entire document would be rejected. But the sickly Wilson, still sheltered behind drawn curtains and blind to disagreeable realities, again sent word to all loyal Democrats to vote down the treaty with the

 obnoxious reservations. He thus signed the death warrant of the treaty as far as America was concerned. On March 19, 1920, the treaty netted a simple majority but failed to get the necessary two-thirds majority by a count of 49 yeas to 35 nays. Who defeated the treaty? The Lodge-Wilson personal feud, traditionalism, isolationism, disillusionment, and partisanship all contributed to the confused picture. But Wilson himself must bear a substantial share of the responsibility. He asked for all or nothing—and got nothing. One Democratic senator angrily charged that the president had strangled his own brainchild with his own palsied hands rather than let the Senate straighten its crooked limbs.

The “Solemn Referendum”
 of 1920 Wilson had his own pet solution for the deadlock, and this partly explains why he refused to compromise on Lodge’s terms. He proposed to settle the treaty issue in the forthcoming presidential campaign of 1920 by appealing to the people for a “solemn referendum.” This was sheer folly, for a true mandate on the League in the noisy arena of politics was clearly an impossibility. Jubilant Republicans gathered in Chicago in June 1920 with wayward bull moosers back in the corral (after Theodore Roosevelt’s death in 1919) and the senatorial Old Guard back in the saddle. The convention devised a masterfully ambiguous platform that could appeal to both pro-League and anti-League sentiment in the party. The nominee would run on a teeter-totter rather than a platform. As the leading presidential contestants jousted with one another, the political weathervane began to veer toward genial Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio. A group of Senate bosses, meeting rather casually in the historic “smoke-ﬁ lled” Room 404 of the Hotel Blackstone, informally decided on the affable and malleable Ohioan. Their fair-haired boy was a prosperous, backslapping, small-town newspaper editor of the “folksy” type, quite the opposite of Wilson, who had earlier noted the senator’s “disturbingly dull” mind. For vice president the party nominated frugal, grimfaced Governor Calvin (“Silent Cal”) Coolidge of Massachusetts, who had attracted conser vative support by breaking a police strike in Boston. Meeting in San Francisco, Democrats nominated earnest Governor James M. Cox of Ohio, who strongly

A
Crippled League of Nations 

 supported the League. His running mate was Assistant Navy Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt, a young, handsome, vibrant New Yorker. Democratic attempts to make the campaign a referendum on the League were thwarted by Senator Harding, who issued muddled and contradictory statements on the issue from his front porch. Pro-League and anti-League Republicans both claimed that Harding’s election would advance their cause, while the candidate suggested that if elected he would work for a vague Association of Nations—a league but not the League. With newly enfranchised women swelling the vote totals, Harding was swept into power with a prodigious plurality of over 7 million votes—16,143,407 to 9,130,328 for Cox, the largest victory margin to that date in a presidential election. The electoral count was 404 to 127. Eugene V. Debs, federal prisoner number 9653 at the Atlanta Penitentiary, rolled up the largest vote ever for the left-wing Socialist party—919,799. Public desire for a change found vent in a resounding repudiation of “high-and-mighty” Wilsonism. People were tired of professional highbrowism, star-reaching idealism, bothersome do-goodism, moral overstrain, and constant self-sacriﬁce. Eager to lapse back into “normalcy,” they were willing to accept a second-rate president—and they got a third-rate one. Although the election could not be considered a true referendum, Republican isolationists successfully turned Harding’s victory into a death sentence for the League. Politicians increasingly shunned the League as they would a leper. When the legendary Wilson died in 1924, admirers knelt in the snow outside his Washington home. His “great vision” of a league for peace had perished long before.

The Betrayal of
Great Expectations
 America’s spurning of the League was tragically shortsighted. The Republic had helped to win a costly war, but it foolishly kicked the fruits of victory under the



 table. Whether a strong international orga ni zation would have averted World War II in 1939 will always be a matter of dispute. But there can be no doubt that the orphaned League of Nations was undercut at the start by the refusal of the mightiest power on the globe to join it. The Allies themselves were largely to blame for the new world conﬂagration that ﬂared up in 1939, but they found a convenient justiﬁcation for their own shortcomings by pointing an accusing ﬁ nger at Uncle Sam. The ultimate collapse of the Treaty of Versailles must be laid, at least in some degree, at America’s doorstep. This complicated pact, tied in with the four other peace treaties through the League Covenant, was a top-heavy structure designed to rest on a four-legged table. The fourth leg, the United States, was never put into place. This rickety structure teetered for over a decade and then crashed in ruins—a debacle that played into the hands of the German demagogue Adolf Hitler. No less ominous events were set in motion when the Senate spurned the Security Treaty with France. The French, fearing that a new generation of Germans would follow in their fathers’ goose steps, undertook to build up a powerful military force. Predictably resenting the presence of strong French armies, Germany began to rearm illegally. The seething cauldron of uncertainty and suspicion brewed an intoxicant that helped inﬂame the fanatical following of Hitler. The United States, as the tragic sequel proved, hurt its own cause when it buried its head in the sand. Granted that the conduct of its Allies had been disillusioning, it had its own ends to serve by carrying through the Wilsonian program. It would have been well advised if it had forthrightly assumed its warborn responsibilities and had resolutely embraced the role of global leader proffered by the hand of destiny. In the interests of its own security, if for no other reason, the United States should have used its enormous strength to shape world-shaking events. Instead it permitted itself blithely to drift toward the abyss of a second and even more bloody international disaster.



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 CHRONOLOGY

 Council of National Defense established



 Germany resumes unrestricted submarine warfare Zimmermann note Railroads placed under federal control United States enters World War I Espionage Act of 1917 Wilson calls for “peace without victory” Bolshevik Revolution



 Wilson proposes Fourteen Points Sedition Act of 1918 Battle of Château-Thierry Second Battle of the Marne Meuse-Argonne offensive

KEY TERMS
Zimmermann note (747) Fourteen Points (748) Committee on Public Information (748) Espionage Act (750) Schenck v. United States (750) War Industries Board (751) National War Labor Board (751) Industrial Workers of the World (751) 
1918–


 Armistice ends World War I Worldwide inﬂuenza pandemic



Paris Peace Conference and Treaty of
Versailles
 Wilson’s pro-League tour and collapse Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition of alcohol) passed First Senate defeat of Versailles Treaty



 Final Senate defeat of Versailles Treaty after reconsideration Nineteenth Amendment (woman suffrage) passed Harding defeats Cox for presidency

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Nineteenth Amendment (753) Sheppard-Towner Maternity Act (753) Château-Thierry, Battle of (758) Meuse-Argonne offensive (760) League of Nations (763) irreconcilables (763) Versailles, Treaty of (764) 
Arthur Zimmermann
George Creel
Eugene V. Debs
William D. (“Big Bill”)
Haywood


Bernard Baruch
Herbert C. Hoover
Henry Cabot Lodge
David Lloyd George


Woodrow Wilson: Realist or Idealist?


A


 s the ﬁ rst president to take the United States into a foreign war, Woodrow Wilson was obliged to make a systematic case to the American people to justify his unprecedented European intervention. His ideas have largely deﬁ ned the character of American foreign policy ever since—for better or worse. “Wilsonianism” comprised three closely related

 principles: (1) the era of American isolation from world affairs had irretrievably ended; (2) the United States must infuse its own founding political and economic ideas—including democracy, the rule of law, free trade, and national self-determination (or anticolonialism)—into the international order; and (3) American inﬂuence could eventually steer the world

To Learn More


 away from rivalry and warfare and toward a cooperative and peaceful international system, maintained by the League of Nations or, later, the United Nations. Whether that Wilsonian vision constituted hardnosed realism or starry-eyed idealism has excited scholarly debate for nearly a century. “Realists,” such as George F. Kennan and Henry Kissinger, insist that Wilson was anything but a realist. They criticize the president as a naive, impractical dreamer who failed to understand that the international order was, and always will be, an anarchic, unruly arena, outside the rule of law, where only military force can effectively protect the nation’s security. In a sharp critique in his 1950 study, American Diplomacy, Kennan condemned Wilson’s vision as “moralism-legalism.” In this view Wilson dangerously threatened to sacriﬁce American self-interests on the altar of his admirable but ultimately unworkable ideas. Wilson’s defenders, including his biographers Arthur S. Link and Thomas J. Knock, argue that Wilson’s idealism was in fact a kind of higher realism, recognizing as it did that armed conﬂ ict on the scale of World War I could never again be tolerated and that some framework of peaceful international relations simply had to be found. The development of nuclear weapons in a later generation gave this argument more force. This “liberal” defense of Wilsonianism derives from the centuries-old liberal faith that, given sufﬁcient intelligence and willpower, the world can be made a better place. Realists reject this notion of moral and political progress as hopelessly innocent, especially as applied to international affairs. Some leftist scholars, such as William Appleman Williams, have argued that Wilson was in fact a realist of another kind: a subtle and wily imperialist whose stirring rhetoric cloaked a grasping ambition to make



 the United States the world’s dominant economic power. Sometimes called “the imperialism of free trade,” this strategy allegedly sought not to decolonialize the world and open up international commerce for the good of peoples elsewhere, but to create a system in which American economic might would irresistibly prevail. Wilson’s defenders, however, would claim that in a Wilsonian world, all parties would be better off because of free trade and international competition. Still other scholars, especially John Milton Cooper, Jr., have emphasized the absence of economic factors in shaping Wilson’s diplomacy. Isolationism, so this argument goes, held such sway over American thinking precisely because the United States had such a puny ﬁ nancial stake abroad—no hard American economic interests were mortally threatened in 1917, nor for a long time thereafter. In these circumstances Wilson—and the Wilsonians who came after him, such as Franklin D. Roosevelt—had no choice but to appeal to abstract ideals and high principles. The “idealistic” Wilsonian strain in American diplomacy, in this view, may have been an unavoidable heritage of America’s historically isolated situation. If so, it was Wilson’s genius to make practical use of those ideas in his bid for popular support of his diplomacy. Finally , a new generation of scholars has begun to explore the inﬂuence of Wilsonian ideals on social movements outside the United States and Europe. Erez Manela has argued that emerging anticolonial and nationalist movements appropriated Wilsonian ideals and adapted them to their own political ends, challenging forms of colonialism that Wilson himself failed to criticize. In this view the legacy of Wilsonian foreign policy may have been felt most strongly outside the United States.

To Learn More
John W. Chambers, To Raise an Army: The Draft Comes
 to Modern America (1987) Alan Dawley, Changing the World: American Progressives in War and Revolution (2003) Paul Fussell, The Great War and Modern Memory (1975) Maurine W. Greenwald, Women, War, and Work (1980) Ellis Hawley, The Great War and the Search for Modern Order (rev. ed., 1997) Jennifer Keene, Doughboys, the Great War, and the Remaking of America (2001) David M. Kennedy, Over Here: The First World War and American Society (rev. ed., 2005)

Thomas J. Knock, To End All Wars: Woodrow Wilson and
 the Quest for a New World Order (1992) Erez Manela, The Wilsonian Moment: Self-Determination and the International Origins of Anticolonial Nationalism (2007) Paul L. Murphy, World War I and the Origin of Civil Liberties in the United States (1979) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

American Life in the
“Roaring Twenties”





1919–1929
 America’s present need is not heroics but healing; not nostrums but normalcy; not revolution but restoration; . . . not surgery but serenity.

B


 loodied by the war and disillusioned by the peace, Americans turned inward in the 1920s. Shunning diplomatic commitments to foreign countries, they also denounced “radical” foreign ideas, condemned “unAmerican” lifestyles, and clanged shut the immigration gates against foreign peoples. They partly sealed off the domestic economy from the rest of the world and plunged headlong into a dizzying decade of homegrown prosperity. The boom of the golden twenties showered genuine beneﬁts on Americans, as incomes and living standards rose for many. But there seemed to be something incredible about it all, even as people sang, My sister she works in the laundry, My father sells bootlegger gin, My mother she takes in the washing, My God! how the money rolls in! New technologies, new consumer products, and new forms of leisure and entertainment made the twen-

 ties roar. Yet just beneath the surface lurked widespread anxieties about the future and fears that America was losing sight of its traditional ways.

Seeing Red
 Hysterical fears of red Russia continued to color American thinking for several years after the Communists came to power in the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, which spawned a tiny Communist party in America. Tensions were heightened by an epidemic of strikes that convulsed the Republic at war’s end, many of them the result of high prices and frustrated unionorganizing drives. Upstanding Americans jumped to the conclusion that labor troubles were fomented by bomb-and-whisker Bolsheviks. A general strike in Seattle in 1919, though modest in its demands and orderly in its methods, prompted a call from the mayor for federal troops to head off “the anarchy of Russia.” Fire-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Red Scare


 and-brimstone evangelist Billy Sunday struck a responsive chord when he described a Bolshevik as “a guy with a face like a porcupine and a breath that would scare a pole cat. . . . If I had my way, I’d ﬁ ll the jails so full of them that their feet would stick out the window.” The big red scare of 1919–1920 resulted in a nationwide crusade against left-wingers whose Americanism was suspect. Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer, who “saw red” too easily, earned the title of the “Fighting Quaker” by his excess of zeal in rounding up suspects. They ultimately totaled about six thousand. This drive to root out radicals was redoubled in June 1919, when a bomb shattered both the nerves and the Washington home of Palmer. The “Fighting Quaker” was thereupon dubbed the “Quaking Fighter.” Other events highlighted the red scare. Late in December 1919, a shipload of 249 alleged alien radicals was deported on the Buford (the “Soviet Ark”) to the

 Radicals on the Run, 1919 In the aftermath of the war, the American Legion, superpatriotic voice of veterans, joined the anti-Bolshevik chorus zealously attacking political leftists in the United States as “enemy reds.”



 An author-soldier (Arthur Guy Empey, 1883-1963) applauded the “deportation delirium” when he wrote,

“


 I believe we should place them [the reds] all on a ship of stone, with sails of lead, and that their ﬁrst stopping place should be hell.

”


 “workers’ paradise” of Russia. One zealot cried, “My motto for the Reds is S.O.S.—ship or shoot.” Hysteria was temporarily revived in September 1920, when a stillunexplained bomb blast on Wall Street killed thirtyeight people and wounded several hundred others. Various states joined the pack in the outcry against radicals. In 1919–1920 a number of legislatures, reﬂecting the anxiety of “solid” citizens, passed criminal syndicalism laws. These anti-red statutes, some of which were born of the war, made unlawful the mere advocacy of violence to secure social change. Critics protested that mere words were not criminal deeds, that there was a great gulf between throwing ﬁts and throwing bombs, and that “free screech” was for the nasty as well as the nice. Violence was done to traditional American concepts of free speech as IWW members and other radicals were vigorously prosecuted. The hysteria went so far that in 1920 ﬁve members of the New York legislature, all lawfully elected, were denied their seats simply because they were Socialists. The red scare was a godsend to conser vative businesspeople, who used it to break the backs of the ﬂedgling unions. Labor’s call for the “closed,” or all-union, shop was denounced as “Sovietism in disguise.” Employers, in turn, hailed their own antiunion campaign for the “open” shop as the American plan. Anti-redism and antiforeignism were reﬂected in a notorious case regarded by liberals as a “judicial lynching.” Nicola Sacco, a shoe-factory worker, and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, a ﬁsh peddler, were convicted in 1921 of the murder of a Massachusetts paymaster and his guard. The jury and judge were prejudiced in some degree against the defendants because they were Italians, atheists, anarchists, and draft dodgers. Liberals and radicals the world over rallied to the defense of the two aliens doomed to die. The case dragged on for six years until 1927, when the condemned men were electrocuted. Communists and other radicals were thus presented with two martyrs in the



