Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 increases, thereby seemingly demonstrating bad faith. The president erupted in wrath. “My father always told me that all businessmen were sons of bitches,” he said, “ but I never believed him till now.” He called the “big steel” men onto the Oval Ofﬁce carpet and unleashed his Irish temper. Overawed, the steel operators backed down. The steel episode provoked ﬁery attacks by big business on the New Frontier, but Kennedy soon appealed to believers in free enterprise when he announced his support of a general tax-cut bill. He rejected the advice of those who wished greater government spending and instead chose to stimulate the economy by slashing taxes and putting more money directly into private hands. When he announced his policy before a big business group, one observer called it “the most Republican speech since McKinley.” Kennedy’s New Frontier vision also extended to the “ﬁ nal frontier.” Early in his term, the president promoted a multibillion-dollar project dedicated, as he put it, to “landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to earth.” When skeptics objected that the money could be better spent elsewhere, Kennedy

 On the Moon This moon’s-eye view of the earth greeted the ﬁrst men to land on the lunar surface. (right) Astronaut Edwin (“Buzz”) Aldrin descends from the spacecraft. As he stepped onto the moon’s surface, his companion, Neil Armstrong, said, “That’s one small step for man; one giant leap for mankind.”

 summoned stirring rhetoric of rising to challenges and expanding human possibilities. In reality, the moonshot was a calculated plan to restore America’s prestige in the space race, severely damaged by the Soviet Sputnik successes (see p. 962). Twenty-four billion dollars later, in July 1969, two NASA astronauts triumphantly planted their footprints—and the American ﬂag—on the moon’s dusty surface. As people around the globe huddled around televisions to watch the Apollo mission live, the world had never seemed so small and interconnected, nor the United States so dominant.

Rumblings in Europe
 A few months after settling into the White House, the new president met Soviet premier Khrushchev at Vienna in June 1961. The tough-talking Soviet leader adopted a belligerent attitude, threatening to make a treaty with East Germany and cut off Western access to Berlin. Though visibly shaken, the president refused to be bullied.

Troubles Abroad




 The Berlin Wall, 1961–1989 The wall separating East and West Berlin stood for nearly thirty years as a hated symbol of the division of Europe into democratic and communist camps. (left) East German soldiers stand guard as the concrete wall is constructed, November 20, 1961. (right) Demonstrators celebrating the impending reuniﬁcation of East and West Germany begin to tear down the wall in 1989.

 The Soviets backed off from their most bellicose threats but suddenly began to construct the Berlin Wall in August 1961. A barbed-wire and concrete barrier, it was designed to plug the heavy population drain from East Germany to West Germany through the Berlin funnel. But to the free world, the “Wall of Shame” looked like a gigantic enclosure around a concentration camp. The wall stood for almost three decades as an ugly scar symbolizing the post–World War II division of Europe into two hostile camps. Kennedy meanwhile turned his attention to Western Europe, now miraculously prospering after the tonic of Marshall Plan aid and the growth of the American-encouraged European Economic Community (EEC), the free-trade area that later evolved into the European Union. He ﬁ nally secured passage of the Trade Expansion Act in 1962, authorizing tariff cuts

 of up to 50 percent to promote trade with EEC countries. This act led to the so-called Kennedy Round of tariff negotiations, concluded in 1967, and to a significant expansion of European-American trade. These liberalized trade policies inaugurated a new era of such robustly invigorated international commerce that a new word was coined to describe it: globalization. But not all of Kennedy’s ambitious designs for Europe were realized. American policymakers were dedicated to an economically and militarily united “Atlantic Community,” with the United States the dominant partner. But they found their way blocked by towering, stiff-backed Charles de Gaulle, president of France. With a haughty “non,” de Gaulle vetoed the British application for Common Market membership in 1963, fearing that the British “special relationship” with the United States would make Britain a Trojan



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 horse for deepening American control over European affairs. De Gaulle deemed the Americans unreliable in a crisis, so he tried to preserve French freedom of action by developing his own small atomic force. Despite the perils of nuclear proliferation or Soviet domination, de Gaulle demanded an independent Europe, free of Yankee inﬂuence.

 Foreign Flare-ups and “Flexible Response” Special problems for U.S. foreign policy emerged from the worldwide decolonization of European overseas possessions after World War II. Sparsely populated Laos, freed of its French colonial overlords in 1954, was festering dangerously by the time Kennedy came into ofﬁce. The Eisenhower administration had drenched this jungle kingdom with dollars but failed to cleanse the country of an aggressive communist element. A red Laos, many observers feared, would be a river on which the inﬂuence of Communist China would ﬂood into all of Southeast Asia. As the Laotian civil war raged, Kennedy’s military advisers seriously considered sending in American troops. But the president found that he had insufﬁcient forces to put out the ﬁ re in Asia and still honor his commitments in Europe. Kennedy thus sought a diplomatic escape hatch in the fourteen-power Geneva conference, which imposed a shaky peace on Laos in 1962. These “brushﬁre wars” intensiﬁed the pressure for a shift away from Secretary Dulles’s dubious doctrine of “massive retaliation.” Kennedy felt hamstrung by the knowledge that in a crisis, he had the Devil’s choice between humiliation and nuclear incineration. With Defense Secretary McNamara, he pushed the strategy of “ﬂexible response”—that is, developing an array of military “options” that could be precisely matched to the gravity of the crisis at hand. To this end Kennedy increased spending on conventional military forces and bolstered the Special Forces (Green Berets). They were an elite antiguerrilla outﬁt trained to survive on snake meat and to kill with scientiﬁc ﬁ nesse.

 Stepping into the Vietnam Quagmire The doctrine of “ﬂexible response” seemed sane enough, but it contained lethal logic. It potentially lowered the level at which diplomacy would give way

 to shooting. It also provided a mechanism for a progressive, and possibly endless, stepping-up of the use of force. Vietnam soon presented grisly proof of these pitfalls. The corrupt, right-wing government of Ngo Dinh Diem in Saigon, despite a deluge of American dollars, had ruled shakily since the partition of Vietnam in 1954 (see p. 960). Anti-Diem agitators noisily threatened to topple the pro-American government from power. In a fateful decision late in 1961, Kennedy ordered a sharp increase in the number of “military advisers” (U.S. troops) in South Vietnam. American forces allegedly entered Vietnam to foster political stability—to help protect Diem from the communists long enough to allow him to enact basic social reforms favored by the Americans. But the Kennedy administration eventually despaired of the reactionary Diem and encouraged a successful coup against him in November 1963. Ironically, the United States thus contributed to a long process of political disintegration that its original policy had meant to prevent. Kennedy still told the South Vietnamese that it was “their war,” but he had made dangerously deep political commitments. By the time of his death, he had ordered more than ﬁ fteen thousand American men into the far-off Asian slaughter pen. A graceful pullout was becoming increasingly difﬁcult (see Map 38.1). “Modernization theory” provided the theoretical underpinnings for an activist U.S. foreign policy in the “underdeveloped” world. Its proponents believed that the traditional societies of Asia, Africa, and Latin

Map 38.1 Vietnam and Southeast Asia, 1954–1975
 Le Ly Hayslip (b. 1949) was born in a peasant village in South Vietnam, just south of Da Nang. In her memoir, When Heaven and Earth Changed Places, she describes the trauma endured by ordinary Vietnamese as a result of America’s ﬁght against the Viet Cong: “In 1963—the year the Viet Cong came to my village— American warplanes bombed Man Quang. It was at noon, just when the children were getting out of school. My aunt Thu and her pregnant daughter-in-law were making lunch for her husband and four grandchildren when the air-raid signal blared. They all jumped under the wooden table and sheltered the pregnant woman with their bodies—even the little kids. A bomb fell in Aunt Thu’s front yard. . . . Hot shrapnel tore through everyone except the pregnant woman. Aunt Thu and one of her grandchildren were killed. The passing fragment left only a weeping hole where her generous heart had been.”

Interactive Map






100 Km.


C


Ho Chi Minh Trail




Re
 d

Bla
 c

 Boat-people refugees after 1975

I


N


A


R


 k

Dienbienphu R.


 French surrender, May 7, 1954

 Harbor mined,

Hanoi


M Y A N M A R


Haiphong


 (BURMA)

H


100 Mi.


.


 Enemy supply routes Major battle of the Tet offensive, January 1968 Major U.S. base during the war

 U.S. bombing begins, 1964 Communist-Pathet Lao victory, 1975

NORTH V I ET N A M

P LAI N OF JARS

G u l f o f To n k i n


20°N


 Alleged attacks on American Naval vessels, August, 1964 (Gulf of Tonkin Incident)

R.


Ca
R.


M


 ek ong

L


A


Vinh


O


Keo Nua Pass


S


Vientiane


U.S.
Seventh Fleet  operations during the war

Mu Gia Pass


Udon Thani


Nakhon Phanom


Demilitarized Zone


 Sépone Khe Sanh Lang Vei

Khon Kaen


T


H


A


I


L


A


Quang Tri
Hue


N


Demarcation Line, 1954


A
Shau Valley


Da Nang


17°N


South China
Sea


D
Chu Lai
Kham
Duc


Ubon Ratchathani


Ta Khli


R.


Ratchasima


Mekong


Kontum
Pleiku An Khe


C E NTRAL H I G H LAN DS

 (KAMPUCHEA) U.S. bombing begins, 1969

U.S.


Nha Trang


 i n v a s i o n , 19 70

Gulf of Thailand


 Mayaguez incident,

 Vi etna mese in va

Phnom Penh


Dalat


100°E


 sion

,1




C A MAU
PE N I N SU L A

105°E


Cam Ranh Bay


SO UT H V I ET N A M

110°E


Bien Hoa
Long Binh


Saigon
Tan Son Nhut
Cholon
My Tho
Vung Tau
Vinh Long
Ben Tre
Can Tho


Chau Duc


Ca Mau


Tuy Hoa


Ban Me Thuot


Bu Dop
Communist-Khmer Rouge
 victory, 1975

Qui Nhon


Duc Co


C A M B O D I A


Sattahip


15°N


Dak To


Don Muang
Bangkok


My Lai
Quang Ngai


N
10°N


Mekong
Delta
Vietcong-North Vietnamese
 victory and U.S. withdrawal,





Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 to help the Good Neighbors close the gap between the callous rich and the wretched poor, and thus quiet communist agitation. But results were disappointing; there was little alliance and even less progress. American handouts had little positive impact on Latin America’s immense social problems. President Kennedy also struck below the border with the mailed ﬁst. He had inherited from the Eisenhower administration a CIA-backed scheme to topple Fidel Castro from power by invading Cuba with anticommunist exiles. On April 17, 1961, some twelve hundred exiles landed at Cuba’s Bay of Pigs. When the ill-starred Bay of Pigs invasion bogged down, Kennedy stood fast in his decision to keep hands off, and the bullet-riddled band of anti-Castroites surrendered. President Kennedy assumed full responsibility for the failure, remarking that “victory has a hundred fathers, and defeat is an orphan.” The Bay of Pigs blunder, along with continuing American covert efforts to assassinate Castro and overthrow his government, naturally pushed the Cuban leader even further into the Soviet embrace. Wily Chair-

Backbone


 The United States supports South Vietnam.

 America could develop into modern industrial and democratic nations by following the West’s own path. Noted economic historian Walt Whitman Rostow, one of the most inﬂuential modernization theorists, charted the route from traditional society to “the age of high mass-consumption” in his book The Stages of Economic Growth (1960). Though it would later come under attack for its Eurocentric bias, modernization theory offered a powerful intellectual framework for policymakers ensnared in the Cold War. Rostow himself served as an inﬂuential adviser to the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.

Cuban Confrontations
 Although the United States regarded Latin America as its backyard, its southern neighbors feared and resented the powerful Colossus of the North. In 1961 Kennedy extended the hand of friendship with the Alliance for Progress (Alianza para el Progreso), hailed as a Marshall Plan for Latin America. A primary goal was

Failed Bay of Pigs Invasion, 1961
 Cuban soldiers demonstrate a beach gun they used against a brigade of ex-Cubans who furtively invaded Cuba as agents of the United States. The debacle was one of several unsuccessful American attempts to overthrow Cuban leader Fidel Castro.

The Cuban Missile Crisis


 man Khrushchev lost little time in taking full advantage of his Cuban comrade’s position just ninety miles off Florida’s coast. In October 1962 the aerial photographs of American spy planes revealed that the Soviets were secretly and speedily installing nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba. The Soviets evidently intended to use these devastating weapons to shield Castro and to blackmail the United States into backing down in Berlin and other trouble spots. Kennedy and Khrushchev now began a nerveracking game of “nuclear chicken.” The president ﬂatly rejected air force proposals for a “surgical” bombing strike against the missile-launching sites. Instead, on October 22, 1962, he ordered a naval “quarantine” of Cuba and demanded immediate removal of the threatening weaponry. He also served notice on Khrushchev that any attack on the United States from Cuba would be regarded as coming from the Soviet Union and would trigger nuclear retaliation against the Russian heartland. For an anxious week, Americans waited while Soviet ships approached the patrol line established by the U.S. Navy off the island of Cuba. Seizing or sinking a Soviet vessel on the high seas would unquestionably be regarded by the Kremlin as an act of war. The world teetered breathlessly on the brink of global atomization. Only in 1991 did the full dimensions of this nuclear peril become known, when the Russians revealed that their ground forces in Cuba already had operational nuclear weapons at their disposal and were authorized to launch them if attacked. In this tense eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation, Khrushchev ﬁ nally ﬂ inched. On October 28 he agreed to a partially face-saving compromise, by which he would pull the missiles out of Cuba. The United States in return agreed to end the quarantine and not invade the island. The American government also quietly signaled that it would remove from Turkey some of its own missiles targeted at the Soviet Union. Fallout from the Cuban missile crisis was considerable. A disgraced Khrushchev was ultimately hounded out of the Kremlin and became an “unperson.” Hard-liners in Moscow, vowing never again to be humiliated in a nuclear face-off, launched an enormous program of military expansion. The Soviet buildup reached a crescendo in the next decade, stimulating, in turn, a vast American effort to “catch up with the Russians.” The Democrats did better than expected in the midterm elections of November 1962— allegedly because the Republicans were “Cubanized.” Kennedy, apparently sobered by the appalling risks



 he had just run, pushed harder for a nuclear test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union. After prolonged negotiations in Moscow, a pact prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the at mosphere was signed in late 1963. Another barometer indicating a thaw in the Cold War was the installation (August 1963) of a MoscowWashington “hot line,” permitting immediate teletype communication in case of a crisis. Most signiﬁcant was Kennedy’s speech at American University in Washington, D.C., in June 1963. The president urged Americans to abandon a view of the Soviet Union as a Devil-ridden land ﬁ lled with fanatics and instead to deal with the world “as it is, not as it might have been had the history of the last eighteen years been different.” Kennedy thus tried to lay the foundation for a realistic policy of peaceful coexistence with the Soviet Union. Here were the modest origins of the policy that later came to be known as “détente” (French for “relaxation of tension”).

The Struggle for
Civil Rights
 Kennedy had campaigned with a strong appeal to black voters, but he proceeded gingerly to redeem his promises. Although he had pledged to eliminate racial discrimination in housing “with a stroke of the pen,” it took him nearly two years to ﬁ nd the right pen. Civil rights groups meanwhile sent thousands of pens to the White House in an “Ink for Jack” protest against the president’s slowness. Political concerns stayed the president’s hand on civil rights. Elected by a wafer-thin margin, and with shaky control over Congress, Kennedy needed the support of southern legislators to pass his economic and social legislation, especially his medical and educational bills. He believed, perhaps justiﬁably, that those mea sures would eventually beneﬁt black Americans at least as much as speciﬁc legislation on civil rights. Bold moves for racial justice would have to wait. But events soon scrambled these careful calculations. After the wave of sit-ins that surged across the South in 1960, groups of Freedom Riders fanned out to end segregation in facilities serving interstate bus passengers. A white mob torched a Freedom Ride bus near Anniston, Alabama, in May 1961, and Attor ney General Robert Kennedy’s personal representative was beaten unconscious in another anti–Freedom Ride riot in Montgomery. When southern ofﬁcials proved unwilling or unable to stem the violence, Washington



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


Freedom Ride, 1961
 Rampaging whites near Anniston, Alabama, burned this bus carrying an interracial group of Freedom Riders on May 14, 1961.

 dispatched federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders. Reluctantly but fatefully, the Kennedy administration had now joined hands with the civil rights movement. Because of that partnership, the Kennedys proved ultrawary about the political associates of Martin Luther King, Jr. Fearful of embarrassing revelations that some of King’s advisers had communist afﬁ liations, Robert Kennedy ordered FBI director J. Edgar Hoover to wiretap King’s phone in late 1963. But for the most part, the relationship between King and the Kennedys was a fruitful one. Encouraged by Robert Kennedy, and with ﬁ nancial backing from Kennedyprodded private foundations, SNCC and other civil rights groups inaugurated the Voter Education Project to register the South’s historically disfranchised blacks. Because of his support for civil rights, President Kennedy told a group of black leaders in 1963, “I may lose the next election . . . I don’t care.” Integrating southern universities threatened to provoke wholesale slaughter. Some desegregated painlessly, but the University of Mississippi (“Ole Miss”) became a volcano. A twenty-nine-year-old air force veteran, James Meredith, encountered violent opposition when he attempted to register in October 1962. In the end President Kennedy was forced to send in four hundred federal marshals and three thousand troops to enroll Meredith in his ﬁ rst class—in colonial American history.

 In the spring of 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr., launched a campaign against discrimination in Birmingham, Alabama, the most segregated big city in America. Although blacks constituted nearly half of the city’s population, they made up fewer than 15 percent of the city’s voters. Previous attempts to crack the city’s rigid racial barriers had produced more than ﬁ fty cross burnings and eighteen bomb attacks since 1957. “Some of the people sitting here will not come back alive from this campaign,” King advised his organizers. Events soon conﬁ rmed this grim prediction of violence. Watching developments on television screens, a horriﬁed world saw peaceful civil rights marchers repeatedly repelled by police with attack dogs and electric cattle prods. Most fearsome of all were the high-pressure water hoses directed at the civil rights demonstrators. They delivered water with enough force to knock bricks loose from buildings or strip bark from trees at a distance of one hundred feet. Water from the hoses bowled little children down the street like tumbleweeds. Jolted by these vicious confrontations, President Kennedy delivered a memorable televised speech to the nation on June 11, 1963. In contrast to Eisenhower’s cool aloofness from the racial question, Kennedy called the situation a “moral issue” and committed his personal and presidential prestige to ﬁ nding a solution. Drawing on the same spiritual traditions as Martin Luther King, Jr., Kennedy declared that the

Marching to Washington




Hosing Down Civil Rights
Demonstrators, Birmingham,
Alabama, 1963


 principle at stake “is as old as the Scriptures and is as clear as the American Constitution.” He called for new civil rights legislation to protect black citizens. In August King led more than 200,000 black and white demonstrators on a peaceful March on Washington in support of the proposed legislation. In an electrifying speech from the Lincoln Memorial, King declared,

 “I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character.” Still the violence continued. On the very night of Kennedy’s stirring television address, a white gunman shot down Medgar Evers, a black Mississippi civil rights

Martin Luther King, Jr., Addresses
 the March on Washington, August 1963 This was the occasion of King’s famous “I Have a Dream” speech, in which he declared, “When the architects of our great republic wrote the magniﬁcent words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to which every American was to fall heir. This note was a promise that all men, yes, black men as well as white men, would be guaranteed the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 In his civil rights address of June 11, 1963, President John F. Kennedy (1917–1963) said,

“


 If an American, because his skin is dark, cannot eat lunch in a restaurant open to the public; if he cannot send his children to the best public school available; if he cannot vote for the public ofﬁcials who represent him; if, in short, he cannot enjoy the full and free life which all of us want, then who among us would be content to have the color of his skin changed and stand in his place?

”


 worker. In September 1963 an explosion blasted a Baptist church in Birmingham, kill ing four black girls who had just ﬁ nished their lesson called “The Love That Forgives.” By the time of Kennedy’s death, his civil rights bill was making little headway, and frustrated blacks were growing increasingly impatient.

The Killing of Kennedy
 Violence haunted America in the mid-1960s, and it stalked onto center stage on November 22, 1963. While riding in an open limousine in downtown Dallas, Texas, President Kennedy was shot in the brain by a concealed riﬂeman and died within seconds. As a stunned nation grieved, the tragedy grew still more unbelievable. The alleged assassin, a furtive ﬁgure named Lee Harvey Oswald, was himself shot to death in front of television cameras by a self-appointed avenger, Jack Ruby. So bizarre were the events surrounding the two murders that even an elaborate ofﬁcial investigation conducted by Chief Justice Warren could not quiet all doubts and theories about what had really happened. Vice President Johnson was promptly sworn in as president on a waiting airplane and ﬂown back to Washington with Kennedy’s body. Although he mistrusted “the Harvards,” Johnson retained most of the bright Kennedy team. The new president managed a digniﬁed and efﬁcient transition, pledging continuity with his slain predecessor’s policies. For several days the nation was steeped in sorrow. Not until then did many Americans realize how fully their young, vibrant president and his captivating wife had cast a spell over them. Chopped down in his prime

 after only slightly more than a thousand days in the White House, Kennedy was acclaimed more for the ideals he had enunciated and the spirit he had kindled than for the concrete goals he had achieved. He had laid one myth to rest forever—that a Catholic could not be trusted with the presidency of the United States. In later years revelations about Kennedy’s womanizing and allegations about his involvement with organized crime ﬁgures tarnished his reputation. But despite those accusations, his apparent vigor, charisma, and idealism made him an inspirational ﬁgure for the generation of Americans who came of age in the 1960s—including Bill Clinton, who as a boy had brieﬂy met President Kennedy and would himself be elected president in 1992.

The LBJ Brand on
 the Presidency The torch passed to craggy-faced Lyndon Baines Johnson, a Texan who towered six feet three inches. The new president hailed from the populist hill country west of Austin, Texas, whose people had ﬁ rst sent him to Washington as a twenty-nine-year-old congressman in 1937. Franklin D. Roosevelt was his political “Daddy,” Johnson claimed, and he had supported New Deal mea sures down the line. But when LBJ lost a Senate race in 1941, he learned the sobering lesson that liberal political beliefs did not necessarily win elections in Texas. He trimmed his sails to the right and squeezed himself into a Senate seat in 1948 with a questionable eighty-seven-vote margin—hence the ironic nickname “Landslide Lyndon.” Entrenched in the Senate, Johnson developed into a masterful wheeler-dealer. He became the Democratic majority leader in 1954, wielding power second only to that of Eisenhower in the White House. He could move mountains or checkmate opponents as the occasion demanded, using what came to be known as the “Johnson treatment”—a ﬂashing display of backslapping, ﬂesh-pressing, and arm-twisting that overbore friend and foe alike. His ego and vanity were legendary. On a visit to the Pope, Johnson was presented with a precious fourteenth-century painting from the Vatican art collection; in return, LBJ gave the Pope a bust—of LBJ! As president, Johnson quickly shed the conser vative coloration of his Senate years to reveal the latent liberal underneath. “No memorial oration or eulogy,” Johnson declared to Congress, “could more eloquently

Conflicting Press Accounts of the
March on Washington, 1963


 he day after the March on Washington of August 28, 1963 (see p. 981), newspapers all over the country carried reports of this historic assembly of more than 200,000 people to demand civil rights and equal job opportunities for African Americans. Although the basic outlines of the story were the same in most papers, ancillary articles, photographs, and editorials revealed deep-seated biases in coverage. Shown here are continuations from the front-page stories in the New York Times, a bastion of northeastern liberalism (below), and the Atlanta Constitution, a major southern newspaper (right). While the Times called the march “orderly” in its headline, the Constitution’s story in its right columns highlighted the potential for violence and the precautions taken by police. The article read: “There was such a force of uniformed ofﬁcers on hand to cope with any possible trouble that one senator was prompted to comment: ‘It almost looks like we had a military coup d’état during the night.’” In addition to stressing the march’s potential for disruption, the Constitution ran an advertisement right below the March on Washington story for a National Ku Klux Klan Rally two days hence, featuring promi nent speakers and a cross burning. This comparison of newspaper coverage of a controversial event serves as a reminder that press reporting

T


 (top) New York Times; (above) Atlanta Constitution

 must always be scrutinized for biases when it is used as historical evidence. What other differences in coverage separated these two newspapers? What factors contribute to press biases?





Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 had created in 1961) to enforce the law. When conser vatives tried to derail the legislation by adding a prohibition on sexual, as well as racial, discrimination, the tactic backﬁ red. The bill’s opponents cynically calculated that liberals would not be able to support a bill that threatened to wipe out laws that singled out women for special protection because of their sex. But the act’s Title VII passed with the sexual clause intact. It soon proved to be a powerful instrument of federally enforced gender equality, as well as racial equality. Johnson struck another blow for women and minorities in 1965 when he issued an executive order requiring all federal contractors to take afﬁrmative action against discrimination. Johnson also rammed Kennedy’s stalled tax bill through Congress and added proposals of his own for a billion-dollar “War on Poverty.” Johnson voiced special concern for Appalachia, where the sickness of the soft-coal industry had left tens of thousands of mountain folk on the human slag heap. Johnson dubbed his domestic program the Great Society—a sweeping set of New Dealish economic and welfare mea sures aimed at transforming the American way of life. Public support for LBJ’s antipoverty war was aroused by Michael Harrington’s The Other America (1962), which revealed that in afﬂuent America 20 percent of the population—and over 40 percent of the black population—suffered in poverty. President Lyndon Baines Johnson (1908–1973) Dedicated and hard-working, Johnson saw his presidency shattered by the trauma of Vietnam. By the end of his term, he was so unpopular that he could ﬁnd nonheckling audiences only on military bases or navy ships.

 honor President Kennedy’s memory than the earliest possible passage of the Civil Rights Bill for which he fought so long.” After a lengthy conser vative ﬁ libuster, Congress at last passed the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964. The act banned racial discrimination in most private facilities open to the public, including theaters, hospitals, and restaurants. It strengthened the federal government’s power to end segregation in schools and other public places. Title VII of the act barred employers from discriminating based on race or national origin in hiring and empowered the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC, a body Kennedy

Johnson Battles Goldwater
 in 1964 Johnson’s nomination by the Democrats in 1964 was a foregone conclusion; he was chosen by acclamation in Atlantic City as his birthday present. Thanks to the tall Texan, the Democrats stood foursquare on their most liberal platform since Truman’s Fair Deal days. The Republicans, convening in San Francisco’s Cow Palace, nominated box-jawed Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, a bronzed and bespectacled champion of rock-ribbed conservatism. The American stage was thus set for a historic clash of political principles. Goldwater’s forces had galloped out of the Southwest to ride roughshod over the moderate Republican “eastern establishment.” Insisting that the GOP offer “a choice not an echo,” Goldwater attacked the federal income tax, the Social Security system, the Tennessee Valley Authority, civil rights legislation, the nuclear test-ban treaty, and, most loudly, the Great

Johnson Reelected


 Negative Campaigning This infamous “attack ad” was televised only once as a paid political advertisement, but it signaled the emergence of a newly noxious style of political campaigning. The ad showed a child dreamily pulling petals from a ﬂower. Suddenly her voice gave way to that of a man reciting an ominous countdown, followed by an exploding nuclear bomb and a throaty voice warning “Vote for President Johnson on November 3. The stakes are too high for you to stay home.” The ad implied that a Goldwater presidency would risk nuclear Armageddon. Controversy forced the ad’s sponsors to take it off the air, but it was repeatedly reshown in news coverage of the controversy itself—raising serious questions about the very deﬁnition of “news.”



 Society. His ﬁercely dedicated followers proclaimed, “In Your Heart You Know He’s Right,” which prompted the Democratic response, “In Your Guts You Know He’s Nuts.” Goldwater warmed right-wing hearts when he proclaimed that “extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. And . . . moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue.” Democrats gleefully exploited the image of Goldwater as a trigger-happy cowboy who would “Barry us” in the debris of World War III. Johnson cultivated the contrasting image of a resolute statesman by seizing upon the Tonkin Gulf episode early in August 1964. Unbeknownst to the American public or Congress, U.S. Navy ships had been cooperating with South Vietnamese gunboats in provocative raids along the coast of North Vietnam. Two of these American destroyers were allegedly ﬁ red upon by the North Vietnamese on August 2 and 4, although exactly what happened still remains unclear. Later investigations strongly suggested that the North Vietnamese ﬁ red in self-defense on August 2 and that the “attack” of August 4 never happened. Johnson later reportedly wisecracked, “For all I know, the Navy was shooting at whales out there.” Johnson nevertheless promptly called the attack “unprovoked” and moved swiftly to make political hay out of this episode. He ordered a “limited” retaliatory air raid against the North Vietnamese bases, loudly proclaiming that he sought “no wider war”— thus implying that the truculent Goldwater did. Johnson also used the incident to spur congressional passage of the all-purpose Tonkin Gulf Resolution. With only two dissenting votes in both houses, the lawmakers virtually abdicated their war-declaring powers and handed the president a blank check to use further force in Southeast Asia. The Tonkin Gulf Resolution, Johnson boasted, was “like grandma’s nightshirt—it covered every thing.” The towering Texan rode to a spectacular victory in November 1964. The voters were herded into Johnson’s column by fondness for the Kennedy legacy, faith in Great Society promises, and fear of Goldwater. A stampede of 43,129,566 Johnson votes trampled the Republican ticket with its 27,178,188 supporters. The tally in the Electoral College was 486 to 52 (see Map 38.2). Goldwater carried only his native Arizona and ﬁve other states—all of them, signiﬁcantly, in the traditionally Democratic but now racially restless South. Johnson’s record-breaking 61 percent of the popular vote swept lopsided Democratic majorities into both houses of Congress.



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 SD 4 NE 5

 NM 4

 CA

 WI

 IN

 OK 8 TX

 OH

 MD

 MT

OR ID

RI NV CA



KS OK

NM TX

 IL

 IN

 MO

 LA

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 14 RI PA NJ CT 4 17 8

 MI

 AK

FL AK

 IA

NE CO

 WI

D.C.


 SC

 GA

 UT

 MN

 SD

 DE

 VA 12

 AL

 ND

 WY

 AZ

 NC 13

 TN 11 MS

 WA

NJ WV

 KY 9

 LA

 ME

 PA

 MO

 AR

 NH

 MA 14 CT

IL KS 7

 AZ 5

UT WY NV 4 3 CO 6

 OR 6

 NY

 MI

 IA 9

ID MT 4 4

 ND 4

 WA 9

 MN 10

 VT

 GA

 SC

DE MD

 DC

 FL

 HI

 HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Johnson (Democrat)




90.3%


43,129,566


61.1%




9.7%


27,178,188


38.5%


Goldwater (Republican)


 Map 38.2 Presidential Election of 1964 In the map on the left the size of each state is distorted according to its weight in the Electoral College. In New Orleans, toward the end of the campaign, a gutsy Johnson displayed his commitment to civil rights when he told a story about an old senator who once said of his Deep South constituents, “I would like to go back down there and make them just one more Democratic speech. . . . The poor old State, they haven’t heard a Democratic speech in 30 years. All they hear at election time is Negro, Negro, Negro!” Johnson’s open voicing of sentiments like this contributed heavily to his losses in the traditionally Democratic “solid South.”

The Great Society Congress
 Johnson’s huge victory temporarily smashed the conservative congressional coalition of southern Democrats and northern Republicans. A wide-open legislative road stretched before the Great Society programs, as the president skillfully ringmastered his two-to-one Democratic majorities. Congress poured out a ﬂood of legislation, comparable only to the output of the New Dealers in the Hundred Days Congress of 1933. Johnson, conﬁdent that a growing economy gave him ample ﬁscal and political room for maneuver, delivered at last on long-deferred Democratic promises of social reform. Escalating the War on Poverty, Congress doubled the appropriation of the Ofﬁce of Economic Opportunity to $2 billion and granted more than $1 billion to redevelop the gutted hills and hollows of Appalachia. Johnson also prodded Congress into creating two new cabinet ofﬁces: the Department of Transportation and the Department of Housing and Urban Development

Interactive Map


 (HUD), to which he named the ﬁ rst black cabinet secretary in the nation’s history, respected economist Robert C. Weaver. Other noteworthy laws established the National Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities, designed to lift the level of American cultural life. Even more impressive were the Big Four legislative achievements that crowned LBJ’s Great Society program: aid to education, medical care for the elderly and indigent, immigration reform, and a new voting rights bill. Johnson neatly avoided the thorny question of separation of church and state by channeling educational aid to students, not schools, thus allowing funds to ﬂow to hard-pressed parochial institutions. (Catholic John F. Kennedy had not dared to touch this prickly issue.) With a keen eye for the dramatic, LBJ signed the education bill in the humble one-room Texas schoolhouse he had attended as a boy. Medicare for the elderly, accompanied by Medicaid for the poor, became a reality in 1965. Like the New Deal’s Social Security program, Medicare and Medicaid created “entitlements.” That is, they conferred

The Great Society




Giving Thanks for Medicare
 An elderly woman showed her gratitude to President Lyndon B. Johnson for his signing of the Medicare bill in April 1965, providing basic medical care for the aged. In tribute to former president Truman’s unsuccessful effort to pass a national medical insurance program twenty years earlier, Johnson ﬂew to Truman’s Missouri home to sign the bill that he claimed would deliver “care for the sick and serenity for the fearful.” No one acknowledged that Truman’s earlier plan had been much more comprehensive or that Johnson, then a young Texas congressman, had opposed it.

 rights on certain categories of Americans virtually in perpetuity, without the need for repeated congressional approval. These programs were part of a spreading “rights revolution” that materially improved the lives of millions of Americans—but also eventually undermined the federal government’s ﬁ nancial health. Immigration reform was the third of Johnson’s Big Four feats. The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 abolished at last the “national-origins” quota system that had been in place since 1921 (see p. 773). The act also doubled (to 290,000) the number of immigrants allowed to enter annually, while for the ﬁ rst time setting limits on immigrants from the Western Hemisphere (120,000). The new law further provided for the admission of close relatives of United States citizens, outside those numerical limits. To the surprise of many of the act’s architects, more than 100,000 persons per year took advantage of its “family uniﬁcation” provisions in the decades after 1965, and the immigrant stream swelled beyond expectations. Even more surprising to the act’s sponsors, the sources of immigration soon shifted heavily from Europe to Latin America and Asia, dramatically changing the racial and ethnic composition of the American population. Great Society programs came in for rancorous political attack in later years. Conservatives charged that the billions spent for “social engineering” had simply been ﬂushed down the waste pipe. Yet the poverty rate declined measurably in the ensuing decade (see Figure 38.1). Medicare made especially dramatic reductions in the incidence of poverty among America’s

Millions/ Percent
 Number in poverty

 Poverty rate (%)



















Figure 38.1 Poverty in the United States, 1960–2006
 In 2000 the poverty rate fell to 11.3 percent, its lowest level since 1979. In the new century, it increased by a percentage point. These ﬁgures refer to the number of people who live in families whose total income is lower than a set “poverty threshold,” which is tied to the consumer price index, so it varies with inﬂation. The “poverty rate” means the percentage of all Americans living below that threshold. (Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, http://www.census.gov/ hhes/www/poverty/histpov/hstpov2.html.)

 elderly. Other antipoverty programs, among them Project Head Start, sharply improved the educational perfor mance of underprivileged youth. Infant mortality rates also fell in minority communities as general health conditions improved. Lyndon Johnson was not



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 fully victorious in the war against poverty, but he did win several noteworthy battles.

Battling for Black Rights
 With the last of his Big Four reforms, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, Johnson made heartening headway against one of the most persistent American evils, racial discrimination. In Johnson’s native South, the walls of segregation were crumbling, but not fast enough for long-suffering African Americans. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 gave the federal government more muscle to enforce school-desegregation orders and to prohibit racial discrimination in all kinds of public accommodations and employment. But the problem of voting rights remained. In Mississippi, which had the largest black minority of any state, only about 5 percent of eligible blacks were registered to vote. The lopsided pattern was similar throughout the South. Ballotdenying devices like the poll tax, literacy tests, and barefaced intimidation still barred black people from the political process. Mississippi law required the names of prospective black registrants to be published for two weeks in local newspapers—a device that virtually guaranteed economic reprisals, or worse. Beginning in 1964, opening up the polling booths became the chief goal of the black movement in the South. The Twenty-fourth Amendment, ratiﬁed in January 1964, abolished the poll tax in federal elections. (See the Appendix.) Blacks joined hands with white civil rights workers—many of them student volunteers from the North—in a massive voter-registration drive in Mississippi during the Freedom Summer of 1964. Singing “We Shall Overcome,” they zealously set out to soothe generations of white anxieties and black fears. But events soon blighted bright hopes. In late June 1964, one black and two white civil rights workers disappeared in Mississippi. Their badly beaten bodies were later found buried beneath an earthen dam. FBI investigators eventually arrested twenty-one white Mississippians, including the local sheriff, in connection with the kill ings. But white juries refused to convict the whites for these murders. In August an integrated Mississippi Freedom Democratic party delegation was denied its seat at the national Democratic convention. Only a handful of black Mississippians had succeeded in registering to vote. Early in 1965 Martin Luther King, Jr., resumed the voter-registration campaign in Selma, Alabama, where blacks made up 50 percent of the population but only

 1 percent of the voters. State troopers with tear gas and whips assaulted King’s demonstrators as they marched peacefully to the state capital at Montgomery. A Boston Unitarian minister was killed, and a few days later a white Detroit woman was shotgunned to death by Klansmen on the highway near Selma. As the nation recoiled in horror before these violent scenes, President Johnson, speaking in soft southern accents, delivered a compelling address on television. What happened in Selma, he insisted, concerned all Americans, “who must overcome the crippling legacy

 Selma March, 1965 Alabama state troopers lie in wait for peaceful civil rights demonstrators marching from Selma to the state capital at Montgomery. This cover to the March 19, 1965, issue of Life magazine signaled that the civil rights movement had found a national audience. A few moments after the photo was taken, state troopers started beating marchers with billy clubs and shooting tear gas at them. Dozens of demonstrators were hospitalized. What Life called “the Savage Season” led Congress ﬁnally to pass the historic Voting Rights Act of 1965.

Black Power




 of bigotry and injustice.” Then, in a stirring adaptation of the anthem of the civil rights movement, the president concluded, “And we shall overcome.” Following words with deeds, Johnson speedily shepherded through Congress the landmark Voting Rights Act of 1965, signed into law on August 6. It outlawed literacy tests and sent federal voter registrars into several southern states. The passage of the Voting Rights Act, exactly one hundred years after the conclusion of the Civil War, climaxed a century of awful abuse and robust resurgence for African Americans in the South. “Give us the ballot,” said Martin Luther King, Jr., “and the South will never be the same again.” He was right. The act did not end discrimination and oppression overnight, but it placed an awesome lever for change in blacks’ hands. Black southerners now had power and began to wield it without fear of reprisals. White southerners began to court black votes and business as never before. In the following decade, for the ﬁrst time since emancipation, African Americans began to migrate into the South.

Black Power
 The Voting Rights Act of 1965 marked the end of an era in the history of the civil rights movement—the era of nonviolent demonstrations, focused on the South, led by peaceful moderates like Martin Luther King, Jr., and aimed at integrating blacks into American society. As if to symbolize the turn of events, just ﬁve days after President Johnson signed the landmark voting law, a bloody riot erupted in Watts, a black ghetto in Los Angeles. Blacks enraged by police brutality burned and looted their own neighborhoods for nearly a week. When the smoke ﬁ nally cleared over the Los Angeles basin, thirty-one blacks and three whites lay dead, more than a thousand people had been injured, and hundreds of buildings stood charred and gutted. The Watts explosion heralded a new phase of the black struggle—increasingly marked by militant confrontation, focusing on northern and western cities, led by radical and sometimes violent spokespersons, and often aiming not at interracial cooperation but at black separatism. The pious Christian moderation of Martin Luther King, Jr., came under heavy ﬁ re from this second wave of younger black leaders, who privately mocked the digniﬁed Dr. King as “de Lawd.” Deepening division among black leaders was highlighted by the career of Malcolm X. Born Malcolm Little, he was at ﬁ rst in-

 Malcolm X The charismatic black leader was a hypnotizing speaker who could rivet and arouse crowds with his call for black separatism. At the end of his life, Malcolm began to temper his separatist creed.

 spired by the militant black nationalists in the Nation of Islam. Like the Nation’s founder, Elijah Muhammed (born Elijah Poole), Malcolm changed his surname to advertise his lost African identity in white America. A brilliant and charismatic preacher, Malcolm X trumpeted black separatism and inveighed against the “blue-eyed white devils.” Eventually Malcolm distanced himself from Elijah Muhammed’s separatist preachings and moved toward mainstream Islam. (By the 1990s Islam was among America’s fastest-growing religions and counted some 2 million African American converts—or “reverts,” as Muslims described it— in its ranks.) In early 1965 he was cut down by rival Nation of Islam gunmen while speaking to a large crowd in New York City. The militant Black Panther party meanwhile brandished weapons in the streets of Oakland, Cal i fornia, even while it was establishing children’s breakfast



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 programs. Then in 1966 Trinidad-born Stokely Carmichael, a leader of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), began to preach the doctrine of Black Power, which, he said, “will smash every thing Western civilization has created.” Some advocates of Black Power insisted that they simply intended the slogan to describe a broad-front effort to exercise the political and economic rights gained by the civil rights movement and to speed the integration of American society. But other African Americans, recollecting previous black nationalist movements like that of Marcus

Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929–1968) and
 Malcolm X (1925–1965) not only differed in the goals they held out to their fellow African Americans— King urging racial integration and Malcolm X black separatism—but also in the means they advocated to achieve them. In his famous “I Have a Dream” speech during the interracial March on Washington on August 28, 1963, King proclaimed to a quarter of a million people assembled at the Lincoln Memorial,

“


 In the process of gaining our rightful place we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds. Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred. . . . We must not allow our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence. Again and again we must rise to the majestic heights of meeting physical force with soul force.

”


 About three months later, Malcolm X angrily rejected King’s “peaceful, turn-the-other-cheek revolution”:

“


 Revolution is bloody, revolution is hostile, revolution knows no compromise, revolution overturns and destroys everything that gets in its way. And you, sitting around here like a knot on the wall, saying, ‘I’m going to love these folks no matter how much they hate me,’ . . . Whoever heard of a revolution where they lock arms, . . . singing ‘We shall overcome?’ You don’t do that in a revolution. You don’t do any singing, you’re too busy swinging.

”


 Garvey earlier in the century (see p. 792), breathed a vibrant separatist meaning into the concept of Black Power. They emphasized African American distinctiveness, promoted “Afro” hairstyles and dress, shed their “white” names for new African identities, and demanded black studies programs in schools and universities. Ironically, just as the civil rights movement had achieved its greatest legal and political triumphs, more city-shaking riots erupted in the black ghettos of several American cities. A bloody outburst in Newark, New Jersey, in the summer of 1967 took twenty-ﬁve lives. Federal troops restored order in Detroit, Michigan, after forty-three people died in the streets. As in Los Angeles, black rioters torched their own neighborhoods, attacking police ofﬁcers and even ﬁ reﬁghters, who had to battle both ﬂames and mobs howling “Burn, baby, burn.” These riotous outbursts angered many white Americans, who threatened to retaliate with their own “backlash” against ghetto arsonists and killers. Innercity anarchy bafﬂed many northerners, who had considered racial problems a purely “southern” question. But black concerns had moved north—as had nearly half the nation’s black people. In the North the Black Power movement now focused less on civil rights and more on economic demands. Black unemployment, for example, was nearly double that for whites. These oppressive new problems seemed even less likely to be solved peaceably than the struggle for voting rights in the South. Despair deepened when the magnetic and moderate voice of Martin Luther King, Jr., was forever silenced by a sniper’s bullet in Memphis, Tennessee, on April 4, 1968. A martyr for justice, he had bled and died against the peculiarly American thorn of race. The kill ing of King cruelly robbed the American people of one of the most inspirational leaders in their history— at a time when they could least afford to lose him. This outrage triggered a nationwide orgy of ghetto-gutting and violence that cost over forty lives. Rioters noisily made news, but thousands of other blacks quietly made history. Their voter registration in the South shot upward, and by the late 1960s several hundred blacks held elected ofﬁce in the Old South. Cleveland, Ohio, and Gary, Indiana, elected black mayors. By 1972 nearly half of southern black children sat in integrated classrooms. Actually, more schools in the South were integrated than in the North. About a third of black families had risen economically into the ranks of the middle class—though an equal proportion

American Escalation in Vietnam


 remained below the “poverty line.” King left a shining legacy of racial progress, but he was cut down when the job was far from completed.

Combating Communism in
Two Hemispheres
 Violence at home eclipsed Johnson’s legislative triumphs, while foreign ﬂare-ups threatened his political life. Discontented Dominicans rose in revolt against their military government in April 1965. Johnson speedily announced that the Dominican Republic was the target of a Castro-like coup by “Communist conspirators,” and he dispatched American troops, ultimately some twenty-ﬁve thousand, to restore order. But the evidence of a communist takeover was fragmentary at best. Johnson was widely condemned, at home and in Latin America, for his temporary reversion to the ofﬁcially abandoned “gunboat diplomacy.” At about the same time, Johnson was sinking deeper into the monsoon mud of Vietnam. Guerillas loyal to the North Vietnamese communists, called Viet Cong, attacked an American air base at Pleiku, South Vietnam, in February 1965. The president immediately ordered retaliatory bombing raids against military installations in North Vietnam and for the ﬁ rst time or-



 dered attacking U.S. troops to land. By the middle of March 1965, the Americans had “Operation Rolling Thunder” in full swing—regular full-scale bombing attacks against North Vietnam. Before 1965 ended, some 184,000 American troops were involved, most of them slogging through the jungles and rice paddies of South Vietnam searching for guerrillas. Johnson had now taken the ﬁ rst fateful steps down a slippery path. He and his advisers believed that a ﬁ ne-tuned, step-by-step “escalation” of American force would drive the enemy to defeat with a minimum loss of life on both sides. But the enemy matched every increase in American ﬁ repower with more men and more wiliness in the art of guerrilla warfare. The South Vietnamese themselves were meanwhile becoming spectators in their own war, as the ﬁghting became increasingly Americanized. Corrupt and collapsible governments succeeded each other in Saigon with bewildering rapidity. Yet American ofﬁcials continued to talk of defending a faithful democratic ally. Washington spokespeople also defended America’s action as a test of Uncle Sam’s “commitment” and of the reliability of his numerous treaty pledges to resist communist encroachment. Persuaded by such panicky thinking, Johnson steadily raised the military stakes in Vietnam. By 1968 he had poured more than

The Mechanized War
 High technology and modern equipment, such as this helicopter, gave the Americans in Vietnam a huge military advantage. But unaccompanied by a clear political purpose and a national will to win, technological superiority was insufﬁcient to achieve ﬁnal victory.



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 half a million troops into Southeast Asia, and the annual bill for the war was exceeding $30 billion. Yet the end was nowhere in sight.

Vietnam Vexations
 America could not defeat the enemy in Vietnam, but it seemed to be defeating itself. World opinion grew increasingly hostile; the blasting of an underdeveloped country by a mighty superpower struck many critics as obscene. Several nations expelled American Peace Corps volunteers. The ever-censorious Charles de Gaulle withdrew France from NATO in 1966 and ordered all American troops out of the country, reportedly prompting Johnson to ask if that included the thousands buried in Normandy. Overcommitment in Southeast Asia also tied America’s hands elsewhere. Attacked by Soviet-backed Egypt, Jordan, and Syria, a beleaguered Israel stunned the world with a military triumph in June, 1967. When the smoke cleared after the Six-Day War, Israel expanded to control new territories in the Sinai Peninsula, the Golan Heights, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank of the Jordan River, including Jerusalem (see Map 40.2 on p. 1038). The Israeli victory brought some 1 million resentful Palestinian Arabs under direct Israeli control, while another 350,000 Palestinian refugees ﬂed to neighboring Jordan. The Israelis eventually withdrew from the Sinai after signing a peace treaty with Egypt, but they refused to relinquish the other areas without a treaty and began moving Jewish settlers into the heavily Arab district of the West Bank. The Six-Day War markedly intensiﬁed the problems of the already volatile Middle East, leading to an intractable standoff between the Israelis and Palestinians, now led by Yasir Arafat (1929–2004), head of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). For decades a return to the “pre-1967 boundaries” would be a key negotiating aim for Palestinians. The Middle East became an ever more dangerously packed powder keg that the war-plagued United States proved powerless to defuse. Domestic discontent festered as the Vietnamese entanglement dragged on. Antiwar demonstrations had begun on a small scale with campus “teach-ins” in 1965, and gradually these protests mounted to tidalwave proportions. As the long arm of the military draft dragged more and more young men off to the Southeast Asian slaughter pen, resistance stiffened. Thousands of draft registrants ﬂed to Canada; others

 Vietnam Vets Protest the War, 1971 Public opinion gradually but inexorably turned against the war. In 1965 polls showed that only 15 percent of Americans favored withdrawal from Vietnam. But by 1969, 69 percent of those interviewed indicated that they considered the war a “mistake,” and by 1970 a majority supported withdrawal of U.S. troops. In this demonstration on April 23, 1971, eight hundred veterans threw away their Purple Hearts, Bronze Stars, Silver Stars, and other military honors in front of the U.S. Capitol in protest against a war they no longer could support.

 publicly burned their draft cards. Hundreds of thousands of marchers ﬁ lled the streets of New York, San Francisco, and other cities, chanting, “Hell no, we won’t go” and “Hey, hey, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?” Many Americans felt pangs of conscience at the spectacle of their countrymen burning peasant huts and blistering civilians with ghastly napalm.

Johnson and Vietnam


 Opposition in Congress to the Vietnam involvement centered in the inﬂuential Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, headed by Senator William Fulbright of Arkansas. A constant thorn in the side of the president, he staged a series of widely viewed televised hearings in 1966 and 1967, during which prominent personages aired their views, largely antiwar. Gradually the public came to feel that it had been deceived about the causes and “winnability” of the war. A yawning “credibility gap” opened between the government and the people. New ﬂocks of antiwar “doves” were hatching daily. Even within the administration, doubts were deepening about the wisdom of the war in Vietnam. When Defense Secretary McNamara expressed increasing discomﬁture at the course of events, he was quietly eased out of the cabinet. (Years later McNamara wrote that “we were wrong, terribly wrong,” about Vietnam.) By early 1968 the brutal and futile struggle had become the longest and most unpopular foreign war in the nation’s history. The government had failed utterly to explain to the people what was supposed to be at stake in Vietnam. Many critics wondered if any objective could be worth the vast price, in blood and treasure, that America was paying. Casualties, killed and wounded, already exceeded 100,000. More bombs had been dropped on Vietnam than on all enemy territory in World War II.

 The Vietnam Quagmire This soldier, carrying a rocket launcher across a stream in the ironically named “demilitarized zone” (DMZ) that separated North and South Vietnam, was killed in action just days after this photo was taken.



 The war was also ripping apart the fabric of American society and even threatening to shred the Constitution. In 1967 President Johnson ordered the CIA, in clear violation of its charter as a foreign intelligence agency, to spy on domestic antiwar activists. He also encouraged the FBI to turn its counterintelligence program, code-named “Cointelpro,” against the peace movement. “Cointelpro” subverted leading “doves” with false accusations that they were communist sympathizers. These clandestine tactics made the FBI look like a totalitarian state’s secret police rather than a guardian of American democracy. As the war dragged on, evidence mounted that America had been entrapped in an Asian civil war, ﬁghting against highly motivated rebels who were striving to overthrow an oppressive regime. Yet Johnson clung to his basic strategy of ratcheting up the pressure bit by bit. He stubbornly assured doubting Americans that he could see “the light at the end of the tunnel.” But to growing numbers of Americans, it seemed that Johnson was bent on “saving” Vietnam by destroying it.

Vietnam Topples Johnson
 Hawkish illusions that the struggle was about to be won were shattered by a blistering communist offensive launched in late January 1968, during Tet, the Vietnamese New Year. At a time when the Viet Cong were supposedly licking their wounds, they suddenly and simultaneously mounted savage attacks on twentyseven key South Vietnamese cities, including the capital, Saigon. Although eventually beaten off with heavy losses, they demonstrated anew that victory could not be gained by Johnson’s strategy of gradual escalation. The Tet offensive ended in a military defeat but a political victory for the Viet Cong. With an increasingly insistent voice, American public opinion demanded a speedy end to the war. Opposition grew so vehement that President Johnson could feel the very foundations of government shaking under his feet. He was also suffering through hells of personal agony over American casualties. He wept as he signed letters of condolence and slipped off at night to pray with monks at a small Catholic church in Washington. American military leaders responded to the Tet attacks with a request for 200,000 more troops. The size of the request staggered many policymakers. Former secretary of state Dean Acheson reportedly advised the president that “the Joint Chiefs of Staff don’t know what they’re talking about.”



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 ence by ﬁ rmly declaring that he would not be a candidate for the presidency in 1968. Johnson’s “abdication” had the effect of preserving the military status quo. He had held the “hawks” in check, while offering himself as a sacriﬁce to the militant “doves.” The United States could thus maintain the maximum acceptable level of military activity in Vietnam with one hand, while trying to negotiate a settlement with the other. North Vietnam shortly agreed to commence negotiations in Paris. But progress was glacially slow, as prolonged bickering developed over the very shape of the conference table.

The Presidential Sweepstakes
 of 1968

President Lyndon Johnson Haunted by Specters of
Vietnam, 1967


 The president meanwhile was being sharply challenged from within his own party. Eugene McCarthy, a little-known Democratic senator from Minnesota, had emerged as a contender for the 1968 Democratic presidential nomination. The soft-spoken McCarthy, a sometime poet and devout Catholic, gathered a small army of antiwar college students as campaign workers. Going “clean for Gene,” with shaven faces and shortened locks, they helped him gain an impressive 41.4 percent of the Democratic vote in the New Hampshire primary on March 12, 1968. Although still second to Johnson’s 49.6 percent, McCarthy’s showing was devastating for the president. Johnson’s star fell further four days later when Senator Robert F. Kennedy, now a senator from New York and an outspoken dove on the war, threw his hat into the ring. The charismatic and handsome Kennedy, heir to his murdered brother’s mantle of leadership, stirred a passionate response among workers, African Americans, Latinos, and young people. These startling events abroad and at home were not lost on LBJ. In a bombshell address on March 31, 1968, he announced on nationwide television that he would freeze American troop levels and scale back the bombing. Then, in a dramatic plea to unify a dangerously divided nation, Johnson startled his vast audi-

 The summer of 1968 was one of the hottest political seasons in the nation’s history. Johnson’s heir apparent for the Democratic nomination was his liberal vice president, Hubert H. Humphrey, a former pharmacist, college professor, mayor, and U.S. senator from Minnesota. Senators McCarthy and Kennedy meanwhile dueled in several state primaries, with Kennedy’s bandwagon gathering ever-increasing speed. But on June 5, 1968, the night of an exciting victory in the Cal i fornia primary, Kennedy was shot to death by a young Arab immigrant resentful of the candidate’s pro-Israel views. Angry antiwar zealots, deprived by an assassin’s bullet of their leading candidate, streamed menacingly into Chicago for the Democratic convention in August 1968. Mayor Richard Daley responded by arranging for barbed-wire barricades around the convention hall (“Fort Daley”), as well as thousands of police and National Guard reinforcements. Some militant demonstrators baited the ofﬁcers in blue by calling them “pigs,” chanting “Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh,” shouting obscenities, and hurling bags and cans of excrement at the police lines. As people the world over watched on television, the exasperated “peace ofﬁcers” broke into a “police riot,” clubbing and manhandling innocent and guilty alike. Acrid tear gas fumes hung heavy over the city even as Humphrey steamrollered to the nomination on the ﬁrst ballot. The Humphrey forces blocked the McCarthyites’ attempt to secure an antiwar platform plank and hammered into place their own declaration that armed force would be relentlessly applied until the enemy showed more willingness to negotiate.

The Election of 1968




The Siege of Chicago, 1968
 Antiwar protesters staged demonstrations in the streets of Chicago during the Democratic National Convention in August 1968. Some 2,500 members of the radical Youth International Party (known as the Yippies) planned a peaceful “festival of light” across the street from the convention hall, but instead found themselves drawn into a melee with the police and National Guardsmen. The confrontation in Chicago badly tarnished Democratic candidate Hubert Humphrey’s presidential campaign. His Republican opponent, Richard Nixon, won the presidency with calls for an “honorable peace” in Vietnam and “law and order” at home.

 Scenting victory over the badly divided Democrats, the Republicans convened in plush Miami Beach, Florida, where former vice president Richard M. Nixon arose from his political grave to win the nomination. As a “hawk” on Vietnam and a right-leaning middleof-the-roader on domestic policy, Nixon pleased the Goldwater conser vatives and was acceptable to party moderates. He appealed to white southern voters and to the “law-and-order” element when he tapped as his vice-presidential running mate Maryland’s Governor Spiro T. Agnew, noted for his tough stands against dissidents and black militants. The Republican platform called for victory in Vietnam and a strong anticrime policy. Adding color and confusion to the campaign was a “spoiler” third-party ticket—the American Independent party—headed by a scrappy ex-pugilist, George C. Wallace, former governor of Alabama. In 1963 he had stood in the doorway to prevent two black students from entering the University of Alabama. “Segregation now! Segregation tomorrow! Segregation forever!” he shouted. Wallace jabbed repeatedly at “pointy-headed bureaucrats,” and he taunted hecklers as “bums” in need of a bath. Speaking behind a bulletproof screen, he called for prodding the blacks into their place, with bayonets if necessary. He and his running mate,

 former air force general Curtis LeMay, also proposed smashing the North Vietnamese to smithereens by “bombing them back to the Stone Age.” Between the positions of the Republicans and the Democrats on Vietnam, there was little choice. Both candidates were committed to carrying on the war until the enemy settled for an “honorable peace,” which seemed to mean an American victory. The millions of “doves” had no place to roost, and many refused to vote at all. Humphrey, scorched by the LBJ brand, went down to defeat as a loyal prisoner of his chief’s policies. Nixon, who had lost a cliffhanger to Kennedy in 1960, won one in 1968. He garnered 301 electoral votes, with 43.4 percent of the popular tally (31,785,480), as compared with 191 electoral votes and 42.7 percent of the popular votes (31,275,166) for Humphrey (see Map 38.3). Unlike most new presidents, Nixon faced congressional majorities of the opposing party in both houses. He carried not a single major city, thus attesting to the continuing urban strength of the Democrats, who also won about 95 percent of the black vote. Nixon had received no clear mandate to do anything. He was a minority president who owed his election to divisions over the war and protest against the unfair draft, crime, and rioting.



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968
WA MT

 OR

 ID

NV CA

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 MN

SD NE

 CO

 WI

IA KS OK

 NM

 IL

MI IN

 MO

 LA

 OH

 WV

KY TN

 AR

 TX

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 14 RI PA NJ CT 4 17 8

 MS

 AL

 GA

 VA

NC R-12/AI
-1 SC 
DE MD DC

 FL

AK HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Nixon (Republican)




56.1%


31,785,480


Humphrey (Democrat)




35.5%


31,275,166


42.7%




8.4%


9,906,473


13.5%


Wallace
(American Independent)


43.4%


 Map 38.3 Presidential Election of 1968 (with electoral vote by state) George Wallace won in ﬁve states, and he denied a clear majority to either of the two major-party candidates in twenty-ﬁve other states. A shift of some ﬁfty thousand votes might well have thrown the election into the House of Representatives, giving Wallace the strategic bargaining position he sought.

Interactive Map


 As for Wallace, he won an impressive 9,906,473 popular votes and 46 electoral votes, all from ﬁve states of the Deep South, four of which the Republican Goldwater had carried in 1964. Wallace remained a formidable force, for he had amassed the largest third-party popular vote in American history to that point and was the last third-party candidate to win any electoral votes. (In 1992 Ross Perot enjoyed a greater popularvote margin but won no states; see p. 1057.) Wallace had also resoundingly demonstrated the continuing power of “populist” politics, which appealed to voters’ fears and resentments rather than to the better angels of their nature. His candidacy foreshadowed a coarsening of American political life that would take deep root in the ensuing decades.

The Obituary of
Lyndon Johnson
 Talented but tragedy-struck Lyndon Johnson returned to his Texas ranch in January 1969 and died there four

 years later. His party was defeated, and his “me-too” Hubert Humphrey was repudiated. Yet Johnson’s legislative leadership for a time had been remarkable. No president since Lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights. None had shown more compassion for the poor, blacks, and the ill-educated. But by 1966 Johnson was already sinking into the Vietnam quicksands. Great Society programs began to wither on the vine, as soaring war costs sucked tax dollars into the military machine. His effort to provide both guns and butter prevented him from delivering either in sufﬁcient quantity. The War on Poverty met resistance that was as stubborn as the Viet Cong and eventually went down to defeat. Great want persisted alongside great wealth. Johnson had cruciﬁed himself on the cross of Vietnam. The Southeast Asian quagmire engulfed his noblest intentions. Committed to some degree by his two predecessors, he had chosen to defend the American foothold and enlarge the conﬂ ict rather than be run out. He was evidently persuaded by his brightest advisers, both civilian and military, that massive aerial bombing and limited troop commitments would make a “cheap” victory possible. His decision not to escalate the ﬁghting further offended the “hawks,” and his refusal to back off altogether antagonized the “doves.” Like the Calvinists of colonial days, luckless Lyndon Johnson was damned if he did and damned if he did not.

The Cultural Upheaval
 of the 1960s The struggles of the 1960s against racism, poverty, and the war in Vietnam had momentous cultural consequences. The decade came to be seen as a watershed dividing two distinct eras in terms of values, morals, and behavior. Everywhere in 1960s America, a newly negative attitude toward all kinds of authority took hold. Disillusioned by the discovery that American society was not free of racism, sexism, imperialism, and oppression, many young people lost their traditional moral rudders. Neither families nor churches nor schools seemed to be able to deﬁ ne values and shape behavior with the certainty of shared purpose that many people believed had once existed. The nation’s mainline Protestant denominations, which had dominated American religious life for centuries, lost their grip in the 1960s, as weekly churchgoing declined from 48 per-

 The Counterculture of the 1960s

 cent in the late 1950s to 41 percent in the early 1970s. The liberal Protestant churches suffered the most. They increasingly ceded religious authority to conservative evangelicals while surrendering cultural authority to secular professionals and academic social scientists. A new cultural divide began to take shape, as educated Americans became increasingly secular and the less educated became more religious. Religious upheaval even churned the tradition-bound Roman Catholic Church, among the world’s oldest and most conser vative institutions. Clerics abandoned their Roman collars and Latin lingo, folk songs replaced Gregorian chants, and meatless Fridays became ancient history. No matter what the topic, conventional wisdom and inherited ideas came under ﬁre. “Trust no one over thirty” was a popular sneer of rebellious youth. Skepticism about authority had deep historical roots in American culture, and it had even bloomed in the supposedly complacent and conformist 1950s. “Beat” poets like Allen Ginsberg and iconoclastic novelists like Jack Kerouac had voiced dark disillusion with the materialistic pursuits and “establishment” arrogance of the Eisenhower era. In movies like Rebel Without a Cause (1955), the attractive young actor James Dean expressed the restless frustration of many young people. The disaffection of the young reached crisis proportions in the tumultuous 1960s. One of the ﬁrst organized protests against established authority broke out at the University of Cal i fornia at Berkeley in 1964, in the aptly named Free Speech Movement. Students objected to an administrative ban on the use of campus space for political debate. During months of protest, they accused the Cold War “megaversity” of promoting corporate interests rather than humane values. But in only a few years, the clean-cut Berkeley activists and their sober-minded sit-ins would seem downright quaint. Fired by outrage against the war in Vietnam, some sons and daughters of the middle class became radical political rebels. Others turned to mind-bending drugs, tuned in to “acid rock,” and dropped out of “straight” society. Still others “did their own thing” in communes or “alternative” institutions. Patriotism became a dirty word. Beﬂowered women in trousers and long-haired men with earrings heralded the rise of a self-conscious “counterculture” stridently opposed to traditional American ways. Social upheaval in the 1960s was far from an American-only phenomenon. As people born in the wake of World War II came of age across the world, they questioned established authority every where. Waves of



The Free Speech Movement, Berkeley, California, 1964
 The Free Speech Movement on the campus of the University of California at Berkeley marked the ﬁrst of the large-scale student mobilizations that rocked campuses across the country throughout the rest of the 1960s. Here a student schooled in passive resistance is dragged by police to a waiting bus.

 protests and calls for individual rights and political freedom spread like wildﬁ re. The year 1968 was so stormy that it became synonymous with un rest in many languages. In May of that year, leftist French students organized city-crippling strikes against their country’s antiquated university system. Joined by millions of workers, they nearly toppled the government. The global spirit of protest—against the Vietnam War, racial injustice, and the strictures of bourgeois society—spread from Berkeley, Cal i fornia, to Columbia University in



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


Paris, 1968
 Protests ripped through the world in 1968. In Paris student battles with campus authorities and police triggered a massive nationwide labor strike and nearly brought down the French government.

 New York, to West Berlin, and even to Communist China. In Czechoslovakia, deep within the Soviet bloc, Western-inspired reformers launched the liberating program that became known as the “Prague Spring” in January 1968. For eight months political freedom blossomed, until ruthlessly mowed down by Soviet tanks. Despite backlashes—by university presidents, conservative politicians, and communist leaders—the genie of cultural and political protest was out of the bottle. The 1960s also witnessed a “sexual revolution,” though its novelty and scale are often exaggerated. Without doubt, the introduction of the birth-control pill in 1960 made unwanted pregnancies much easier to avoid and sexual appetites easier to satisfy. The Mattachine Society, founded in Los Angeles in 1951, was a pioneering advocate for gay rights, as gay men and lesbians increasingly demanded sexual tolerance. A brutal attack on gay men by off-duty police ofﬁcers at New York’s Stonewall Inn in 1969 proved a turning point, when the victims fought back in what became known as the Stonewall Rebellion. Widening worries in the 1980s about sexually transmitted diseases like genital herpes and AIDS (acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome) ﬁ nally slowed, but did not reverse, the sexual revolution. Launched in youthful idealism, many of the cultural “revolutions” of the 1960s sputtered out in vio-

 lence and cynicism. Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), once at the forefront of the antipoverty and antiwar campaigns, had by decade’s end spawned an underground terrorist group called the Weathermen. Peaceful civil rights demonstrations had given way to blockbusting urban riots. What started as apparently innocent experiments with drugs like marijuana and LSD had fried many youthful brains and spawned a loathsome underworld of drug lords and addicts. Straight-laced guardians of respectability denounced the self-indulgent romanticism of the “ﬂower children” as the beginning of the end of modern civilization. Sympathetic observers hailed the “greening” of America—the replacement of materialism and imperialism by a new consciousness of human values. The upheavals of the 1960s could be largely attributed to the three P’s: the youthful population bulge, protest against racism and the Vietnam War, and the apparent permanence of prosperity. As the decade ﬂowed into the 1970s, the ﬂower children grew older and had children of their own, the civil rights movement fell silent, the war ended, and economic stagnation blighted the bloom of prosperity. Young people in the 1970s seemed more concerned with ﬁ nding a job in the system than with tearing the system down. But if the “counterculture” had not managed fully to replace older values, it had weakened their grip, perhaps permanently.

Chronology




The First Gay Pride
Parade, New York City, 1970
 On the ﬁrst anniversary of homosexuals’ celebrated resistance to police harassment at the Stonewall Inn, on June 27, 1969, two hundred men and women marched from Greenwich Village to Central Park, initiating a tradition that now has spread to many other American cities and around the globe, attracting thousands of paraders, onlookers, and even prominent politicians.

 CHRONOLOGY

 European Economic Community (EEC, Common Market) created by Treaty of Rome



 Berlin Wall built Alliance for Progress Bay of Pigs invasion Kennedy sends “military advisers” to South Vietnam



 Pressure from Kennedy results in rollback of steel prices Trade Expansion Act Laos neutralized Cuban missile crisis



 France vetoes British membership in EEC Anti-Diem coup in South Vietnam Civil rights march in Washington, D.C. Kennedy assassinated; Johnson assumes presidency



 Twenty-fourth Amendment (abolishing poll tax in federal elections) ratiﬁed “Freedom Summer” voter registration in South Gulf of Tonkin Resolution

 Johnson defeats Goldwater for presidency War on Poverty begins Civil Rights Act

 Great Society legislation Voting Rights Act U.S. troops occupy Dominican Republic

 1965– Race riots in U.S. cities

 France withdraws from NATO



 Six-Day War between Israel and Egypt



 North Vietnamese army launches Tet offensive in South Vietnam Worldwide protests Martin Luther King, Jr., and Robert Kennedy assassinated Prague Spring crushed by Soviet army Nixon defeats Humphrey and Wallace for presidency



 Stonewall Inn riot in New York City Astronauts land on moon



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


KEY TERMS
New Frontier (972) Peace Corps (973) Apollo (974) Berlin Wall (975) European Economic Community (EEC) (975) Bay of Pigs invasion (978) Cuban missile crisis (979) Freedom Riders (979) Voter Education Project (980) March on Washington (981) Civil Rights Act of 1964 (984) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
afﬁrmative action (984) Great Society (984) Freedom Summer (988) Mississippi Freedom Democratic party (988) Voting Rights Act of 1965 (989) Black Panther party (989) Black Power (990) Six-Day War (992) Stonewall Rebellion (998) Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) (998) 
Robert F. Kennedy
 Robert S. McNamara Ngo Dinh Diem James Meredith

Lee Harvey Oswald
Malcolm X
 Eugene McCarthy George C. Wallace

The Sixties: Constructive or Destructive?


T


 he 1960s were convulsed by controversy, and they have remained controversial ever since. Conﬂ icts raged in that turbulent decade between social classes, races, sexes, and generations. More than three decades later, the shock waves from the 1960s still reverberate through American society. The “Contract with America” that swept conser vative Republicans to power in 1994 amounted to nothing less than a wholesale repudiation of the government activism that marked the sixties and a resounding reafﬁ rmation of the “traditional values” that sixties culture supposedly trashed. Liberal Democrats, on the other hand, continue to press afﬁ rmative action for women and minorities, protection for the environment, an expanded welfare state, and sexual tolerance—all legacies of the stormy sixties. Four issues dominate historical discussion of the 1960s: the struggle for civil rights, the Great Society’s “War on Poverty,” the Vietnam War and the antiwar movement, and the emergence of the “counterculture.”

 Although most scholars praise the civil rights achievements of the 1960s, they disagree over the civil rights movement’s turn away from nonviolence and its embrace of separatism and Black Power. The Freedom Riders and Martin Luther King, Jr., ﬁ nd much more approval in most history books than do Malcolm X and the Black Panther party. But some scholars, notably William L. Van Deburg in New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American Culture, 1965–1975 (1992), argue that the “ﬂank effect” of radical Black Power advocates like Stokely Carmichael actually enhanced the bargaining position of moderates like Dr. King. Deburg also suggests that the enthusiasm of Black Power advocates for African American cultural uniqueness reshaped both black self-consciousness and the broader culture, as it provided a model for the feminist and multiculturalist movements of the 1970s and later. Johnson’s War on Poverty has found its liberal defenders in scholars like Allen Matusow (The Unraveling of America, 1984) and John Schwarz (America’s

To Learn More


 Hidden Success, 1988). Schwarz demonstrates, for example, that Medicare and Social Security reforms virtually eliminated poverty among America’s elderly. But the Great Society has also provoked strong criticism from writers such as Charles Murray (Losing Ground, 1984) and Lawrence Meade (Beyond Entitlements, 1986). As those conser vative critics see the poverty issue, the Great Society was part of the problem, not part of the solution. In their view the War on Poverty did not simply fail to eradicate poverty among the so-called underclass; it actually deepened the dependency of the poor on the welfare state and even generated a multigenerational “cycle” of poverty. In this argument Johnson’s Great Society stands indicted of creating in effect a permanent welfare class. For many young people of the 1960s, the antiwar movement protesting America’s policy in Vietnam provided their initiation into politics and their introduction to “movement culture,” with its sense of community and shared purpose. But scholars disagree over the movement’s real effectiveness in checking the war. Writers like John Lewis Gaddis (Strategies of Containment, 1982) explain America’s eventual withdrawal from Vietnam essentially without reference to the protesters in the streets. Others, like Todd Gitlin (The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage, 1987), insist that mass protest was the force that ﬁ nally pressed the war to a conclusion. Debate over the counterculture not only pits liberals against conser vatives but also pits liberals against radicals. A liberal historian like William O’Neill (Coming Apart, 1971) might sympathize with what he considers some of the worthy values pushed



 by student activists, such as racial justice, nonviolence, and the antiwar movement, but he also claims that much of the sixties “youth culture” degenerated into hedonism, arrogance, and social polarization. In contrast, younger historians such as Michael Kazin and Maurice Isserman argue that cultural radicalism and political radicalism were two sides of the same coin. Many young people in the sixties made little distinction between the personal and the political. As Sara Evans demonstrates in Personal Politics (1980), “the personal was the political” for many women. She ﬁ nds the roots of modern feminism in the sexism women activists encountered in the civil rights and antiwar movements. Although scholars rightly see the 1960s as a liberal decade, some have also started to focus on the other side of the political spectrum. Historians like Lisa McGirr (Suburban Warriors, 2001) argue that even though Barry Goldwater lost in a landslide in 1964, the conser vative movement he kick-started laid the foundation for later successes by Ronald Reagan and both George Bushes. Rebecca Klatch shows in A Generation Divided (1999) how the New Right fed off the New Left, reshaping American politics in profound ways. Liberal policies toward minorities, women, and the poor fueled the ﬁ res of traditionalists who wanted a return to “the good old days.” And the hedonistic counterculture sparked a religious revival that led to politically powerful groups like the Moral Majority by the 1970s. While critics may argue over the “good” versus the “bad” sixties, there is no denying the degree to which that tumultuous time, for better or worse, shaped the world in which we now live.

To Learn More
Dan Carter, The Politics of Rage: George Wallace, the Origins
 of the New Conservatism, and the Transformation of American Politics (1995) Robert Dallek, An Unﬁnished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917– 1963 (2003) Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (1966) Maurice Isserman and Michael Kazin, America Divided: The Civil War of the 1960s (2000) Robert F. Kennedy, Thirteen Days (1969) Lisa McGirr, Suburban Warriors: The Origins of the New American Right (2001) James Miller, “Democracy Is in the Streets”: From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago ( 1987)

Ann Moody, Coming of Age in Mississippi (1968)
Bruce Schulman, Lyndon B. Johnson and American
Liberalism (1994)
Jeremi Suri, Power and Protest: Global Revolution and the
 Rise of Détente (2003)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Stalemated
Seventies





1968–1980
 In all my years of public life, I have never obstructed justice. People have got to know whether or not their President is a crook. Well, I’m not a crook; I earned every thing I’ve got. RICHARD NIXON, 1973

A


 s the 1960s lurched to a close, the fantastic quartercentury economic boom of the post–World War II era also showed signs of petering out. By increasing their productivity, American workers had doubled their average standard of living in the twenty-ﬁve years since the end of World War II. Now, fatefully, productivity gains slowed to the vanishing point. The entire decade of the 1970s did not witness a productivity advance equivalent to even one year’s progress in the preceding two decades. At the new rate, it would take ﬁve hundred more years to bring about another doubling of the average worker’s standard of living. The median income of the average American family stagnated in the two decades after 1970 and failed to decline only because of the addition of working wives’ wages to the family income (see Figure 39.1). The rising

 baby-boom generation now faced the depressing prospect of a living standard that would be lower than that of their parents. As the postwar wave of robust economic growth crested by the early 1970s, at home and abroad the “can-do” American spirit gave way to an unaccustomed sense of limits.

Sources of Stagnation
 What caused the sudden slump in productivity? Some observers cited the increasing presence in the work force of women and teenagers, who typically had fewer skills than adult male workers and were less likely to take the full-time, long-term jobs where skills might be developed. Other commentators blamed declining

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Economic Woes


Figure 39.1 Median Household Income, 1970–2005
 During the long post–World War II economic boom (from about 1950 to 1970), family incomes increased dramatically, but after 1970 “real,” or inﬂation-adjusted, incomes stagnated. Prosperity in the late 1990s led to a slight upward trend, though adjusted median family income began to decline in the early years of the twenty-ﬁrst century. (Sources: U.S. Census Bureau, Historical Income Tables—Households, 2007; U.S. Census Bureau, “Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2005”; Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2007.)



U.S.
Dollars (in thousands) 
Nominal








 Inflation - adjusted (1970 dollars)













 investment in new machinery, the heavy costs of compliance with government-imposed safety and health regulations, and the general shift of the American economy from manufacturing to ser vices, where productivity gains were allegedly more difﬁcult to achieve and mea sure. Yet in the last analysis, much mystery attends the productivity slowdown, and economists have wrestled inconclusively with the puzzle. The Vietnam War also precipitated painful economic distortions. The disastrous conﬂict in Southeast Asia drained tax dollars from needed improvements in education, deﬂected scientiﬁc skill and manufacturing capacity from the civilian sector, and touched off a sickening spiral of inﬂation. Sharply rising oil prices in the 1970s also fed inﬂation, but its deepest roots lay in deﬁcit spending in the 1960s—especially Lyndon Johnson’s insistence on simultaneously ﬁghting the war in Vietnam and funding Great Society programs at home, all without a tax increase to ﬁnance the added expenditures. Both military spending and welfare spending are inherently inﬂationary (in the absence of offsetting tax collections), because they put dollars into people’s hands without adding to the supply of goods that those dollars can buy. Whatever its cause, the effects of inﬂation were deeply felt. Prices increased astonishingly throughout the 1970s. The cost of living tripled in the dozen years after Richard Nixon’s inauguration, in the longest and steepest inﬂationary cycle in American history. Other weaknesses in the nation’s economy were also laid bare by the abrupt reversal of America’s ﬁnancial fortunes in the 1970s. The competitive advantage of many major American businesses had been so enormous after World War II that they had small in-

 The Nixon Wave During Richard Nixon’s presidency, Americans experienced the ﬁrst serious inﬂation since the immediate post–World War II years. The inﬂationary surge grew to tidal-wave proportions by the late 1970s, when the consumer price index rose at an annual rate of more than 10 percent.



