Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 gatherings and in their ecstasy engaged in frenzies of rolling, dancing, barking, and jerking. Many of the “saved” soon backslid into their former sinful ways, but the revivals boosted church membership and stimulated a variety of humanitarian reforms. Responsive easterners were moved to do missionary work in the West with Indians, in Hawaii, and in Asia. Methodists and Baptists reaped the most abundant harvest of souls from the ﬁelds fertilized by revivalism. Both sects stressed personal conversion (contrary to predestination), a relatively democratic

 control of church affairs, and a rousing emotionalism. As a frontier jingle ran, The devil hates the Methodists Because they sing and shout the best. Powerful Peter Cartwright (1785–1872) was the best known of the Methodist “circuit riders,” or traveling frontier preachers. This ill-educated but sinewy servant of the Lord ranged for a half-century from Tennessee to Illinois, calling upon sinners to repent. With bellowing voice and ﬂailing arms, he converted thousands of souls to the Lord. Not only did he lash the Devil with his tongue, but with his ﬁsts he knocked out rowdies who tried to break up his meetings. His Christianity was deﬁ nitely muscular. Bell-voiced Charles Grandison Finney was the greatest of the revival preachers. Trained as a lawyer, Finney abandoned the bar to become an evangelist after a deeply moving conversion experience as a young man. Tall and athletically built, Finney held huge crowds spellbound with the power of his oratory and the pungency of his message. He led massive revivals in Rochester and New York City in 1830 and 1831. Finney preached a version of the old-time religion, but he was also an innovator. He devised the “anxious bench,” where repentant sinners could sit in full view of the

 In his lecture “Hindrances to Revivals,” delivered in the 1830s, Charles Grandison Finney (1792–1875) proposed the excommunication of drinkers and slaveholders:

“
Charles Grandison Finney (1792–1875), 1834
 The charismatic Finney appears here at age fortytwo, at the height of his career as an evangelist. A mesmerizer of audiences, he was said to have converted over a half million people. In 1834, Finney had just led a series of enormously successful revivals in cities along the Erie Canal. The next year he would establish a theology department at the newly founded Oberlin College in Ohio, where he helped train a generation of ministers and served as president from 1851 to 1866.

 Let the churches of all denominations speak out on the subject of temperance, let them close their doors against all who have anything to do with the death-dealing abomination, and the cause of temperance is triumphant. A few years would annihilate the trafﬁc. Just so with slavery. . . . It is a great national sin. It is a sin of the church. The churches by their silence, and by permitting slaveholders to belong to their communion, have been consenting to it. . . . The church cannot turn away from this question. It is a question for the church and for the nation to decide, and God will push it to a decision.

”


The Birth of the Mormons


 congregation, and he encouraged women to pray aloud in public. Holding out the promise of a perfect Christian kingdom on earth, Finney denounced both alcohol and slavery. He eventually served as president of Oberlin College in Ohio, which he helped to make a hotbed of revivalist activity and abolitionism. A key feature of the Second Great Awakening was the feminization of religion, in terms of both church membership and theology. Middle-class women, the wives and daughters of businessmen, were the ﬁ rst and most fervent enthusiasts of religious revivalism. They made up the majority of new church members, and they were most likely to stay within the fold when the tents were packed up and the traveling evangelists left town. Perhaps women’s greater ambivalence than men about the changes wrought by the expanding market economy made them such eager converts to piety. It helped as well that evangelicals preached a gospel of female spiritual worth and offered women an active role in bringing their husbands and families back to God. That accomplished, many women turned to saving the rest of society. They formed a host of benevolent and charitable orga ni zations and spearheaded crusades for most, if not all, of the era’s ambitious reforms.

Denominational Diversity
 Revivals also furthered the fragmentation of religious faiths. Western New York, where many descendants of New Eng land Puritans had settled, was so blistered by sermonizers preaching “hellﬁ re and damnation” that it came to be known as the Burned-Over District. Millerites, or Adventists, who mustered several hundred thousand adherents, rose from the superheated soil of the Burned-Over District in the 1830s. Named after the eloquent and commanding William Miller, they interpreted the Bible to mean that Christ would return to earth on October 22, 1844. Donning their go-to-meeting clothes, they gathered in prayerful assemblies to greet their Redeemer. The failure of Jesus to descend on schedule dampened but did not destroy the movement. Like the First Great Awakening, the Second Great Awakening tended to widen the lines between classes and regions. The more prosperous and conser vative denominations in the East were little touched by revivalism, and Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Unitarians continued to rise mostly from the wealthier, better-educated levels of society.



 Methodists, Baptists, and the members of the other new sects spawned by the swelling evangelistic fervor tended to come from less prosperous, less “learned” communities in the rural South and West. Religious diversity further reﬂected social cleavages when the churches faced up to the slavery issue. By 1844–1845 both the southern Baptists and the southern Methodists had split with their northern brethren over human bondage. The Methodists came to grief over the case of a slaveowning bishop in Georgia, whose second wife added several household slaves to his estate. In 1857 the Presbyterians, North and South, parted company. The secession of the southern churches foreshadowed the secession of the southern states. First the churches split, then the political parties split, and then the Union split.

A
Desert Zion in Utah  The smoldering spiritual embers of the Burned-Over District kindled one especially ardent ﬂame in 1830. In that year Joseph Smith—a rugged visionary, proud of his prowess at wrestling—reported that he had received some golden plates from an angel. When deciphered, they constituted the Book of Mormon, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (the Mormons) was launched. It was a native American product, a new religion, destined to spread its inﬂuence worldwide. After establishing a religious oligarchy, Smith ran into serious opposition from his non-Mormon neighbors, ﬁ rst in Ohio and then in Missouri and Illinois. His cooperative sect antagonized rank-and-ﬁ le Americans, who were individualistic and dedicated to free enterprise. The Mormons aroused further anger by voting as a unit and by openly but understandably drilling their militia for defensive purposes. Accusations of polygamy likewise arose and increased in intensity, for Joseph Smith was reputed to have several wives. Continuing hostility ﬁ nally drove the Mormons to desperate mea sures. In 1844 Joseph Smith and his brother were murdered and mangled by a mob in Carthage, Illinois, and the movement seemed near collapse. The falling torch was seized by a remarkable Mormon Moses named Brigham Young. Stern and austere in contrast to Smith’s charm and affability, the barrelchested Brigham Young had received only eleven days of formal schooling. But he quickly proved to be an aggressive leader, an eloquent preacher, and a gifted administrator. Determined to escape further persecution,



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


Mormon Trekkers Crossing the Mississippi on the Ice Driven out of Illinois
 after the murder of founder Joseph Smith in 1844, the Mormons wintered near Council Bluffs, Iowa Territory, before beginning the long overland trek to Utah.

 Young in 1846–1847 led his oppressed and despoiled Latter-Day Saints over vast rolling plains to Utah as they sang “Come, Come, Ye Saints.” Overcoming pioneer hardships, the Mormons soon made the desert bloom like a new Eden by means of ingenious and cooperative methods of irrigation. The crops of 1848, threatened by hordes of crickets, were saved when ﬂocks of gulls appeared, as if by a miracle, to gulp down the invaders. (A monument to the seagulls stands in Salt Lake City today.) Semiarid Utah grew remarkably. By the end of 1848, some ﬁve thousand settlers had arrived, and other large bands were to follow them (see Map 15.1). Many dedicated Mormons in the 1850s actually made the thirteenhundred-mile trek across the plains pulling two-wheeled carts. Under the rigidly disciplined management of Brigham Young, the community became a prosperous frontier theocracy and a cooperative commonwealth. Young married as many as twenty-seven women— some of them wives in name only—and begot ﬁ fty-six

 children. The population was further swelled by thousands of immigrants from Europe, where the Mormons had established a ﬂourishing missionary movement. A crisis developed when the Washington government was unable to control the hierarchy of Brigham Young, who had been made territorial governor in 1850. A federal army marched in 1857 against the Mormons, who harassed its lines of supply and rallied to die in their last dusty ditch. Fortunately the quarrel was ﬁ-

 Polygamy was an issue of such consequence that it was bracketed with slavery in the Republican national platform of 1856:

“


 It is both the right and the imperative duty of Congress to prohibit in the Territories those twin relics of barbarism—Polygamy and Slavery.

”


OREGON TERRITORY
Sn 
 ak

 eR .

Fort Bridger
Salt Lake City


UTAH TERRITORY C

Littlefield
Las Vegas


 r th

Pla


 tte

 iss

 our

 i R.

IOWA R.

Winter Quarters


Council
Bluffs


.
Platte R


R.


Carthage


Nauvoo


 ILLINOIS

Moab
Arkansas


INDIAN TERRITORY

R.


 Lee’s Ferry

 MISSOURI

Tempe


 ipp

 ARKANSAS

Luna


Mesa


N


.
Gila R


 e

 TENN.

Red R.


 Mormon trek, 1846–1847

Thatcher


Pomerene


California Trail


St. David


N


 siss

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 nd

Holbrook


Mis


E A
O C


San Bernardino


 i R.

Tuba City


Barstow
120°W


 ado olor

Fort Laramie


No


M


Rio G
 ra

I C
P A C I F


Parowan Beaver
Mountain Meadow
Cedar City
St. George


 CALIFORNIA

MINNESOTA TERRITORY

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

Fort Hall


40°N


Mormon Station


90°W


100°W


110°W


WASHINGTON TERRITORY

Mormon Corridor


 TEXAS

30°N






200 Mi.


Fort


 Map 15.1 The Mormon World After Joseph Smith’s murder at Carthage in 1844, the Mormons abandoned their thriving settlement at Nauvoo, Illinois (which had about twenty thousand inhabitants in 1845) and set out for the valley of the Great Salt Lake, then still part of Mexico. When the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (see p. 410) in 1848 brought the vast Utah Territory into the United States, the Mormons rapidly expanded their desert colony, which they called Deseret, especially along the “Mormon Corridor” that stretched from Salt Lake to southern California.

Free Schools for
 a Free People Tax-supported primary schools were scarce in the early years of the Republic. They had the odor of pauperism about them, since they existed chieﬂy to educate the children of the poor—the so-called ragged schools. Advocates of “free” public education met stiff opposition. A midwestern legislator cried that he wanted only this simple epitaph when he died: “Here lies an enemy of public education.”

 Mormon settlements Non-Mormon settlement

 MEXICO

 nally adjusted without serious bloodshed. The Mormons later ran afoul of the antipolygamy laws passed by Congress in 1862 and 1882, and their unique marital customs delayed statehood for Utah until 1896.

 Proposed state of Deseret Boundaries as of 1853

200 Km.


Interactive Map


 Well-to-do, conser vative Americans gradually saw the light. If they did not pay to educate “other folkses brats,” the “brats” might grow up into a dangerous, ignorant rabble—armed with the vote. Taxation for education was an insurance premium that the wealthy paid for stability and democracy. Tax-supported public education, though miserably lagging in the slavery-cursed South, triumphed between 1825 and 1850. Hard-toiling laborers wielded increased inﬂuence and demanded instruction for their children. Most important was the gaining of manhood suffrage for whites in Jackson’s day. A free vote cried aloud for free education. A civilized nation that was both ignorant and free, declared Thomas Jefferson, “never was and never will be.” The famed little red schoolhouse—with one room, one stove, one teacher, and often eight grades—became



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 The Country School, by Winslow Homer, 1871 Stark and simple by latter-day standards, the one-room schoolhouse nevertheless contributed richly to the development of the young Republic.

 the shrine of American democracy. Regrettably, it was an imperfect shrine. Early free schools stayed open only a few months of the year. Schoolteachers, most of them men in this era, were too often ill-trained, ill-tempered, and ill-paid. They frequently put more stress on “lickin’” (with a hickory stick) than on “larnin’.” These knights of the blackboard often “boarded around” in the community, and some knew scarcely more than their older pupils. They usually taught only the “three Rs”— “readin’, ’ritin’, and ’rithmetic.” To many rugged Americans, suspicious of “book larnin’,” this was enough. Reform was urgently needed. Into the breach stepped Horace Mann (1796–1859), a brilliant and idealistic graduate of Brown University. As secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education, he campaigned effectively for more and better schoolhouses, longer school terms, higher pay for teachers, and an expanded curriculum. His inﬂuence radiated out to other states, and impressive improvements were chalked up. Yet education remained an expensive luxury for many communities. As late as 1860, the nation counted only about a hundred public secondary schools—and nearly a million white adult illiterates. Black slaves in the South

 Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) wrote of his education (1859),

“


 There were some schools so-called [in Indiana], but no qualiﬁcation was ever required of a teacher beyond ‘readin’, writin’ and cipherin’ to the rule of three. . . . There was absolutely nothing to excite ambition for education. Of course, when I came of age I did not know much. Still, somehow, I could read, write and cipher to the rule of three, but that was all. I have not been to school since. The little advance I now have upon this store of education, I have picked up from time to time under the pressure of necessity. I was raised to work, which I continued till I was twenty-two.

”


The Growth of Higher Education


 were legally forbidden to receive instruction in reading or writing, and even free blacks, in the North as well as the South, were usually excluded from the schools. Educational advances were aided by improved textbooks, notably those of Noah Webster (1758–1843), a Yale-educated Connecticut Yankee who was known as the “Schoolmaster of the Republic.” His “reading lessons,” used by millions of children in the nineteenth century, were partly designed to promote patriotism. Webster devoted twenty years to his famous dictionary, published in 1828, which helped to standardize the American language. Equally inﬂuential was Ohioan William H. McGuffey (1800–1873), a teacher-preacher of rare power. His grade-school readers, ﬁ rst published in the 1830s, sold 122 million copies in the following decades. McGuffey’s Readers hammered home lasting lessons in morality, patriotism, and idealism.

Higher Goals for
Higher Learning
 Higher education was likewise stirring. The religious zeal of the Second Great Awakening led to the planting of many small, denominational, liberal arts colleges, chieﬂy in the South and West. Too often they were academically anemic, established more to satisfy local pride than genuinely to advance the cause of learning. Like their more venerable, ivy-draped brethren, the new colleges offered a narrow, tradition-bound curriculum of Latin, Greek, mathematics, and moral philosophy. On new and old campuses alike, there was little intellectual vitality and much boredom. The ﬁ rst state-supported universities sprang up in the South, beginning with North Carolina in 1795. Federal land grants nourished the growth of state institutions of higher learning. Conspicuous among the early group was the University of Virginia, founded in 1819. It was largely the brainchild of Thomas Jefferson, who designed its beautiful architecture and who at times watched its construction through a telescope from his hilltop home. He dedicated the university to freedom from religious or political shackles, and modern languages and the sciences received unusual emphasis. Women’s higher education was frowned upon in the early decades of the nineteenth century. A woman’s place was believed to be in the home, and training in needlecraft seemed more important than training in algebra. In an era when the clinging-vine bride was the ideal, coeducation was regarded as frivolous. Preju-



 An editorial in the popular women’s magazine Godey’s Lady’s Book in 1845, probably written by editor Sarah Josepha Hale (1788–1879), argued for better education for women as a beneﬁt to all of society:

“


 The mass of mankind are very ignorant and wicked. Wherefore is this? Because the mother, whom God constituted the ﬁrst teacher of every human being, has been degraded by men from her high ofﬁce; or, what is the same thing, been denied those privileges of education which only can enable her to discharge her duty to her children with discretion and effect. . . . If half the effort and expense had been directed to enlighten and improve the minds of females which have been lavished on the other sex, we should now have a very different state of society.

”


 dices also prevailed that too much learning injured the feminine brain, undermined health, and rendered a young lady unﬁt for marriage. The teachers of Susan B. Anthony, the future feminist, refused to instruct her in long division. Women’s schools at the secondary level began to attain some respectability in the 1820s, thanks in part to the dedicated work of Emma Willard (1787–1870). In 1821 she established the Troy (New York) Female Seminary. Oberlin College, in Ohio, jolted traditionalists in 1837 when it opened its doors to women as well as men. (Oberlin had already created shock waves by admitting black students.) In the same year, Mary Lyon established an outstanding women’s school, Mount Holyoke Seminary (later College), in South Hadley, Massachusetts. Mossback critics scoffed that “they’ll be educatin’ cows next.” Adults who craved more learning satisﬁed their thirst for knowledge at private subscription libraries or, increasingly, at tax-supported libraries. House-tohouse peddlers also did a lush business in feeding the public appetite for culture. Traveling lecturers helped to carry learning to the masses through the lyceum lecture associations, which numbered about three thousand by 1835. The lyceums provided platforms for speakers in such areas as science, literature, and moral philosophy. Talented talkers like Ralph Waldo Emerson



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 The Women Graduates of the Oberlin College Class of 1855 Oberlin was the ﬁrst coeducational institution of higher education in the United States, accepting women in 1837, two years after it had welcomed African Americans. Feminists continued to press for coeducation, and by 1872 ninety-seven American universities accepted women. At some of these institutions, however, such as Radcliffe College of Harvard University and Barnard College of Columbia University, women were educated in associated schools, not alongside male students.

 journeyed thousands of miles on the lyceum circuits, casting their pearls of civilization before appreciative audiences. Magazines ﬂourished in the pre–Civil War years, but most of them withered after a short life. The North American Review, founded in 1815, was the long-lived leader of the intellectuals. Godey’s Lady’s Book, founded in 1830, survived until 1898 and attained the enormous circulation (for those days) of 150,000. It was devoured devotedly by millions of women, many of whom read the dog-eared copies of their relatives and friends.

An Age of Reform
 As the young Republic grew, reform campaigns of all types ﬂourished in sometimes bewildering abundance. Some reformers were simply crackbrained cranks. But most were intelligent, inspired idealists, usually touched by the ﬁ re of evangelical religion then licking through the pews and pulpits of American churches. The opti-

 mistic promises of the Second Great Awakening inspired countless souls to do battle against earthly evils. These modern idealists dreamed anew the old Puritan vision of a perfected society: free from cruelty, war, intoxicating drink, discrimination, and—ultimately—slavery. Women were particularly prominent in these reform crusades, especially in their own struggle for suffrage. For many middle-class women, the reform campaigns provided a unique opportunity to escape the conﬁ nes of the home and enter the arena of public affairs. In part the practical, activist Christianity of these reformers resulted from their desire to reafﬁ rm traditional values as they plunged ever further into a world disrupted and transformed by the turbulent forces of a market economy. Mainly middle-class descendants of pioneer farmers, they were often blissfully unaware that they were witnessing the dawn of the industrial era, which posed unprecedented problems and called for novel ideas. They either ignored the factory workers, for example, or blamed their problems on bad habits. With naive single-mindedness, reformers sometimes applied

Social Reform


 In presenting her case to the Massachusetts legislature for more humane treatment for the mentally ill, Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) quoted from the notebook she carried with her as she traveled around the state:

“


 Lincoln. A woman in a cage. Medford. One idiotic subject chained, and one in a close stall for seventeen years. Pepperell. One often doubly chained, hand and foot; another violent; several peaceable now. . . . Dedham. The insane disadvantageously placed in the jail. In the almshouse, two females in stalls . . . ; lie in wooden bunks ﬁlled with straw; always shut up. One of these subjects is supposed curable. The overseers of the poor have declined giving her a trial at the hospital, as I was informed, on account of expense.

”


 conventional virtue to refurbishing an older order— while events hurtled them headlong into the new. Imprisonment for debt continued to be a nightmare, though its extent has been exaggerated. As late as 1830, hundreds of penniless people were languishing



 in ﬁ lthy holes, sometimes for owing less than one dollar. The poorer working classes were especially hard hit by this merciless practice. But as the embattled laborer won the ballot and asserted himself, state legislatures gradually abolished debtors’ prisons. Criminal codes in the states were likewise being softened, in accord with more enlightened European practices. The number of capital offenses was being reduced, and brutal punishments, such as whipping and branding, were being slowly eliminated. A refreshing idea was taking hold that prisons should reform as well as punish—hence “reformatories,” “houses of correction,” and “penitentiaries” (for penance). Sufferers of so-called insanity were still being treated with incredible cruelty. The medieval concept had been that the mentally deranged were cursed with unclean spirits; the nineteenth-century idea was that they were willfully perverse and depraved—to be treated only as beasts. Many crazed persons were chained in jails or poor-houses with sane people. Into this dismal picture stepped a formidable New Eng land teacher-author, Dorothea Dix (1802–1887). A physically frail woman afﬂ icted with persistent lung trouble, she possessed inﬁ nite compassion and willpower. She traveled some sixty thousand miles in eight years and assembled her damning reports on insanity and asylums from ﬁ rsthand observations. Though she

The Stepping Mill, Auburn Prison,
 New York, 1823 Reformers like Dorothea Dix believed that idleness was a scourge and prescribed rigorous exercise regimens for prisoners. At the experimental prison in Auburn, chained prisoners were obliged to turn this wheel for long periods of time.



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 never raised her voice, Dix’s message was loud and clear. Her classic petition of 1843 to the Massachusetts legislature, describing cells so foul that visitors were driven back by the stench, turned legislative stomachs and hearts. Her persistent prodding resulted in improved conditions and in a gain for the concept that the demented were not willfully perverse but mentally ill. Agitation for peace also gained momentum in the pre–Civil War years. In 1828 the American Peace Society was formed, with a ringing declaration of war on war. A leading spirit was William Ladd, who orated when his legs were so badly ulcerated that he had to sit on a stool. His ideas were ﬁ nally to bear some fruit in the international orga ni zations for collective security of the twentieth century. The American peace crusade, linked with a European counterpart, was making promising progress by midcentury, but it was set back by the bloodshed of the Crimean War in Europe and the Civil War in America.

Demon Rum—
The “Old Deluder”
 The ever-present drink problem attracted dedicated reformers. Custom, combined with a hard and monotonous life, led to the excessive drinking of hard liquor, even among women, clergymen, and members of Congress. Weddings and funerals all too often became disgraceful brawls, and occasionally a drunken mourner would fall into the open grave with the corpse. Heavy drinking decreased the efﬁciency of labor, and poorly safeguarded machinery operated under the inﬂuence of alcohol increased the danger of accidents occurring at work. Drunkenness also fouled the sanctity of the family, threatening the spiritual welfare—and physical safety—of women and children. After earlier and feebler efforts, the American Temperance Society was formed in Boston in 1826. Within a few years, about a thousand local groups sprang into existence. They implored drinkers to sign the temperance pledge and orga nized children’s clubs, known as the “Cold Water Army.” Temperance crusaders also made effective use of pictures, pamphlets, and lurid lecturers, some of whom were reformed drunkards. A popular temperance song ran, We’ve done with our days of carousing, Our nights, too, of frolicsome glee; For now with our sober minds choosing, We’ve pledged ourselves never to spree.

Temperance Banner Lithograph, by Kellogg and
 Comstock, ca. 1848–1850 Among the many evils of alcohol, reformers fulminated especially against its corrupting effects on family life. Here a young man is torn between a drink-bearing temptress and a maiden who exempliﬁes the virtues of womanly purity.

 The most popular anti-alcohol tract of the era was T. S. Arthur’s melodramatic novel, Ten Nights in a Barroom and What I Saw There (1854). It described in shocking detail how a once-happy village was ruined by Sam Slade’s tavern. The book was second only to Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin as a best seller in the 1850s, and it enjoyed a highly successful run on the stage. Its touching theme song began with the words of a little girl: Father, dear father, come home with me now, The clock in the belfry strikes one. Early foes of Demon Drink adopted two major lines of attack. One was to stiffen the individual’s will to resist the wiles of the little brown jug. The moderate

The Feminist Movement Takes Form




 reformers thus stressed “temperance” rather than “teetotalism,” or the total elimination of intoxicants. But less patient zealots came to believe that temptation should be removed by legislation. Prominent among this group was Neal S. Dow of Maine, a blue-nosed reformer who, as a mayor of Portland and an employer of labor, had often witnessed the debauching effect of alcohol—to say nothing of the cost to his pocketbook of work time lost because of drunken employees. Dow—the “Father of Prohibition”—sponsored the so-called Maine Law of 1851. This drastic new statute, hailed as “the law of Heaven Americanized,” prohibited the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquor. Other states in the North followed Maine’s example, and by 1857 about a dozen had passed various prohibitory laws. But these ﬁgures are deceptive, for within a decade some of the statutes were repealed or declared unconstitutional, if not openly ﬂouted. It was clearly impossible to legislate thirst for alcohol out of existence, especially in localities where public sentiment was hostile. Yet on the eve of the Civil War, the prohibitionists had registered inspiring gains. There was much less drinking among women than earlier in the century and probably much less per capita consumption of hard liquor.

Women in Revolt
 When the nineteenth century opened, it was still a man’s world, both in America and in Europe. A wife was supposed to immerse herself in her home and subordinate herself to her lord and master (her husband). Like black slaves, she could not vote; like black slaves, she could be legally beaten by her overlord “with a reasonable instrument.” When she married, she could not retain title to her property; it passed to her husband. Yet American women, though legally regarded as perpetual minors, fared better than their European cousins. French visitor Alexis de Tocqueville noted that in his native France, rape was punished only lightly, whereas in America it was one of the few crimes punishable by death. Despite these relative advantages, women were still “the submerged sex” in America in the early part of the century. But as the decades unfolded, women increasingly surfaced to breathe the air of freedom and self-determination. In contrast to women in colonial times, many women now avoided marriage altogether—about 10 percent of adult women remained “spinsters” at the time of the Civil War.

 Stellar Suffragists Elizabeth Cady Stanton (left) and Susan B. Anthony (right) were two of the most persistent battlers for rights. Their National Woman Suffrage Association fought for women’s equality in courts and workplaces as well as at the polls.

 Gender differences were strongly emphasized in nineteenth-century America—largely because the burgeoning market economy was increasingly separating women and men into sharply distinct economic roles. Women were thought to be physically and emotionally weak, but also artistic and reﬁ ned. Endowed with ﬁ nely tuned moral sensibilities, they were the keepers of society’s conscience, with special responsibility to teach the young how to be good and productive citizens of the Republic. Men were considered strong but crude, always in danger of slipping into some savage or beastly way of life if not guided by the gentle hands of their loving ladies. The home was a woman’s special sphere, the centerpiece of the “cult of domesticity.” Even reformers like Catharine Beecher, who urged her sisters to seek employment as teachers, endlessly celebrated the role



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 of the good homemaker. But some women increasingly felt that the gloriﬁed sanctuary of the home was in fact a gilded cage. They yearned to tear down the bars that separated the private world of women from the public world of men. Clamorous female reformers—most of them white and well-to-do—began to gather strength as the century neared its halfway point. Most were broad-gauge battlers; while demanding rights for women, they joined in the general reform movement of the age, ﬁghting for temperance and the abolition of slavery. Like men, they had been touched by the evangelical spirit that offered the promise of earthly reward for human endeavor. Neither foul eggs nor foul words, when hurled by disapproving men, could halt women heartened by these doctrines. The women’s rights movement was mothered by some arresting characters. Prominent among them was Lucretia Mott, a sprightly Quaker whose ire had been aroused when she and her fellow female delegates to the London antislavery convention of 1840 were not recognized. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a mother of seven who had insisted on leaving “obey” out of her marriage ceremony, shocked fellow feminists by going so far as to advocate suffrage for women. Quaker-reared Susan B. Anthony, a militant lecturer for women’s rights, fearlessly exposed herself to rotten garbage and vulgar epithets. She became such a conspicuous advocate of female rights that progressive women every where were called “Suzy Bs.”

What It Would Be If Some Ladies
Had Their Own Way The men in
 this antifeminist cartoon are sewing, tending the baby, and washing clothes. The scene seemed absurd then, but not a century later.

 Other feminists challenged the man’s world. Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, a pioneer in a previously forbidden profession for women, was the ﬁ rst female graduate of a medical college. Precocious Margaret Fuller edited a transcendentalist journal, The Dial, and took part in the struggle to bring unity and republican government to Italy. She died in a shipwreck off New York’s Fire Island while returning to the United States in 1850. The talented Grimké sisters, Sarah and Angelina, championed antislavery. Lucy Stone retained her maiden name after marriage—hence the latter-day “Lucy Stoners,” who follow her example. Amelia Bloomer revolted against the current “street sweeping” female attire by donning a short skirt with Turkish trousers—“bloomers,” they were called—amid much bawdy ridicule about “Bloomerism” and “loose habits.” A jeering male rhyme of the times jabbed, Gibbey, gibbey gab The women had a confab And demanded the rights To wear the tights Gibbey, gibbey gab. Unﬂ inching feminists met in 1848 in a memorable Woman’s Rights Convention at Seneca Falls, New York. The deﬁant Stanton read a “Declaration of Sentiments,” which in the spirit of the Declaration of Independence declared that “all men and women are created equal.” One resolution formally demanded the ballot for females. Amid scorn and denunciation from press and

Dress as Reform
 mong the many social movements that swept nineteenth-century America, dress reform emerged in the 1840s as a critique of materialism and the constraints that fashion imposed on women. Medical professionals, social reformers, and transcendentalist intellectuals all argued that corsets constrict ing vital organs and voluminous skirts dragging along garbage-strewn streets unfairly restricted women’s mobility, prevented women from bearing healthy children, and even induced serious sickness and death. The “Bloomer costume” depicted in this illustration from Harper’s New Monthly Magazine in 1851 included Turkish-style trousers, a jacket, and a short overskirt that came to the knees. Named after reformer Amelia Bloomer (1818–1894), who publicized the new style in her magazine, The Lily, the bloomer dress was ﬁ rst adopted by utopian communities such as the Owenites in New Harmony, Indiana, and the Oneidans in New York. Radical social

A


 critic Henry David Thoreau also advocated rational dress as a way of rejecting the artiﬁcial desires created by industrialization. But while applauded by reformers, new-style dress was viciously ridiculed by mainstream society, as this print demonstrates. Critics claimed that women blurred gender distinctions by adopting “male” attire, endangering the family and even American civilization. After only a decade, practitioners gave up wearing bloomers in public, adopting plain and simpliﬁed clothing instead. But Owenites, some Mormons, women’s rights advocates, farmers, and travelers on the overland trail continued to wear bloomers in private. How did dress reform intersect with other religious and social movements of the era? Why did bloomers upset so many antebellum Americans? Have there been other historical eras when new styles of dress came to symbolize broader social change?





Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 When early feminist Lucy Stone (1818–1893) married fellow abolitionist Henry B. Blackwell (1825–1909) in West Brookﬁeld, Massachusetts, in 1855, they added the following vow to their nuptial ceremony:

“


 While acknowledging our mutual affection by publicly assuming the relation of husband and wife, yet in justice to ourselves and a great principle, we deem it a duty to declare that this act on our part implies no . . . promise of voluntary obedience to such of the present laws of marriage, as refuse to recognize the wife as an independent, rational being, while they confer upon the husband an injurious and unnatural superiority.

”


 pulpit, the Seneca Falls meeting launched the modern women’s rights movement. The crusade for women’s rights was eclipsed by the campaign against slavery in the decade before the Civil War. Still, any white male, even an idiot, over the age of twenty-one could vote, while no woman could. Yet women were gradually being admitted to colleges, and some states, beginning with Mississippi in 1839, were even permitting wives to own property after marriage.

Wilderness Utopias
 Bolstered by the utopian spirit of the age, various reformers, ranging from the high-minded to the “lunatic fringe,” set up more than forty communities of a cooperative, communistic, or “communitarian” nature. Seeking human betterment, a wealthy and idealistic Scottish textile manufacturer, Robert Owen, founded in 1825 a communal society of about a thousand people at New Harmony, Indiana. Little harmony prevailed in the colony, which, in addition to hard-working visionaries, attracted a sprinkling of radicals, work-shy theorists, and outright scoundrels. The colony sank in a morass of contradiction and confusion. Brook Farm in Massachusetts, comprising two hundred acres of grudging soil, was started in 1841 with the brotherly and sisterly cooperation of about twenty intellectuals committed to the philosophy of transcen-

 dentalism (see p. 361). They prospered reasonably well until 1846, when they lost by ﬁ re a large new communal building shortly before its completion. The whole venture in “plain living and high thinking” then collapsed in debt. The Brook Farm experiment inspired Nathaniel Hawthorne’s classic novel The Blithedale Romance (1852), whose main character was modeled on the feminist writer Margaret Fuller. A more radical experiment was the Oneida Community, founded in New York in 1848. It practiced free love (“complex marriage”), birth control (through “male continence,” or coitus reservatus), and the eugenic selection of parents to produce superior offspring. This curious enterprise ﬂourished for more than thirty years, largely because its artisans made superior steel traps and Oneida Community (silver) Plate (see “Makers of America: The Oneida Community,” pp. 356–357). Various communistic experiments, mostly small in scale, have been attempted since Jamestown. But in competition with democratic free enterprise and free land, virtually all of them sooner or later failed or changed their methods. Among the longest-lived sects were the Shakers, founded in Eng land in 1747 and brought to America in 1774 by Mother Ann Lee. She moved her tiny band of followers to upstate New York —the ﬁ rst of a score or so of American Shaker communities. The Shakers attained a membership of about six thousand in 1840, but since their monastic customs prohibited both marriage and sexual relations, they were virtually extinct by 1940.

 The Dawn of Scientiﬁc Achievement Early Americans, confronted with pioneering problems, were more interested in practical gadgets than in pure science. Jefferson, for example, was a gifted amateur inventor who won a gold medal for a new type of plow. Noteworthy also were the writings of the mathematician Nathaniel Bowditch (1733–1838) on practical navigation and of the oceanographer Matthew F. Maury (1806–1873) on ocean winds and currents. These writers promoted safety, speed, and economy. But as far as basic science was concerned, Americans were best known for borrowing and adapting the ﬁ ndings of Europeans. Yet the Republic was not without scientiﬁc talent. The most inﬂuential American scientist of the ﬁ rst half of the nineteenth century was Professor Benjamin Sil-

Utopian Communities




 Women Planting Corn, by Olof Krans, 1894–1896 The Shakers’ emphasis on simplicity and ingenuity, and their segregation of the sexes, were captured in this painting of the Bishop Hill community in Illinois. The prongs on the poles measured the distance between rows, and the knots on the rope showed the women how far apart to plant the corn.

 liman (1779–1864), a pioneer chemist and geologist who taught and wrote brilliantly at Yale College for more than ﬁ fty years. Professor Louis Agassiz (1807–1873), a distinguished French Swiss immigrant, served for a quarter of a century at Harvard College. A pathbreaking student of biology who sometimes carried snakes in his pockets, he insisted on original research and deplored the reigning overemphasis on memory work. Professor Asa Gray (1810–1888) of Harvard College, the Columbus of American botany, published over 350 books, monographs, and papers. His textbooks set new standards for clarity and interest. Lovers of American bird lore owed much to the French-descended naturalist John J. Audubon (1785– 1851), who painted wildfowl in their natural habitat. His magniﬁcently illustrated Birds of America attained considerable popularity. The Audubon Society for the protection of birds was named after him, although as a young man he shot much feathered game for sport.

 Medicine in America, despite a steady growth of medical schools, was still primitive by modern standards. Bleeding remained a common cure and a curse as well. Smallpox plagues were still dreaded, and the An outbreak of cholera occurred in New York City in 1832, and a wealthy businessman, Philip Hone (1780–1851), wrote in his diary for the Fourth of July,

“


 The alarm about the cholera has prevented all the usual jolliﬁcation under the public authority. . . . The Board of Health reports today twenty new cases and eleven deaths since noon yesterday. The disease is here in all its violence and will increase. God grant that its ravages may be conﬁned, and its visit short.

”


MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Oneida TheThe Great AfricanCommunity American Migration 
J


 ohn Humphrey Noyes (1811–1886), the founder of the Oneida Community, repudiated the old Puritan doctrines that God was vengeful and that sinful mankind was doomed to dwell in a vale of tears. Noyes believed in a benign deity, in the sweetness of human nature, and in the possibility of a perfect Christian community on earth. “The more we get acquainted with God,” he declared, “the more we shall ﬁ nd it our special duty to be happy.” That sunny thought was shared by many earlynineteenth-century American utopians (a word derived from Greek that slyly combines the meanings of “a good place” and “no such place”). But Noyes added some wrinkles of his own. The key to happiness, he taught, was the suppression of selﬁshness. True Christians should possess no private property—nor should they indulge in exclusive emotional relationships, which bred jealousy, quarreling, and covetousness. Material things and sexual partners alike, Noyes preached, should be shared. Marriage should not be monogamous. Instead all members of the community should be free to love one another in “complex marriage.” Noyes called his system “Bible Communism.” Tall and slender, with piercing blue eyes and reddish hair, the charismatic Noyes began voicing these ideas in his hometown of Putney, Vermont, in the 1830s. He soon attracted a group of followers who called themselves the Putney Association, a kind of extended family whose members farmed ﬁve hundred acres by day and sang and prayed together in the evenings. They sustained their spiritual intensity by submitting to “Mutual Criticism,” in which the person being criticized would sit in silence while other members frankly discussed his or her faults and merits. “I was, metaphorically, stood upon my head and allowed to drain till all the self-righteousness had dripped out of me,” one man wrote of his experience with Mutual Criticism. The Putney Association also indulged in sexual practices that outraged the surrounding community’s sense of moral propriety. Indicted for adultery in 1847, Noyes led his followers to Oneida, in the supposedly more tolerant region of New York’s Burned-Over District, the following year. Several afﬁ liated communities were also established, the most important of which was at Wallingford, Connecticut.



 The Oneidans struggled in New York until they were joined in the 1850s by Sewell Newhouse, a clever inventor of steel animal traps. The manufacture of Newhouse’s traps, and other products such as sewing silk and various types of bags, put the Oneida Community on a sound ﬁ nancial footing. By the 1860s Oneida was a ﬂourishing commonwealth of some three hundred people. Men and women shared equally in all the community’s tasks, from ﬁeld to factory to kitchen. The members lived under one roof in Mansion House, a sprawling building that boasted central heating, a wellstocked library, and a common dining hall, as well as the “Big Hall,” where members gathered nightly for prayer and entertainment. Children at the age of three were removed from direct parental care and raised communally in the Children’s House until the age of thirteen or fourteen, when they took up jobs in the community’s industries. They imbibed their religious doctrines with their school lessons: I-spirit With me never shall stay, We-spirit Makes us happy and gay. Oneida’s apparent success fed the utopian dreams of others, and for a time it became a great tourist attraction. Visitors from as far away as Europe came to picnic on the shady lawns, speculating on the sexual secrets that Mansion House guarded, while their hosts fed them strawberries and cream and entertained them with music. But eventually the same problems that had driven Noyes and his band from Vermont began to shadow their lives at Oneida. Their New York neighbors grew increasingly horriﬁed at the Oneidans’ licentious sexual practices, including the selective breeding program by which the community matched mates and gave permission—or orders—to procreate, without regard to the niceties of matrimony. “It was somewhat startling to me,” one straight-laced visitor commented, “to hear Miss ___________ speak about her baby.” Yielding to their neighbors’ criticisms, the Oneidans gave up complex marriage in 1879. Soon other “communistic” practices withered away as well. The communal dining hall became a restaurant, where meals

 were bought with money, something many Oneidans had never used before. In 1880 the Oneidans abandoned communism altogether and became a joint-stock company specializing in the manufacture of silver tableware. Led by Noyes’s son Pierrepont, Oneida Community, Ltd., grew into the world’s leading manufacturer of stainless steel knives, forks, and spoons, with annual sales by the 1990s of some half a billion dollars.

 As for Mansion House, it still stands in central New York, but it now serves as a museum and private residence. The “Big Hall” is the site of Oneida, Ltd.’s annual shareholders’ meetings. Ironically, what grew from Noyes’s religious vision was not utopia but a mighty capitalist corporation.

 Mansion House A sprawling, resplendent building, it formed the center of the Oneida Community’s life and was a stunning specimen of mid-nineteenth-century architectural and engineering achievement.

The Founding Father
John Humphrey Noyes (1811–1886).


A
Bag Bee on the Lawn of  Mansion House The ﬂedgling community supported itself in part by manufacturing bags. Men and women shared equally in the bag-making process.





Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 (left) Passenger Pigeons, by John Audubon; (right) John J. Audubon (1785–1851) An astute naturalist and a gifted artist, Audubon drew the birds of America in loving detail. Ironically, he had to go to Britain in the 1820s to ﬁnd a publisher for his pioneering depictions of the unique beauty of American wildlife. Born in Haiti and educated in France, he achieved fame as America’s greatest ornithologist. The passenger pigeons shown here once numbered in the billions in North America but were extinct by 1900, thanks to aggressive hunting and trapping. This was perhaps the greatest mass slaughter of wildlife in history.

 yellow fever epidemic of 1793 in Philadelphia took several thousand lives. “Bring out your dead!” was the daily cry of the corpse-wagon drivers. People every where complained of ill health— malaria, the “rheumatics,” the “miseries,” and the chills. Illness often resulted from improper diet, hurried eating, perspiring and cooling off too rapidly, and ignorance of germs and sanitation. “We was sick every fall, regular,” wrote the mother of future president James Garﬁeld. Life expectancy was still dismayingly short—about forty years for a white person born in 1850, and less for blacks. The suffering from decayed or ulcerated teeth was enormous; tooth extraction was often practiced by the muscular village blacksmith.

 Self-prescribed patent medicines were common (one dose for people, two for horses) and included Robertson’s Infallible Worm Destroying Lozenges. Fad diets proved popular, including the whole-wheat bread and crackers regimen of Sylvester Graham. Among home remedies was the rubbing of tumors with dead toads. The use of medicine by regular doctors was often harmful, and Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes declared in 1860 that if the medicines, as then employed, were thrown into the sea, humans would be better off and the ﬁsh worse off. Victims of surgical operations were ordinarily tied down, often after a stiff drink of whiskey. The surgeon then sawed or cut with breakneck speed, undeterred by the piercing shrieks of the patient. A priceless boon

Landmarks in Painting and Music


 Early Advertising Hawkers of patent medicines pioneered the techniques of modern advertising. Here a painkiller is promoted by invoking the totally irrelevant image of Molly Pitcher. The legendary subject of a poem by John Greenleaf Whittier, Pitcher reputedly took her fallen husband’s place at a cannon during the Revolutionary War Battle of Monmouth in 1778. What this exploit had to do with anesthetics is by no means clear, but it supposedly sold the product.

 for medical progress came in the early 1840s, when several American doctors and dentists, working independently, successfully employed laughing gas and ether as anesthetics.

Artistic Achievements
 Architecturally, America contributed little of note in the ﬁ rst half of the century. The rustic Republic, still under pressure to erect shelters in haste, was continu-



 ing to imitate European models. Public buildings and other important structures followed Greek and Roman lines, which seemed curiously out of place in a wilderness setting. A remarkable Greek revival came between 1820 and 1850, partly stimulated by the heroic efforts of the Greeks in the 1820s to wrest independence from the “terrible Turk.” About midcentury strong interest developed in a revival of Gothic forms, with their emphasis on pointed arches and large windows. Talented Thomas Jefferson, architect of revolution, was probably the ablest American architect of his generation. He brought a classical design to his Virginia hilltop home, Monticello—perhaps the most stately mansion in the nation. The quadrangle of the University of Virginia at Charlottesville, another of Jefferson’s creations, remains one of the ﬁ nest examples of classical architecture in America. The art of painting continued to be handicapped. It suffered from the dollar-grabbing of a raw civilization; from the hustle, bustle, and absence of leisure; from the lack of a wealthy class to sit for portraits—and then pay for them. Some of the earliest painters were forced to go to Eng land, where they found both training and patrons. America exported artists and imported art. Painting, like the theater, also suffered from the Puritan prejudice that art was a sinful waste of time— and often obscene. John Adams boasted that “he would not give a sixpence for a bust of Phidias or a painting by Raphael.” When Edward Everett, the eminent Boston scholar and orator, placed a statue of Apollo in his home, he had its naked limbs draped. Competent painters nevertheless emerged. Gilbert Stuart (1755–1828), a spendthrift Rhode Islander and one of the most gifted of the early group, wielded his brush in Britain in competition with the best artists. He produced several portraits of Washington, all of them somewhat idealized and dehumanized. Truth to tell, by the time he posed for Stuart, the famous general had lost his natural teeth and some of the original shape of his face. Charles Willson Peale (1741–1827), a Marylander, painted some sixty portraits of Washington, who patiently sat for about fourteen of them. John Trumbull (1756–1843), who had fought in the Revolutionary War, recaptured its scenes and spirit on scores of striking canvases. During the nationalistic upsurge after the War of 1812, American painters of portraits turned increasingly from human landscapes to romantic mirrorings of local landscapes. The Hudson River school excelled in this type of art. At the same time, portrait painters gradually encountered some unwelcome competition



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 The Oxbow, by Thomas Cole, 1836 This rendering of the oxbow of the Connecticut River near Northampton, Massachusetts, after a thunderstorm is considered one of Cole’s (1801–1848) masterpieces. A leader of the so-called Hudson River school, Cole wandered on foot over the mountains and rivers of New York State and New England, making pencil studies from which he painted in his studio during the winter. He and other members of this group transformed their realistic sketches into lyrical, romantic celebrations of the beauty of the American wilderness.

 from the invention of a crude photograph known as the daguerreotype, perfected about 1839 by a Frenchman, Louis Daguerre. Music was slowly shaking off the restraints of colonial days, when the prim Puritans had frowned upon nonreligious singing. Rhythmic and nostalgic “darky” tunes, popularized by whites, were becoming immense hits by midcentury. Special favorites were the uniquely American minstrel shows, featuring white actors with blackened faces. “Dixie,” later adopted by the Confederates as their battle hymn, was written in 1859, ironically in New York City by an Ohioan. The most famous black songs, also ironically, came from a white Pennsylvanian, Stephen C. Foster (1826–1864). His one excursion into the South occurred in 1852, after he had published “Old Folks at Home.” Foster made a valuable contribution to American folk music by capturing the plaintive spirit of the slaves. An odd and pathetic ﬁgure, he ﬁ nally lost both his art and his popularity and died in a charity ward after drowning his sorrows in drink.

The Blossoming of
 a National Literature “Who reads an American book?” sneered a British critic of 1820. The painful truth was that the nation’s roughhewn, pioneering civilization gave little encouragement to “polite” literature. Much of the reading matter was imported or plagiarized from Britain. Busy conquering a continent, the Americans poured most of their creative efforts into practical outlets. Praiseworthy were political essays, like The Federalist of Hamilton, Jay, and Madison; pamphlets, like Tom Paine’s Common Sense; and political orations, like the masterpieces of Daniel Webster. In the category of nonreligious books published before 1820, Benjamin Franklin’s Autobiography (1818) is one of the few that achieved genuine distinction. His narrative is a classic in its simplicity, clarity, and inspirational quality. Even so, it records only a fragment of “Old Ben’s” long, fruitful, and amorous life.

Leading Transcendentalists


 A genuinely American literature received a strong boost from the wave of nationalism that followed the War of Independence and especially the War of 1812. By 1820 the older seaboard areas were sufﬁciently removed from the survival mentality of tree-chopping and butter-churning that literature could be supported as a profession. The Knickerbocker Group in New York blazed brilliantly across the literary heavens, thus enabling America for the ﬁ rst time to boast of a literature to match its magniﬁcent landscapes. Washington Irving (1783–1859), born in New York City, was the ﬁ rst American to win international recognition as a literary ﬁgure. Steeped in the traditions of New Netherland, he published in 1809 his Knickerbocker’s History of New York, with its amusing caricatures of the Dutch. When the family business failed, Irving was forced to turn to the goose-feather pen. In 1819–1820 he published The Sketch Book, which brought him immediate fame at home and abroad. Combining a pleasing style with delicate charm and quiet humor, he used Eng lish as well as American themes and included such immortal Dutch American tales as “Rip Van Winkle” and “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.” Europe was amazed to ﬁ nd at last an American with a feather in his hand, not in his hair. Later turning to Spanish locales and biography, Irving did much to interpret America to Europe and Europe to America. He was, said the Englishman William Thackeray, “the ﬁ rst ambassador whom the New World of letters sent to the Old.” James Fenimore Cooper (1789–1851) was the ﬁ rst American novelist, as Washington Irving was the ﬁrst general writer, to gain world fame and to make New World themes respectable. Marrying into a wealthy family, he settled down on the frontier of New York. Reading one day to his wife from an insipid Eng lish novel, Cooper remarked in disgust that he could write a better book himself. His wife challenged him to do so— and he did. After an initial failure, Cooper launched out upon an illustrious career in 1821 with his second novel, The Spy—an absorbing tale of the American Revolution. His stories of the sea were meritorious and popular, but his fame rests most enduringly on the Leatherstocking Tales. A dead-eye riﬂeman named Natty Bumppo, one of nature’s noblemen, meets with Indians in stirring adventures like The Last of the Mohicans. James Fenimore Cooper’s novels had a wide sale among Europeans, some of whom came to think of all American people as born with tomahawk in hand. Actually Cooper was exploring the viability and destiny of America’s republican experiment, by contrasting the



 undeﬁ led values of “natural men,” children of the wooded wilderness, with the artiﬁciality of modern civilization. A third member of the Knickerbocker group in New York was the belated Puritan William Cullen Bryant (1794–1878), transplanted from Massachusetts. At age sixteen he wrote the meditative and melancholy “Thanatopsis” (published in 1817), which was one of the ﬁ rst high-quality poems produced in the United States. Critics could hardly believe that it had been written on “this side of the water.” Although Bryant continued with poetry, he was forced to make his living by editing the inﬂuential New York Evening Post. For over ﬁ fty years, he set a model for journalism that was digniﬁed, liberal, and conscientious.

Trumpeters of
Transcendentalism
 A golden age in American literature dawned in the second quarter of the nineteenth century, when an amazing outburst shook New England. One of the mainsprings of this literary ﬂowering was transcendentalism, especially around Boston, which preened itself as “the Athens of America.” The transcendentalist movement of the 1830s resulted in part from a liberalizing of the straightjacket Puritan theology. It also owed much to foreign inﬂuences, including the German romantic philosophers and the religions of Asia. The transcendentalists rejected the prevailing theory, derived from John Locke, that all knowledge comes to the mind through the senses. Truth, rather, “transcends” the senses: it cannot be found by observation alone. Every person possesses an inner light that can illuminate the highest truth and put him or her in direct touch with God, or the “Oversoul.” These mystical doctrines of transcendentalism deﬁed precise deﬁ nition, but they underlay concrete beliefs. Foremost was a stiff-backed individualism in matters religious as well as social. Closely associated was a commitment to self-reliance, self-culture, and self-discipline. These traits naturally bred hostility to authority and to formal institutions of any kind, as well as to all conventional wisdom. Finally came exaltation of the dignity of the individual, whether black or white—the mainspring of a whole array of humanitarian reforms. Best known of the transcendentalists was Bostonborn Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882). Tall, slender,



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


Ralph Waldo Emerson
 (1803–1882) Public lecturing provided a way for Emerson to put his ideas before a larger audience than his readers and to support his family. His philosophical observations included such statements as “The less government we have, the better—the fewer laws, and the less conﬁded power”; “To be great is to be misunderstood”; “Every hero becomes a bore at last”; “Shallow men believe in luck”; and “When you strike a king, you must kill him.”

 and intensely blue-eyed, he mirrored serenity in his noble features. Trained as a Unitarian minister, he early forsook his pulpit and ultimately reached a wider audience by pen and platform. He was a never-failing favorite as a lyceum lecturer and for twenty years took a western tour every winter. Perhaps his most thrilling public effort was a Phi Beta Kappa address, “The Amer-

 In 1849 Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862) published “Resistance to Civil Government,” (later renamed “Civil Disobedience”), asserting,

“


 All men recognize the right of revolution; the right to refuse allegiance to and to resist the government, when its tyranny or its inefﬁciency are great and endurable. But almost all say that such is not the case now. . . . I say, when a sixth of the population of a nation which has undertaken to be the refuge of liberty are slaves, and a whole country is unjustly overrun and conquered by a foreign army, and subjected to military law, I think that it is not too soon for honest men to rebel and revolutionize. What makes this duty more urgent is the fact, that the country so overrun is not our own, but ours is the invading army.

”


 ican Scholar,” delivered at Harvard College in 1837. This brilliant appeal was an intellectual declaration of independence, for it urged American writers to throw off European traditions and delve into the riches of their own backyards. Hailed as both a poet and a philosopher, Emerson was not of the highest rank as either. He was more inﬂuential as a practical philosopher and through his fresh and vibrant essays enriched countless thousands of humdrum lives. Catching the individualistic mood of the Republic, he stressed self-reliance, self-improvement, self-conﬁdence, optimism, and freedom. The secret of Emerson’s popularity lay largely in the fact that his ideals reﬂected those of an expanding America. By the 1850s he was an outspoken critic of slavery, and he ardently supported the Union cause in the Civil War. Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862) was Emerson’s close associate—a poet, a mystic, a transcendentalist, and a nonconformist. Condemning a government that supported slavery, he refused to pay his Massachusetts poll tax and was jailed for a night.* A gifted prose writer, he is well known for Walden: Or Life in the Woods (1854). The book is a record of Thoreau’s two years of simple existence in a hut that he built on the edge of Walden Pond, near Concord, Massachusetts. A stiff-necked in-

 *The story (probably apocryphal) is that Emerson visited Thoreau at the jail and asked, “Why are you here?” The reply came, “Why are you not here?”

Prominent Writers


Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862), 1856
 Thoreau’s lyrical essays about nature made him a spiritual father of the later conservation movement.

 dividualist, he believed that he should reduce his bodily wants so as to gain time for a pursuit of truth through study and meditation. Thoreau’s Walden and his essay On the Duty of Civil Disobedience exercised a strong inﬂuence in furthering idealistic thought, both in Amer-

 In 1876 the London Saturday Review referred to Walt Whitman (1819–1892) as the author of a volume of

“


 so-called poems which were chieﬂy remarkable for their absurd extravagances and shameless obscenity, and who has since, we are glad to say, been little heard of among decent people.

”


 In 1888 Whitman wrote,

“


 I had my choice when I commenced. I bid neither for soft eulogies, big money returns, nor the approbation of existing schools and conventions. . . . I have had my say entirely my own way, and put it unerringly on record—the value thereof to be decided by time.

”




 Walt Whitman (1819–1892), ca. 1860 Whitman’s love affair with America and the American people inspired later poets such as Allen Ginsberg, and “Whitmanesque” came to describe any poetry that celebrates the possibilities of American life and unbridled personal freedom.

 ica and abroad. His writings later encouraged Mahatma Gandhi to resist British rule in India and, still later, inspired the development of American civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr.’s thinking about nonviolence. Bold, brassy, and swaggering was the open-collared ﬁgure of Brooklyn’s Walt Whitman (1819–1892). In his famous collection of poems Leaves of Grass (1855), he gave free rein to his gushing genius with what he called a “barbaric yawp.” Highly romantic, emotional, and unconventional, he dispensed with titles, stanzas, rhymes, and at times even regular meter. He handled sex with shocking frankness, although he laundered his verses in later editions, and his book was banned in Boston. Whitman’s Leaves of Grass was at ﬁ rst a ﬁ nancial failure. The only three enthusiastic reviews that it received were written by the author himself—anonymously. But in time the once-withered Leaves of Grass, revived and honored, won for Whitman an enormous following in both America and Europe. His fame increased immensely among “Whitmaniacs” after his death. Leaves of Grass gained for Whitman the informal title “Poet Laureate of Democracy.” Singing with



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 transcendental abandon of his love for the masses, he caught the exuberant enthusiasm of an expanding Amer ica that had turned its back on the Old World: All the Past we leave behind; We debouch upon a newer, mightier world, varied world; Fresh and strong the world we seize—world of labor and the march— Pioneers! O Pioneers! Here at last was the native art for which critics had been crying.

Glowing Literary Lights
 Certain other literary giants were not actively associated with the transcendentalist movement, though not completely immune to its inﬂuences. Professor Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807–1882), who for many years taught modern languages at Harvard College, was one of the most popular poets ever produced in America. Handsome and urbane, he lived a generally serene life, except for the tragic deaths of two wives, the second of whom perished before his eyes when her dress caught ﬁ re. Writing for the genteel classes, he was adopted by the less cultured masses. His wide knowledge of European literature supplied him with many themes, but some of his most admired poems—“Evangeline,” “The Song of Hiawatha,” and “The Courtship of Miles Standish”—were based on American traditions. Immensely popular in Europe, Longfellow was the only American ever to be honored with a bust in the Poets’ Corner of Westminster Abbey. A ﬁghting Quaker, John Greenleaf Whittier (1807– 1892), with piercing dark eyes and swarthy complexion, was the uncrowned poet laureate of the antislavery crusade. Less talented as a writer than Longfellow, he was vastly more important in inﬂuencing social action. His poems cried aloud against inhumanity, injustice, and intolerance, against The outworn rite, the old abuse, The pious fraud transparent grown. Undeterred by insults and the stoning of mobs, Whittier helped arouse a callous America on the slavery issue. A supreme conscience rather than a sterling poet or intellect, Whittier was one of the moving forces of his generation, whether moral, humanitarian, or spiritual. Gentle and lovable, he was preeminently the poet of human freedom.

 Many-sided professor James Russell Lowell (1819– 1891), who succeeded Professor Longfellow at Harvard, ranks as one of America’s better poets. He was also a distinguished essayist, literary critic, editor, and diplomat—a diffusion of talents that hampered his poetical output. Lowell is remembered as a political satirist in his Biglow Papers, especially those of 1846 dealing with the Mexican War. Written partly as poetry in the Yankee dialect, the Papers condemned in blistering terms the alleged slavery-expansion designs of the Polk administration. The scholarly Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809– 1894), who taught anatomy with a sparkle at Harvard Medical School, was a prominent poet, essayist, novelist, lecturer, and wit. A nonconformist and a fascinating conversationalist, he shone among a group of literary lights who regarded Boston as “the hub of the universe.” His poem “The Last Leaf,” in honor of the last “white Indian” of the Boston Tea Party, came to apply to himself. Dying at the age of eighty-ﬁve, he was the “last leaf” among his distinguished contemporaries.* Two women writers whose work remains enormously popular today were also tied to this New England literary world. Louisa May Alcott (1832–1888) grew up in Concord, Massachusetts, in the bosom of transcendentalism, alongside neighbors Emerson, Thoreau, and Fuller. Her philosopher father Bronson Alcott occupied himself more devotedly to ideas than earning a living, leaving his daughter to write Little Women (1868) and other books to support her mother and sisters. Not far away in Amherst, Massachusetts, poet Emily Dickinson (1830–1886) lived as a recluse but created her own original world through precious gems of poetry. In deceptively spare language and simple rhyme schemes, she explored universal themes of nature, love, death, and immortality. Although she refused during her lifetime to publish any of her poems, when she died, nearly two thousand of them were found among her papers and eventually made their way into print. The most noteworthy literary ﬁgure produced by the South before the Civil War, unless Edgar Allan Poe is regarded as a southerner, was novelist William Gilmore Simms (1806–1870). Quantitatively, at least, he was great: eighty-two books ﬂowed from his ever-moist pen, winning for him the title “the Cooper of the South.” His themes dealt with the southern frontier in colonial

 *Oliver Wendell Holmes had a son with the same name who became a distinguished justice of the Supreme Court (1902–1932) and who lived to be ninety-four less two days.

A
Literary Renaissance 

 Louisa May Alcott (1832–1888), 1856 In search of independence for herself and ﬁnancial security for her family, Alcott worked as a seamstress, governess, teacher, and housemaid until her writing ﬁnally brought her success. Her much-loved, largely autobiographical novel Little Women has remained in print continuously from 1868 until our own day.

 days and with the South during the Revolutionary War. But he was neglected by his own section, even though he married into the socially elite and became a slaveowner. The high-toned planter aristocracy would never accept the son of a poor Charleston storekeeper.

Literary Individualists
 and Dissenters Not all writers in these years believed so keenly in human goodness and social progress. Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849), who spent much of his youth in Virginia, was an eccentric genius. Orphaned at an early age, cursed with ill health, and married to a child-wife of thirteen who fell fatally ill of tuberculosis, he suffered hunger, cold, poverty, and debt. Failing at suicide, he took refuge in the bottle and dissipated his talent early. Poe was a gifted lyric poet, as “The Raven” attests. A master stylist, he also excelled in the short story, espe-



 cially of the horror type, in which he shared his alcoholic nightmares with fascinated readers. If he did not invent the modern detective novel, he at least set new high standards in tales like “The Gold Bug.” Poe was fascinated by the ghostly and ghastly, as in “The Fall of the House of Usher” and other stories. He reﬂected a morbid sensibility distinctly at odds with the usually optimistic tone of American culture. Partly for this reason, Poe has perhaps been even more prized by Europeans than by Americans. His brilliant career was cut short when he was found drunk in a Baltimore gutter and shortly thereafter died. Two other writers reﬂected the continuing Calvinist obsession with original sin and with the neverending struggle between good and evil. In somber Salem, Massachusetts, writer Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804–1864) grew up in an at mosphere heavy with the memories of his Puritan forebears and the tragedy of his father’s premature death on an ocean voyage. His masterpiece was The Scarlet Letter (1850), which describes the Puritan practice of forcing an adulteress to wear a scarlet “A” on her clothing. The tragic tale chronicles the psychological effects of sin on the guilty heroine and her secret lover (the father of her baby), a minister of the gospel in Puritan Boston. In The Marble Faun (1860), Hawthorne dealt with a group of young American artists who witness a mysterious murder in Rome. The book explores the concepts of the omnipresence of evil and the dead hand of the past weighing upon the present. Herman Melville (1819–1891), an orphaned and illeducated New Yorker, went to sea as a youth and served eighteen adventuresome months on a whaler. “A whale ship was my Yale College and my Harvard,” he wrote. Jumping ship in the South Seas, he lived among cannibals, from whom he providently escaped uneaten. His fresh and charming tales of the South Seas were immediately popular, but his masterpiece, Moby Dick (1851), was not. This epic novel is a complex allegory of good and evil, told in terms of the conﬂ ict between a whaling captain, Ahab, and a giant white whale, Moby Dick. Captain Ahab, having lost a leg to the marine monster, lives only for revenge. His pursuit ﬁ nally ends when Moby Dick rams and sinks Ahab’s ship, leaving only one survivor. The whale’s exact identity and Ahab’s motives remain obscure. In the end the sea, like the terrifyingly impersonal and unknowable universe of Melville’s imagination, simply rolls on. Moby Dick was widely ignored at the time of its publication; people were accustomed to more straightforward and upbeat prose. A disheartened Melville



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 Capturing a Sperm Whale, painted by William Page from a sketch by C. B. Hulsart, 1835 This painting and Melville’s Moby Dick vividly portray the hazards of whaling. Despite the dangers, it proved to be an important industry from colonial times to the end of the nineteenth century

 continued to write unproﬁtably for some years, part of the time eking out a living as a customs inspector, and then died in relative obscurity and poverty. Ironically, his brooding masterpiece about the mysterious white whale had to wait until the more jaded twentieth century for readers and for proper recognition.

Portrayers of the Past
 A distinguished group of American historians was emerging at the same time that other writers were winning distinction. Energetic George Bancroft (1800– 1891), who as secretary of the navy helped found the Naval Academy at Annapolis in 1845, has deservedly received the title “Father of American History.” He published a spirited, superpatriotic history of the United States to 1789 in six (originally ten) volumes (1834– 1876), a work that grew out of his vast researches in dusty archives in Europe and America. Two other historians are read with greater plea sure and proﬁt today. William H. Prescott (1796–1859), who

 accidentally lost the sight of an eye while in college, conserved his remaining weak vision and published classic accounts of the conquest of Mexico (1843) and Peru (1847). Francis Parkman (1823–1893), whose eyes were so defective that he wrote in darkness with the aid of a guiding machine, penned a brilliant series of volumes beginning in 1851. In epic style he chronicled the struggle between France and Britain in colonial times for the mastery of North America. Early American historians of prominence were almost without exception New Eng landers, largely because the Boston area provided well-stocked libraries and a stimulating literary tradition. These writers numbered abolitionists among their relatives and friends and hence were disposed to view unsympathetically the slavery-cursed South. This “made in New Eng land” interpretation dominated the writing of American history until the close of the nineteenth century, when pressure for national reconciliation overcame regional bias. “The history of the United States has been written by Boston,” one pro-southern historian bitterly complained, “and largely written wrong.”

Key Terms




 CHRONOLOGY

 Shaker movement founded in Manchester, Eng land

 1770s

 First Shaker communities established in New York



 Thomas Paine publishes The Age of Reason



 University of North Carolina founded



 Second Great Awakening begins



 Jefferson founds University of Virginia



 Cooper publishes The Spy, his ﬁ rst successful novel Emma Willard establishes Troy (New York) Female Seminary



 New Harmony commune established



 American Temperance Society founded



 Noah Webster publishes dictionary American Peace Society founded

1830–


 Joseph Smith founds Mormon Church Godey’s Lady’s Book ﬁ rst published



 Lyceum movement ﬂourishes



 Oberlin College admits female students Mary Lyon establishes Mount Holyoke Seminary Emerson delivers “The American Scholar” address



 London antislavery convention refuses to recognize female delegates



 Brook Farm commune established



 Dorothea Dix petitions Massachusetts legislature on behalf of the insane

1846–


 Mormon migration to Utah



 Seneca Falls Woman’s Rights Convention held Oneida Community established



 Hawthorne publishes The Scarlet Letter



 Melville publishes Moby Dick Maine passes ﬁ rst law prohibiting liquor



 Whitman publishes Leaves of Grass

 Finney conducts revivals in eastern cities

KEY TERMS
The Age of Reason (341) Deism (341) Unitarians (341) Second Great Awakening (341) Burned-Over District (343) Mormons (343) lyceum (347) American Temperance Society (350) Maine Law of 1851 (351) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Woman’s Rights Convention at Seneca Falls (352) New Harmony (354) Brook Farm (354) Oneida Community (354) Shakers (354) Hudson River school (359) minstrel shows (360) transcendentalism (361) “The American Scholar” (362) 
Peter Cartwright
Charles Grandison
Finney
Joseph Smith
Brigham Young
Horace Mann
Dorothea Dix
Neal S. Dow
Lucretia Mott
Elizabeth Cady Stanton
Susan B. Anthony
Lucy Stone
Amelia Bloomer
Robert Owen


John J. Audubon
Stephen C. Foster
James Fenimore Cooper
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Henry David Thoreau
Walt Whitman
Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow
Louisa May Alcott
Emily Dickinson
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Herman Melville
Francis Parkman




Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


Reform: Who? What? How? and Why?


E


 arly chronicles of the antebellum period universally lauded the era’s reformers, portraying them as idealistic, altruistic crusaders intent on improving American society. After World War II, however, some historians began to detect selﬁsh and even conser vative motives underlying the apparent benevolence of the reformers. This view described the advocates of reform as anxious, upper-class men and women threatened by the ferment of life in antebellum America. The pursuit of reforms like temperance, asylums, prisons, and mandatory public education represented a means of asserting “social control.” In this vein, one historian described a reform movement as “the anguished protest of an aggrieved class against a world they never made.” In Michael Katz’s treatment of early educational reform, proponents were community leaders who sought a school system that would ease the traumas of America’s industrialization by inculcating business-oriented values and discipline in the working classes. The wave of reform activity in the 1960s prompted a reevaluation of the reputations of the antebellum reformers. These more recent interpretations found much to admire in the authentic religious commitments of reformers and especially in the participation of women, who sought various social improvements as an extension of their function as protectors of the home and family. The scholarly treatment of abolitionism is a telling example of how reformers and their campaigns have risen and fallen in the estimation of histor ians. To northern historians writing in the late nineteenth century, abolitionists were courageous men and women so devoted to uprooting the evil of slavery that they were willing to dedicate their lives to a cause that often ostracized them from their communities. By the mid-twentieth century, an interpretation more favorable to the South prevailed, one that blamed the fanaticism of the abolitionists for the Civil War. But as the racial climate in the United States began to change during the 1960s, historians once again showed sympathy for the abolitionist struggle, and by the end of the twentieth century abolitionist men and women were revered as ideologically committed individuals

 dedicated not just to freeing the enslaved but to saving the moral soul of America. Scholars animated by the modern feminist movement have inspired a reconsideration of women’s reform activity. It had long been known, of course, that women were active participants in charitable orga nizations. But not until Nancy Cott, Kathryn Sklar, Mary Ryan, and other historians began to look more closely at what Cott has called “the bonds of womanhood” did the links between women’s domestic lives and their public benevolent behavior fully emerge. Car roll Smith-Rosenberg showed in her study of the New York Female Moral Reform Society, for example, that members who set out at ﬁ rst to convert prostitutes to evangelical Protestantism and to close down the city’s many brothels soon developed an ideology of female autonomy that rejected male dominance. When men behaved in immoral or illegal ways, women reformers claimed that they had the right—even the duty—to leave the conﬁ nes of their homes and actively work to purify society. More recently, historians Nancy Hewitt and Lori Ginzberg have challenged the assumption that all women reformers embraced a single deﬁnition of female identity. Instead they have emphasized the importance of class differences in shaping women’s reform work, which led inevitably to tensions within female ranks. Giving more attention to the historical evolution of female reform ideology, Ginzberg has also detected a shift from an early focus on moral uplift to a more class-based appeal for social control. Historians of the suffrage movement have emphasized another kind of exclusivity among women reformers—the boundaries of race. Ellen DuBois has shown that after a brief alliance with the abolitionist movement, many female suffrage reformers abandoned the cause of black liberation in an effort to achieve their own goal with less controversy. Whatever historians may conclude about the liberating or leashing character of early reform, it is clear by now that they have to contend with the ways in which class, gender, and race divided reformers, making the plural—reform movements—the more accurate depiction of the impulse to “improve” that pervaded American society in the early nineteenth century.

To Learn More




To Learn More
Robert Abzug, Cosmos Crumbling: American Reform and
 the Religious Imagination (1994) Nathan O. Hatch, The Democratization of American Christianity (1989) Joseph Hawes, Children in Urban Society (1971) Paul Johnson, A Shopkeeper’s Millennium: Society and Revivals in Rochester, New York, 1815–1837 (1978) Joseph F. Kett, Rites of Passage: Adolescence in America (1976) Spencer Klaw, Without Sin: The Life and Death of the Oneida Community (1993)

Steven Mintz and Susan Kellogg, Domestic Revolutions: A
Social History of American Family Life (1988)
William Rorabaugh, The Alcoholic Republic (1979)
Ronald Walters, American Reformers, 1815–1860 (1978)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

 PART

 THREE

Testing the
New Nation





1820–1877


T


 he Civil War of 1861 to 1865 was the awesome trial by ﬁ re of American nationhood, and of the American soul. All Americans knew, said Abraham Lincoln, that slavery “was somehow the cause of this war.” The war tested, in Lincoln’s ringing phrase at Gettysburg, whether any nation “dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal . . . can long endure.” How did this great and bloody conﬂ ict come about? And what were its results? American slavery was by any measure a “peculiar institution.” Slavery was rooted in both racism and economic exploitation, and depended for its survival on brutal repression. Yet the American

 slave population was the only enslaved population in history that grew by means of its own biological reproduction—a fact that suggests to many historians that conditions under slavery in the United States were somehow less punitive than those in other slave societies. Indeed a distinctive and durable African American culture managed to ﬂourish under slavery, further suggesting that the slave regime provided some “space” for African American cultural development. But however benignly it might be painted, slavery still remained a cancer in the heart of American democracy, a moral outrage that mocked the nation’s claim to be a model of social and

 Returning from the Cotton Fields in South Carolina African American slaves planted and picked virtually all the cotton that formed the foundation of the nineteenth-century southern economy. The white South ferociously defended its “peculiar institution” of slavery, which ended at last only in the ﬁres of the Civil War.

Testing the New Nation




The 1st Virginia Regiment These Virginia
 militiamen were photographed in 1859 while attending the trial of the abolitionist John Brown for treason against the State of Virginia. Two years later their regiment formed part of the Confederate army that struck for southern independence.

 political enlightenment. As time went on, more and more voices called more and more stridently for its abolition. The nation lived uneasily with slavery from the outset. Thomas Jefferson was only one among many in the founding generation who felt acutely the conﬂ ict between the high principle of equality and the ugly reality of slavery. The federal government in the early Republic took several steps to check the growth of slavery. It banned slavery in the Old Northwest in 1787, prohibited the further importation of slaves after 1808, and declared in the Missouri Compromise of 1820 that the vast western territories secured in the Louisiana Purchase were forever closed to slavery north of the state of Missouri. Antislavery sentiment even abounded in the South in the immediate post-Revolutionary years. But as time progressed, and especially after Eli Whitney’s invention of the cotton gin in the 1790s, the southern planter class became increasingly dependent on slave labor to wring proﬁts from the sprawling plantations that carpeted the South. As cotton cultivation spread westward, the South’s stake in slavery grew deeper, and the abolitionist outcry grew louder. The controversy over slavery signiﬁcantly intensiﬁed following the war with Mexico in the 1840s.

 “Mexico will poison us,” predicted the philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, and he proved to be distressingly prophetic. The lands acquired from Mexico—most of the present-day American Southwest, from Texas to Cal i fornia—reopened the question of extending slavery into the western territories. The decade and a half that followed the Mexican War—from 1846 to 1861—witnessed a series of ultimately ineffective efforts to come to grips with that question, including the ill-starred Compromise of 1850, the conﬂ ict-breeding Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854, and the Supreme Court’s inﬂammatory decision in the Dred Scott case of 1857. Ultimately, the slavery question was settled by force of arms, in the Civil War itself. The Civil War, as Lincoln observed, was assuredly about slavery. But as Lincoln also repeatedly insisted, the war was about the viability of the Union as well and about the strength of democracy itself. Could a democratic government, built on the principle of popular consent, rightfully deny some of its citizens the same right to independence that the American revolutionaries had exercised in seceding from the British Empire in 1776? Southern rebels, calling the conﬂ ict “The War for Southern Independence,” asked that question forcefully, but ultimately it, too, was answered not in the law courts or in the legislative halls but on the battleﬁeld. The Civil War unarguably established the supremacy of the Union, and it ended slavery as well. But as the victorious Union set about the task of “reconstruction” after the war’s end in 1865, a combination of weak northern will and residual southern power frustrated the goal of making the emancipated blacks full-ﬂedged American citizens. The Civil War in the end brought nothing but freedom—but over time, freedom proved a powerful tool indeed.

The South and the
Slavery Controversy





1793–1860
 Those who deny freedom to others deserve it not for themselves, and, under a just God, cannot long retain it. ABRAHAM LINCOLN, 1859

A


 t the dawn of the Republic, slavery faced an uncertain future. Touched by Revolutionary idealism, some southern leaders, including Thomas Jefferson, were talking openly of freeing their slaves. Others predicted that the iron logic of economics would eventually expose slavery’s unproﬁtability, speeding its demise. But the introduction of Eli Whitney’s cotton gin in 1793 scrambled all those predictions. Whitney’s invention made possible the wide-scale cultivation of short-staple cotton. The white ﬁber rapidly became the dominant southern crop, eclipsing tobacco, rice, and sugar. The explosion of cotton cultivation created an insatiable demand for labor, chaining the slave to the gin and the planter to the slave. As the nineteenth century opened, the reinvigoration of southern slavery carried fateful implications for blacks and whites alike—and threatened the survival of the nation itself.

“Cotton Is King!”
 As time passed, the Cotton Kingdom developed into a huge agricultural factory, pouring out avalanches of the ﬂuffy ﬁber. Quick proﬁts drew planters to the loamy bottomlands of the Gulf states. As long as the soil was still vigorous, the yield was bountiful and the rewards were high. Caught up in an economic spiral, the planters bought more slaves and land to grow more cotton, so as to buy still more slaves and land. Northern shippers reaped a large part of the proﬁts from the cotton trade. They would load bulging bales of cotton at southern ports, transport them to Eng land, sell their ﬂeecy cargo for pounds sterling, and buy needed manufactured goods for sale in the United States. To a large degree, the prosperity of both North and South—and of Eng land, too—rested on the bent backs of enslaved bondsmen.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Cotton Empire


 So did the young nation’s growing wealth. Cotton accounted for half the value of all American exports after 1840, and export earnings provided much of the capital that stoked the Republic’s economic growth. The South produced more than half of the entire world’s supply of cotton—a fact that held foreign nations in partial bondage. Britain was then the leading industrial power. Its most important single manufacture in the 1850s was cotton cloth, from which about one-ﬁ fth of its population, directly or indirectly, drew its livelihood. About 75 percent of this precious supply of ﬁber came from the white-carpeted acres of the South. Southern leaders were fully aware that Britain was tied to them by cotton threads, and this dependence gave them a heady sense of power. In their eyes “Cotton was King,” the gin was his throne, and the black bondsmen were his henchmen. If war should ever break out between North and South, northern warships would presumably cut off the outﬂow of cotton. Fiberfamished British factories would then close their gates, starving mobs would force the London government to break the blockade, and the South would triumph. Cotton was a powerful monarch indeed.

The Planter “Aristocracy”
 Before the Civil War, the South was in some respects not so much a democracy as an oligarchy—or a government



 by the few, in this case heavily inﬂuenced by a planter aristocracy. In 1850 only 1,733 families owned more than 100 slaves each, and this select group provided the cream of the political and social leadership of the section and nation. Here was the mint-julep South of the tall-columned and white-painted plantation mansion—the “big house,” where dwelt the “cottonocracy.” The planter aristocrats, with their blooded horses and Chippendale chairs, enjoyed a lion’s share of southern wealth. They could educate their children in the ﬁnest schools, often in the North or abroad. Their money provided the leisure for study, reﬂection, and statecraft, as was notably true of men like John C. Calhoun (a Yale graduate) and Jefferson Davis (a West Point graduate). They felt a keen sense of obligation to serve the public. It was no accident that Virginia and the other southern states produced a higher proportion of front-rank statesmen before 1860 than the “dollar-grubbing” North. But even in its best light, dominance by a favored aristocracy was basically undemocratic. It widened the gap between rich and poor. It hampered tax-supported public education, because the rich planters could and did send their children to private institutions. A favorite author of elite southerners was Sir Walter Scott, whose manors and castles, graced by brave Ivanhoes and fair Rowenas, helped them idealize a feudal society, even when many of their economic activities were undeniably capitalistic. Southern aristocrats, who sometimes staged jousting tournaments, strove to

Interior of the Cotton Bureau in
New Orleans, by Edgar Degas,
 1873 Although this painting dates from 1873, French impressionist painter Edgar Degas (1834–1917) captured the insouciant self-conﬁdence of cotton traders in the pre–Civil War era. As cotton cultivation spread into the new states of the trans-Appalachian Southwest, the entire Cotton Kingdom paid tribute to New Orleans, Queen City of the South, and the port through which millions of cotton bales ﬂowed out to British textile mills.



