Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 The French statesman Anne Robert Jacques Turgot (1727–1781) had high expectations for a united America:

“


 This people is the hope of the human race. . . . The Americans should be an example of political, religious, commercial and industrial liberty. . . . But to obtain these ends for us, America . . . must not become . . . a mass of divided powers, contending for territory and trade.

”


 America’s population was still about 90 percent rural, despite the ﬂourishing cities. All but 5 percent of the people lived east of the Appalachian Mountains. The trans-Appalachian overﬂow was concentrated chieﬂy in Kentucky, Tennessee, and Ohio, all of which were welcomed as states within fourteen years. (Vermont preceded them, becoming the fourteenth state in 1791.) Foreign visitors to America looked down their noses at the roughness and crudity resulting from axand-riﬂe pioneering life. People of the western waters—in the stumpstudded clearings of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Ohio— were particularly restive and dubiously loyal. The mouth of the Mississippi, their life-giving outlet, lay in the hands of unfriendly Spaniards. Smooth-talking Spanish and British agents, jingling gold, moved freely among the settlers and held out seductive promises of independence. Many observers wondered whether the emerging United States would ever grow to maturity.

Washington for President
 George Washington, the esteemed war hero, was unanimously drafted as president by the Electoral College in 1789—the only presidential nominee ever to be honored by unanimity. His presence was imposing: 6 feet 2 inches, 175 pounds, broad and sloping shoulders, strongly pointed chin, and pockmarks (from smallpox) on nose and cheeks. Much preferring the quiet of Mount Vernon to the turmoil of politics, he was perhaps the only president who did not in some way angle for this exalted ofﬁce. Balanced rather than brilliant, he commanded his followers by strength of character rather than by the arts of the politician.

 Washington Honored This idealized portrait symbolizes the reverential awe in which Americans held “the Father of His Country.”

 Washington’s long journey from Mount Vernon to New York City, the temporary capital, was a triumphal procession. He was greeted by roaring cannon, pealing bells, ﬂower-carpeted roads, and singing and shouting citizens. With appropriate ceremony, he solemnly and somewhat ner vously took the oath of ofﬁce on April 30, 1789, on a crowded balcony overlooking Wall Street, which some have regarded as a bad omen. Washington soon put his stamp on the new government, especially by establishing the cabinet. The Constitution does not mention a cabinet (see Table 10.1); it merely provides that the president “may require” written opinions of the heads of the executive-branch departments (see Art. II, Sec. II, para. 1 in the Appendix). But this system proved so cumbersome, and involved so much homework, that cabinet meetings gradually evolved in the Washington administration. At ﬁ rst only three full-ﬂedged department heads served under the president: Secretary of State Thomas

The Bill of Rights


Jefferson, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, and Secretary of War Henry Knox.


The Bill of Rights
 The new nation faced some unﬁ nished business. Many antifederalists had sharply criticized the Constitution drafted at Philadelphia for its failure to provide guarantees of individual rights such as freedom of religion and trial by jury. Many states had ratiﬁed the federal Constitution on the understanding that it would soon be amended to include such guarantees. Drawing up a bill of rights headed the list of imperatives facing the new government. Amendments to the Constitution could be proposed in either of two ways—by a new constitutional convention requested by two-thirds of the states or by a two-thirds vote of both houses of Congress. Fearing that a new convention might unravel the narrow federalist victory in the ratiﬁcation struggle, James Madison determined to draft the amendments himself. He then guided them through Congress, where his intellectual



 and political skills were quickly making him the leading ﬁgure. Adopted by the necessary number of states in 1791, the ﬁ rst ten amendments to the Constitution, popularly known as the Bill of Rights, safeguard some of the most precious American principles. Among these are protections for freedom of religion, speech, and the press; the right to bear arms and to be tried by a jury; and the right to assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances. The Bill of Rights also prohibits cruel and unusual punishments and arbitrary government seizure of private property. To guard against the danger that enumerating such rights might lead to the conclusion that they were the only ones protected, Madison inserted the crucial Ninth Amendment. It declares that specifying certain rights “shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.” In a gesture of reassurance to the states’ righters, he included the equally signiﬁcant Tenth Amendment, which reserves all rights not explicitly delegated or prohibited by the federal Constitution “to the States respectively, or to the people.” By preserving a strong central government

Table 10.1 Evolution of the Cabinet
Position


Date Established


Comments


 Secretary of state Secretary of Treasury Secretary of war Attorney general



 Secretary of navy Postmaster general Secretary of interior Secretary of agriculture Secretary of commerce and labor Secretary of commerce Secretary of labor



 Loses cabinet status, 1947 Loses cabinet status, 1970

 Secretary of defense



 Secretary of health, education, and welfare Secretary of housing and urban development Secretary of transportation Secretary of energy Secretary of health and human ser vices Secretary of education Secretary of veterans’ affairs Secretary of homeland security



 Subordinate to this secretary, without cabinet rank, are secretaries of army, navy, and air force Ofﬁce divided, 1979

 Loses cabinet status, 1947 Not head of Justice Dept. until 1870

 Ofﬁce divided, 1913



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 while specifying protections for minority and individual liberties, Madison’s amendments partially swung the federalist pendulum back in an antifederalist direction. (See Amendments I–X.) The ﬁ rst Congress also nailed other newly sawed government planks into place. It created effective federal courts under the Judiciary Act of 1789. The act orga nized the Supreme Court, with a chief justice and ﬁve associates, as well as federal district and circuit courts, and established the ofﬁce of attorney general. New Yorker John Jay, Madison’s collaborator on The Federalist papers and one of the young Republic’s most seasoned diplomats, became the ﬁ rst chief justice of the United States.

Hamilton Revives the
Corpse of Public Credit
 The key ﬁgure in the new government was still smoothfaced Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, a native of the British West Indies. Hamilton’s genius was unquestioned, but critics claimed he loved his adopted country more than he loved his countrymen. Doubts about his character and his loyalty to the republican experiment always swirled about his head. Hamilton regarded himself as a kind of prime minister in Washington’s cabinet and on occasion thrust his hands into the affairs of other departments, including that of his archrival, Thomas Jefferson, who served as secretary of state. A ﬁ nancial wizard, Hamilton set out immediately to correct the economic vexations that had crippled the Articles of Confederation. His plan was to shape the ﬁscal policies of the administration in such a way as to favor the wealthier groups. They, in turn, would gratefully lend the government monetary and political support. The new federal regime would thrive, the propertied classes would fatten, and prosperity would trickle down to the masses. The youthful ﬁ nancier’s ﬁ rst objective was to bolster the national credit. Without public conﬁdence in the government, Hamilton could not secure the funds with which to ﬂoat his risky schemes. He therefore boldly urged Congress to “fund” the entire national debt “at par” and to assume completely the debts incurred by the states during the recent war. Funding at par meant that the federal government would pay off its debts at face value, plus accumulated interest—a then-enormous total of more than $54 million. So many people believed the infant Treasury in-

Alexander Hamilton (1755–1804), by John Trumbull,
 1792 He was one of the youngest and most brilliant of the Founding Fathers, who might have been president but for his ultraconservatism, a scandalous adultery, and a duelist’s bullet. Hamilton favored a strong central government with a weak legislature to unify the infant nation and encourage industry. His chief rival, Thomas Jefferson, who extolled states’ rights as a bulwark of liberty and thought the United States should remain an agricultural society, regarded Hamilton as a monarchist plotter and never forgave him for insisting that “the British Govt. was the best in the world: and that he doubted much whether any thing short of it would do in America.”

 capable of meeting those obligations that government bonds had depreciated to ten or ﬁ fteen cents on the dollar. Yet speculators held ﬁstfuls of them, and when Congress passed Hamilton’s mea sure in 1790, they grabbed for more. Some of them galloped into rural areas ahead of the news, buying for a song the depreciated paper holdings of farmers, war veterans, and widows. Hamilton was willing, even eager, to have the new government shoulder additional obligations. While

 Hamilton's Financial Politics

 push ing the funding scheme, he urged Congress to assume the debts of the states, totaling some $21.5 million. The secretary made a convincing case for assumption. The state debts could be regarded as a proper national obligation, for they had been incurred in the war for independence. But foremost in Hamilton’s thinking was the belief that assumption would chain the states more tightly to the “federal chariot.” Thus the secretary’s maneuver would shift the attachment of wealthy creditors from the states to the federal government. The support of the rich for the national administration was a crucial link in Hamilton’s political strategy of strengthening the central government. States burdened with heavy debts, like Massachusetts, were delighted by Hamilton’s proposal. States with small debts, like Virginia, were less charmed. The stage was set for some old-fashioned horse trading. Virginia did not want the state debts assumed, but it did want the forthcoming federal district*—now the District of Columbia—to be located on the Potomac River. It would thus gain in commerce and prestige. Hamilton persuaded a reluctant Jefferson, who had recently come home from France, to line up enough votes in Congress for assumption. In return, Virginia would have the federal district on the Potomac. The bargain was carried through in 1790.

Customs Duties and
Excise Taxes
 The new ship of state thus set sail dangerously overloaded. The national debt had swelled to $75 million owing to Hamilton’s insistence on honoring the outstanding federal and state obligations alike. Anyone less determined to establish such a healthy public credit could have sidestepped $13 million in back interest and could have avoided the state debts entirely. But Hamilton, “Father of the National Debt,” was not greatly worried. His objectives were as much political as economic. He believed that within limits, a national debt was a “national blessing”—a kind of Union adhesive. The more creditors to whom the government owed money, the more people there would be with a personal stake in the success of his ambitious enterprise. His unique contribution was to make a debt—ordinarily a liability—an asset for vitalizing the

 *Authorized by the Constitution, Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 17.



Debt Owed
Foreigners
$11,710,000
Federal Domestic Debt
$42,414,000
State Debt
$21,500,000


Miscellaneous
Revenue


Excise
Revenue
 (on Whiskey, etc.)

Customs
Duties
(Tariffs)


 Figure 10.1 Hamilton’s Financial Structure Supported by Revenues

 ﬁ nancial system as well as the government itself (see Figure 10.1). Where was the money to come from to pay interest on this huge debt and run the government? Hamilton’s ﬁ rst answer was customs duties, derived from a tariff. Tariff revenues, in turn, depended on a vigorous foreign trade, another crucial link in Hamilton’s overall economic strategy for the new Republic. The ﬁ rst tariff law, imposing a low tariff of about 8 percent on the value of dutiable imports, was speedily passed by the ﬁrst Congress in 1789, even before Hamilton was sworn in. Revenue was by far the main goal, but the mea sure was also designed to erect a low protective wall around infant industries, which bawled noisily for more shelter than they received. Hamilton had the vision to see that the Industrial Revolution would soon reach America, and he argued strongly in favor of more protection for the well-to-do manufacturing groups—another vital element in his economic program. But Congress was still dominated by the agricultural and commercial interests, and it voted only two slight increases in the tariff during Washington’s presidency. Hamilton, with characteristic vigor, sought additional internal revenue and in 1791 secured from Congress an excise tax on a few domestic items, notably whiskey. The new levy of seven cents a gallon was borne chieﬂy by the distillers who lived in the backcountry, where the wretched roads forced the farmer to reduce (and liquefy) bulky bushels of grain to horseback proportions. Whiskey ﬂowed so freely on the frontier in the form of distilled liquor that it was used for money.



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 One of the most eloquent tributes to Hamilton’s apparent miracle working came from Daniel Webster (1782–1852) in the Senate (1831):

“


 He smote the rock of the national resources, and abundant streams of revenue gushed forth. He touched the dead corpse of public credit, and it sprung upon its feet.

”


Hamilton Battles Jefferson
 for a Bank As the capstone for his ﬁ nancial system, Hamilton proposed a bank of the United States. An enthusiastic admirer of most things Eng lish, he took as his model the Bank of Eng land. Speciﬁcally, he proposed a powerful private institution, of which the government would be the major stockholder and in which the federal Treasury would deposit its surplus monies. The central government not only would have a convenient strongbox, but federal funds would stimulate business by remaining in circulation. The bank would also print urgently needed paper money and thus provide a sound and stable national currency, badly needed since the days when the Continental dollar was “not worth a Continental.” The proposed bank would indeed be useful. But was it constitutional? Jefferson, whose written opinion on this question Washington requested, argued vehemently against the bank. There was, he insisted, no speciﬁc authorization in the Constitution for such a ﬁ nancial octopus. He was convinced that all powers not speciﬁcally granted to the central government were reserved to the states, as provided in the about-to-be-ratiﬁed Bill of Rights (see Amendment X). He therefore concluded that the states, not Congress, had the power to charter banks. Believing that the Constitution should be interpreted “literally” or “strictly,” Jefferson and his states’ rights disciples zealously embraced the theory of “strict construction.” Hamilton, also at Washington’s request, prepared a brilliantly reasoned reply to Jefferson’s arguments. Hamilton in general believed that what the Constitution did not forbid it permitted; Jefferson, in contrast, generally believed that what it did not permit it forbade. Hamilton boldly invoked the clause of the Constitution that stipulates that Congress may pass any laws “necessary and proper” to carry out the powers vested in

 the various government agencies (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 18). The government was explicitly empowered to collect taxes and regulate trade. In carrying out these basic functions, Hamilton argued, a national bank would be not only “proper” but “necessary.” By inference or implication—that is, by virtue of “implied powers”—Congress would be fully justiﬁed in establishing the Bank of the United States. In short, Hamilton contended for a “loose” or “broad” interpretation of the Constitution. He and his federalist followers thus evolved the theory of “loose construction” by invoking the “elastic clause” of the Constitution—a precedent for enormous federal powers. Hamilton’s ﬁ nancial views prevailed. His eloquent and realistic arguments were accepted by Washington, who reluctantly signed the bank mea sure into law. This explosive issue had been debated with much heat in Congress, where the old North-South cleavage still lurked ominously. The most enthusiastic support for the bank naturally came from the commercial and ﬁnancial centers of the North, whereas the strongest opposition arose from the agricultural South. The Bank of the United States, as created by Congress in 1791, was chartered for twenty years. Located in Philadelphia, it was to have a capital of $10 million, one-ﬁ fth of it owned by the federal government. Stock was thrown open to public sale. To the agreeable surprise of Hamilton, a milling crowd oversubscribed in less than two hours, pushing aside many would-be purchasers.

Mutinous Moonshiners
 in Pennsylvania The Whiskey Rebellion, which ﬂared up in southwestern Pennsylvania in 1794, sharply challenged the new national government. Hamilton’s high excise tax bore harshly on these homespun pioneer folk. They regarded it not as a tax on a frivolous luxury but as a burden on an economic necessity and a medium of exchange. Even preachers of the gospel were paid in “Old Monongahela rye.” Rye and corn crops distilled into alcohol were more cheaply transported to eastern markets than bales of grain. Deﬁant distillers ﬁ nally erected whiskey poles, similar to the liberty poles of anti–stamp tax days in 1765, and raised the cry “Liberty and No Excise.” Boldly tarring and feathering revenue ofﬁcers, they brought collections to a halt. President Washington, once a revolutionary, was alarmed by what he called these “self-created societ-

The Whiskey Rebellion




 The Whiskey Boys The cartoonist clearly favored the Pennsylvania rebels who resisted Hamilton’s imposition of an excise tax on whiskey.

 ies.” With the hearty encouragement of Hamilton, he summoned the militias of several states. Anxious moments followed the call, for there was much doubt as to whether men in other states would muster to crush a rebellion in a fellow state. Despite some opposition, an army of about thirteen thousand rallied to the colors, and two widely separated columns marched briskly forth in a gorgeous, leaf-tinted Indian summer, until knee-deep mud slowed their progress.

Attorney Hugh Henry Brackenridge (1748–1816)
 mediated between the Whiskey Rebels and the town of Pittsburgh. He later wrote of the hated excise tax,

“


 I saw the operation to be unequal in this country. . . . It is true that the excise paid by the country would be that only on spirits consumed in it. But even in the case of exports, the excise must be advanced in the ﬁrst instance by the distiller and this would prevent effectually all the poorer part from carrying on the business. I . . . would have preferred a direct tax with a view to reach unsettled lands which all around us have been purchased by speculating men.

”


 When the troops reached the hills of western Pennsylvania, they found no insurrection. The “Whiskey Boys” were overawed, dispersed, or captured. Washington, with an eye to healing old sores, pardoned the two small-fry convicted culprits. The Whiskey Rebellion was minuscule—some three rebels were killed—but its consequences were mighty. George Washington’s government, now substantially strengthened, commanded a new respect. Yet the foes of the administration condemned its brutal display of force—for having used a sledgehammer to crush a gnat.

The Emergence of
Political Parties
 Almost overnight, Hamilton’s ﬁscal feats had established the government’s sound credit rating. The Treasury could now borrow needed funds in the Netherlands on favorable terms. But Hamilton’s ﬁ nancial successes—funding, assumption, the excise tax, the bank, the suppression of the Whiskey Rebellion—created some political liabilities. All these schemes encroached sharply upon states’ rights. Many Americans, dubious about the new Constitution in the ﬁ rst place, might never have approved it if they had foreseen how the states were going to be



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 overshadowed by the federal colossus. Now, out of resentment against Hamilton’s revenue-raising and centralizing policies, an orga nized opposition began to build. What once was a personal feud between Hamilton and Jefferson developed into a full-blown and frequently bitter political rivalry. National political parties, in the modern sense, were unknown in America when George Washington took his inaugural oath. There had been Whigs and Tories, federalists and antifederalists, but these groups were factions rather than parties. They had sprung into existence over hotly contested special issues; they had faded away when their cause had triumphed or ﬁ zzled. The Founders at Philadelphia had not envisioned the existence of permanent political parties. Organized opposition to the government—especially a democratic government based on popular consent—seemed tainted by disloyalty. Opposition to the government affronted the spirit of national unity that the glorious cause of the Revolution had inspired. The notion of a formal party apparatus was thus a novelty in the 1790s, and when Jefferson and Madison ﬁ rst orga nized their opposition to the Hamiltonian program, they conﬁ ned their activities to Congress and did not anticipate creating a long-lived and popular party. But as their antagonism to Hamilton stiffened, and as the amazingly boisterous and widely read newspapers of the day spread their political message, and Hamilton’s, among

 the people, primitive semblances of political parties began to emerge. The two-party system has existed in the United States since that time (see Table 10.2). Ironically, in light of early suspicions about the very legitimacy of parties, their competition for power has actually proved to be among the indispensable ingredients of a sound democracy. The party out of power—“the loyal opposition”— traditionally plays the invaluable role of the balance wheel on the machinery of government, ensuring that politics never drifts too far out of kilter with the wishes of the people.

The Impact of the
French Revolution
 When Washington’s ﬁ rst administration ended in early 1793, Hamilton’s domestic policies had already stimulated the formation of two political camps— Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans and Hamiltonian Federalists. As Washington’s second term began, foreign-policy issues brought the differences between them to a fever pitch. Only a few weeks after Washington’s inauguration in 1789, the curtain had risen on the ﬁ rst act of the French Revolution. (See “Thinking Globally: Two Revolutions,” pp. 208–209.) Twenty-six years were to pass before the seething continent of Europe collapsed into

Table 10.2 Evolution of Major Parties*
Year


Hamiltonians


Jeffersonians


 ca. 1792 Federalists ca. 1816 Death of Federalists

 ca. 1820

Democratic-Republicans


Republicans
 One party: Era of Good Feelings

 ca. 1825 National Republicans

Whigs




Republicans
 To present

*See


 the Appendix (Presidential Elections) for third parties.

Democratic-Republicans
(Jacksonian Democrats)
Democrats


 To present

The French Revolution


 a peace of exhaustion. Few non-American events have left a deeper scar on American political and social life. In a sense the French Revolution was misnamed: it was a historic, global revolution that sent tremors through much of the Western world and beyond. In its early stages, the upheaval was surprisingly peaceful, involving as it did a successful attempt to impose constitutional shackles on Louis XVI. The American people, loving liberty and deploring despotism, cheered. They were ﬂattered to think that the outburst in France was but the second chapter of their own glorious Revolution, as to some extent it was. Only a few ultraconser vative Federalists—fearing change, reform, and “leveling” principles—were from the outset dubious or outspokenly hostile to the “despicable mobocracy.” The more ardent Jeffersonians were overjoyed. The French Revolution entered a more ominous phase in 1792, when France declared war on hostile Austria. Powerful ideals and powerful armies alike were on the march. Late in that year, the electrifying news reached America that French citizen armies had hurled back the invading foreigners and that France had proclaimed itself a republic. Americans enthusiastically sang “The Marseillaise” and other rousing French Revolutionary songs, and they renamed thor-



 British political observer William Cobbett (1763– 1835) wrote of the frenzied reaction in America to the death of Louis XVI,

“


 Never was the memory of a man so cruelly insulted as that of this mild and humane monarch. He was guillotined in efﬁgy, in the capital of the Union [Philadelphia], twenty or thirty times every day, during one whole winter and part of the summer. Men, women and children ﬂocked to the tragical exhibition, and not a single paragraph appeared in the papers to shame them from it.

”


 oughfares with democratic ﬂare. King Street in New York, for example, became Liberty Street, and in Boston, Royal Exchange Alley became Equality Lane. But centuries of pent-up poison could not be purged without baleful results. The guillotine was set up, the king was beheaded in 1793, the church was attacked, and the head-rolling Reign of Terror was begun. Back in America, God-fearing Federalist aristocrats ner vously

 The Execution of Queen Marie Antoinette, 1793 The bloody excesses of the notorious guillotine disgusted many Americans and soured them on the promises of the French Revolution.

THINKING GLOBALLY

Two Revolutions


O


 n July 14, 1789, a howling mob stormed the Bastille—a dank Parisian prison described by the Marquis de Lafayette as France’s “fortress of despotism”—killed half a dozen soldiers, and paraded the severed heads of its commanding ofﬁcer and the mayor of Paris throughout the city. The French Revolution was thus bloodily launched. Bastille Day is still celebrated as France’s national birthday, just as Americans celebrate the Fourth of July. The roots of the two Revolutions were thickly intertwined. To defray the cost of the war that had ousted France from North America in 1763, Britain had levied new taxes on its colonists, provoking them to revolt in 1776. In turn, aiding the rebellious Americans forced the French government to seek new revenues, lighting the fuse that led to the political explosion in Paris in 1789. Even more notable was the intellectual commonality between the two upheavals. The ideas that inspired the American and French revolutionaries grew from the common heritage of radical eighteenth-century Enlightenment thinking about equality, freedom, and the sovereignty of

 the people. The French Declaration of the Rights of Man (1789) deliberately echoed Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence (1776) when it said that “men are born and remain free and equal in rights,” among which were “liberty, property, security, and resistance to oppression.” Many French thinkers openly credited the American Revolution as the inspiration for their own. As the American revolutionary Thomas Paine remarked to George Washington, “The principles of America opened the Bastille.” Indeed, in many ways the French were even more radical than the Americans; their Revolution abolished slavery (temporarily), something the Americans failed to do for almost one hundred years more. And yet the two Revolutions unfolded in dramatically different ways and left vastly different legacies. The Americans largely disarmed after winning their independence; allowed some eighty thousand hard-core Loyalists to depart without suffering grievous retribution (see “Makers of America: The Loyalists,” pp. 154–155); peacefully resumed their habits of worship, toil, and governance; and pro-

 Storming the Bastille, 1789 This event signaled the outbreak of the French Revolution.



 ceeded to draft the U.S. Constitution, under which they have lived, with amendments, for more than two centuries. The American revolutionaries, in short, secured the fruits of their Revolution fairly easily, while the French struggled through ghastly bloodshed to ultimate failure—an outcome that haunted European politics for at least a century thereafter. Revolutionaries in France had to grapple with the constant threats of counterrevolution at home and armed intervention from abroad. As a result, they soon descended into grisly violence, including the execution of some forty thousand Frenchmen in the notorious Reign of Terror of 1793–1794, the guillotining of the king and queen, and preemptive attacks on neighboring countries. They stripped the Catholic Church of its property and privileges, brieﬂy experimented with a new state religion called the Cult of Reason, and eventually conceded supreme power to a brash young general, Napoleon Bonaparte, who convulsed all of Europe in the name of “liberty, equality, and fraternity.” Napoleon was ﬁnally defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815, after which the Bourbon monarchy was restored to the throne. Why did these two great eruptions, sprung from a shared chain of events and espousing almost identical political philosophies, fare so differently? Many scholars have found the answer in the two countries’ markedly different pre-Revolutionary histories. France’s Revolution confronted implacably entrenched adversaries in the landed nobility and the clergy. Those two “estates,” as they were called, clung tenaciously to their ancient privileges, as did the princes and potentates who ruled in all the countries on France’s borders. To succeed, the French Revolution had to concentrate power in the hands of a state powerful enough to extinguish its internal enemies and to forestall foreign intervention as well. Those stark necessities help account for the fact that down to the present day, central governments are stronger in almost all European societies than in the United States. The Americans faced no such obstacles. They had no aristocracy worthy of the name, no church with the kind of inﬂuence that the Catholic Church commanded in France, and no menacing neighbors to fear. They had the luxury of being able to focus on limiting the power of the state, not enlarging it. Theirs was largely a colonial conﬂict, whereas France had to endure a class conﬂict. Not until Reconstruction following the Civil War would Americans confront a comparable task of mustering sufﬁcient power to uproot and permanently extinguish an entire social order. It has been said that to mount a revolution is “to murder and create.” What was exceptional about the American

 revolutionaries was that they were spared the necessity to murder. The American Revolution grew not from abstract ideas, but from the preceding two centuries of American experience. It was less a revolution in the usual sense than a consolidation of already well-established norms, values, and behaviors. Alexander Hamilton understood that crucial point when he wrote to the Marquis de Lafayette in 1789, “I dread the reveries of your philosophic politicians.”

The Key to the Bastille, Mount Vernon, Virginia
 The Marquis de Lafayette instructed Thomas Paine, his American Revolutionary War comrade, to deliver the key to the liberated Bastille to George Washington. It hangs to this day in the entry hall of Washington’s home at Mount Vernon, Virginia, a lasting symbol of the deep afﬁnity between the French and American Revolutions.





Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 ﬁ ngered their tender white necks and eyed the Jeffersonian masses apprehensively. Lukewarm Federalist approval of the early Revolution turned, almost overnight, to heated talk of “blood-drinking cannibals.” Sober-minded Jeffersonians regretted the bloodshed. But they felt, with Jefferson, that one could not expect to be carried from “despotism to liberty in a feather bed” and that a few thousand aristocratic heads were a cheap price to pay for human freedom. Such approbation was shortsighted, for dire peril loomed ahead. The earlier battles of the French Revolution had not hurt America directly, but now Britain was sucked into the contagious conﬂ ict. The conﬂagration speedily spread to the New World, where it vividly affected the expanding young American Republic. Thus was repeated the familiar story of every major European war, beginning with 1688, that involved a watery duel for control of the Atlantic Ocean. (See Table 6.2 on p. 114.)

 Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation Ominously, the Franco-American alliance of 1778 was still on the books. By its own terms, it was to last “forever.” It bound the United States to help the French defend their West Indies against future foes, and the booming British ﬂeets were certain to attack these strategic islands. Many Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans favored honoring the alliance. Aﬂame with the liberal ideals of the French Revolution, red-blooded Jeffersonians were eager to enter the conﬂ ict against Britain, the recent foe, at the side of France, the recent friend. America owed France its freedom, they argued, and now was the time to pay the debt of gratitude. But President George Washington, levelheaded as usual, was not swayed by the clamor of the crowd. Backed by Hamilton, he believed that war had to be avoided at all costs. Washington was coolly playing for enormous stakes. The nation in 1793 was militarily feeble, economically wobbly, and politically disunited. But solid foundations were being laid, and American cradles were continuing to rock a bumper crop of babies. Washington wisely reasoned that if America could avoid the broils of Europe for a generation or so, it would then be populous enough and powerful enough to assert its maritime rights with strength and success. Otherwise it might invite catastrophe. The strategy of delay—of playing for time while the birthrate fought

 America’s battles—was a cardinal policy of the Founding Fathers. It was based on a shrewd assessment of American strengths and weaknesses at this critical moment in the young Republic’s history. Hamilton and Jefferson, often poles apart on other issues, were in agreement here. Accordingly, Washington boldly issued his Neutrality Proclamation in 1793, shortly after the outbreak of war between Britain and France. This epochal document not only proclaimed the government’s ofﬁcial neutrality in the widening conﬂ ict but sternly warned American citizens to be impartial toward both armed camps. As America’s ﬁ rst formal declaration of aloofness from Old World quarrels, Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation proved to be a major prop of the spreading isolationist tradition. It also proved to be enormously controversial. The pro-French Jeffersonians were enraged by the Neutrality Proclamation, especially by Washington’s method of announcing it unilaterally, without consulting Congress. The pro-British Federalists were heartened. Debate soon intensiﬁed. An impetuous, thirtyyear-old representative of the French Republic, Citizen Edmond Genêt, had landed at Charleston, South Carolina. With unrestrained zeal he undertook to ﬁt out privateers and otherwise take advantage of the existing Franco-American alliance. The giddy-headed envoy— all sail and no anchor—was soon swept away by his enthusiastic reception by the Jeffersonian Republicans. He foolishly came to believe that the Neutrality Proclamation did not reﬂect the true wishes of the American people, and he consequently embarked upon unneutral activity not authorized by the French alliance— including the recruitment of armies to invade Spanish Florida and Louisiana, as well as British Canada. Even Madison and Jefferson were soon disillusioned by his conduct. After he threatened to appeal over the head of “Old Washington” to the sovereign voters, the president demanded Genêt’s withdrawal, and the Frenchman was replaced by a less impulsive emissary. Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation clearly illustrates the truism that self-interest is the basic cement of alliances. In 1778 both France and America stood to gain; in 1793 only France. Technically, the Americans did not ﬂout their obligation because France never ofﬁcially called upon them to honor it. American neutrality in fact favored France. The French West Indies urgently needed Yankee foodstuffs. If the Americans had entered the war at France’s side, the British ﬂeets would have blockaded the American coast and cut off those essential supplies. America was thus much



The French Revolution




La k
Supere
 ior





100 Km.


80°W


ER W DA LO NA CA

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA

100 Mi.


 n

Hu


L.


M


 ke

 ich

La


 ron

P
 UP

Fort
Point au Fer


 ER

N
 CA

Lak


 AD

A


 a e Ont

 rio

Fort
 Dutchman’s Point

Fort Oswegatchie


 VT.

Fort Oswego


NEW YORK
Original 13 states 
Fort Detroit


 Wayne’s Victory Fallen Timbers,

La


 ke

E


 Territory ceded to the United States, 1783

 rie

 Treaty line Indian battle British fort on American soil

Fort Miami


40°N


 PENNSYLVANIA

 MD.

 io

R.


 of Line Treaty , 1795 le il v Green Oh

 St. Clair’s Defeat,

R.


Fort Niagara


NORTHWEST TERRITORY

 Harmar’s Defeat, 1790

 ce

.L


 aw

 re

Ft. Michilimackinac


St


 n

 ig

 a

N


DEL. VIRGINIA

Map 10.1 American Posts Held by the British and British-American Clashes
After 1783
Interactive Map


 more useful to France as a reliable neutral provider than as a blockaded partner-in-arms.

 Embroilments with Britain President Washington’s far-visioned policy of neutrality was sorely tried by the British. For ten long years, they had been retaining the chain of northern frontier posts on U.S. soil, all in deﬁance of the peace treaty of 1783 (see Map 10.1). The London government was reluctant to abandon the lucrative fur trade in the Great Lakes region and also hoped to build up an Indian buffer state to contain the ambitious Americans. British agents openly sold ﬁrearms and ﬁ rewater to the Indians of the Miami Confederacy, an alliance of eight Indian nations who terrorized Americans invading their lands. Little Turtle, war chief of the Miamis, gave notice

 that the confederacy regarded the Ohio River as the United States’ northwestern, and their own southeastern, border. In 1790 and 1791, Little Turtle’s braves defeated armies led by Generals Josiah Harmar and Arthur St. Clair, kill ing hundreds of soldiers and handing the United States what remains one of its worst defeats in the history of the frontier. But in 1794, when a new army under General “Mad Anthony” Wayne routed the Miamis at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, the British refused to shelter Indians ﬂeeing from the battle. Abandoned when it counted by their red-coated friends, the Indians soon offered Wayne the peace pipe. In the Treaty of Greenville, signed in August 1795, the confederacy gave up vast tracts of the Old Northwest, including most of presentday Indiana and Ohio. In exchange the Indians received a lump-sum payment of $20,000, an annual annuity of $9,000, the right to hunt the lands they had ceded, and,



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 Signing the Treaty of Greenville, 1795 Following General Wayne’s victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794, the Miami Indians surrendered their claims to much of the Old Northwest.

 most important, what they hoped was recognition of their sovereign status. Although the treaty codiﬁed an unequal relationship, the Indians felt that it put some limits on the ability of the United States to decide the fate of Indian peoples.

 Thomas Paine (1737–1809), then in France and resenting George Washington’s anti-French policies, addressed the president in an open letter (1796) that reveals his bitterness:

“


 And as to you, sir, treacherous in private friendship (for so you have been to me, and that in the day of danger) and a hypocrite in public life, the world will be puzzled to decide, whether you are an apostate or an imposter; whether you have abandoned good principles, or whether you ever had any.

”


 On the sea frontier, the British were eager to starve out the French West Indies and naturally expected the United States to defend them under the FrancoAmerican alliance. Hard-boiled commanders of the Royal Navy, ignoring America’s rights as a neutral, struck savagely. They seized about three hundred American merchant ships in the West Indies, impressed scores of seamen into ser vice on British vessels, and threw hundreds of others into foul dungeons. These actions, especially impressment, incensed patriotic Americans. A mighty outcry arose, chieﬂy from Jeffersonians, that America should once again ﬁght George III in defense of its liberties. At the very least, it should cut off all supplies to its oppressor through a nationwide embargo. But the Federalists stoutly resisted all demands for drastic action. Hamilton’s high hopes for economic development depended on trade with Britain. War with the world’s mightiest commercial empire would pierce the heart of the Hamiltonian ﬁ nancial system.

 Washington's Farewell

 Jay’s Treaty and Washington’s Farewell President Washington, in a last desperate gamble to avert war, decided to send Chief Justice John Jay to London in 1794. The Jeffersonians were acutely unhappy over the choice, partly because they feared that so notorious a Federalist and Anglophile would sell out his country. Arriving in London, Jay gave the Jeffersonians further cause for alarm when, at the presentation ceremony, he routinely kissed the queen’s hand. Unhappily, Jay entered the negotiations with weak cards, which were further sabotaged by Hamilton. The latter, fearful of war with Britain, secretly supplied the British with the details of America’s bargaining strategy. Not surprisingly, Jay won few concessions. The British did promise to evacuate the chain of posts on U.S. soil—a pledge that inspired little conﬁdence, since it had been made before in Paris (to the same John Jay!) in 1783. In addition, Britain consented to pay damages for the recent seizures of American ships. But the British stopped short of pledging anything about future maritime seizures and impressments or about supplying arms to Indians. And they forced Jay to give ground by binding the United States to pay the debts still owed to British merchants on pre-Revolutionary accounts. Jay’s unpopular pact, more than any other issue, vitalized the newborn Democratic-Republican party of Thomas Jefferson. When the Jeffersonians learned of Jay’s concessions, their rage was fearful to behold. The treaty seemed like an abject surrender to Britain, as well as a betrayal of the Jeffersonian South. Southern planters would have to pay the major share of the preRevolutionary debts, while rich Federalist shippers were collecting damages for recent British seizures. Jeffersonian mobs hanged, burned, and guillotined in efﬁgy that “damn’d archtraitor, Sir John Jay.” Even George Washington’s huge popularity was compromised by the controversy over the treaty. Jay’s Treaty had other unforeseen consequences. Fearing that the treaty foreshadowed an AngloAmerican alliance, Spain moved hastily to strike a deal with the United States. Pinckney’s Treaty of 1795 with Spain granted the Americans virtually every thing they demanded, including free navigation of the Mississippi, the right of deposit (warehouse rights) at New Orleans, and the large disputed territory of western Florida. (See Map 9.3 on p. 184.)



 Exhausted after the diplomatic and partisan battles of his second term, President Washington decided to retire. His choice contributed powerfully to establishing a two-term tradition for American presidents.* In his Farewell Address to the nation in 1796 (never delivered orally but printed in the newspapers), Washington strongly advised the avoidance of “permanent alliances” like the still-vexatious Franco-American Treaty of 1778. Contrary to general misunderstanding, Washington did not oppose all alliances, but favored only “temporary alliances” for “extraordinary emergencies.” This was admirable advice for a weak and divided nation in 1796. But what is sound counsel for a young stripling may not apply later to a mature and muscular giant. Washington’s contributions as president were enormous, even though the sparkling Hamilton at times seemed to outshine him. The central government, its ﬁscal feet now under it, was solidly established. The West was expanding. The merchant marine was plowing the seas. Above all, Washington had kept the nation out of both overseas entanglements and foreign wars. The experimental stage had passed, and the presidential chair could now be turned over to a less impressive ﬁgure. But republics are notoriously ungrateful. When Washington left ofﬁce in 1797, he was showered with the brickbats of partisan abuse, quite in contrast with the bouquets that had greeted his arrival.

John Adams Becomes President
 Who should succeed the exalted “Father of His Country”? Alexander Hamilton was the best-known member of the Federalist party, now that Washington had bowed out. But his ﬁ nancial policies, some of which had fattened the speculators, had made him so unpopular that he could not hope to be elected president. The Federalists were forced to turn to Washington’s vice president, the experienced but ungracious John Adams, a rugged chip off old Plymouth Rock. The DemocraticRepublicans naturally rallied behind their master organizer and leader, Thomas Jefferson. Political passions ran feverishly high in the presidential campaign of 1796. The lofty presence of

 *Not broken until 1940 by Franklin D. Roosevelt and made a part of the Constitution in 1951 by the Twenty-second Amendment. (See the Appendix.)



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


Although Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) and John
 Adams hardly saw eye to eye, Jefferson displayed grudging respect for Adams in a piece of private correspondence in 1787:

“


 He is vain, irritable, and a bad calculator of the force and probable effect of the motives which govern men. This is all the ill which can possibly be said of him. He is as disinterested as the Being who made him.

”


John Adams, by John Singleton Copley, 1783
 When he entered Harvard College in 1751, Adams intended to prepare for the ministry, but four absorbing years of study excited him about other intellectual and career possibilities: “I was a mighty metaphysician, at least I thought myself such.” Adams also tried his hand at being a mighty scientist, doctor, and orator. Upon graduation he became a schoolmaster but soon decided to take up the law.

 Washington had hitherto imposed some restraints; now the lid was off. Cultured Federalists like Fisher Ames referred to the Jeffersonians as “ﬁ re-eating salamanders, poison-sucking toads.” Federalists and Democratic-Republicans even drank their ale in separate taverns. The issues of the campaign, as it turned out, focused heavily on personalities. But the Jeffersonians again assailed the too-forceful crushing of the

 Whiskey Rebellion and, above all, the negotiation of Jay’s hated treaty. John Adams, with most of his support in New England, squeezed through by the narrow margin of 71 votes to 68 in the Electoral College. Jefferson, as runnerup, became vice president.* One of the ablest statesmen of his day, Adams at sixty-two was a stuffy ﬁgure. Sharp-featured, bald, relatively short (ﬁve feet seven inches), and thickset (“His Rotundity”), he impressed observers as a man of stern principles who did his duty with stubborn devotion. Although learned and upright, he was a tactless and prickly intellectual aristocrat, with no appeal to the masses and with no desire to cultivate any. Many citizens regarded him with “respectful irritation.” The crusty New Eng lander suffered from other handicaps. He had stepped into Washington’s shoes, which no successor could hope to ﬁ ll. In addition, Adams was hated by Hamilton, who had resigned from the Treasury in 1795 and who now headed the war faction of the Federalist party, known as the “High Federalists.” The famed ﬁ nancier even secretly plotted with cer tain members of the cabinet against the president, who had a conspiracy rather than a cabinet on his hands. Adams regarded Hamilton as “the most ruthless, impatient, artful, indefatigable and unprincipled intriguer in the United States, if not in the world.” Most ominous of all, Adams inherited a violent quarrel with France—a quarrel whose gunpowder lacked only a spark.

 *The possibility of such an inharmonious two-party combination in the future was removed by the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution in 1804. (See the Appendix.)

The French Crisis




 The XYZ Affair When President Adams’s envoys to Paris were asked to pay a huge bribe as the price of doing diplomatic business, humiliated Americans rose up in wrath against France. Here an innocent young America is being plundered by Frenchmen as John Bull looks on in amusement from across the English Channel.

 Unofﬁcial Fighting with France The French were infuriated by Jay’s Treaty. They condemned it as the initial step toward an alliance with Britain, their perpetual foe. They further assailed the pact as a ﬂagrant violation of the Franco-American Treaty of 1778. French warships, in retaliation, began to seize defenseless American merchant vessels, altogether about three hundred by mid-1797. Adding insult to outrage, the Paris regime haughtily refused to receive America’s newly appointed envoy and even threatened him with arrest. President Adams kept his head, temporarily, even though the nation was mightily aroused. True to Washington’s policy of steering clear of war at all costs, he tried again to reach an agreement with the French and appointed a diplomatic commission of three men, including John Marshall, the future chief justice. Adams’s envoys, reaching Paris in 1797, hoped to meet with Charles Maurice de Talleyrand, the crafty French foreign minister. They were secretly approached

 by three go-betweens, later referred to as X, Y, and Z in the published dispatches. The French spokesmen, among other concessions, demanded an unneutral loan of 32 million ﬂorins, plus what amounted to a bribe of $250,000, for the privilege of merely talking with Talleyrand. These terms were intolerable. The American trio knew that bribes were standard diplomatic devices in Europe, but they gagged at paying a quarter of a million dollars for mere talk, without any assurances of a settlement. Negotiations quickly broke down, and John Marshall, on reaching New York in 1798, was hailed as a conquering hero for his steadfastness. The XYZ Affair sent a wave of war hysteria sweeping through the United States, catching up even President Adams. The slogan of the hour became “Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute.” The Federalists were delighted at this unexpected turn of affairs, whereas all except the most rabid Jeffersonians hung their heads in shame over the misbehavior of their French friends. War preparations in the United States were pushed along at a feverish pace, despite considerable Jeffersonian opposition in Congress. The Navy Department



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


Preparation for War to Defend
Commerce: The Building of
 the Frigate Philadelphia In 1803 this frigate ran onto the rocks near Tripoli harbor, and about three hundred ofﬁcers and men were imprisoned by the Tripolitans (see Map 11.2 on p. 233). The ship was reﬂoated for service against the Americans, but Stephen Decatur led a party of men that set it aﬁre.

 was created; the three-ship navy was expanded; the United States Marine Corps was reestablished (originally created in 1775, the Marine Corps had been disbanded at the end of the Revolutionary War). A new army of ten thousand men was authorized (but not fully raised). Bloodshed was conﬁ ned to the sea, and principally to the West Indies. In two and a half years of undeclared hostilities (1798–1800), American privateers and menof-war of the new navy captured over eighty armed vessels ﬂying the French colors, though several hundred Yankee merchant ships were lost to the enemy. Only a slight push, it seemed, might plunge both nations into a full-dress war.

 Americans would send a new minister, he would be received with proper respect. This French furor brought to Adams a degree of personal acclaim that he had never known before—and was never to know again. He doubtless perceived that a full-ﬂedged war, crowned by the conquest of the Floridas and Louisiana, would bring new plaudits to the Federalist party—and perhaps a second term to himself. But the heady wine of popularity did not sway his ﬁ nal judgment. He, like other Founding Fathers, realized full well that war must be avoided while the country was relatively weak. Adams unexpectedly exploded a bombshell when, early in 1799, he submitted to the Senate the name of a new minister to France. Hamilton and his war-hawk

Adams Puts Patriotism
Above Party
 Embattled France, its hands full in Europe, wanted no war. An outwitted Talleyrand realized that to ﬁght the United States would merely add one more foe to his enemy roster. The British, who were lending the Americans cannon and other war supplies, were actually driven closer to their wayward cousins than they were to be again for many years. Talleyrand therefore let it be known, through roundabout channels, that if the

 The ﬁrmness of President John Adams (1735–1826) was revealed in his message to Congress (June 1798):

“


 I will never send another minister to France without assurances that he will be received, respected, and honored as the representative of a great, free, powerful, and independent nation.

”


The Alien and Sedition Hysteria


 faction were enraged. But public opinion—Jeffersonian and reasonable Federalist alike—was favorable to one last try for peace. America’s envoys (now three) found the political skies brightening when they reached Paris early in 1800. The ambitious “Little Corporal,” the Corsican Napoleon Bonaparte, had recently seized dictatorial power. He was eager to free his hands of the American squabble so that he might continue to redraw the map of Europe and perhaps create a New World empire in Louisiana. The afﬂ ictions and ambitions of the Old World were again working to America’s advantage. After a great deal of haggling, a memorable treaty known as the Convention of 1800 was signed in Paris. France agreed to annul the twenty-two-year-old marriage of (in)convenience, but as a kind of alimony the United States agreed to pay the damage claims of American shippers. So ended the nation’s only peacetime military alliance for a century and a half. Its troubled history does much to explain the traditional antipathy of the American people to foreign entanglements. John Adams, ﬂ inty to the end, deserves immense credit for his belated push for peace, even though he was moved in part by jealousy of Hamilton. Adams not only avoided the hazards of war, but also unwittingly smoothed the path for the peaceful purchase of Louisiana three years later. He should indeed rank high among the forgotten purchasers of this vast domain. If America had drifted into a full-blown war with France in 1800, Napoleon would not have sold Louisiana to Jefferson on any terms in 1803. President Adams, the bubble of his popularity pricked by peace, was aware of his signal contribution to the nation. He later suggested as the epitaph for his tombstone (not used), “Here lies John Adams, who took upon himself the responsibility of peace with France in the year 1800.”

The Federalist Witch Hunt
 Exulting Federalists had meanwhile capitalized on the anti-French frenzy to drive through Congress in 1798 a sheaf of laws designed to mufﬂe or minimize their Jeffersonian foes. The ﬁ rst of these oppressive laws was aimed at supposedly pro-Jeffersonian “aliens.” Most European immigrants, lacking wealth, were scorned by the aristocratic Federalist party. But they were welcomed as voters by the less prosperous and more democratic Jeffersonians. The Federalist Congress, hoping to dis-



 courage the “dregs” of Europe, erected a disheartening barrier. They raised the residence requirements for aliens who desired to become citizens from a tolerable ﬁve years to an intolerable fourteen. This drastic new law violated the traditional American policy of opendoor hospitality and speedy assimilation. Two additional Alien Laws struck heavily at undesirable immigrants. The president was empowered to deport dangerous foreigners in time of peace and to deport or imprison them in time of hostilities. Though defensible as a war mea sure—and an ofﬁcially declared war with France seemed imminent—this was an arbitrary grant of executive power contrary to American tradition and to the spirit of the Constitution, even though the stringent Alien Laws were never enforced. The “lockjaw” Sedition Act, the last mea sure of the Federalist clampdown, was a direct slap at two priceless freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution by the Bill of Rights—freedom of speech and freedom of the press (First Amendment). This law provided that anyone who impeded the policies of the government or falsely defamed its ofﬁcials, including the president, would be liable to a heavy ﬁ ne and imprisonment. Severe though the mea sure was, the Federalists believed that it was justiﬁed. The verbal violence of the day was unrestrained, and foul-penned editors, some of them exiled aliens, viliﬁed Adams’s anti-French policy in vicious terms. Many outspoken Jeffersonian editors were indicted under the Sedition Act, and ten were brought to trial. All of them were convicted, often by packed juries swayed by prejudiced Federalist judges. Some of the victims were harmless partisans, who should have been spared the notoriety of martyrdom. Among them was Congressman Matthew Lyon (the “Spitting Lion”), who had earlier gained fame by spitting in the face of a Federalist. He was sentenced to four months in jail for writing of President Adams’s “unbounded thirst for ridiculous pomp, foolish adulation, and selﬁsh avarice.” Another culprit was lucky to get off with a ﬁ ne of $100 after he had expressed the wish that the wad of a cannon ﬁ red in honor of Adams had landed in the seat of the president’s breeches. The Sedition Act seemed to be in direct conﬂ ict with the Constitution. But the Supreme Court, dominated by Federalists, was of no mind to declare this Federalist law unconstitutional. (The Federalists intentionally wrote the law to expire in 1801, so that it could not be used against them if they lost the next election.) This attempt by the Federalists to crush free speech and silence the opposition party, high-handed



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


Congressional Pugilists
 Satirical representation of Matthew Lyon’s ﬁght in Congress with the Federalist representative Roger Griswold.

 as it was, undoubtedly made many converts for the Jeffersonians. Yet the Alien and Sedition Acts, despite pained outcries from the Jeffersonians they muzzled, commanded widespread popular support. Anti-French hysteria played directly into the hands of witch-hunting conser-

 In 1800 James Callender (1758–1803) published a pamphlet that assailed the president in strong language. For blasts like the following tirade, Callender was prosecuted under the Sedition Act, ﬁned $250, and sentenced to prison for nine months:

“


 The reign of Mr. Adams has, hitherto, been one continued tempest of malignant passions. As president, he has never opened his lips, or lifted his pen, without threatening and scolding. The grand object of his administration has been to exasperate the rage of contending parties, to calumniate and destroy every man who differs from his opinions. . . . Every person holding an ofﬁce must either quit it, or think and vote exactly with Mr. Adams.

”


 vatives. In the congressional elections of 1798–1799, the Federalists, riding a wave of popularity, scored the most sweeping victory of their entire history.

The Virginia (Madison)
 and Kentucky (Jefferson) Resolutions Resentful Jeffersonians naturally refused to take the Alien and Sedition Acts lying down. Jefferson himself feared that if the Federalists managed to choke free speech and free press, they would then wipe out other precious constitutional guarantees. His own ﬂedgling political party might even be stamped out of existence. If this had happened, the country might have slid into a dangerous one-party dictatorship. Fearing prosecution for sedition, Jefferson secretly penned a series of resolutions, which the Kentucky legislature approved in 1798 and 1799. His friend and fellow Virginian James Madison drafted a similar but less extreme statement, which was adopted by the legislature of Virginia in 1798. Both Jefferson and Madison stressed the compact theory—a theory popular among Eng lish political philosophers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. As applied to America by the Jeffersonians, this concept meant that the thirteen sovereign states, in creat-

Federalists Versus Republicans


 ing the federal government, had entered into a “compact,” or contract, regarding its jurisdiction. The national government was consequently the agent or creation of the states. Since water can rise no higher than its source, the individual states were the ﬁ nal judges of whether their agent had broken the “compact” by overstepping the authority originally granted. Invoking this logic, Jefferson’s Kentucky resolutions concluded that the federal regime had exceeded its constitutional powers and that with regard to the Alien and Sedition Acts, “nulliﬁcation”—a refusal to accept them—was the “rightful remedy.” No other state legislatures, despite Jefferson’s hopes, fell into line. Some of them ﬂatly refused to endorse the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions. Others, chieﬂy in Federalist states, added ringing condemnations. Many Federalists argued that the people, not the states, had made the original compact, and that it was up to the Supreme Court—not the states—to nullify unconstitutional legislation passed by Congress. This practice, though not speciﬁcally authorized by the Constitution, was ﬁ nally adopted by the Supreme Court in 1803 (see pp. 231–232). The Virginia and Kentucky resolutions were a brilliant formulation of the extreme states’ rights view regarding the Union—indeed more sweeping in their implications than their authors had intended. They were later used by southerners to support nulliﬁcation— and ultimately secession. Yet neither Jefferson nor Madison, as Founding Fathers of the Union, had any

 intention of breaking it up; they were groping for ways to preserve it. Their resolutions were basically campaign documents designed to crystallize opposition to the Federalist party and to unseat it in the upcoming presidential election of 1800. The only real nulliﬁcation that Jefferson had in view was the nulliﬁcation of Federalist abuses.

Federalists Versus
Democratic-Republicans
 As the presidential contest of 1800 approached, the differences between Federalists and DemocraticRepublicans were sharply etched (see Table 10.3). As might be expected, most federalists of the preConstitution period (1787–1789) became Federalists in the 1790s. Largely welded by Hamilton into an effective group by 1793, they openly advocated rule by the “best people.” “Those who own the country,” remarked Federalist John Jay, “ought to govern it.” With their intellectual arrogance and Tory tastes, Hamiltonians distrusted full-blown democracy as the fountain of all mischiefs and feared the “swayability” of the untutored common folk. Hamiltonian Federalists also advocated a strong central government with the power to crush democratic excesses like Shays’s Rebellion, protect the lives and estates of the wealthy, subordinate the sovereigntyloving states, and promote foreign trade. They believed

Table 10.3 The Two Political Parties, 1793–1800
Federalist Features


Democratic-Republican (Jeffersonian) Features


 Rule by the “best people” Hostility to extension of democracy A powerful central government at the expense of states’ rights Loose interpretation of Constitution Government to foster business; concentration of wealth in interests of capitalistic enterprise A protective tariff Pro-British (conser vative Tory tradition) National debt a blessing, if properly funded An expanding bureaucracy A powerful central bank Restrictions on free speech and press Concentration in seacoast area

 Rule by the informed masses Friendliness toward extension of democracy A weak central government so as to preserve states’ rights Strict interpretation of Constitution No special favors for business; agriculture preferred No special favors for manufacturers Pro-French (radical revolutionary tradition) National debt a bane; rigid economy Reduction of federal ofﬁceholders Encouragement to state banks Relatively free speech and press Concentration in South and Southwest; in agricultural areas and backcountry A minimal navy for coastal defense

 A strong navy to protect shippers





Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


Thomas Jefferson at Natural Bridge, by Caleb Boyle,
 ca. 1801 A great statesman, Jefferson wrote his own epitaph: “Here was buried Thomas Jefferson, Author of the Declaration of Independence, of the Statute of Virginia for Religious Freedom, and Father of the University of Virginia.”

 that government should support private enterprise but not interfere with it. This attitude came naturally to the merchants, manufacturers, and shippers along the Atlantic seaboard, who made up the majority of Federalist support. Farther inland, few Hamiltonians dwelled. The hinterland was largely anti-Federalist territory. Leading the anti-Federalists, who came eventually to be known as Democratic-Republicans or sometimes simply Republicans, was Thomas Jefferson. His rivalry with Hamilton deﬁ ned the archetypal conﬂ ict in American political history. The two leaders appealed to dif-

 ferent constituencies and expressed different theories of society, politics, and diplomacy. Lanky and relaxed in appearance, lacking personal aggressiveness, weak-voiced, and unable to deliver a rabble-rousing speech, Jefferson became a master political organizer through his ability to lead people rather than drive them. His strongest appeal was to the middle class and to the underprivileged— the “dirt” farmers, the laborers, the artisans, and the small shopkeepers. Liberal-thinking Jefferson, with his aristocratic head set on a farmer’s frame, was a bundle of inconsistencies. By one set of tests, he should have been a Federalist, for he was a Virginia aristocrat and slaveowner who lived in an imposing hilltop mansion at Monticello. A so-called traitor to his own upper class, Jefferson cherished uncommon sympathy for the common people, especially the downtrodden, the oppressed, and the persecuted. As he wrote in 1800, “I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man.” Jeffersonian Republicans demanded a weak central regime. They believed that the best government was the one that governed least. The bulk of the power, Jefferson argued, should be retained by the states. There the people, in intimate contact with local affairs, could keep a more vigilant eye on their public servants. Otherwise a dictatorship might develop. Central authority—a kind of necessary evil—was to be kept at a minimum through a strict interpretation of the Constitution. The national debt, which he saw as a curse illegitimately bequeathed to later generations, was to be paid off. Jeffersonian Republicans, themselves primarily agrarians, insisted that there should be no special privileges for special classes, particularly manufacturers. Agriculture, to Jefferson, was the favored branch of the economy and formed the foundation of his political thought. “Those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of God,” he said. Most of his followers naturally came from the agricultural South and Southwest. Above all, Jefferson advocated the rule of the people. But he did not propose thrusting the ballot into the hands of every adult white male. He favored government for the people, but not by all the people—only by those white men who were literate enough to inform themselves and wear the mantle of American citizenship worthily. Universal education would have to precede universal suffrage. The ignorant, he argued, were incapable of self-government. But he had profound

 Jefferson's Republic

 Thomas Jefferson’s vision of a republican America was peopled with virtuous farmers, not factory hands. As early as 1784, he wrote,

“


 While we have land to labor then, let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a work-bench, or twirling a distaff. . . . For the general operations of manufacture, let our workshops remain in Europe. . . . The mobs of great cities add just so much to the support of pure government, as sores do to the strength of the human body.

”


 faith in the reasonableness and teachableness of the masses and in their collective wisdom when taught. Landlessness among American citizens threatened popular democracy as much as illiteracy, in Jefferson’s eyes. He feared that propertyless dependents would be political pawns in the hands of their landowning superiors. How could the emergence of a landless class of voters be avoided? The answer, in part, was by slavery. A system of black slave labor in the South ensured that white yeoman farmers could remain independent landowners. Without slavery, poor whites would have to provide the cheap labor so necessary for the cultivation of tobacco and rice, and their low wages would preclude their ever owning property. Jefferson thus tortuously reconciled slaveholding—his own included—with his more democratic impulses. Yet for his time, Jefferson’s conﬁdence that white, free men could become responsible and knowledgeable citizens was open-minded. He championed their freedom of speech, for without free speech, the misdeeds of tyranny could not be exposed. Jefferson even dared to say that given the choice of “a government without newspapers” and “newspapers without a gov-



 ernment,” he would opt for the latter. Yet no other American leader, except perhaps Abraham Lincoln, ever suffered more foul abuse from editorial pens; Jefferson might well have prayed for freedom from the Federalist press. Differences over foreign policy deﬁned another sharp distinction between Hamilton and Jefferson. Hamilton looked outward and eastward. He sought to build a strong national state that would assert and expand America’s commercial interests. “No Government could give us tranquility and happiness at home,” he declared, “which did not possess sufﬁcient stability and strength to make us respectable abroad.” Foreign trade, especially with Britain, was a key cog in Hamilton’s ﬁscal machinery, and friendship with Britain was thus indispensable. Jeffersonian Republicans, unlike the Federalist “British boot-lickers,” were basically proFrench. They earnestly believed that it was to America’s advantage to support the liberal ideals of the French Revolution, rather than applaud the reaction of the British Tories. Jefferson, in effect, faced inward and westward. His priorities were to protect and strengthen democracy at home, especially in the frontier regions beyond the Appalachians, rather than ﬂex America’s muscles abroad. So as the young Republic’s ﬁ rst full decade of nationhood came to a close, the Founders’ hopes seemed already imperiled. Conﬂ icts over domestic politics and foreign policy undermined the unity of the Revolutionary era and called into question the very viability of the American experiment in democracy. As the presidential election of 1800 approached, the danger loomed that the fragile and battered American ship of state, like many another before it and after it, would founder on the rocks of controversy. The shores of history are littered with the wreckage of nascent nations torn asunder before they could grow to a stable maturity. Why should the United States expect to enjoy a happier fate?



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 CHRONOLOGY

 Constitution formally put into effect Judiciary Act of 1789 Washington elected president French Revolution begins Declaration of the Rights of Man (France)



 First ofﬁcial census



 Bill of Rights adopted Vermont becomes fourteenth state Bank of the United States created Excise tax passed



 Washington reelected president

1792–


Federalist and Democratic-Republican
 parties formed



 Louis XVI beheaded; radical phase of French Revolution France declares war on Britain and Spain Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation Citizen Genêt affair

KEY TERMS
Bill of Rights (201) Judiciary Act of 1789 (202) funding at par (202) assumption (203) tariff (203) excise tax (203) Bank of the United States (204) Whiskey Rebellion (204) Reign of Terror (207) Neutrality Proclamation (210) 


Whiskey Rebellion
Battle of Fallen Timbers
 Jay’s Treaty with Britain



 Treaty of Greenville: Indians cede Ohio Pinckney’s Treaty with Spain



 Washington’s Farewell Address



 Adams becomes president XYZ Affair



Alien and Sedition Acts


1798–


 Virginia and Kentucky resolutions

1798–


 Undeclared war with France



 Convention of 1800: peace with France

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Fallen Timbers, Battle of (211) Greenville, Treaty of (211) Jay’s Treaty (213) Pinckney’s Treaty (213) Farewell Address (213) XYZ Affair (215) Convention of 1800 (217) Alien Laws (217) Sedition Act (217) Virginia and Kentucky resolutions (219) 
George Washington
Alexander Hamilton
Louis XVI
 Edmond Genêt Little Turtle “Mad Anthony” Wayne

John Jay
John Adams
Charles Maurice de
Talleyrand


To Learn More




To Learn More
Joanne Freeman, Affairs of Honor: National Politics in the
New Republic (2001)
Frank Lambert, The Barbary Wars: American Independence
 in the Atlantic World (2005) Michael Merrill and Sean Wilentz, eds., The Key of Liberty: The Life and Democratic Writings of William Manning, “A Laborer,” 1747–1814 (1992) Jeffrey L. Pasley, “The Tyranny of Printers”: Newspaper Politics in the Early American Republic (2001) Jeffrey L. Pasley, Andrew W. Robertson, and David Waldstreicher, eds., Beyond the Founders: New Approaches to the Political History of the Early American Republic (2004) Bernard Schwartz, The Great Rights of Mankind: A History of the American Bill of Rights (1991) James Roger Sharp, American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis (1993)

Thomas P. Slaughter, The Whiskey Rebellion: Frontier
Epilogue to the American Revolution (1986)
Robert W. Smith, Keeping the Republic: Ideology and Early
American Diplomacy (2004)
 Alan Taylor, William Cooper’s Town: Power and Persuasion on the Frontier of the Early American Republic (1995) Robert E. Wright, Hamilton Unbound: Finance and the Creation of the American Republic (2002)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Triumphs and
Travails of the
Jeffersonian Republic





1800–1812
 Timid men . . . prefer the calm of despotism to the boisterous sea of liberty.

I


 n the critical presidential contest of 1800, the ﬁ rst in which Federalists and Democratic-Republicans functioned as two national political parties, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson again squared off against each other. The choice seemed clear and dramatic: Adams’s Federalists waged a defensive struggle for strong central government and public order. Their Jeffersonian opponents presented themselves as the guardians of agrarian purity, liberty, and states’ rights. The next dozen years, however, would turn what seemed like a clear-cut choice in 1800 into a messier reality, as the Jeffersonians in power were confronted with a series of opportunities and crises requiring the assertion of federal authority. As the ﬁ rst challengers to rout a reigning party, the Republicans were the ﬁ rst to learn that it is far easier to condemn from the stump than to govern consistently.

Federalist and Republican
Mudslingers
 In ﬁghting for survival, the Federalists labored under heavy handicaps. Their Alien and Sedition Acts had aroused a host of enemies, although most of these critics were dyed-in-the-wool Jeffersonians anyhow. The Hamiltonian wing of the Federalist party, robbed of its glorious war with France, split openly with President Adams. Hamilton, a victim of arrogance, was so indiscreet as to attack the president in a privately printed pamphlet. Jeffersonians soon got hold of the pamphlet and gleefully published it. The most damaging blow to the Federalists was the refusal of Adams to give them a rousing ﬁght with France. Their feverish war preparations had swelled

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Federalists Versus Republicans


The Reverend Timothy Dwight (1752–1817),
 president of Yale College, predicted that in the event of Jefferson’s election,

“


 the Bible would be cast into a bonﬁre, our holy worship changed into a dance of [French] Jacobin phrensy, our wives and daughters dishonored, and our sons converted into the disciples of Voltaire and the dragoons of Marat.

”


 the public debt and had required disagreeable new taxes, including a stamp tax. After all these unpopular mea sures, the war scare had petered out, and the country was left with an all-dressed-up-but-no-place-to-go feeling. The military preparations now seemed not only unnecessary but extravagant, as seamen for the “new



 navy” were called “John Adams’s Jackasses.” Adams himself was known, somewhat ironically, as “the Father of the American Navy.” Thrown on the defensive, the Federalists concentrated their ﬁ re on Jefferson himself, who became the victim of one of America’s earliest “whispering campaigns.” He was accused of having robbed a widow and her children of a trust fund and of having fathered numerous mulatto children by his own slave women. (Jefferson’s long-rumored intimacy with one of his slaves, Sally Hemings, has been conﬁ rmed through DNA testing. See “Examining the Evidence,” p. 227.) As a liberal in religion, Jefferson had earlier incurred the wrath of the orthodox clergy, largely through his successful struggle to separate church and state in his native Virginia. Although Jefferson did believe in God, preachers throughout New Eng land, stronghold of Federalism and Congregationalism, thundered against his alleged atheism. Old ladies of Federalist families, fearing Jefferson’s election, even buried their Bibles or hung them in wells.

Washington and
Jefferson Compared, 1807
 This pro-Federalist, anti-Jefferson cartoon accuses Jefferson of sympathizing with French Revolutionary despotism.



