Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 An Early Computer, ca. 1950 Just a few decades later, technological improvements would bring the computing power of this bulky behemoth to the user’s desktop.

 Aerospace industries also grew fantastically in the 1950s, thanks both to Eisenhower’s aggressive buildup of the Strategic Air Command and to a robustly expanding passenger airline business—as well as to

 connections between military and civilian aircraft production. In 1957 the Seattle-based Boeing Company brought out the ﬁ rst large passenger jet, the “707.” Its design owed much to the previous development of SAC’s long-range strategic bomber, the B-52. Two years later Boeing delivered the ﬁrst presidential jet, a specially modiﬁed 707, to its ﬁ rst user, Dwight D. Eisenhower. “Air Force One” dazzled him with its speed and comfort. The nature of the work force was also changing. A quiet revolution was marked in 1956 when “white-collar” workers for the ﬁ rst time outnumbered “blue-collar” workers, signaling the passage from an industrial to a postindustrial, or ser vice-based, economy. Keeping pace with that fundamental transformation, orga nized labor withered along with the smokestack industries that had been its sustenance. Union membership as a percentage of the labor force peaked at about 35 percent in 1954 and then went into steady decline (see p. 843). Some observers concluded that the union movement had played out its historic role of empowering workers and ensuring economic justice, and that unions would eventually disappear altogether in the postindustrial era. The surge in white-collar employment opened special opportunities for women (see Table 37.1). When World War II ended, many women, including those who had worked in war plants, returned to highly conventional female roles as wives and mothers—the remarkably proliﬁc mothers of the huge “baby-boom” generation. A “cult of domesticity” emerged in popular culture to celebrate those eternal feminine functions. When 1950s television programs like “Ozzie and Har-

Table 37.1 Occupational Distribution of Workingwomen,
1900–2000*


 Total white-collar workers† Clerical workers Manual workers Farmworkers Service workers‡













17.8%
4.0
27.8
18.9
35.5


38.8%
18.7
23.8
13.5
23.9


44.9%
21.5
21.6
4.0
29.4


52.5%
28.7
18.0
1.8
21.9


65.6%
30.5
14.8
1.0
18.1


73.0%
36.7
8.7
0.3
18.0


 *Major categories; percentage of all women workers in each category, calculated at fourteen and older until 1970 and then sixteen and older. †Includes clerical, sales, professional, and technical workers, managers, and ofﬁcials. ‡Includes domestic servants. (Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States and Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years.)

A
Changing Economy 

 Percentage of women age 16 and over in the labor force since 1900





1920 1930








1970 1980




’00 ’05


Figure 37.1 Women in the Labor Force, 1900–2005
(Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States and Statistical Abstract
 of the United States, relevant years.)

 riet” or “Leave It to Beaver” depicted idyllic suburban families with a working husband, two children, and a wife who did not work outside the home, they did so without irony; much of white, middle-class America really did live that way. But as the 1950s progressed, another quiet revolution was gaining momentum that



 was destined to transform women’s roles and even the character of the American family. Of some 40 million new jobs created in the three decades after 1950, more than 30 million were in clerical and ser vice work. Women ﬁ lled the huge majority of these new positions. They were the principal employment beneﬁciaries of the postwar era, creating an extensive “pink-collar ghetto” of occupations that came to be dominated by women (see Figure 37.1). Exploding employment opportunities for women in the 1950s unleashed a groundswell of social and psychological shocks that mounted to tidal-wave proportions in the decades that followed. From one perspective women’s surge into the workplace was nothing new, only a return to the days when the United States was an agricultural nation, and men and women alike toiled on the family farm. But the urban age was not the agricultural age, and women’s new dual role as both workers and homemakers raised urgent questions about family life and traditional deﬁ nitions of gender differences. Feminist Betty Friedan gave focus and fuel to women’s feelings in 1963 when she published The Feminine Mystique, a runaway best seller and a classic of feminist protest literature that launched the modern women’s movement. Friedan spoke in rousing accents to millions of able, educated women who applauded her indictment of the stiﬂ ing boredom of suburban

The Booming Service Sector
 Services displaced manufacturing as the most dynamic area of the economy in the post–World War II era, and women made up a majority of new workers in the nation’s ofﬁces and classrooms and on sales ﬂoors and hospital wards.



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


The Original Golden
Arches, 1955 Maurice and
 Richard McDonald replaced their original drive-in hamburger stand in San Bernardino, California, with this double-arched design in 1953. McDonald’s soon became one of the largest franchised restaurant chains in the world and a global symbol of American consumerism.

Consumer Culture
 in the Fifties The 1950s witnessed a huge expansion of the middle class and the blossoming of a consumer culture. Diner’s Club introduced the plastic credit card in 1949, just one year after the ﬁ rst “fast-food”–style McDonald’s hamburger stand opened in San Bernardino, Cal ifornia. In 1955 Disneyland opened its doors in Anaheim, Cal i fornia. Easy credit, high-volume “fast-food” production, and new forms of leisure marked an emerging afﬂuent lifestyle that soon moved beyond America’s borders. Manufacturers, retailers, and advertisers spread American-style consumer capitalism throughout much of the noncommunist world. Crucial to the development of that lifestyle was the rapid rise of the new technology of television. Only 6 TV stations were broadcasting in 1946; a decade later 442 stations were operating. TV sets were rich people’s novelties in the 1940s, but 7 million sets were sold in 1951. By 1960 virtually every American home had one, in a stunning display of the speed with which

 new technologies can pervade and transform modern societies (see Figure 37.2). Attendance at movies sank as the entertainment industry changed its focus from the silver screen to the picture tube. By the mid-1950s, advertisers annually spent $10 billion to hawk their wares on television, while critics fumed that the wildly popular new mass medium was degrading the public’s aesthetic, social, moral, political, and educational standards. To the question “Why is television called a medium?” pundits replied, “Because it’s never rare or well done.”

Percentage


 housewifery. Many of those women were already working for wages, but they were also struggling against the guilt and frustration of leading an “unfeminine” life as deﬁ ned by the postwar “cult of domesticity.”















Year


 Figure 37.2 Households with Television Sets, 1946–2009



A
Nation of Consumers 



 The King With his ﬂeshy face, pouting lips, and antic, sexually suggestive gyrations, Elvis Presley became the high priest of rock ’n’ roll in the 1950s, to the chagrin of parents everywhere. Bloated by fame, fortune, and drugs, he died in 1977 at the age of forty-two.

 Even religion capitalized on the powerful new electronic pulpit. “Televangelists” like the Baptist Billy Graham, the Pentecostal Holiness preacher Oral Roberts, and the Roman Catholic Fulton J. Sheen took to the airwaves to spread the Christian gospel. Television also catalyzed the commercialization of professional sports, as viewing audiences that once numbered in the stadium-capacity thousands could now be counted in the couch-potato millions. Sports also reﬂected the shift in population toward the West and South. In 1958 baseball’s New York Giants moved to San Francisco, and the Brooklyn Dodgers abandoned Flatbush for Los Angeles. Those moves touched off a new westward and southward movement of sports franchises. Shifting population and spreading afﬂuence led eventually to substantial expansion of the major baseball leagues and the principal football and basketball leagues as well. Popular music was dramatically transformed in the ﬁ fties. The chief revolutionary was Elvis Presley, a white singer born in 1935 in Tupelo, Mississippi. Fusing black rhythm and blues with white bluegrass and country styles, Elvis created a new musical idiom known forever after as rock ’n’ roll. Rock was “crossover” music, carrying its heavy beat and driv ing rhythms across the cultural divide that separated black and white musical traditions. Listening and dancing to rock

 ’n’ roll became a rite of passage for millions of young people around the world, from Japan to working-class Liverpool, Eng land, where Elvis’s music inspired teenagers John Lennon and Paul McCartney to form a band that would become the Beatles. Traditionalists were repelled by Presley, and they found much more to upset them in the afﬂuent ﬁ fties. Movie star Marilyn Monroe, with her ingenuous smile and mandolin-curved hips, helped to popularize—and commercialize—new standards of sensuous sexuality. So did Playboy magazine, whose ﬁ rst issue Monroe graced in 1953. As the decade closed, Americans were well on their way to becoming free-spending consumers of mass-produced, standardized products, which were advertised on the electronic medium of television and often sold for their alleged sexual allure. Many critics lamented the implications of this new consumerist lifestyle. Harvard sociologist David Riesman portrayed the postwar generation as a pack of conformists in The Lonely Crowd (1950), as did William H. Whyte, Jr., in The Organization Man. Novelist Sloan Wilson explored a similar theme in The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit (1955). Harvard economist John Kenneth Galbraith questioned the relation between private wealth and the public good in a series of books beginning with The Afﬂuent Society (1958). The postwar explosion of prosperity, Galbraith claimed, had



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 produced a troublesome combination of private opulence amid public squalor. Americans had televisions in their homes but garbage in their streets. They ate rich food but breathed foul air. But Galbraith’s call for social spending to match private purchasing fell on mostly deaf ears in the giddily afﬂuent 1950s.

The Advent of Eisenhower
 Democratic prospects in the presidential election of 1952 were blighted by the military deadlock in Korea, Truman’s clash with MacArthur, war-bred inﬂation, and whiffs of scandal from the White House. Dispirited Democrats nominated a reluctant Adlai E. Stevenson, the eloquent and idealistic governor of Illinois. Republicans enthusiastically chose war hero General Dwight D. Eisenhower on the ﬁ rst ballot. “Ike’s” running mate was Cal i fornia senator Richard M. Nixon, who had gained notoriety as a relentless red-hunter. Eisenhower was already the most popular American of his time, as “I Like Ike” buttons every where testiﬁed. Striking a grandfatherly, nonpartisan pose, Eisenhower left the rough campaigning to Nixon, who relished bare-knuckle political combat. The vicepresidential candidate lambasted his opponents with charges that they had cultivated corruption, caved in on Korea, and coddled communists. He particularly blasted the cerebral Stevenson as “Adlai the appeaser,” with a “Ph.D. from [Secretary of State] Dean Acheson’s College of Cowardly Communist Containment.” Nixon himself faltered late in the campaign amid accusations that he had accepted illegal donations. Responding with a self-pitying live address on television, Nixon denied the charges and solemnly declared that the only campaign gift he had ever received was the family cocker spaniel, Checkers. The shameless and mawkish Checkers Speech saved Nixon’s spot on the ticket and spotlighted a fundamental change in American politics. Television was now a formidable political tool that, much more than radio, allowed candidates to bypass traditional party machinery and speak directly to voters. Soon even Eisenhower was reluctantly appearing in short, tightly scripted televised “spots” that foreshadowed the future of political advertising. Devoid of substance, they vastly oversimpliﬁed complicated economic and social issues. They amounted, as one critic observed, to “selling the President like toothpaste.” And given television’s origins in entertainment

The Republicans’ Choice, 1952 Nominee Eisenhower
 and his vice-presidential running mate, Nixon, greet the delegates.

 and advertising, political messages would be increasingly tuned to the standards of show business and commercialism. The outcome of the presidential election of 1952 was never really in doubt. Given an extra prod by Eisenhower’s last-minute pledge to go personally to Korea to end the war, the voters overwhelmingly declared for Ike. He garnered 33,936,234 votes to Stevenson’s 27,314,992, ringing up 442 electoral votes to 89 for his opponent (see Map 37.1). Ike also managed to pull enough Republican legislators into ofﬁce on his military coattails to gain GOP control of the new Congress by a hairbreadth. True to his campaign pledge, president-elect Eisenhower undertook a ﬂying three-day visit to Korea in December 1952. But even a glamorous Ike could not immediately budge the peace negotiations off dead center. Seven long months later, after Eisenhower had hinted that he might use atomic weapons, an armistice was ﬁ nally signed. (Subsequent inquiries suggested that Ike’s hints were so artfully veiled that the Chinese

Ike as President


WA MT

OR ID NV CA

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 MN

 SD

 IA

NE CO

 WI

KS OK

 NM

 TX

 IL

MI IN

 MO

 LA

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 16 RI PA NJ CT 4 16 8

 GA

DE MD

 Map 37.1 Presidential Election of 1952 (with electoral vote by state) A Democrat quipped that “if the voters liked the Republicans the way they liked Ike, the two-party system would be in bad shape.” Fortunately for Democrats, Eisenhower scored a personal, not a party, victory. Republicans won minuscule majorities in Congress, which disappeared in the congressional elections two years later. Interactive Map

 SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Eisenhower (Republican)




83%


33,936,234


55.1%




17%


27,314,992


44.4%


Stevenson (Democrat)




 never understood them. They agreed to end the war for reasons of their own, especially its burdensome ﬁnancial costs.) The brutal and futile ﬁghting had lasted three years. About ﬁ fty-four thousand Americans lay dead,

 Korean War Scene A grief-stricken American soldier whose buddy has been killed is being comforted, while a medical corpsman ﬁlls out casualty tags.

 joined by perhaps more than a million Chinese, North Koreans, and South Koreans. Tens of billions of American dollars had been poured down the Asian sinkhole. Yet this terrible toll in blood and trea sure bought only a return to the conditions of 1950: Korea remained divided at the thirty-eighth parallel, Communist in the North, Western-looking in the South. Americans took what little comfort they could from the fact that communism had been “contained” and that the bloodletting had been “limited” to something less than full-scale global war. The shooting had ended, but the Cold War still remained frigidly frozen. As a military commander, Eisenhower had cultivated a leadership style that self-consciously projected an image of sincerity, fairness, and optimism. He had been widely perceived during World War II as an “unmilitary” general, and in the White House he similarly struck the pose of an “unpolitical” president, serenely above the petty partisan fray. He also shrewdly knew that his greatest “asset” was his enjoyment of the “affection and respect of our citizenry,” as he conﬁded to his diary in 1949. Ike thus seemed ideally suited to soothe the anxieties of troubled Americans, much as a distinguished and well-loved grandfather brings stability to his family. He played this role well as he presided over a decade of shaky peace and shining prosperity. Yet critics charged that he unwisely hoarded the “asset” of his



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 the Democratic administration. Ohio’s Senator John Bricker reportedly said, “Joe, you’re a dirty s.o.b., but there are times when you’ve got to have an s.o.b. around, and this is one of them.” McCarthy’s rhetoric grew bolder and his accusations spread more wildly after the Republican victory in 1952. McCarthy saw the red hand of Moscow everywhere. The Democrats, he charged, “bent to whispered pleas from the lips of traitors.” Incredibly, he even denounced General George Marshall, former army chief of staff and ex–secretary of state, as “part of a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous venture in the history of man.” McCarthy—and what became known as McCarthyism—ﬂourished in the seething Cold War at mosphere of suspicion and fear. The senator was neither the ﬁ rst nor the most effective red-hunter, but he was surely the most ruthless, and he did the most damage to American traditions of fair play and free speech. The careers of countless ofﬁcials, writers, and actors were ruined after “Low-Blow Joe” had “named” them, often unfairly, as communists or communist sympathizers. Politicians trembled in the face of such on-

A
Popular President “Ike” exuded grandfatherly graciousness and goodwill. 
 immense popularity, rather than spend it for a good cause (especially civil rights), and that he cared more for social harmony than for social justice.

The Rise and Fall of
 Joseph McCarthy One of the ﬁ rst problems Eisenhower faced was the swelling popularity and swaggering power of an obstreperous anticommunist crusader, Wisconsin Republican senator Joseph R. McCarthy. Elected to the Senate on the basis of a trumped-up war-hero record, McCarthy had crashed into the limelight in February 1950 when he accused Secretary of State Dean Acheson of knowingly employing 205 Communist party members. Pressed to reveal the names, McCarthy later conceded that there were only 57 genuine communists and in the end failed to root out even one. Some of McCarthy’s Republican colleagues nevertheless realized the partisan usefulness of this kind of attack on

 Senator McCarthy Extinguishes the Torch of Liberty While preaching patriotism, McCarthy irresponsibly menaced American traditions of civil liberties.

 The Scourge of McCarthyism

 In a moment of high drama during the ArmyMcCarthy hearings, attorney Joseph Welch (1890– 1960) reproached McCarthy in front of a huge national television audience for threatening to slander a young lawyer on Welch’s staff:

 holism. But “McCarthyism” has passed into the Eng lish language as a label for the dangerous forces of unfairness and fear that a democratic society can unleash only at its peril.

Desegregating American
Society


“


 Until this moment, Senator, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness. Little did I dream you could be so cruel as to do an injury to that lad. . . . If it were in my power to forgive you for your reckless cruelty, I would do so. I like to think that I am a gentleman, but your forgiveness will have to come from someone other than me. . . . Have you no decency, sir, at long last? Have you left no sense of decency?

”


 slaughts, especially when opinion polls showed that a majority of the American people approved of McCarthy’s crusade. Eisenhower privately loathed McCarthy but publicly tried to stay out of his way, saying, “I will not get in the gutter with that guy.” Trying to appease the brash demagogue from Wisconsin, Eisenhower allowed him, in effect, to control personnel policy at the State Department. One baleful result was severe damage to the morale and effectiveness of the professional foreign ser vice. In particular, McCarthyite purges deprived the government of a number of Asian specialists who might have counseled a wiser course in Vietnam in the fateful decade that followed. McCarthy’s extreme antics also damaged America’s international reputation for fair and open democracy at a moment when it was important to keep Western Europe on the United States’ side in an intensifying Cold War. McCarthy ﬁ nally bent the bow too far when he attacked the U.S. Army. The embattled military men fought back in thirty-ﬁve days of televised hearings in the spring of 1954. The political power of the new broadcast medium was again demonstrated by the Army-McCarthy hearings, as up to 20 million Americans at a time watched in fascination while a boorish, surly McCarthy publicly cut his own throat by parading his essential meanness and irresponsibility. A few months later, the Senate formally condemned him for “conduct unbecoming a member.” Three years later, unwept and unsung, McCarthy died of chronic alco-



 America counted some 15 million black citizens in 1950, two-thirds of whom still made their homes in the South. There they lived bound by the iron folkways of a segregated society. A rigid set of antiquated rules known as Jim Crow laws governed all aspects of their existence, from the schoolroom to the restroom. Every day of their lives, southern blacks dealt with a bizarre array of separate social arrangements that kept them insulated from whites, economically inferior, and politically powerless. Blacks in the South not only attended segregated schools but were compelled to use separate public toilets, drinking fountains, restaurants, and waiting rooms. Trains and buses had “whites only” and “colored only” seating. Only about 20 percent of eligible southern blacks were registered to vote, and fewer than 5 percent were registered in some Deep South states like Mississippi and Alabama. As late as 1960, white southern sensibilities about segregation were so tender that television networks blotted out black speakers at the national political conventions for fear of offending southern stations. Where the law proved insufﬁcient to enforce this regime, vigilante violence did the job. Six black war

 A black woman described the day-in, day-out humiliations of life in a Jim Crow South:

“


 You could not go to a white restaurant; you sat in a special place at the movie house; and Lord knows, you sat in the back of the bus. It didn’t make any difference if you were rich or poor, if you were black you were nothing. You might have a hundred dollars in your pocket, but if you went to the store you would wait at the side until all the clerks got through with all the white folks, no matter if they didn’t have change for a dollar. Then the clerk would ﬁnally look at you and say, ‘Oh, did you want something? I didn’t see you there.’

”




Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 The Face of Segregation These women in the segregated South of the 1950s were compelled to enter the movie theater through the “Colored Entrance.” Once inside, they were restricted to a separate seating section, usually in the rear of the theater.

 veterans, claiming the rights for which they had fought overseas, were murdered in the summer of 1946. A Mississippi mob lynched black fourteen-year-old Emmett Till in 1955 for allegedly leering at a white woman. It is small wonder that a black clergyman declared that “every where I go in the South the Negro is forced to choose between his hide and his soul.” Segregation tarnished America’s international image, much as McCarthyism did. After the war African American entertainers like Paul Robeson and Josephine Baker toured widely in Europe and Latin America, informing audiences about the horrors of Jim Crow and raising doubts about America’s reputation as the beacon of freedom against Soviet communism. In response, the State Department conﬁscated Robeson’s passport, but it had to ﬁ nd other ways to silence Baker,

 who had assumed French citizenship. Intellectuals poured on criticism as well. Swedish scholar Gunnar Myrdal published his landmark book, An American Dilemma, exposing the scandalous contradiction between “The American Creed”—allegiance to the values of “progress, liberty, equality, and humanitarianism”— and the nation’s shameful treatment of black citizens. International pressure combined with grassroots and legal activism to propel some racial progress in the North after World War II. In a growing number of northern cities and states, African Americans battled for—and won—equal access to public accommodations like restaurants, hotels, theaters, and beaches. Jackie Robinson cracked baseball’s color barrier when the Brooklyn Dodgers signed him in 1947. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) pushed the Supreme Court in 1950 to rule in Sweatt v. Painter that separate professional schools for blacks failed to meet the test of equality. The national conscience was slowly awakening from its centurieslong slumber, but black suffering still continued, especially in the South. Increasingly, however, African Americans refused to suffer in silence (see “Makers of America: The Great African American Migration,” pp. 954–955). On a chilly day in December 1955, Rosa Parks, a college-educated black seamstress, made history in Montgomery, Alabama. She boarded a bus, took a seat in the “whites only” section, and refused to give it up. Her arrest for

 Joseph E. Lowery (b. 1923), a Methodist minister and civil rights activist in Mobile, Alabama, reﬂected on the powerful message of the 1955 Montgomery bus boycott for blacks:

“


 You see, what the bus thing did was simply more than withholding patronage from the bus; it was restoring a sense of dignity to the patrons, as best expressed by an oft-quoted black woman in Montgomery who said, ‘Since I’ve been walking, my feet are tired, but my soul’s rested.’ . . . [P]rior to the bus boycotts, the determination of our freedom rested with the courts. With the bus boycott, we determined it. . . . The court could say what it liked, we weren’t gon’ ride—in the back of the bus. We’d walk.

”


The Civil Rights Struggle


 violating the city’s Jim Crow statutes sparked a yearlong black boycott of city buses and served notice throughout the South that blacks would no longer submit meekly to the absurdities and indignities of segregation. The Montgomery bus boycott also catapulted to prominence a young pastor at Montgomery’s Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. Barely twenty-seven years old, King seemed an unlikely champion of the downtrodden and disfranchised. Raised in a prosperous black family in Atlanta and educated partly in the North, he had for most of his life been sheltered from the grossest cruelties of segregation. But his oratorical skill, his passionate devotion to biblical and constitutional conceptions of justice, and his devotion to the nonviolent principles of India’s Mohandas Gandhi were destined to thrust him to the forefront of the black revolution that would soon pulse across the South and the rest of the nation.

Seeds of the Civil Rights
Revolution
 When President Harry Truman heard about the lynching of black war veterans in 1946, he exclaimed, “My God! I had no idea it was as terrible as that.” The horriﬁed Truman responded by commissioning a report titled “To Secure These Rights.” Following the report’s recommendations, Truman in 1948 ended segregation in federal civil ser vice and ordered “equality of treatment and opportunity” in the armed forces. Yet Congress stubbornly resisted passing civil rights legislation, and Truman’s successor, Dwight Eisenhower, showed no real interest in racial issues. It was the Supreme Court that assumed political leadership in the civil rights struggle. Chief Justice Earl Warren, former governor of Cal ifornia, shocked traditionalists with his active judicial intervention in previously taboo social issues. Publicly snubbed and privately scorned by President Eisenhower, Warren courageously led the Court to address urgent issues that Congress and the president preferred to avoid, as “Impeach Earl Warren” signs blossomed along the nation’s highways. The unanimous decision of the Warren Court in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas in May 1954 was epochal. In a forceful opinion, the learned justices ruled that segregation in the public schools



 was “inherently unequal” and thus unconstitutional. The uncompromising sweep of the decision startled conser vatives like an exploding time bomb, for it reversed the Court’s earlier declaration of 1896 in Plessy v. Ferguson (see p. 547) that “separate but equal” facilities were allowable under the Constitution. That doctrine was now dead. Desegregation, the justices insisted, must go ahead with “all deliberate speed.” The Border States generally made reasonable efforts to comply with this ruling, but in the Deep South diehards orga nized “massive resistance” against the Court’s annulment of the sacred principle of “separate but equal.” More than a hundred southern congressional representatives and senators signed the “Declaration of Constitutional Principles” in 1956, pledging their unyielding resistance to desegregation. Several states diverted public funds to hastily created “private” schools, for there the integration order was more difﬁcult to apply. Throughout the South white citizens’ councils, sometimes with ﬁ re and hemp, thwarted attempts to make integration a reality. Ten years after the Court’s momentous ruling, fewer than 2 percent of the eligible blacks in the Deep South were sitting in classrooms with whites. President Eisenhower remained reluctant to promote integration. He shied away from employing his vast popularity and the prestige of his ofﬁce to educate white Americans about the need for racial justice. His personal attitudes may have helped to restrain him. He had grown up in an all-white town, spent his career in a segregated army, and advised against integration of the armed forces in 1948. He complained that the Supreme Court’s decision in Brown v. Board of Education had upset “the customs and convictions of at least two generations of Americans,” and he steadfastly refused to issue a public statement endorsing the Court’s conclusions. “I do not believe,” he explained, “that prejudices, even palpably unjustiﬁable prejudices, will succumb to compulsion.” But in September 1957, Ike was forced to act. Orval Faubus, the governor of Arkansas, mobilized the National Guard to prevent nine black students from enrolling in Little Rock’s Central High School. Confronted with a direct challenge to federal authority, Eisenhower sent troops to escort the children to their classes. In the same year, Congress passed the ﬁ rst Civil Rights Act since Reconstruction days. Eisenhower characteristically reassured a southern senator that the legislation represented “the mildest civil rights bill possible.” It set up a permanent Civil Rights Commission

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The The Great Great African AfricanAmerican American Migration Migration 
T


 he great social upheavals of World War II continued to transform America well after the guns had fallen silent in 1945. Among the groups most affected by the war were African Americans. Predominantly a rural, southern people before 1940, African Americans were propelled by the war into the cities of the North and West, and by 1970 a majority lived outside the states of the old Confederacy. The results of that massive demographic shift were momentous, for African Americans and for all of American society. So many black southerners took to the roads during World War II that local ofﬁcials lost track of their numbers. Black workers on the move crowded into boardinghouses, camped out in cars, and clustered in the juke joints of roadside America en route to their new lives. Southern cotton ﬁelds and tobacco plantations had historically yielded slender sustenance to African American farmers, most of whom struggled to make ends meet as tenants or sharecroppers. The Great Depression dealt black southerners yet another blow, for when New Deal farm programs paid growers to leave their land fallow, many landlords simply pocketed the

The Migration of the Negro, by
Jacob Lawrence, 1940–1941
 Artist Jacob Lawrence depicted the migration of southern blacks to the North during and after World War II in a series of paintings. The ﬁrst panel of the series bears the description “During the World War there was a great migration north by southern Negroes.”



 money and evicted their tenants—white as well as black—from their now-idle ﬁelds. As the Depression deepened, dispossessed former tenants and sharecroppers toiled as seasonal farmworkers or languished without jobs, without shelter, and without hope. The spanking-new munitions plants and bustling shipyards of wartime America at ﬁrst offered little solace to African Americans, particularly in the South. In 1940 and 1941, the labor-hungry war machine soaked up unemployed white workers but commonly denied jobs to blacks. When the army constructed a training camp near Petersburg, Virginia, it imported white carpenters from all parts of the United States, rather than employ the hundreds of skilled black carpenters who lived nearby. Fed up with such injustices, many African Americans headed for shipyards, factories, foundries, and ﬁelds on the Paciﬁc Coast or north of the Mason-Dixon line, where their willing hands found more work awaiting them. Angered by the racism that was depriving their people of a fair share of jobs, black leaders cajoled President Roosevelt into issuing an executive order in June 1941 declaring that “there shall be no discrim-

 The Home Front Though often confronted by prejudice and discrimination, many African American migrants from the rural South found their ﬁrst industrial jobs in wartime defense plants during World War II.

 ination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government because of race, creed, color, or national origin.” Roosevelt’s action was a tenuous, hesitant step. Yet in its way Executive Order 8802 amounted to a second Emancipation Proclamation, as the federal government for the ﬁ rst time since Reconstruction had committed itself to ensuring justice for African Americans. The entire nation was now forced to face the evil of racism, as bloody wartime riots in Detroit, New York, Philadelphia, and other cities tragically demonstrated. But for the ﬁ rst time, large numbers of blacks secured a foothold in the industrial economy, and they were not about to give it up. By war’s end the great wartime exodus had scattered hundreds of thousands of African Americans to new regions and new ways of life—a second black diaspora comparable in its scale and consequence to the original black dispersal out of Africa. In the postwar decades, blacks continued to pour out of the South in search of economic opportunity and political freedom. In western and northern cities, blacks now com-

Detroit Race Riot, 1943
 from a streetcar.

 A black passenger is dragged

 peted for housing and jobs, and they also voted—many of them for the ﬁ rst time in their lives. As early as 1945, NAACP leader Walter White concluded that the war “immeasurably magniﬁed the Negro’s awareness of the disparity between the American profession and practice of democracy.” After the war, he predicted, African Americans would be “convinced that whatever betterment of their lot is achieved must come largely from their own efforts.” The wartime migration thus set the stage for the success of the civil rights movement that began to stir in the late 1940s and the 1950s. With their new political base outside the Old South, and with new support from the Democratic party, African Americans eventually forced an end to the hated segregationist practices that had kept them from enjoying full rights as citizens.





Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 Integration at Little Rock, 1957 While white mobs jeered at the ﬁrst black students entering Central High School, federal troops, with bayonets ﬁxed, enforced the law.

 to investigate violations of civil rights and authorized federal injunctions to protect voting rights. Blacks meanwhile continued to take the civil rights movement into their own hands. Martin Luther King, Jr., formed the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in 1957. It aimed to mobilize the vast power of the black churches on behalf of black rights.

 This was an exceptionally shrewd strategy, because the churches were the largest and best-organized black institutions that had been allowed to ﬂourish in a segregated society. More spontaneous was the “sit-in” movement launched on February 1, 1960, by four black college freshmen in Greensboro, North Carolina. Without a

Martin Luther King, Jr., and His
Wife, Coretta, Arrested.
 King and his wife were arrested for the ﬁrst time in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1955 while organizing the bus boycott.

Undertaking Operation Wetback




 detailed plan or institutional support, they demanded ser vice at a whites-only Woolworth’s lunch counter. Observing that “fellows like you make our race look bad,” the black waitress refused to serve them. But they kept their seats and returned the next day with nineteen classmates. The following day, eighty-ﬁve students joined in; by the end of the week, a thousand. The sitin movement rolled swiftly across the South, swelling into a wave of wade-ins, lie-ins, and pray-ins to compel equal treatment in restaurants, transportation, employment, housing, and voter registration. In April 1960 southern black students formed the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC, pronounced “snick”) to give more focus and force to these efforts. Young and impassioned, SNCC members would eventually lose patience with the more stately tactics of the SCLC and the even more deliberate legalisms of the NAACP.

Eisenhower Republicanism
 at Home The balding, sixty-two-year-old General Eisenhower had entered the White House in 1953 pledging his administration to a philosophy of “dynamic conservatism.” “In all those things which deal with people, be liberal, be human,” he advised. But when it came to “people’s money, or their economy, or their form of government, be conser vative.” This balanced, middleof-the-road course harmonized with the depressiondaunted and war-weary mood of the times. Some critics called Eisenhower’s presidency a case of “the bland leading the bland.” Above all, Eisenhower strove to balance the federal budget and guard the Republic from what he called “creeping socialism.” The former supreme Allied commander put the brakes on Truman’s enormous military buildup, though defense spending still soaked up some 10 percent of the GNP. True to his smallgovernment philosophy, Eisenhower supported the transfer of control over offshore oil ﬁelds from the federal government to the states. Ike also tried to curb the TVA (see p. 839) by encouraging a private power company to build a generating plant to compete with the massive public utility spawned by the New Deal. Eisenhower’s secretary of health, education, and welfare condemned the free distribution of the Salk antipolio vaccine as “socialized medicine.” Eisenhower responded to the Mexican government’s worries that illegal Mexican immigration to the United States would undercut the bracero program

 Operation Wetback Thousands of illegal Mexican immigrants were forcibly repatriated to Mexico in the federal government’s 1954 roundup operation, which was promoted in part by the Mexican government. The man in this photograph is being pulled across the border by a Mexican ofﬁcial, while an American spectator tries to pull him back into the United States.

 of legally imported farmworkers inaugurated during World War II (see p. 881). In a massive roundup of il legal immigrants, dubbed Operation Wetback in reference to the migrants’ watery route across the Rio Grande, as many as 1 million Mexicans were apprehended and returned to Mexico in 1954. In yet another of the rude and arbitrary reversals that long have afﬂ icted the government’s relations with Native Americans, Eisenhower also sought to cancel the tribal preservation policies of the “Indian New Deal,” in place since 1934 (see p. 838). He proposed to “terminate” the tribes as legal entities and to revert to the assimilationist goals of the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887 (see p. 639). Most Indians resisted termination, and the policy was abandoned in 1961. Eisenhower obviously could not unscramble all the eggs that had been fried by New Dealers and Fair Dealers for twenty long years. He pragmatically accepted



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 and thereby legitimated many New Dealish programs, stitching them permanently into the fabric of American society. As he told his brother, “Should any political party attempt to abolish Social Security, unemployment insurance, and eliminate labor and farm programs, you would not hear of that party again in our political history.” In some ways Eisenhower even did the New Deal one better. In a public works project that dwarfed any thing the New Dealers had ever dreamed of, Ike backed the Federal Highway Act of 1956, a $27 billion plan to build forty-two thousand miles of sleek, fast motorways. The former general believed that such roads were essential to national defense, allowing U.S. troops to mobilize anywhere in the country in the event of a Soviet invasion. Beyond being a defense strategy, laying down these modern, multilane roads created countless construction jobs and speeded the suburbanization of

 America. The Highway Act offered juicy beneﬁts to the trucking, automobile, oil, and travel industries, while at the same time robbing the railroads, especially passenger trains, of business. The act also exacerbated problems of air quality and energy consumption, and had especially disastrous consequences for cities, whose once-vibrant downtowns withered away while shopping malls and other sites of leisure and consumption ﬂourished in the far-ﬂung suburbs.

A “New Look” in
Foreign Policy
 The 1952 Republican platform called for a “new look” in foreign policy. It condemned mere “containment” of communism as “negative, futile, and immoral.” Incoming secretary of state John Foster Dulles promised not

 Drive-in Movie Theater, Utah, 1958 Going to the movies became one more thing Americans could do in their cars in the 1950s. Here moviegoers watch Charlton Heston as Moses in the Academy Award–winning motion picture The Ten Commandments. It was the last ﬁlm made by famed director Cecil B. DeMille.

The Doctrine of Massive Retaliation


 merely to stem the red tide but to “roll back” its gains and “liberate captive peoples.” At the same time, the new administration promised to balance the budget by cutting military spending. How were these two contradictory goals to be reached? Dulles answered with a policy of boldness in early 1954. Eisenhower would relegate the army and the navy to the backseat and build up an airﬂeet of superbombers (called the Strategic Air Command, or SAC) equipped with city-ﬂattening nuclear bombs. These fearsome weapons would inﬂ ict “massive retaliation” on the Soviets or the Chinese if they got out of hand. The advantages of this new policy were thought



 to be its paralyzing nuclear impact and its cheaper price tag when compared with conventional forces— “more bang for the buck.” At the same time, Eisenhower sought a thaw in the Cold War through negotiations with the new Soviet leaders who came to power after dictator Joseph Stalin’s death in 1953. In the end, the touted “new look” proved illusory. A new Soviet premier, the burly apparatchik Nikita Khrushchev, rudely rejected Ike’s call in 1955 for an “open skies” mutual inspection program over both the Soviet Union and the United States. In 1956 the Hungarians rose up against their Soviet masters and felt badly betrayed when the United States turned a deaf ear to their desperate appeals for aid. The brutally crushed Hungarian uprising revealed the sobering truth that America’s mighty nuclear sledgehammer was too heavy a weapon to wield in such a relatively minor crisis. The rigid futility of the “massive retaliation” doctrine was thus starkly exposed. To his dismay, Eisenhower also discovered that the aerial and atomic hardware necessary for “massive retaliation” was staggeringly expensive.

The Vietnam Nightmare


Hungarian Uprising, October 26, 1956
 Soviet tanks rolled through the streets of Budapest to crush an anticommunist uprising against the Soviets, who had controlled Hungary since World War II. This demonstration of brute force against a grassroots democratic movement turned many communist sympathizers in the West deﬁnitively against the Soviet Union.

 Western Europe, thanks to the Marshall Plan and NATO, seemed reasonably secure by the early 1950s, but Southeast Asia was a different can of worms. In Vietnam and elsewhere, nationalist movements had sought for years to throw off the yoke of French colonial rule. The legendary Vietnamese leader, goateed Ho Chi Minh, had tried to appeal personally to Woodrow Wilson in Paris as early as 1919 to support selfdetermination for the peoples of Southeast Asia. Franklin Roosevelt had likewise inspired hope among Asian nationalists. But Cold War events dampened the dreams of anticolonial Asian peoples. Their leaders—including Ho Chi Minh—became increasingly communist while the United States became increasingly anticommunist. By 1954 American taxpayers were ﬁnancing nearly 80 percent of the costs of a bottomless French colonial war in Indochina. The United States’ share amounted to about $1 billion a year. Despite this massive aid, French forces continued to crumble under pressure from Ho Chi Minh’s nationalist guerrilla forces, called the Viet Minh. In March 1954 a key French garrison was trapped hopelessly in the fortress of Dien Bien Phu in the northwestern corner of Vietnam. The new “policy of boldness” was now



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960




500 1,000 Km.






1,000 Mi.


40°N


NORTH KOREA SOUTH KOREA

 undertook certain social reforms. Change came at a snail’s pace, but American aid continued, as communist guerrillas heated up their campaign against Diem. The Americans had evidently backed a losing horse but could see no easy way to call off their bet.

 JAPAN

Shanghai


PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

Cold War Crises in Europe
 and the Middle East

INDIA
Okinawa 
 BURMA

Tropic of Cancer
TAIWAN
Hong Kong (Nationalist China) (Gr. Br.) 20°N 
Hanoi
LAOS NORTH VIETNAM

Seventeenth Parallel
 THAILAND

 INDOCHINA

 CAMBODIA

SOUTH VIETNAM

Saigon


South
China
Sea


PAC I F IC OCEAN PHILIPPINES

N


M A L AYA
(Gr. Br.)


Singapore
(Gr. Br.)
100°E


 INDONESIA

BORNEO 120°E

Map 37.2 East and Southeast Asia, 1955–1956
Interactive Map


 put to the test. Secretary Dulles, Vice President Nixon, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff favored intervention with American bombers to help bail out the beleaguered French. But Eisenhower, wary about another war in Asia so soon after Korea and correctly fearing British nonsupport, held back. The Battle of Dien Bien Phu proved a victory for the nationalists, and a multination conference in Geneva roughly halved Vietnam at the seventeenth parallel (see Map 37.2). The victorious Ho Chi Minh in the north consented to this arrangement on the assurance that Vietnam-wide elections would be held within two years. In the south a pro-Western government under Ngo Dinh Diem was soon entrenched at Saigon. The Vietnamese never held the promised elections, primarily because the communists seemed certain to win, and Vietnam remained a dangerously divided country. The United States did not sign the Geneva accords, though Eisenhower promised economic and military aid to the autocratic Diem regime, provided that it

 The United States had initially backed the French in Indochina in part to win French approval of a plan to rearm West Germany. Despite French fears, the Germans were ﬁ nally welcomed into the NATO fold in 1955, with an expected contribution of half a million troops. In the same year, the Eastern European countries and the Soviets signed the Warsaw Pact, creating a red military counterweight to the newly bolstered NATO forces in the West. Despite these hardening military lines, the Cold War seemed to be thawing a bit in 1955. In May the Soviets rather surprisingly agreed to end their occupation of Austria. A summit conference in Geneva in July produced little progress on the burning issues, but it bred a conciliatory “spirit of Geneva” that caused a modest blush of optimism to pass over the face of the Western world. Hopes rose further the following year when Soviet Communist party boss Khrushchev publicly denounced the bloody excesses of Joseph Stalin, the dictator dead since 1953. Violent events late in 1956 ended the post-Geneva lull. When the liberty-loving Hungarians struck for their freedom, they were ruthlessly overpowered by Soviet tanks, while the Western world looked on in horror. Fears of Soviet penetration into the oil-rich Middle East further heightened Cold War tensions. The government of Iran, supposedly inﬂuenced by the Kremlin, began to resist the power of the gigantic Western companies that controlled Iranian petroleum. In response, the American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) helped to engineer a coup in 1953 that installed the youthful shah of Iran, Mohammed Reza Pahlevi, as a kind of dictator. Though successful in the short run in securing Iranian oil for the West, the American intervention left a bitter legacy of resentment among many Iranians. More than two decades later, they took their revenge on the shah and his American al lies (see pp. 1025–1027). The Suez crisis proved far messier than the swift stroke in Iran. President Nasser of Egypt, an ardent

Problems in the Middle East




Egyptian President Gamal Abdel
 Nasser, 1954 Shown here greeting exuberant supporters after his election as the ﬁrst president of the new Egyptian republic, Nasser was long a thorn in the ﬂesh of American and European policymakers anxious to protect the precious oil resources of the Middle East. “Nassarism,” his version of pan-Arabism, won a great following in the Arab world during the 1950s and 1960s.

 Arab nationalist, was seeking funds to build an immense dam on the upper Nile for urgently needed irrigation and power. America and Britain tentatively offered ﬁ nancial help, but when Nasser began to ﬂ irt openly with the communist camp, Secretary of State Dulles dramatically withdrew the dam offer. Nasser promptly regained face by nationalizing the Suez Canal, owned chieﬂy by British and French stockholders. Nasser’s action placed a razor’s edge at the jugular vein of Western Europe’s oil supply. America’s jittery French and British allies, deliberately keeping Washington in the dark and coordinating their blow with one from Israel, staged a joint assault on Egypt late in October 1956. For a breathless week, the world teetered on the edge of the abyss. The French and British, however, had made a fatal miscalculation—that the United States would supply them with oil while their Middle Eastern supplies were disrupted, as an oil-rich Uncle Sam had done in the two world wars. But to their unpleasant surprise, a furious President Eisenhower resolved to let them “boil in their own oil” and refused to release emergency supplies. The oilless allies resentfully withdrew their troops, and for the ﬁ rst time in history, a United Nations police force was sent to maintain order.

 The Suez crisis also marked the last time in history that the United States could brandish its “oil weapon.” As recently as 1940, the United States had produced two-thirds of the world’s oil, while a scant 5 percent of the global supply ﬂowed from the Middle East. But by 1948 the United States had become a net oil importer. Its days as an “oil power” clearly were numbered as the economic and strategic importance of the Middle East oil region grew dramatically. The U.S. president and Congress proclaimed the Eisenhower Doctrine in 1957, pledging U.S. military and economic aid to Middle Eastern nations threatened by communist aggression. The real threat to U.S. interests in the Middle East, however, was not com munism but nationalism, as Nasser’s wild popularity among the masses of all Arab countries demonstrated. The poor, sandy sheikdoms increasingly resolved to reap for themselves the lion’s share of the enormous oil wealth that Western companies pumped out of the scorching Middle Eastern deserts. In a portentous move, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq, and Iran joined with Venezuela in 1960 to form the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). In the next two decades, OPEC’s stranglehold on the Western economies would tighten to a degree that even Nasser could not have imagined.



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


Round Two for Ike
 The election of 1956 was a replay of the 1952 contest, with President Eisenhower pitted once more against Adlai Stevenson. The Democrats were hard-pressed to ﬁ nd issues with which to attack the genial general in a time of prosperity and peace, and the voters made it clear that they still liked Ike. Eisenhower piled up an enormous majority of 35,590,472 popular votes to Stevenson’s 26,022,752; in the Electoral College, the count was even more unbalanced at 457 for Republicans to 73 for Democrats. Eisenhower made deeper inroads into the traditional bastion of Democratic strength, the once-solid South, than he had in 1952. Louisiana went Republican for the ﬁ rst time since 1876, during Reconstruction days. But the general’s coattails were

The Helicopter Era, 1957 President Eisenhower was
 routinely criticized by liberals, as in this Herblock cartoon in the Washington Post, for his apparent indifference to many seething social problems of the day. His failure to employ his vast prestige on behalf of civil rights was especially conspicuous.

 not so stiff or broad as in 1952. He failed to win for his party either house of Congress—the ﬁ rst time since Zachary Taylor’s election in 1848 that a winning president had headed such a losing ticket. In fragile health, Eisenhower began his second term as a part-time president. Critics charged that he kept his hands on his golf clubs, ﬂy rod, and shotgun more often than on the levers of power. But in his last years in ofﬁce, Ike rallied himself to do less golﬁng and more governing. A key area in which the president bestirred himself was labor legislation. Congressional investigations produced scandalous revelations of gangsterism, fraud, and brass-knuckles tactics in many American unions, especially the Teamsters. The AF of L–CIO, born of a merger of the two giants in 1955, expelled the Teamsters in 1957 for choosing leaders like two-ﬁsted James R. “Jimmy” Hoffa. Convicted of jury tampering, Hoffa served part of his sentence before disappearing without a trace—evidently the victim of gangsters he had crossed. To counter such corruption, Eisenhower persuaded Congress to pass the Landrum-Grifﬁ n Act in 1959. The act was designed to bring labor leaders to book for ﬁ nancial shenanigans and bullying tactics, but it also expanded some of the antilabor strictures of the earlier Taft-Hartley Act (see p. 910). Soviet scientists astounded the world on October 4, 1957, by lofting into orbit around the globe a beep-beeping “baby moon” (Sputnik I) weighing 184 pounds. A month later they topped their own ace by sending aloft a larger satellite (Sputnik II) weighing 1,120 pounds and carrying a dog. This amazing breakthrough rattled American selfconﬁdence. It cast doubts on America’s vaunted scientiﬁc superiority and raised some sobering military questions. If the Soviets could ﬁ re heavy objects into outer space, they certainly could reach America with intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs). “Rocket fever” swept the nation. Eisenhower established the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and directed billions of dollars to missile development. After humiliating and well-advertised failures—notably the Vanguard missile, which blew up on national television just a few feet above the ground in 1957—in February 1958 the United States managed to put into orbit a grapefruit-sized satellite weighing 2.5 pounds. By the end of the decade, several satellites had been launched, and the United States had successfully tested its own ICBMs. The Sputnik success led to a critical comparison of the American educational system, which was already

 Competing with the Soviets



 under ﬁ re as too easygoing, with that of the Soviet Union. A strong move now developed in the United States to replace “frills” with solid subjects—to substitute square roots for square dancing. Congress rejected demands for federal scholarships, but late in 1958 the National Defense and Education Act (NDEA) authorized $887 million in loans to needy college students and in grants for the improvement of teaching the sciences and languages.

The Continuing Cold War
 The fantastic race toward nuclear annihilation continued unabated. Humanity-minded scientists urged that nuclear tests be stopped before the at mosphere became so polluted as to produce generations of deformed mutants. The Soviets, after completing an intensive series of exceptionally “dirty” tests, proclaimed a suspension in March 1958 and urged the Western world to follow. Beginning in October 1958, Washington did halt both underground and atmospheric testing. But attempts to regularize such suspensions by proper inspection sank on the reef of mutual mistrust. Thermonuclear suicide seemed nearer in July 1958, when both Egyptian and communist plottings threatened to engulf Western-oriented Lebanon. After its president had called for aid under the Eisenhower Doctrine, the United States boldly landed several thousand troops and helped restore order without taking a single life. The burly Khrushchev, seeking new propaganda laurels, was eager to meet with Eisenhower and pave the way for a “summit conference” with Western leaders. Despite grave misgivings as to any tangible results, the president invited him to America in 1959. Arriving in New York, Khrushchev appeared before the U.N. General Assembly and dramatically resurrected the ancient Soviet proposal of complete disarmament. But he offered no practical means of achieving this end. A result of this tour was a meeting at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland. Khrushchev emerged saying that his ultimatum for the evacuation of Berlin would be extended indeﬁ nitely. The relieved world gave prayerful but premature thanks for the “spirit of Camp David.” The Camp David spirit quickly evaporated when the follow-up Paris “summit conference,” scheduled for May 1960, turned out to be an incredible ﬁasco. Both Moscow and Washington had taken a ﬁ rm stand on the

 What’s So Funny? 1960 Premier Khrushchev gloats over Ike’s spying discomﬁture.

 burning Berlin issue, and neither could risk backing down publicly. Then, on the eve of the conference, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down deep in the heart of Russia. After bungling bureaucratic denials in Washington, “honest Ike” took the unprecedented step of assuming personal responsibility. Khrushchev stormed into Paris ﬁ lling the air with invective, and the conference collapsed before it could get off the ground. The concord of Camp David was replaced with the grapes of wrath.

 Cuba’s Castroism Spells Communism Latin Americans bitterly resented Uncle Sam’s lavishing of billions of dollars on Europe, while doling out only millions to its poor relations to the south. They also chafed at Washington’s continuing habit of intervening in Latin American affairs—as in a CIA-directed coup that ousted a leftist government in Guatemala in



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 1954. On the other hand, Washington continued to support—even decorate—bloody dictators who claimed to be combating communists. Most ominous of all was the communist beachhead in Cuba. Ironﬁsted dictator Fulgencio Batista, in power since the 1930s, had encouraged huge investments of American capital, and Washington in turn had given him some support. But early in 1959, blackbearded Fidel Castro engineered a revolution that ousted Batista. Castro then denounced the Yankee imperialists and began to expropriate valuable American properties in pursuing a land-distribution program. Washington, ﬁ nally losing patience, released Cuba from “imperialistic slavery” by cutting off the heavy U.S. imports of Cuban sugar. Castro retaliated with further wholesale conﬁscations of Yankee property and in effect made his left-wing dictatorship an economic and military satellite of Moscow, to the Kremlin’s delighted surprise. An exodus of anti-Castro Cubans headed for the United States, especially Florida. Nearly 1 million arrived between 1960 and 2000. Washington broke diplomatic relations with Castro’s government early in 1961 and imposed a strict embargo on trade with Cuba. Strengthened by the HelmsBurton Act in 1996, the embargo has remained in place, even since Castro’s departure from power in 2008. Americans talked seriously of invoking the Monroe Doctrine before the Soviets set up a communist base only ninety miles from their shores. Khrushchev angrily proclaimed that the Monroe Doctrine was dead and indicated that he would shower missiles upon the United States if it attacked his new friend Castro.

 was patrician Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., of Massachusetts (grandson of Woodrow Wilson’s arch-foe). By contrast, the Democratic race for the presidential nomination started as a free-for-all. John F. Kennedy—a youthful, dark-haired millionaire senator from Massachusetts—won impressive victories in the primaries. He then scored a ﬁ rst-ballot triumph in Los Angeles over his closest rival, Senator Lyndon B. Johnson, the Senate majority leader from Texas. A disappointed South was not completely appeased when Johnson accepted second place on the ticket in an eleventh-hour marriage of convenience. Kennedy’s challenging acceptance speech called upon the American people for sacriﬁces to achieve their potential greatness, which he hailed as the New Frontier. Bigotry inevitably showed its snarling face. Senator Kennedy was a Roman Catholic, the ﬁ rst to be nominated since Al Smith’s ill-starred campaign in 1928.

Kennedy Challenges Nixon
 for the Presidency Republicans approached the presidential campaign of 1960 with Vice President Nixon as their heir apparent. To many he was a gifted party leader, to others a ruthless opportunist. The “old” Nixon had been a no-holds-barred campaigner, adept at skewering Democrats and left-wingers. The “new” Nixon was represented as a mature, seasoned statesman. He had gained particular notice in a ﬁ nger-pointing kitchen debate with Khrushchev in Moscow in 1959, where Nixon extolled the virtues of American consumerism over Soviet economic planning. The next year he handily won the Republican nomination. His running mate

John F. Kennedy Campaigning for the Presidency,
 1960 At right is his wife, Jacqueline Kennedy.

The Kennedy-Nixon Contest


WA MT

OR ID NV CA

 ND

 WY

 CO

 NM

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

 SD

KS OK R-7/I-1

 TX

 IL

 MI

 LA

 OH

 IN

MO AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 16 RI PA NJ CT 4 16 8 WV

 KY

 NC

TN AL MS I-6/D-5

 VA

 GA

DE MD

 SC

 FL

 AK

 HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Kennedy (Democrat)




56.50%


34,266,731


49.7%


Nixon (Republican)




40.75%


34,108,157


49.5%


Byrd (Independent)




2.75%


501,643


0.7%


 Smear artists revived the ancient charges about the Pope’s controlling the White House. Kennedy pointed to his fourteen years of ser vice in Congress, denied that he would be swayed by Rome, and asked if some 40 million Catholic Americans were to be condemned to second-class citizenship from birth. Kennedy’s Catholicism aroused misgivings in the Protestant, Bible Belt South, which was ordinarily Democratic. “I fear Catholicism more than I fear communism,” declaimed one Baptist minister in North

 Candidate John F. Kennedy (1917–1963), in a speech to a Houston group of Protestant ministers (September 12, 1960), declared,

“


 I believe in an America where the separation of church and state is absolute— where no Catholic prelate would tell the President, should he be a Catholic, how to act, and no Protestant minister would tell his parishioners for whom to vote . . . and where no man is denied public ofﬁce because his religion differs from the President who might appoint him or the people who might elect him.

”




 Map 37.3 Presidential Election of 1960 (with electoral vote by state) Kennedy owed his hairbreadth triumph to his victories in twenty-six of the forty largest cities— and to Lyndon Johnson’s strenuous campaigning in the South, where Kennedy’s Catholicism may have been a hotter issue than his stand on civil rights. Interactive Map

 Carolina. But the religious issue largely canceled itself out. If many southern Democrats stayed away from the polls because of Kennedy’s Catholicism, northern Democrats in unusually large numbers supported Kennedy because of the bitter attacks on their Catholic faith. Kennedy charged that the Soviets, with their nuclear bombs and circling Sputniks, had gained on America in prestige and power. Nixon retorted that the nation’s prestige had not slipped, although Kennedy was causing it to do so by his unpatriotic talk. Television may well have tipped the scales. Nixon agreed to meet Kennedy in four so-called debates. The contestants crossed words in millions of living rooms before audiences estimated at 60 million or more. Nobody “won” the debates. But Kennedy at least held his own and did not suffer by comparison with the more “experienced” Nixon. The debates once again demonstrated the importance of image over substance in the television age. Many viewers found Kennedy’s glamour and vitality far more appealing than Nixon’s tired and pallid appearance. Kennedy squeezed through by the rather comfortable margin of 303 electoral votes to 219,* but with the breathtakingly close popular margin of only 118,574 votes out of over 68 million cast (see Map 37.3). He was the ﬁ rst Roman Catholic and the youngest person to date to be elected president. Like Franklin Roosevelt, Kennedy ran well in the large industrial centers, where he had strong support from workers, Catholics, and African Americans. (He had solicitously telephoned the pregnant Coretta King, whose husband, Martin Luther King, Jr., was then imprisoned in Georgia for a sit-in.) Although losing a few seats, the Democrats also swept both houses of Congress by wide margins.

 *Six Democratic electors in Alabama, all eight unpledged Democratic electors in Mississippi, and one Republican elector in Oklahoma voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd, who ran as an independent.



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


An Old General Fades Away
 President Eisenhower continued to enjoy extraordinary popularity to the ﬁ nal curtain. Despite Democratic jibes about “eight years of golﬁng and gooﬁng,” of “putting and puttering,” Eisenhower was universally admired and respected for his dignity, decency, sincerity, goodwill, and moderation. Pessimists had predicted that Eisenhower would be a seriously crippled “lame duck” during his second term, owing to the barrier against reelection erected by the Twenty-second Amendment, ratiﬁed in 1951. (See the Appendix.) In truth, he displayed more vigor, more political know-how, and more aggressive leadership during his last two years as president than ever before. For an unprecedented six years, from 1955 to 1961, Congress remained in Democratic hands, yet Eisenhower exerted unusual control over the legislative branch. He wielded the veto 169 times, and only twice was his nay overridden by the required twothirds vote. America was fabulously prosperous in the Eisenhower years, despite pockets of poverty and unemployment, recurrent recessions, and perennial farm problems. To the north the vast St. Lawrence waterway project, constructed jointly with Canada and completed in 1959, had turned the cities of the Great Lakes into bustling ocean seaports. “Old Glory” could now proudly display ﬁ fty stars. Alaska attained statehood in 1959, as did Hawaii. Alaska, though gigantic, was thinly populated and noncontiguous, but these objections were overcome in a Democratic Congress that expected Alaska to vote Democratic. Hawaii had ample population (largely of Asian descent), advanced democratic institutions, and more acreage than the mainland states of Rhode Island, Delaware, or Connecticut. As the ﬁ rst noncontiguous states to join the Union, Alaska and Hawaii helped turn America’s face toward the Paciﬁc and East Asia. Though a crusading general, Eisenhower as president mounted no moral crusade for civil rights. This was perhaps his greatest failing. Yet he was no bigot, and he had done far more than grin away problems and tread water. As a Republican president, he had further woven the reforms of the Democratic New Deal and Fair Deal into the fabric of national life. As a former general, he had exercised wise restraint in his use of military power and had soberly guided foreign policy away from countless threats to peace. The old soldier left ofﬁce crestfallen at his failure to end the

 After campaigning with promises to reduce the defense budget, President Dwight Eisenhower (1890–1969) presided over unprecedented increases in military spending. In his Farewell Address on January 17, 1961, he sagely but ironically warned against the menace his own policies had nurtured:

“


 This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience. . . . In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted inﬂuence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex.

”


 arms race with the Soviets. Yet he had ended one war and avoided all others. As the decades lengthened, appreciation of him grew.

The Life of the Mind
 in Postwar America America’s afﬂuence in the heady post–World War II decades was matched by a mother lode of literary gems. In ﬁction writing some of the prewar realists continued to ply their trade, notably Ernest Hemingway in The Old Man and the Sea (1952). A Nobel laureate in 1954, Hemingway was dead by his own duck gun in 1961. John Steinbeck, another prewar writer who persisted in graphic portrayals of American society, such as East of Eden (1952) and Travels with Charley (1962), received the Nobel Prize for literature in 1962, the seventh American to be so honored. Curiously, World War II did not inspire the same kind of literary outpouring that World War I had. Searing realism, the trademark style of war writers in the 1920s, characterized the earliest novels that portrayed soldierly life in World War II, such as Norman Mailer’s The Naked and the Dead (1948) and James Jones’s From Here to Eternity (1951). James Gould Cozzens delivered what is often considered the ﬁ nest American war novel in Guard of Honor (1948), the story of a colonel on a Florida army base struggling with how to balance the claims of black ofﬁcers for racial equality with his duty to keep the base operating smoothly in wartime. But as time passed, realistic writ-

The Shopping Mall as New Town Square, 1960
 n this photograph, Democratic presidential candidate John F. Kennedy is shown campaigning at the Bergen Mall in Paramus, New Jersey, in 1960. The Bergen Mall opened in 1957, at a time when similar shopping centers were popping up in suburbanizing metropolitan areas all over the United States. Real estate developers watched Americans ﬂee cities for suburbs, and they followed the money, locating shopping centers strategically at new highway intersections or along the busiest thoroughfares. As suburbanites increasingly found branches of their favorite department and chain stores closer to home during the 1950s and 1960s, they found it less and less necessary to go downtown. Shopping centers for their part went out of their way to sell themselves as modern-style downtowns worthy of being the public core of new suburban communities, even though legally they were privately owned space. They provided the full range of shops and ser vices once found in city centers, including restaurants, post

I


 ofﬁces, Laundromats, banks, and even chapels. They offered entertainment, from movie theaters and skating rinks to free open-air concerts, carnivals, and exhibitions. They made auditoriums available for community meetings. And they attracted public events like Kennedy on the stump. Just four years earlier, a regional shopping center would have been a rare campaign stop for a presidential candidate. Look closely at this photograph. What kind of audience greeted candidate Kennedy at the Bergen Mall? How different might the crowd have looked in a more socially diverse urban center like Manhattan or in nearby Newark, the largest city in New Jersey at the time? What did it mean for sites of consumption, such as privately owned shopping centers, to take on the roles and responsibilities previously associated with urban streets, squares, and parks? How might current struggles of downtown merchants against big-box chain stores like Wal-Mart be related to this history?





Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 Ernest Hemingway (1899–1961) Celebrated both for his writing and his colorful, swashbuckling lifestyle, Hemingway poses here with a dead leopard in 1953.

 ing fell from favor. Authors tended increasingly to write about the war in fantastic and even psychedelic prose. Joseph Heller’s Catch-22 (1961) dealt with the improbable antics and anguish of American airmen in the wartime Mediterranean. A savage satire, it made readers hurt when they laughed. The supercharged imagination of Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., poured forth works of puzzling complexity in sometimes impenetrably inventive prose, including the dark comedy war tale Slaughterhouse Five (1969). The dilemmas created by the new mobility and afﬂuence of American life were explored by Pennsylvania-born John Updike in books like Rabbit, Run (1960) and Couples (1968), and by Massachusetts-bred John Cheever in The Wapshot Chronicle (1957) and The Wapshot Scandal (1964). Louis Auchincloss wrote elegantly about upper-class New Yorkers. Gore Vidal penned a series of intriguing historical novels, as well as several impish and always iconoclastic works, in-

 cluding Myra Breckinridge (1968), about a reincarnated transsexual. Together these writers constituted the rear guard of an older, WASP (white Angle-Saxon Protestant) elite that had long dominated American writing. Poetry also ﬂowered in the postwar era, though poets were often highly critical, even deeply despairing, about the character of American life. Older poets were still active, including cantankerous Ezra Pound, jailed after the war in a U.S. Army detention center near Pisa, Italy, for alleged collaboration with the Fascists. Connecticut insurance executive Wallace Stevens and New Jersey pediatrician William Carlos Williams continued after 1945 to pursue second careers as proliﬁc poets of world-class stature. But younger poets were coming to the fore during the postwar period. Paciﬁc northwesterner Theodore Roethke wrote lyrically about the land until his death by drowning in Puget Sound in 1963. Robert Lowell, descended from a long line of patrician New Eng landers, sought to apply the wisdom of the Puritan past to the perplexing present in allegorical poems like For the Union Dead (1964). Troubled Sylvia Plath crafted the moving verses of Ariel (published posthumously in 1966) and a disturbing novel, The Bell Jar (1963), but her career was cut short when she took her own life in 1963. Anne Sexton produced brooding autobiographical poems until her death by apparent suicide in 1974. Another brilliant poet of the period, John Berryman, ended it all in 1972 by leaping from a Minneapolis bridge onto the frozen bank of the Mississippi River. Writing poetry seemed to be a dangerous pursuit in modern America. The life of the poet, it was said, began in sadness and ended in madness. Playwrights were also active. Tennessee Williams wrote a series of searing dramas about psychological misﬁts struggling to hold themselves together amid the disintegrating forces of modern life. Noteworthy were A Streetcar Named Desire (1947) and Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1955). Arthur Miller brought to the stage searching probes of American values, notably Death of a Salesman (1949) and The Crucible (1953), which treated the Salem witch trials as a dark parable warning against the dangers of McCarthyism. Lorraine Hansberry offered an affecting portrait of African American life in A Raisin in the Sun (1959). In the 1960s Edward Albee exposed the rapacious underside of middleclass life in Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1962). Books by black authors also made the best-seller lists, beginning with Richard Wright’s chilling portrait of a black Chicago killer in Native Son (1940). Ralph Ellison depicted the African American’s searing quest

Postwar American Literature


 Death of a Salesman First performed in 1949, Arthur Miller’s play probed the psychic costs of failure in a society that held out the promise of “success” to all. The play especially resonated with audiences in the booming 1950s and quickly took its place as an American classic. This scene from the original Broadway production shows Arthur Kennedy as Biff Loman (left) confronting his father, Willy, played by Lee J. Cobb (seated), while his brother, Happy, portrayed by Cameron Mitchell, looks on. Not shown here is Willy’s compassionate wife, Linda, brilliantly acted by Mildred Dunnock.

 for personal identity in Invisible Man (1952), a haunting novel narrated by a nameless black person who ﬁ nds that none of his supposed supporters—white philanthropists, black nationalists, and Communist party members—can see him as a real man. James Baldwin won plaudits as a novelist and essayist, particularly for his sensitive reﬂections on the racial question in The Fire Next Time (1963). Black nationalist LeRoi



 Jones, who changed his name to Imamu Amiri Baraka, crafted powerful plays like Dutchman (1964). The South boasted a literary renaissance, led by veteran Mississippi author William Faulkner, who was a Nobel recipient in 1950. Fellow Mississippians Walker Percy and Eudora Welty grasped the falling torch from the failing Faulkner, who died in 1962. Tennessean Robert Penn Warren immortalized Louisiana politico Huey Long in All the King’s Men (1946). Flannery O’Connor wrote perceptively of her native Georgia, and Virginian William Styron confronted the harsh history of his home state in a controversial ﬁctional representation of an 1831 slave rebellion, The Confessions of Nat Turner (1967). Especially bountiful was the harvest of books by Jewish novelists. Some critics quipped that a knowledge of Yiddish was becoming necessary to understand much of the dialogue presented in modern American novels. J. D. Salinger painted an unforgettable portrait of a sensitive, upper-class, Anglo-Saxon adolescent in The Catcher in the Rye (1951), but other Jewish writers found their favorite subject matter in the experience of lower- and middle-class Jewish immigrants. Bernard Malamud rendered a touching portrait of a family of New York Jewish storekeepers in The Assistant (1957). Malamud also explored the mythic qualities of the culture of baseball in The Natural (1952). Philip Roth wrote comically about young New Jersey suburbanites in Goodbye, Columbus (1959) and penned an uproarious account of a sexually obsessed middleaged New Yorker in Portnoy’s Complaint (1969). Chicagoan Saul Bellow contributed masterful sketches of Jewish urban and literary life in landmark books like The Adventures of Augie March (1953) and Herzog (1962). Bellow became the eighth American Nobel laureate for literature in 1977. Isaac Bashevis Singer immigrated to America from Poland in the 1930s and continued to write in Yiddish. He won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1978. E. L. Doctorow employed Old Testament themes in his ﬁctional account of atomic spies Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, The Book of Daniel (1971), and later he imaginatively recast other modern historical materials in books like Ragtime (1975), World’s Fair (1985), and Billy Bathgate (1989).



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 CHRONOLOGY

 Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for presidency Ellison publishes Invisible Man



 CIA-engineered coup installs shah of Iran Joseph Stalin dies



 French defeated at Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam Army-McCarthy hearings Brown v. Board of Education Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) formed Nasser becomes prime minister of Egypt CIA-sponsored coup in Guatemala





 Montgomery bus boycott by blacks begins; emergence of Martin Luther King, Jr. Geneva summit meeting on Vietnam Soviet Union withdraws troops from Austria Warsaw Pact signed AF of L merges with CIO Tennessee Williams’s Cat on a Hot Tin Roof ﬁ rst performed



 Little Rock school desegregation crisis Civil Rights Act passed Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) formed Eisenhower Doctrine Soviet Union launches Sputnik satellites



 U.S. troops sent to Lebanon NDEA authorizes loans and grants for science and language education Galbraith publishes The Afﬂuent Society

1958–


 Berlin crisis



 Castro seizes power in Cuba Landrum-Grifﬁ n Act Alaska and Hawaii attain statehood



 Sit-in movement for civil rights begins U-2 incident sabotages Paris summit OPEC formed Kennedy defeats Nixon for presidency

 Soviets crush Hungarian revolt Suez crisis Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for presidency Mills publishes The Power Elite

KEY TERMS
The Feminine Mystique (945) rock ’n’ roll (947) Checkers Speech (948) McCarthyism (950) Army-McCarthy hearings (951) Jim Crow (951) Montgomery bus boycott (953) Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (953) Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) (957) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Operation Wetback (957) Federal Highway Act of 1956 (958) policy of boldness (959) Hungarian uprising (959) Dien Bien Phu, Battle of (960) Suez crisis (960) Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) (961) Sputnik (962) kitchen debate (964) 
Dwight D. (“Ike)
Eisenhower
Richard M. Nixon
Betty Friedan
Elvis Presley
 Joseph McCarthy Rosa Parks Martin Luther King, Jr.

Earl Warren
John Foster Dulles
Nikita Khrushchev
Ho Chi Minh
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Fidel Castro
John F. Kennedy
Lyndon B. Johnson


To Learn More




To Learn More
Glenn Altschuler, All Shook Up: How Rock ’N’ Roll Changed
America (2003)
Stephen Ambrose, Eisenhower: The President (1984)
Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of
Mass Consumption in Postwar America (2003)
Mary Dudziak, Cold War Civil Rights (2000)
John Egerton, Speak Now Against the Day: The Generation
Before the Civil Rights Movement in the South (1994)
Tom Engelhardt, The End of Victory Culture (1995)
 Melvyn Lefﬂer, For the Soul of Mankind: The United States, the Soviet Union, and the Cold War (2007)

Elaine May, Homeward Bound: American Families in the
Cold War Era 1988)
Thomas Sugrue, Origins of the Urban Crisis: Race and
Inequality in Postwar Detroit (1992)
Theodore White, Making of the President, 1960 (1961)
 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Stormy Sixties





1960–1968
 Let the word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans. JOHN F. KENNEDY, INAUGURAL, 1961

C


 omplacent and comfortable as the 1950s closed, Americans elected in 1960 a young, vigorous president who pledged “to get the country moving again.” Neither the nation nor the new president had any inkling as the new decade opened just how actionpacked it would be, both at home and abroad. The 1960s would bring a sexual revolution, a civil rights revolution, the emergence of a “youth culture,” a devastating war in Vietnam, and the beginnings, at least, of a feminist revolution. By the end of the stormy sixties, many Americans would yearn nostalgically for the comparative calm of the ﬁ fties.

 Kennedy’s “New Frontier” Spirit Hatless and topcoatless in the twenty-two-degree chill, John F. Kennedy delivered a stirring inaugural address on January 20, 1961. Tall, elegantly handsome, speaking crisply and with staccato ﬁ nger jabs at the air, Kennedy personiﬁed the glamour and vitality of

 the new administration. The youngest president ever elected, he assembled one of the youngest cabinets, including his thirty-ﬁve-year-old brother, Robert F. Kennedy, as attorney general. “Bobby,” the president quipped, would ﬁ nd “some legal experience” useful when he began to practice law. The new attorney general set out, among other reforms, to recast the priorities of the FBI. The bureau deployed nearly a thousand agents on “internal security” work but targeted only a dozen against orga nized crime and gave virtually no attention to civil rights violations. Robert Kennedy’s efforts were stoutly resisted by J. Edgar Hoover, who had served as FBI director longer than the new attorney general had been alive. Business whiz Robert S. McNamara left the presidency of the Ford Motor Company to take over the Defense Department. Along with other youthful, talented advisers, these appointees made up an inner circle of “the best and the brightest” men around the president. From the outset Kennedy inspired high expectations, especially among the young. His challenge of a New Frontier quickened patriotic pulses. He brought

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Kennedy Takes Charge


 Richard Goodwin (b. 1931), a young Peace Corps staffer, eloquently summed up the buoyantly optimistic mood of the early 1960s:

“


 For a moment, it seemed as if the entire country, the whole spinning globe, rested, malleable and receptive, in our beneﬁcent hands.

”


 a warm heart to the Cold War when he proposed the Peace Corps, an army of idealistic and mostly youthful volunteers to bring American skills to underdeveloped countries. He summoned citizens to ser vice with his clarion call to “ask not what your country can do for you: ask what you can do for your country.” Himself Harvard-educated, Kennedy and his Ivy League lieutenants (heavily from Harvard) radiated conﬁdence in their abilities. The president’s personal grace and wit won him the deep affection of many of his fellow citizens. A journalist called Kennedy “the most seductive man I’ve ever met. He exuded a sense of vibrant life and humor that seemed naturally to bubble up out of him.” In an unprecedented gesture, he invited white-maned poet Robert Frost to speak at his inaugural ceremonies. The old Yankee versiﬁer



 shrewdly took stock of the situation. “You’re something of Irish and I suppose something of Harvard,” he told Kennedy—and advised him to be more Irish than Harvard.

The New Frontier at Home
 Kennedy came into ofﬁce with fragile Democratic majorities in Congress. Southern Democrats threatened to team up with Republicans and ax New Frontier proposals such as medical assistance for the aged and increased federal aid to education. Kennedy won a ﬁ rst round in his campaign for a more cooperative Congress when he forced an expansion of the all-important House Rules Committee, dominated by conser vatives who could have bottled up his entire legislative program. Despite this victory, the New Frontier did not expand swiftly. Key medical and education bills remained stalled in Congress. Another vexing problem was the economy. Kennedy had campaigned on the theme of revitalizing the economy after the recessions of the Eisenhower years. His administration helped negotiate a noninﬂationary wage agreement in the steel industry in early 1962. The assumption was that the companies, for their part, would keep the lid on prices. But almost immediately steel management announced signiﬁcant price

President John F. Kennedy and His Wife,
Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy
 Shown here leaving the White House to attend a series of inaugural balls in January 1961, the young and vibrant ﬁrst couple brought beauty, style, and grace to the presidency.



