the world before 1492 the peopling of north america the diverse communities of the americas in the 1400s a changing europe in the 1400s africa in the 1400s asia in the 1400s chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 1492 1607 columbus the columbian exchange and early conquests a divided europe the impact of the protestant reformation exploration and encounter in north america the spanish exploration and encounter in north america the french exploration and encounter in north america the english 1 the world before 1492 jacques le moyne an early french explorer recorded native american women cultivating crops.
within the cultures of most north american tribes women were indeed the prime cultivators of crops while men hunted.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the life and culture among the first north americans and later the independent development of cultures among native americans europeans and africans before the encounters of 1492.
the peopling of north america describe what the archeological record tells about the arrival development and cultures of the first peoples of i north america.
the diverse communities of the americas in the 1400s describe the diversity of american indian cultures in the united states on the eve of their encounter with europeans.
a changing europe in the 1400s describe the changes in europe that led to columbus s voy ages and that shaped european attitudes when encountering the peoples of the americas.
africa in the 1400s describe the political cultural and religious developments in africa that would shape contact between europeans and africans in the americas.
asia in the 1400s contrast developments in asia with those in europe at the time when europeans first reached the americas.
the navajo people or dine as they prefer to be called tell a story ot their coming into this world.
the story begins in a world of darkness nihodilhil because of the strife in the first world first man atse i lastin first woman atse estsan and the coyote called first angry followed by all the others climbed up from the world of darkness and dampness to the second or blue world.
from this dark or black world the people emerged through the blue and yellow worlds before finally making their way to the bright white world where they live today the locust was the first to reach the next world.
he looked around and saw that the world was covered with water that glittered and everything looked white.
this is why they call it the glittering world or white world nihalgai.
soon first man and first woman began to make things the way they were supposed to be.
the holy people helped them.
their first job was to rebuild the mountains then the people made a fire.
to start it they used flint first man and first woman wanted a hogan talking god helped to build the first hogan this was the place where the people lived and worked.
by now first man and first woman had become human.
they were like us.
2 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 iff navajo art regularly portrayed the many different gods that in navajo tradition accompanied human beings in their emergence into the world.
the navajo believed that these gods could help hinder or occasionally play tricks on people in their daily lives.
after this there were four seasons.
in the spring the plants came up from the ground.
in the winter the plants died and were hidden under the snow.
then in the spring they came up again.
the plants grew into crops like corn beans and squash.
source ihere are many versions of the navajo creation story.
this account was provided by harry benally a navajo carver and silversmith from sheep springs new mexico and harold carey a navajo historian from malad city idaho downloaded february 14 2013.
other north american tribes had their own stories of how their people emerged onto the earth from a region below or arrived through the water or came down from the clouds.
all believed that some ancient pilgrimage had brought them to the place where their tribe resided and would with divine favor reside forever.
modern anthropologists tend to trace the path of early human immigration from asia either on foot across what was sometimes dry land between what is now russian siberia and alaska or by small boats that hugged the coast of the two continents beginning some 25 000 or even 35 000 years ago.
hunters from siberia may have followed their animal prey across solid land and then fanned out across the americas.
seafaring travelers might have followed the fish from alaska down the coast of north and south america.
perhaps both forms of migration took place.
while the ancestors of modern american indians were building their communities establishing their culture and engaging in extended trade with other native americans other humans in other parts of the world were developing their own often quite different cultures.
carvings found in southern france and north africa date from the same period as the earliest settlements of the americas.
although contact between the rest of the world and the americas was at best minimal the people who lived in africa asia and europe maintained some level of contact with one another over thousands of years even as they developed their own languages as well as agricultural and social systems.
the arrival of europeans in the americas after 1492 led to dramatic transformations of the cultures of all of these places.
peoples who had developed very different cultural norms as well as different ways of viewing the world suddenly came into contact with each other.
understanding the independent development of people and cultures on both sides of the atlantic is essential to understanding how contact between them would significantly change them all.
significant dates approx.
30 000 years earliest signs of settlement in western alaska and california stone age ago carvings dating to this era found in france and north africa c 750 mound building cultures expand in the mississippi river valley 850 1100s rise and decline of the anasazi in chaco canyon founding of acoma pueblo 950 1400 rise and decline of cahokia 1101 norse colony of vineland established in north america 1142 possible date for the founding of the iroquois confederacy 1324 pilgrimage of mansa musa emperor of mali to mecca 1325 rise of aztec empire founding of tenochtitlan mexico city 1348 1350s bubonic plague begins in europe 1415 portuguese begin exploration of the atlantic coast of africa 1421 1423 chinese explore the indian ocean and east africa 1453 ottoman turks capture constantinople end of the hundred years war between france and england 1458 songhay empire captures timbuktu 1469 marriage of isabella of castile and ferdinand of aragon 1485 king henry vii ends the war of the roses unified england 1488 bartolomeu dias rounds cape of good hope 1492 granada falls to christians ending islamic rule in spain christopher columbus sails from spain to the americas 1493 1528 askia muhammad rules songhay empire at its height 1498 vasco da gama reaches india from portugal chapter 1 the world before 1492 3 the peopling of north america 1 1 1 1 describe what the archeological record tells about the arrival development and cultures of the first peoples of north america.
while the navajo told the stories of first man and first woman emerging after the long journey up through various worlds to find themselves in the place where the tribe lived other native americans had their own creation stories.
to the residents of the jemez pueblo in northern new mexico fotease chief of the war society planned a journey to come to this world to test the peoples power and when they arrived at the site of their pueblo they knew they had found the right place saying this will be the place for us forever from here we are not going to move the pueblo to any other place for the shasta of what is now the northwest united states their world began when old man above bored a hole through the sky and came down to earth to plant the first trees and to create birds and fish and all the animals including the grizzly bear and then continued to live in his tepee mount shasta.
in the zuni story the sun was lonely so he sent for the people who lived below the ground and invited them to come out and live in the sunlight and gave them corn.
while storytellers in every tribe keep these creation stories alive modern anthropologists have a different explanation of the way the various tribes arrived in the places where they lived.
during an ice age more of the worlds water is stored in glaciers.
as a result the oceans are lower sometimes much lower.
geological evidence indicates that between 36 000 and 32 000 years ago and again between 25 000 and 14 000 years ago substantial dry land existed between the northern tip of asia in siberia and north america see map 1 1.
duoutjusi wnen the first americans ltwpr hfrm 1 s strong evidence that ice made the ips possible.
since sea levels were much because so much water was being held in glaciers it was possible to walk from siberia across w like h enn9 nt0 north america and then down through passage ways in the glaciers it is also hkely that m grants came by small boats down the pacific coasts of north and south america part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 this land was wide enough for animals including mammoths and the human hunters who followed them to cross.
but when the glaciers melted oceans rose and what anthropologists now refer to as the bering land bridge disappeared under what is now the bering sea.
any further human migration had to be by boat which would explain the rapid expansion of human communities from alaska to the southern tip of south america.
bering land bridge the name given to the land that connected alaska and siberia thousands of years ago which is now under the current bering sea.
the land bridge clovis culture and recent discoveries most anthropologists used to believe that the first immigrants to the americas were the clovis people who might have come to north america around 13 000 years ago.
the clovis people took their name from a site near what is now clovis new mexico where a trove of 13 000 year old arrow and spear points was found in 1929.
the points which were fluted so they could be attached to spears were obvious signs of human activity and were the oldest human artifacts found in the americas up to that time.
recent excavations in central texas however found primitive spear tips that are at least 15 500 years old much older and less sophisticated than those found at clovis.
archaeologists have discovered similar evidence at many sites elsewhere in the americas.
because no clovis like spear tips have ever been found in siberia most anthropologists now believe that the clovis spear point was an invention that early americans developed long after they had lost contact with asia.
newer anthropological evidence also suggests that not all of the first peoples of the americas walked to get there.
other peoples may have crossed the oceans thousands of years before the first europeans ever set foot in the western hemisphere.
whenever and however the first inhabitants of the americas came their descendants adapted to their new lands spread out across the americas and created a wide range of languages and civilizations.
by 14 000 years ago various peoples were living in every part of north and south america.
clovis people the name of early residents of north america whose spear points were found near what is now clovis new mexico in 1929.
spear points found near clovis new mexico.
the human workmanship on these points is obvious and though earlier spear points have now been found these show the development of native american hunting skill at an early time.
chapter 1 the world before 1492 5 1 1 american voices the natchez tradition ca.
800 i 1j i 14 any american indian tribes moved often seeking better hunting or farming or to escape more belligerent neighbors.
the natchez tribe of louisiana is related linguistically and culturally to the pyramid builders of mexico and guatemala.
they tell a story of their movement north to louisiana that fits with the archeological evidence of such a movement around the year 800.
a keeper or priest of the natchez told the following story to a frenchman in louisiana in the 7 700s.
before we came to this land we lived yonder under the sun pointing with his finger nearly southwest by which i understood that he meant mexico we lived in a fine country where the earth is always pleasant there our suns chiefs had their abode and our nation maintained itself for a long time against the ancients of the country who conquered some of our villages in the plains but never could force us from the mountains.
our nation extended itself along the great water the gulf of mexico where this large river the mississippi loses itself but as our enemies were become very numerous and very wicked our suns sent some of their subjects who lived near this river to examine whether we could retire into the country through which it flowed.
the country on the east side of the river being found extremely pleasant the great sun upon the return of those who had examined it ordered all his subjects who lived in the plains and who still defended themselves against the ancients of the country to remove into this land here to build a temple and to preserve the eternal fire.
source from judith niles native american history new york ballantine books 1996 p 43.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how does the story teller explain the migration patterns of his people.
historical interpretation what light does the story shed on relations between american indian peoples before the arrival of columbus in the americas.
changing climate and cultures anasazi and cahokia before the arrival of columbus the largest and most sophisticated civilizations in the americas were found in mexico and south america.
nevertheless hundreds of years before columbus crossed the ocean complex communities could be found in the present day united states among the ancient residents of chaco canyon in new mexico known as the anasazi and among the cahokia people of the mississippi river valley.
anasazi the anasazi of the southwest the anasazi or ancient ones began build anasazi meaning ancient ones lived in ing communities in new mexico and arizona perhaps 700 years before the arrival of colorado some 700 years before columbus.
they cultivated crops such as corn or maize beans squash and chilies that were needed to feed a settled urbanized community.
in time the anasazi began developing chaco canyon in northwest new mexico as the hub of a widespread trade and ceremonial religious network.
chaco canyon was a large city built of logs and adobe mud bricks with buildings as high as five stories.
it included more than a dozen pueblos large buildings in an area measuring 8 miles by 2 miles.
facing the main plaza with its underground kivas where religious rites were conducted pueblo bonito contained 800 rooms and may have housed 2 000 people.
it was the largest apartment building in north america until the 1880s.
roads from chaco canyon allowed trade to develop in many directions.
turquoise and other valuable goods were traded perhaps as far south as central mexico.
after a prolonged drought in the early 1100s the anasazi abandoned chaco canyon.
their descendants created small farming communities across the southwest.
some built the cliff dwellings that can still be seen at mesa verde in southwestern colorado.
while smaller than chaco canyon mesa verde includes some 200 rooms.
built into the side of the canyon wall the rooms offered protection 6 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 the anasazi built housing or palaces into the cliffs to provide protection from the weather and from other tribes who might try to attack.
from enemies since they could be reached only by ladders.
by 1300 the anasazi faced with another great drought also abandoned mesa verde and seem to have disappeared from history though the founders of acoma pueblo may have been anasazi.
acoma not far from albuquerque new mexico was established some time in the 1100s.
still functioning today it may be the oldest continuously inhabited city in the current united states.
other peoples known as the hohokam settled on lands further west near present day phoenix arizona.
while the hohokam communities existed for hundreds of years the high point of their civilization is estimated to have been between 1150 and 1450.
they developed an extensive agricultural system using canals to irrigate crops that included cotton tobacco corn beans and squash.
but like the anasazi they slowly declined.
ruins of hohokam communities may be seen in casa grande arizona.
slowly hopi zuni pueblo and navajo peoples moved into the older anasazi and hohokam territory of new mexico arizona utah and colorado and built the pueblos and villages that the first spanish explorers encountered in the 1500s.
cahokia and the mississippi river valley the cahokia people of the mississippi valley also known as the mound builders created a flourishing culture between 900 and 1350.
if one could go back 1 000 years and visit cahokia the center of this culture one would find a city surrounded by strong wooden walls with thatch covered houses that were home to 20 000 to 40 000 people near what is now east st louis illinois.
cahokia was probably the largest settlement in what is now the united states and 1 000 years ago its mississippian culture flourished throughout the mississippi valley and beyond.
archaeologists have found similar mound building communities at coosa and etowah georgia moundville alabama and natchez mississippi.
mound builders a name given to native american tribes that built large burial and ceremonial mounds on which religious and sports activities took place.
chapter 1 the world before 1492 7 this artist s rendition of ancient cahokia shows the large city on the banks of the mississippi river.
aztec artists created this drawing of the cultivation of corn before the arrival of the first europeans.
at the center of cahokia a series of wide earth mounds up to 100 feet high led to the people being called the mound builders.
these mounds were used to bury the most prominent leaders.
atop the central mound was a temple and a wide plaza used for ceremonies centered on the seasons and the sun.
the plaza was located on a perfect north south axis and a massive circle of wooden posts functioned as a kind of observatory to trace the suns path.
priests and chiefs at cahokia tracked the sun conducted rituals and dispensed gifts that displayed their power while nearby hamlets grew the food that fed the citys inhabitants.
such large settled communities were possible because agricultural practices had replaced the earlier hunting and gathering economy and made a differentiated society possible.
by about 900 a warming trend in the earths climate had made new forms of agriculture possible.
instead of being limited to what they could find or hunt to eat residents of cahokia were thus able to begin farming.
like the hohokam of the southwest they cultivated squash corn and beans which they could grow on a seasonal basis store as a surplus through the winter and thereby support an urbanized culture.
when eaten together maize and beans form a complete protein and as a result the population could be well nourished.
in cahokia and in most settled native american cultures farming was womens work.
men hunted to add animal protein and flavor to the diet.
together they produced a rich supply of food enough to sustain not only themselves but a much larger community that included many priests chiefs and the workers who built the mounds who neither farmed nor hunted.
quick review describe in what ways the anasazi and cahokia cultures changed over time.
what unique features did each culture develop.
what did they have in common.
8 pai itactand exploration 1491 1607 the diverse communities of the americas in the 1400s 1 2 describe the diversity of american indian cultures in the united states on the eve of their encounter with europeans.
the native peoples of north america were a remarkably diverse group.
they spoke many different languages some more different from each other than english is from chinese.
these languages were spread among 500 to 600 independent societies with different approaches to hunting and farming different social structures varying creation stories and diverse understandings of the spiritual see map 1 2.
nevertheless native american tribes also tended to share some things in common.
they tended to live comfortably with nature and in harmony with the sacred which they found in every aspect of life.
they saw time as circular not a steady line from creation to the present and fixture but a reoccurring series of events to be celebrated in rituals that involved the retelling of ancient stories linked to the annual growth of the crops and to animal life.
they honored shamans and priests who were considered visionaries and who were expected to have contact with the supernatural and keep the stories alive.
these shamans and priests had the special responsibility of helping restore harmony when it was disrupted by disease war or climactic changes that brought famine.
most native north americans saw the community and not the individual as the focus of life and labor.
community members won fame and respect by what they gave away more than by what they kept for themselves.
the accumulative spirit of autonomous europeans gaining ever more possessions especially land and the status in european society that came from land ownership made no sense to most american indians.
although precise measurement is impossible scholars estimate that approximately 7 million indians lived in what is now the united states and canada with much larger numbers in mexico and central and south america.
the total population for all of the americas was probably 50 to 70 million perhaps as high as 100 million when the first europeans arrived.
europes population at the time was approximately 70 to 90 million and africas population was 50 to 70 million.
if these numbers are correct then although north america was relatively sparsely populated the americas as a whole had as many or more people than either europe or africa in 1492.
asia it is worth noting had a far larger population perhaps in the range of 200 to 300 million people.
north american indians also lived in a land of extraordinary physical diversity from the tundra of alaska to the forests of new england from the prairies and grasslands of the midwest to the lush pacific coast and the dry southwest.
in these diverse environments climatic changes led to seasons of plenty and seasons of famine.
different environments also led to radically different ways of life.
while the settled farmers of cahokia and their descendants in the southeast and the pueblo peoples of the southwest left the clearest records many nomadic tribes roamed the heart of the continent and the pacific coast depending much more on their skills as hunters and their ability to gather abundant plant foods than on settled agriculture.
success and failure in war or the spread of disease caused american indian populations to ebb and flow long before the first european encounters.
the pueblo people of the southwest some of the largest american indian settlements in what is now the united states were in the southwest.
in place of the abandoned anasazi centers pueblo and hopi people created thriving settlements in new mexico and arizona.
taos pueblo in northern new mexico with its multistoried buildings for many families is still inhabited as are many other pueblo and hopi communities in the region.
in the pueblo and hopi southwest an intricate maze of canals dams and terracing allowed agriculture to flourish in a dry climate.
like the anasazi the pueblo and hopi diet relied on corn brown beans and various forms of squash.
they had domesticated turkeys and used dogs to hunt so wild game in addition to turkey added animal protein to their diet.
in both hopi and pueblo communities members of special societies wore ritual masks called kachinas and danced in ceremonies designed to connect the community with its ancestors while seeking their presence and blessing on the crops.
the pueblo people eventually spread out over arizona and new mexico speaking different languages yet connected to each other by trade and common religious practices.
the tribes of the mississippi valley in the mid 1300s cahokia and the mound building culture began to disappear.
no one knows all of the reasons for this decline but climate almost certainly had a role 10 part i contact and exploration 1491 in it.
around 1350 a relatively rapid colder climate shift known as the little ice age began and lasted until 1800.
as the climate got colder agriculture suffered.
europeans abandoned their settlements in places like greenland.
if the power of its priests and kings in cahokia depended on their seeming control of the sun and the seasons the little ice age sapped that power.
ihe change in weather drastically reduced the supply of food from outlying hamlets on which their large cities depended.
whatever all the reasons by 1400 cahokia was abandoned.
with the decline of cahokia and the mound building culture the population of the mississippi valley shrank.
ihe most direct descendants of cahokia the people later known as the creeks choctaws and chickasaws settled on the eastern side of the mississippi river and the southern appalachian mountains.
other tribes dominated other parts of cahokias former territory.
ihe cherokees and tuscaroras settled in parts of georgia tennessee and north carolina.
they are connected linguistically with the iroquois of the great lakes and new york more than with the creeks and choctaws.
yet other tribes dominated the piedmont of what would be the carolinas.
whatever their language or background most of these tribes lived in small communities of 500 to 2 000 people.
none lived in cities that were anything like cahokia.
neighboring villages might exchange corn or meat.
longer distance exchange and there was considerable long distance exchange was generally limited to things that were rare and easy to carry copper implements beads and shells from the atlantic coast or quartz from the rocky mountains.
artifacts uncovered in almost any native settlement in north america attest to the lively trade among all of the continents tribes.
archeological evidence also suggests that as cahokia declined smaller chiefdoms developed and often fought with each other and with other tribes.
these communities sometimes only a few families built places of refuge throughout the mississippi valley.
mississippian villages in the 1400s included a half dozen to several dozen houses with a central field for games or ceremonies all surrounded by a wooden wall that if not strong enough to keep out a determined enemy at least assured against surprise attacks.
several families often shared a single structure.
structures that housed a chief s family were somewhat larger but do not seem to have reflected a grander lifestyle.
as weather and war made food scarcer it was harder to cultivate crops and more dangerous to hunt game if human enemies were lurking nearby.
the possibility of starvation increased.
still the first european explorers who arrived in the 1540s reported finding large settlements in modern south carolina georgia alabama and tennessee with rich well tended fields and well designed houses and villages.
the pacific coast from the shasta to the california indians in the pacific northwest the shasta and other tribes lived in towns of several hundred people constructing houses as long as 60 feet built of cedar and richly decorated with painting and sculpture.
these pacific coast indians lived primarily on the abundant salmon in their rivers which could be smoked or dried for year round consumption.
as a result of plentiful food and good housing these tribes developed a settled community life with their own art and culture.
farther down the pacific coast in california the yokut miwok maidu and porno represented one of the largest concentrations of american indians north of mexico perhaps 700 000 or 10 percent of the indians north of the rio grande.
these native americans lived in clans of extended families rather than larger tribal units.
their economy was based on gathering wild plants and on fishing and hunting.
they did not engage in settled agriculture probably because the wild foods in california were so abundant and settled agriculture offered little improvement in their diet or way of life.
the iroquois confederacy and the tribes of the atlantic coast in the northeast the original five nations of the iroquois or the haudenosaunee as they call themselves the mohawks oneidas onondagas cayugas and senecas developed 1 2 chapter 1 the world before 1492 11 this drawing shows an iroquois onondaga village under an attack led by the french explorer samuel de champlain.
it also shows the long houses that provided homes to several families all surrounded by a stockade fence.
an alliance and a united front against other tribes an approach that would also serve them well in their encounters with europeans.
the iroquois confederacys central meeting place and council fire was near present day syracuse new york.
in iroquois communities several families would live in a single sturdy longhouse made of posts and poles covered with bark but the house itself and the land around it belonged to the community.
as many as 1 000 people lived in some iroquois towns made up of many longhouses.
iroquois legends tell of a great peace maker dekanawidah who convinced the warring tribes to live together under the great law of peace.
an eclipse of the sun around the year 1142 supposedly strengthened his plea for unity.
clans led by women governed the five nations.
the women leaders chose the sachems male leaders who attended the council meetings and led in war but who were also accountable to the clans.
on the atlantic coast and the eastern slopes of the appalachians were algonquian speaking tribes the largest of which the powhatans may have included 60 000 or more people.
for these tribes some of the first to encounter europeans hunting and fishing as well as farming corn beans and squash provided the major food sources.
they lived in permanent towns and villages.
like other tribes the atlantic coast indians did not keep written records but even as late as the 1670s an english trader described an indian town of many houses along crisscrossing streets surrounded by a stockade 2 feet thick and 12 feet high.
social life centered in the ceremonies of the seasons that gave thanks for the gifts of food especially the green corn dance held in late summer which might attract several hundred indians from surrounding villages to give thanks for the harvest and to celebrate the start of a new year.
although the description came from the early 1600s there is no reason to assume that algonquian community life had changed much since the 1400s.
the aztec mayan and inca empires traveling south from the current united states in the mid 1400s one came to the great aztec city of tenochtitlan.
with a population of 200 000 it was as large as or larger than any contemporary city in africa or europe.
the aztecs founded tenochtitlan 12 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 american voices richard hakluyt the itue pictures and fashions of the people in that part of american now called virginia 1585 1 2 n 1585 the english adventurer sir walter raleigh founded the short lived colony of roanoke on the coast of what is now north carolina.
richard hakluyt who never left england used stories of raleigh s experiences in north america to create a true picture of the american indians.
since the indians themselves did not keep such records hakluyt s account provides some of the best examples of what native american life was like at the time of their first contacts with europeans.
note the elizabethan english of the original is hard to follow.
the text below has been rendered in contemporary english.
the princes of virginia wear the hair of their heads long.
they wear a chain about their necks of pearls or beads of copper which they much esteem and they wear bracelets of the same material on their arms they carry a quiver made of small rushes holding their bow ready bent in one hand and an arrow in the other ready to defend themselves.
in this manner they go to war or to their solemn feasts and banquets.
they take much pleasure in hunting deer whereof there is great store in the country for it is fruitful pleasant and full of good woods the women are of reasonably good proportion.
in their going they carry their hands dangling down and wear a deer skin excellently well dressed hanging down from their navel unto the middle of their thighs which also cover their hinder parts.
the rest of their bodies are all bare at a certain time of the year they make a great and solemn feast whereunto their neighbors of the towns adjoining repair from all parts every man attired in the most strange fashion then being set in order they dance sing and use the strangest gestures all this is done after the sun is set for avoiding of the heat.
the towns of this country are compassed about with poles stuck fast in the ground but they are not very strong.
the entrance is very narrow.
there are but few houses therein save those which belong to the king and his nobles.
this people therefore void of all covetousness live cheerfully and at their hearts ease.
but they solemnize their feasts in the night and therefore they keep very great fires to avoid darkness and to testify their joy.
source copyright 2004 by the university library the university of north carolina at chapel hill.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis based on this document what picture might an elizabethan reader have formed about conditions in virginia.
crafting an argument in your opinion how useful is this document as evidence of the true nature of american indian societies in virginia.
what argument can you make to support your opinion.
a map of the aztec capital of tenochtitlan on site of what is now mexico city.
the aztec built tenochtitlan on an island with only a few easy to defend causeways linking it to the mainland and built beautiful floating gardens along the waterways.
chapter 1 the world before 1492 13 inca empire inca town inca road mapi 3 inca empire in 1500.
the inca empire was perhaps the largest empire in the world stretching down nearly all of the pacific coast of south america connected by roads and reporting to a single centralized government based in modern day peru.
on an island in the middle of lake texcoco in 1325 connected it to the mainland by three broad causeways and supplied the city with fresh drinking water through a carefully designed aqueduct.
when the aztecs first arrived in central mexico the people who then ruled the region known as the toltecs looked down on them as barbarians.
that soon changed.
the aztecs conquered the toltecs and destroyed their capital.
the aztecs tenochtitlan used toltec designs but was a new and grander capital.
led by their emperor aztec society was highly stratified the emperor and priests at the top ruled a powerful empire with a population of 10 to 20 million that dominated subju gated tribes in surrounding areas.
the huge markets of tenochtitlan in which 40 000 or 50 000 traders met to exchange gold and jewelry pottery and baskets meat fish fruit and vegetables amazed the first spaniards who described it as thrice as large as the celebrated square in salamanca in spain the aztecs maintained an extensive trade network with other peoples but also made war on them to expand their empire and ensure a steady stream of prisoners for the human sacrifices they believed their gods demanded.
while the aztecs built their empire by making strategic alliances with other tribes by the mid 1400s they relied on their own large army and attacked former allies creating enemies who would help the spanish conquer the aztecs in the early 1500s.
to the east and southeast of the aztec empire was the once great empire of the maya.
the mayan empire had been at its height long before the aztecs emerged on the scene.
indeed the mayan culture had been developing for thousands of years when they first came into contact with europeans.
the high point of mayan culture known as the classical period entered a period of decline hundreds of years before the rise of the aztecs probably due to an extended period of drought and overfarming of the land.
the mayans dominated what is now the yucatan peninsula of mexico and much of modern honduras belize and guatemala.
the mayans were the only american culture to develop a fully functional written language.
they also developed sophisticated systems of mathematics and a calendar that projected time far into the future.
like the aztecs they practiced human sacrifice and subjugated other nearby tribes in pursuit of people and goods.
they had an extensive agricultural system producing not only food but also cotton which was a source of trade and wealth.
while in decline the mayans some 800 000 people divided into 16 to 18 independent kingdoms were still a strong presence in western mexico and central america in the 1400s.
the remains of their greatest architecture could be seen all around them.
they still produced and traded cotton and their trade routes connected them with the other empires of the americas.
further south the inca empire was even larger than that of the aztecs.
it extended along the pacific coast of south america from southern colombia to northern chile and included almost all of what is today peru ecuador and bolivia see map 1 3.
the incas ruled some 32 million people from their capital of cuzco another city of 200 000 in what is now peru and from the mountain fortress and religious center of machu picchu.
the empire had a vast bureaucracy and army as well as 25 000 miles of roads and bridges rivaling those of ancient rome all supported by heavy taxes.
incan religion was centered on the sun and its seasons human and animal sacrifice was common.
the inca emperor and his family were considered divine.
like the aztecs the inca empire was relatively new when europeans encountered it in the early 1500s.
the main inca conquests had occurred only in the 1400s.
4 parti contact and exploration.
1491 1607 american indian cultures trade and initial encounters with europeans while the peoples living in north and south america before 1492 were divided by significant language differences and great distances they still knew quite a bit about each other and traded regularly with far distant communities.
trade networks stretched from the aztec empire across all parts of north america.
the presence of sea shells in native american communities a thousand miles from the ocean and copper implements hundreds of miles from the nearest copper mine attests to the trade in goods that was rich and varied by the 1400s see map 1 4.
not all exchanges between tribes were friendly.
there was certainly warfare also sometimes to settle matters of honor and sometimes in the search for valuables.
hunting peoples seem to have raided farming communities and farming communities fought with each other from time to time if one was thought to encroach on anothers land.
bows and arrows were deadly weapons and scalping an enemy to gain a trophy and perhaps a part of the enemys spirit were well known before 1492.
even though the native peoples of north and south america maintained their trade networks and fought with other tribes each tribe saw itself as the center of its own world.
their different stories and cultures reflected that although trade might be of value trading partners were not seen as part of their community.
to understand indian responses to the arrival of the europeans it is essential first to understand that no indians thought of themselves as being american indians or native americans as opposed to white europeans.
instead they thought of themselves as senecas or creeks or hopi or some other discrete population.
this mindset prevented any unified resistance to the first european aggressions in the 1400s and later in the 1500s and even 1600s.
if a particular tribe thought it made sense to ally with the europeans against another tribe or trade with the europeans for new goods that would give them an advantage over another tribe they saw no reason not to do so.
if the europeans could become part of well established trade networks or allies in attacking long standing enemies so much the better.
it took several hundred years before most american indians realized that the europeans did not look on them as they looked on themselves and that any equality in trade or warfare was to be short lived.
while different tribes were happy to make alliances with different groups of europeans native american culture tended to understand warfare in ways radically different from most europeans.
war among tribes was usually a way to settle specific issues or achieve honor and most of all to restore the balance that was essential to indian life.
the european model of total conquest was a concept that would have been foreign to most american indian cultures.
in this way as in so many other ways the europeans who began arriving in the 1490s could not have been more different.
at the same time and unknown to the people of the americas other peoples living in europe africa and asia were developing their own societies creation stories and world views.
the world was never the same once representatives from these diverse peoples spanish explorers slaves and free servants from west africa and those who followed them across the atlantic met and mingled with the native peoples of the americas.
but to understand the mingling one must understand the development of separate cultures in other parts of the world.
1 2 quick review what are three unique cultural developments among specific american indian tribes that were influenced by the geography or climate in which their tribe lived.
1 3 black death the bubonic plague that devastated europe in the 1300s reducing the population by as much as half.
a changing europe in the 1400s describe the changes in europe that led to columbus s voyages and that shaped european attitudes when encountering the peoples of the americas.
europeans had been sailing on the atlantic long before columbus was born.
norse sailors commonly known as vikings came from modern day norway and denmark and settled iceland in the late 800s.
in 980 they expanded their territory to greenland where they interacted not always peacefully with the local inuit people and exported lumber to scandinavia while maintaining themselves with successful farms.
in 1001 a norse party led by leif erickson established a colony further west that they named vineland.
no one is sure where vineland was though tradition places it in north america.
modern excavations show the remains of a norse colony in the modern canadian province of newfoundland.
some claim norse settlements as far south as the modern state of maine.
but while iceland maintained contact with europe and the greenland colony survived until the early 1400s when the same colder weather that undermined cahokia also brought the greenland colony to an end vineland was never permanent and by the time columbus was born all earlier european contact with north america was long forgotten.
in the hundred years before columbus sailed across the atlantic europe went through a series of extraordinary changes.
those changes not only set columbus on his travels but shaped the beliefs and expectations with which the first europeans arrived in the americas.
if a time traveler were to go back to the europe of the 1400s to london england or seville spain or paris france or the rural countryside where most people lived they would find a world that would seem strange and primitive.
there were not a lot of people around.
europe was still recovering from the devastating black death the bubonic plague that arrived in 1348 on rats carried by ships trading in the black sea.
in a few years after it first arrived the plague wiped out at least one third perhaps even one half of europe s population.
about 70 million people lived in europe in 1300.
by the late 1350s the plague had reduced the population to perhaps 45 million.
whole families and villages disappeared.
through the late 1300s there were empty fields or forests where people had once lived or farmed.
the loss of so many people traumatized the survivors who looked for someone to blame for the disaster jews religious nonconformists and foreigners made good scapegoats and there were massive persecutions across europe.
16 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 a unified roman catholic christian church dominated the religious life of europe in the 1400s.
the protestant reformation was still a century in the future.
distance between cities the difficulty of travel and political divisions resulted in a catholic church that was far less centralized than it is today.
nevertheless the church with its liturgy creeds and clergy the pope bishops priests monks and nuns was the strongest institution in europe unifying people who had different languages and leaders.
literacy learning and the preservation of culture rested mostly with the church.
the church also provided what social services there were for the aged sick and poor.
jews lived in most parts of europe sometimes tolerated sometimes savagely repressed occasionally honored for their contributions to medicine commerce and scholarship but they were a small minority.
in the cities a great cathedral was the largest building and everywhere church spires marked the center of both secular and religious life.
life to modern eyes would seem primitive.
most people were dirty poorly clothed and illiterate.
life expectancy was in the 30s especially because infant mortality and deaths from childbirth were high.
trade was limited because transporting most things was difficult and expensive.
the church taught that seeking wealth especially charging interest for loans was sinful.
people were encouraged to stay where they were in the community and in social class where they were born whether they were peasants or nobles.
the ottoman empire changes eastern europe in 1453 when christopher columbus was 2 years old muslim ottoman turks conquered the city of constantinople the most important city in eastern europe.
from their new capital renamed istanbul the ottomans ruled an empire that stretched from hungary to include the balkans and most of the middle east and north africa.
the ottoman empire controlled the eastern mediterranean for the next 4 centuries.
the fall of constantinople shocked europe.
constantinople had been at the crossroads of the trade routes between europe and asia and was considered the equivalent of rome as a religious and political center.
the ottomans encouraged trade within their empire but restricted others from using the land and sea routes across the eastern mediterranean.
suddenly christian europe was cut off from the lucrative land based trade in spices and luxury goods with asia that had existed since italys marco polo had traveled to china in the late 1200s.
the mediterranean which had been the great unifying conduit of the roman empire was now as divided as the lands surrounding it.
the city states of italy venice genoa and florence especially which had dominated the mediterranean and trade with asia and grown wealthy from it began a slow decline.
other europeans on the atlantic coast especially those in portugal and spain began to seek new ways to reach asia without the need to deal with the ottomans.
in the 1400s the vast majority of the people of europe were poor peasants who worked long days in the fields with little economic gain to show for their work.
at the top of society were nobles who lived in grand castles like the one pictured and the clergy who reminded nobles and peasants of their responsibility to stay in the class to which they were born and not seek economic or social advancement.
the rise of portuguese exploration the first and in many ways most adventurous european to seek a new way of connecting with asia was prince henry of portugal 1394 1460.
even before the ottoman conquest of constantinople henry a younger son of the king of portugal decided that portugal with its strategic location on europe s southern atlantic coast should try to establish a new trade route to asia by sailing around africa.
although he is known to history as the navigator henrys personal seagoing was modest.
in 1415 he commanded a portuguese fleet but for the rest of his life he stayed at his castle at sagres on the portuguese coast and commissioned others to make voyages and report back to him.
these voyages generated not only geographical information about the african coast but they also led to better navigational instruments and charts as well as better designed ships that could travel greater distances in bad weather and good.
in 1424 prince henry organized a long series of expeditions in which others did the actual travel that sailed farther and farther south along the coast of africa.
once they learned how to navigate the currents off the african coast portuguese explorers moved quickly.
in 1444 portuguese ships reached senegal long fabled as a source of chapter 1 the world before 1492 17 prince henry a younger son of the king of portugal sponsored new developments in ship building and navigation and ordered a series of voyages that allowed portuguese sailors to explore the west coast of africa and eventually after henry s death to sail around the continent and on to india where they developed lucrative trade.
gold and established a slave trading company in lagos.
they reached sierra leone around 1460 as well as claimed and settled the previously uninhabited cape verde islands.
finally in 1488 bartolomeu dias rounded the cape of good hope on the southern tip of africa.
a decade later in 1498 vasco da gama followed diass route and reached india.
these successful expeditions led to flourishing trade with asia and africa by the early 1500s.
the portuguese not only established a string of trading colonies in india indonesia and china they also developed a massive new african trade.
portuguese merchants virtually reinvented slavery in western europe and portugal became the first and most significant player in the african slave trade as well as in the spice trade with asia.
by 1504 at least one ship a month sailed from lisbon to asia and the wealth from asian spices and other luxury goods and from african gold and slaves was making portugal the richest nation in europe.
historians have argued about henrys and by extension portugals motives.
henry certainly wanted to find a route that would put portugal at the center of the trade with asia.
asian goods porcelain silk spices had long been popular and profitable luxury goods in europe.
the nation that could secure access to these goods after the ottomans restricted the eastern mediterranean routes would become rich.
old animosity between christian europe and the muslim world fueled the quest to defy ottoman trade obstacles.
legends of a christian presence in the heart of africa also motivated expanded contact with that continent.
if the christians of europe could ally with christians who might be in africa their armies would surround the muslim world and weaken its power.
perhaps most important to henry however was the wealth to be made in africa itself.
portugal could obtain african gold and slaves from every voyage whether or not it made discoveries or alliances with far off christians.
slavery was an ancient institution.
it was sanctioned in the bible and other ancient texts thousands of years before the days of prince henry.
the roman empire had slaves including some from africa.
but while slavery had died out in most of europe during the middle ages although serfs in russia were only semi free it persisted in the middle east and africa.
arab traders brought african slaves across the sahara to sell in markets in the middle east.
in fact various african peoples routinely captured and enslaved their rivals.
and muslim conquerors and pirates enslaved captured european christians.
europeans developed new forms of slavery along with the exploration of africa.
as early as 1336 king alfonso iv of portugal reported and probably sponsored slave raiding in the canary islands off the coast of west africa.
indeed the canary islands would be an important base for further exploration of africa one often contested between portugal and spain.
after 1500 slavery would transform european commerce most of all in the trade with european colonies in the americas while also transforming and weakening the economies of africa and in particular utterly changing the lives of millions of africans.
england and france while portugal was establishing its ocean routes to asia and growing fabulously wealthy in the process most of the rest of europe remained poor and distracted with more immediate worries.
france and england fought the hundred years war 1337 1453 with each other depleting both nations resources.
when the war ended france was divided by a bitter civil war until 1477 as the royal government sought to assert its control of the kingdom.
england was also torn by a civil war the war of the roses as the lancaster and york branches of the royal family fought until henry vii defeated richard iii of york in 1485.
the destruction wrought by war and plague left little time money or energy for either france or england to engage in exploration.
despite all their troubles england and france were relatively unified kingdoms.
in contrast other areas of europe were not united at all during this period and in fact would not be until the mid 1800s.
for centuries before its unification most of what 18 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 is now germany was considered part of the holy roman empire but the empire was actually a very loose confederation divided into a number of much smaller entities.
no even nominally unified italian state existed.
until the 1800s what is now modern italy was divided into many competing independent free cities principalities and small kingdoms that spoke different and often mutually incomprehensible versions of italian.
these groups were also often at war with each other.
as a result these areas did not initiate much organized external exploration.
even though many sailors from what is now italy were among the most important european explorers of the era they worked for other governments.
the unification and rise of spain unlike some other parts of europe spain however achieved a dramatic new unity in the late 1400s and this unified spain would be a powerful force in the americas.
the political cultural and religious unification of spain known as the reconquista or reconquest was an extraordinary development given the 7 centuries during which unity of any sort had seemed impossible.
in 711 muslim invaders from north africa conquered most of the iberian peninsula modern spain and portugal and remained in control of parts of it for almost 800 years.
while the rest of europe remained christian much of medieval spain was in african muslim moorish hands.
christian monarchs gradually reconquered portugal and most of spain from the muslims but the struggle took centuries.
while some areas were ruled by christians many others remained muslim.
yet the very divisions of spain resulted in some of the richest cultural developments in europe.
while armies fought people mingled producing new ideas and some of the scientific developments that would later enrich all of europe.
it was through spain that the culture of islam came into europe including arabic numerals algebra paper cotton rice and sugar.
it was in muslim cordoba that greek philosophy roman law and eastern art and architecture mixed.
it was also in spain far more than elsewhere in europe that jews were treated with respect even honor as peoples of the book who shared sacred scriptures with christians and muslims.
it was also on the border lands between christianity and islam that some of the great medieval cities of spain leon zamora burgos and avila emerged creating an independent class of citizens who were neither nobles nor serfs but free women and men.
as the medieval saying went the air of the city makes you free spains long standing divisions ended in the late 1400s.
by 1400 the iberian peninsula was divided into four christian kingdoms castile aragon portugal and navarre and one muslim kingdom in the south granada.
in 1469 isabella of castile married ferdinand of aragon.
this marriage united the two most powerful spanish thrones.
the joint monarchs then began a long campaign to finish the reconquest of spain.
in january 1492 their armies defeated muslim granada adding its territory to their kingdom and ending the 800 year long islamic presence in spain.
that same year in the name of religious uniformity ferdinand and isabella expelled all jews from spain a move that cost them some of their most innovative citizens.
but isabella and ferdinand wanted their nation to be unified and like most europeans at the time they saw religious uniformity as key to that goal.
and in that same eventful year isabella commissioned an italian sailor named christopher columbus to try to find a route to asia that would be different from the african one portugal was exploring.
reconquista the long struggle ending in 1492 during which spanish christians reconquered the iberian peninsula from muslim occupiers who first invaded in the 8th century.
1 1 quick review how did changes in europe in the 1400s determine european states ability to launch expeditions of discovery in the atlantic.
how did the unification of spain and the fall of constantinople to the ottomans affect this process.
chapter 1 the world before 1492 19 12 12 12 1 4 12 africa in the 1400s describe the political cultural and religious developments in africa that would shape contact between europeans and africans in the americas.
in the late 1400s parts of africa were also undergoing changes that would influence the cultural interactions that would take place in the new world in the 1500s.
just as in europe and the americas none of the people in africa knew that they were living on the edge of events that would turn their world upside down.
yet events were underway that would change the lives economies cultures and worldviews of almost everyone.
ancient ties between africa and europe contact between africa and europe did not begin with prince henrys voyages.
north africa had been part of mediterranean civilization for at least 3 000 years.
what are today the nations of egypt libya algeria morocco and tunisia were some of the richest provinces of the roman empire.
as christianity spread throughout the roman empire some of the strongest christian centers were in north africa.
one of the most influential of all early christian thinkers was st augustine 354 430 born in what is now algeria who served as bishop of the algerian city of hippo.
farther south christianity took root quickly in ethiopia and that part of east africa has remained predominantly christian for 2 000 years.
in addition southern europe and parts of africa south of the sahara desert shared a long history of trade see map 1 5.
this trade was never entirely interrupted even when arab armies conquered north africa in the 600s and islam replaced christianity as the dominant religion there.
1 4 atlantic ocean mediterranean sea ftunis map 1 5 african trade networks.
like american indians africans traded over great distances and the major trade routes made trade centers like timbuktu and gao rich and powerful as goods and often people being sold as slaves were transported through these cities from one region to another.
20 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 the empires of ghana mali and songhay coastal areas of africa south of the sahara that the portuguese encountered in the mid 1400s differed in customs ethnicity and economic life from muslim north africa.
as these coastal africans met portuguese traders they quickly took an interest in particular european goods including iron and cloth acquiring them through exchanges of hides copper ivory and slaves.
trade produced a greater variety of goods on both continents and for the african elite added the prestige of owning goods from far away.
the africa that first began major economic and cultural contact with europe in those years was a continent that met its northern neighbor on terms of equality in military cultural and technological terms its population not yet decimated by the massive trade in slaves that was to come or by attacks by industrialized european colonial forces.
just south of the sahara the kingdom of ghana governed much of west africa for hundreds of years.
ghanas power was based on trade and its mastery of metalworking to make weapons and tools.
ghana was at the northern end of african trade routes that brought gold ivory and slaves out of the african interior and at the southern end of the desert routes by which muslim traders brought the slaves gold and ivory from south of the sahara to north africa the middle east and europe in exchange for salt silk and other goods.
control of that trade made ghana rich.
royal and religious officials soldiers merchants and iron workers dominated ghana.
as early as 1050 king barmandana of mali began to extend his kingdom and the empire of mali slowly dominated and replaced ghana as the leading power in the region.
barmandana converted to islam and made a pilgrimage to mecca the muslim holy city in arabia.
some 200 years later another malian king sundiata made mali the master of west africa.
when one of sundiatas successors mansa musa made his pilgrimage to mecca in 1324 his lavish caravan and generous gifts spread gold so freely that the value of cairos currency was depressed for many years.
mansa musa built new mosques and schools and established an islamic university at timbuktu that was respected throughout the muslim world for its scholarship.
this mosque in djenne mali was originally built in the 1300s of mud hardened by the sun and was restored in the early 1900s to look much as it did at the height of the mali empire.
to the east of mali another empire songhay grew stronger capturing timbuktu in 1458 just as the portuguese were exploring the african coast.
in the late 1400s under two of its greatest kings sunni ali r 1464 1492 who died in the year of columbuss first voyage and askia muhammad r 1493 1528 songhay became the strongest military and economic power in west africa.
when sunni ali became king of songhay in 1464 he quickly established himself as an effective military leader.
sunni ali also understood the religious divisions of his lands.
the urban inhabitants who controlled trade were mostly muslim.
but in the countryside most people held to traditional beliefs and they were the source of the agricultural wealth of the kingdom.
though himself a muslim sunni ali treated both groups with respect and brought stability and prosperity to his kingdom.
when sunni ali died in 1492 his son and heir sunni baru rejected islam but was overthrown and a new leader askia muhammad r 1493 1528 came to power.
askia muhammad was a devout muslim but like sunni ali he respected traditional customs.
as with mali and ghana songhays power was based on trade.
gold ivory and slaves could be collected from the south and east.
in exchange silks and other fine goods were brought in caravans across the sahara from egypt the middle east and europe.
trade created wealth which allowed both lavish lifestyles and military power that extended the empires.
and trade also facilitated the exchange of ideas and scientific information.
askia muhammads control was such that he was able to make his own pilgrimage to mecca in 1494 1497 trusting subordinates to maintain his rule in his absence.
kongo benin and central africa south of songhay in the kingdoms of kongo benin and surrounding areas government was powerful but far less structured than in the empires of mali and songhay.
in the 1490s portuguese missionaries converted the king of kongo to catholicism.
close ties developed between kongo and the papacy in rome despite the enormous distances between them.
miore than a century later slaves from kongo would confuse english and spanish authorities who did not expect their christian beliefs and knowledge of the catholic mass.
chapter 1 the world before 1492 21 li 13 13 1 4 1 5 while kongo kings were catholic most other central africans practiced traditional religions that included belief in a world after death ancestor worship and a central role for priests and other intermediaries between divine and human affairs.
ihe africans who were taken across the atlantic to the americas as slaves brought these religious and cultural traditions with them.
kongo kings generally inherited the throne from their father or brother but a group of nobles or electors could choose a different ruler.
a similar system was found in much of central africa.
in ndongo election ratified succession within a reigning family.
in biguba in what is now guinea bissau the king was elected from among a group of elite families.
in sierra leone the ruler was elected but once in office could dismiss the electors and a similar system was followed in benin.
europeans reported that to maintain their own power nobles sometimes deliberately selected weak monarchs.
in 1601 one european wrote a village mayor in our country has more authority than such a king in these west african kingdoms a person or family could cultivate land secure in the knowledge that they would truly own the crops or goods produced on the land and could sell or trade them but they could never sell the land itself.
indeed if the family stopped working the land any claim they might have to it disappeared.
centralized government and the wealth generated by trade also led to military power that allowed west africans to resist not only the first portuguese attempts at conquest but also many subsequent ones.
in 1446 when portuguese explorers seeking slaves and gold reached the senegal river which is now the northern border of the country of senegal african canoes attacked their ship and nearly all of the european raiders were killed.
a year later the same thing happened to another crew near the island of goree.
similar types of resistance would continue for the next 2 centuries.
african boats were small compared to european ships.
they tended to be canoes dug out of a single log but their small size gave them power.
they could navigate shallow areas where the europeans could not go and could move quickly between rivers estuaries and the ocean.
these canoes carried as many as 50 to 100 fighters each.
facing such effective resistance at sea before they ever landed on unknown shores or attempted to travel up uncharted and hostile rivers the earliest portuguese travelers quickly decided that it was better to seek peaceful trade agreements with african kings than to do battle.
the result was that as early as 1456 diogo gomes represented the portuguese crown in negotiating treaties of peace and commerce with african rulers of several states.
slavery in africa slavery was a significant part of the african economy in the 1400s.
it was important in the empires of mali and songhay and in kongo long before the portuguese arrived.
in an economic system where the community not an individual owned land in common as it did in west africa owning people who could work the land was a way to accumulate wealth.
when the portuguese began their african trade in the 1400s african slaves had been brought across the sahara to europe and the middle east for over 1 000 years.
benin city had seen slaves parade through for centuries.
the portuguese simply shifted part of this trade to europeans on the coast and away from the arab dominated overland routes across the sahara.
although the voracious demand for enslaved africans in the americas would disrupt the african economy in the 1600s and 1700s that was a later story.
when the portuguese first became involved in the slave trade they merely built on existing trade and cultural traditions.
far fewer people were involved than would be the case in the future but for those who were enslaved the new patterns created huge dislocations.
an african could be enslaved for many reasons as punishment for crime or as payment for debt but most slaves were captured in war from other communities.
those who sold them considered the slaves aliens not people like themselves.
like the american indians africans did not think of themselves as africans but as members of a specific tribe ashanti yoruba kru and enslaving members of another tribe did not distress them.
the economic advantages of capturing slaves in war and then selling them 22 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 s ma waf pro ta e commercial venture and exacerbated other tensions.
1 5 1 1 1 2 13 14 1 5 nevertheless just because slavery and the slave trade were already part of the economic systems of west africa when the portuguese arrived in the mid 1400s does not change the horror of the institution.
being captured in war losing ones freedom and then being sent away from home must always have been terrifying.
it was even worse if one was forced to march across the terrible sahara desert or loaded onto a ship controlled by strange looking people who spoke a totally different language and who considered slaves not merely aliens but subhuman.
although the earliest african and european slave traders did not recognize it or probably care about it a more terrible form of slavery was being born in the 1400s.
for the first time not only the slaves freedom but also their language culture and identity were being destroyed.
the africans unlucky enough to become american slaves already knew about slavery as an institution but they had never encountered conditions in which they were stripped of everything familiar to them.
africans as slaves or as free people hired for the work would accompany some of the earliest portuguese spanish and english explorers of north and south america in the 1500s helping explore florida virginia texas and new mexico.
descendants of europeans and africans have lived together with american indians in the land that would be the united states for 500 years.
quick review how were empires like mali and songhay similar to or different from european kingdoms in the 1400s.
how did the earliest european contact with africa change or not change the nature of african slavery.
asia in the 1400s contrast developments in asia with those in europe at the time when europeans first reached the americas.
while the americas africa and europe were all divided into many small tribes cities and nation states in the 1400s china was united in a single empire and had been for more than 2 000 years.
when columbus sailed from spain to the americas in 1492 europe had some 500 independent states.
a single emperor governed perhaps 150 to 200 million people in china.
of course china is not all of asia.
the indian subcontinent included 75 to 150 million people living in many independent principalities.
korea and japan were independent kingdoms while tibet and vietnam struggled to maintain their independence from china.
but asia was much more unified than elsewhere and most of the peoples of asia were in contact with one another and enriched each one anothers cultures.
in 1421 the chinese emperor zhu di celebrated the completion of the forbidden city his new palace and temple complex in beijing.
envoys from as far away as east africa and arabia were present.
twenty six thousand guests feasted at a 10 course banquet.
in the same month englands king henry v celebrated his wedding to a french princess with 600 guests.
zhu di s army included 1 million soldiers armed with gunpowder while henry had 5 000 soldiers armed with bows and arrows.
but then zhu dis new capital of beijing had a population that was 50 times larger than henrys london.
zhu di r 1402 1424 also commissioned chinese fleets that sailed to south asia india and east africa.
these treasure fleets mapped the indian ocean and brought back exotic animals trade goods and knowledge that made china a center of geographic studies in the early 1400s.
but chinese oceanic exploration came at high cost.
huge forests in china and vietnam were cleared to provide the teak to build the fleets ships.
thousands of artisans labored to build the ships and many more left as sailors most of whom never returned.
the expensive ocean voyages also distracted chinas attention from its vulnerable land frontiers in the northwest.
and the mandarins china s professional highly educated bureaucrats despised and resented the naval officers who were in charge of the fleets.
chapter 1 the world before 1492 23 1 1 1 2 13 1 4 1 5 in 1424 a new emperor zhu gaozhi issued an edict all voyages of the treasure ships are to be stopped those officials who are currently abroad on business are ordered back to the capital immediately.
the building and repair of all treasure ships is to be stopped immediately.
for the next 200 years china became increasingly isolated from the rest of the non asian world.
as a result china played no role in the initial creation of the new world that came into being as people of the americas europe and africa interacted.
by the 1490s china was prospering but quite inward looking.
south asia especially india was just beginning to be engaged in what would be a growing trade with europe through the new trade routes that portuguese explorers were establishing.
sub saharan africa dominated by the songhay empire and the kingdom of kongo was also trading with europeans via a newly established atlantic trade route dominated by the portuguese as well as their long established trade routes across the sahara that connected them with the muslim world increasingly dominated by the ottoman empire.
american indians had their own long distance trade relationships that spanned thousands of miles even though they never contemplated trade that might cross the oceans that bounded them.
as all of this interaction was taking place the newly united kingdom of spain took the lead in seeking yet another way to expand trade in the world that they knew.
at the beginning of the year 1492 no one living anywhere on the planet knew how eventful that effort to seek new pathways tor trade would be.
quick review how did asia differ from europe.
what effect did these differences have on the continent.
conclusion the world that existed before the encounter that took place in 1492 was rich and dynamic in cultures civilizations and diversity.
the first peoples of north america had discovered and settled the continent long before columbus set sail in 1492.
the ancestors of today s american indians began to people north american during the ice age when land routes existed between siberia and alaska.
whether they came by land or water these original groups of people established agrarian and hunter gatherer cultures over the centuries and usually lived in remarkable harmony with their environment.
this respect for harmony was a feature of their religions and worldview that in so many ways would be different from the european mindset.
later north american indian cultures established sophisticated trading empires and founded cities that rivaled those of medieval europe.
their cultural heritage would be lost or changed forever by the impact of european arrival and colonization.
while the first peoples of north america had been establishing their communities europeans in the 1400s were on the move recovering from the wars and the bubonic plague that had decimated the continent in the late 1300s.
european contact with north america was motivated in part by the 1452 muslim conquest of constantinople which placed the eastern mediterranean under the control of the ottoman empire and closed off traditional land and sea routes to india and other centers of trade in asia.
the kingdom of portugal led the way in exploring sailing routes around africa.
eventually new trade relationships gradually developed between europeans and the many preexisting african empires and kingdoms that had also developed sophisticated cultures and agricultural economies.
the portuguese adopted and exploited the institution of slavery and the slave trade which had generally disappeared in europe and brought african slaves back to europe even before the first slaves were transported to the americas.
24 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 over a quarter century before portugals prince henry the navigator dispatched his sailors to explore the african coast the chinese emperor zhu di ordered the construction of the treasure fleets which explored and established trade routes in the indian and pacific oceans.
his ships and sailors matched those of europe however zhu dis successor ordered the end of the treasure fleets which were seen as a drain on chinas wealth.
for this reason europeans had no serious rivals when they first encountered the americas.
while portuguese sailors sailed around africa to reach asia an italian sailor christopher columbus was commissioned by the king and queen of spain to try a different route sailing west across the atlantic rather than south and east around africa.
the result was an encounter between civilizations in europe africa and the americas that knew nothing of each other a world changing event for everyone involved.
chapter review what was life and culture like for native americans europeans and africans before the encounters of 1492.
chapter 1 the world before 1492 25 chapter 1 chapter review 1 1 the peopling of north america describe what the archeological record tells about the arrival development and cultures of the first peoples of north america.
review questions 1.
historical interpretation how do most anthropologists explain the peopling of north america.
what evidence do they use to support this explanation.
crafting an argument how did the adoption of settled agriculture shape the development of cahokia society.
the diverse communities of the americas in the 1400s u describe the diversity of american indian cultures in the united states on the eve of their encounter with europeans.
review questions 3.
comparison what similarities existed between the aztec and inca empires.
crafting an argument how would you explain the fact that after the demise of cahokia no urban center of similar size and sophistication emerged to take its place.
synthesis what common features characterized the world view of most american indian peoples.
13 a changing europe in the 1400s describe the changes in europe that led to columbus s voyages and that shaped european attitudes when encountering the peoples of the americas.
review questions 6.
chronological reasoning what were the long term consequences for europe of the fall of constantinople to the ottomans.
contextualization what prompted portuguese exploration in the 15th century.
comparison compare and contrast spain england and france on the eve of the age of exploration.
why did spain take the lead in westward expansion.
africa in the 1400s 14 describe the political cultural and religious developments in africa that would shape contact between europeans and africans in the americas.
review questions 9.
comparison how did trade affect the development of ghana mali and songhay.
contextualization what characterized the african slave trade in the 15th century.
crafting an argument why were europeans unable to dictate the terms of their economic relationships with west and central african states.
asia in the 1400s 1 5 contrast developments in asia with those in europe at the time when europeans first reached the americas.
review question 12.
comparison compare and contrast europe and asia on the eve of european westward expansion.
what is the significance of the differences you note.
26 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 first encounters first sts many of the islands on which columbus landed including the bahamas hispaniola and cuba were inhabitated by taino indians the first people in the americas to interact with columbus.
this is a recreation of a taino village in modern day cuba.
cti ve lonstrate an understanding of the initial encounters of europeans africans and american indians.
e c t i v e s after 66 days of sailing the last half on uncharted open seas an italian sailor commissioned by queen isabella of spain christopher columbus and his crew landed on a small caribbean island on october 12 1492.
columbus named the island san salvador.
no one is sure on which island in the bahamas columbus first landed.
but there was a taino village on the shore and human contact came quickly.
columbus and his crew received a friendly greeting from the tainos of whom columbus said i recognized that they were people who would be better freed from error and converted to our holy faith by love than by force to some of them i gave red caps and glass beads and many other things of small value in which they took so much pleasure and became so much our friends that it was a marvel.
later they came swimming to the ships launches where we were and brought us parrots and cotton thread in balls and javelins in sum they took everything and gave of what they had very willingly all of them go around as naked as their mothers bore them.
the world was never the same again.
although columbus did not know it that encounter represented the beginning of an extraordinary change in worldwide human contact.
columbus claimed that he had achieved his mission to reach asia.
the europeans who came after him quickly learned that they had encountered columbus the columbian exchange and early conquests explain the reasons behind the voyages of columbus and early spanish encounters with the peoples of the caribbean mexico and south america.
a divided europe the impact of the protestant reformation explain how the protestant reformation and the development of the nation state changed europe and european ideas about how best to settle and govern america.
exploration and encounter in north america the spanish analyze early spanish exploration of america north of mexico.
exploration and encounter in north america the french analyze early french exploration and claims in north america.
exploration and encounter in north america the english explain english explorers privateers and reasons for settlement.
2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 unit 1 setting the stage 80w physical features of north america j our colonial heritage in this unit you will learn about the first americans the american indian peoples who were here when the first europeans arrived.
you will also learn about the europeans who colonized north america.
the british colonies settled along the atlantic coast would become the first 13 states in the nation.
political divisions like colonies and states did not exist before the europeans arrived.
each american indian group occupied a territory that had no formal boundaries.
as the map on the opposite page shows the continent s physical geography varies greatly.
american indians lived in harmony with the land.
their different anvironments gave them different ways of life.
contact with european colonists changed those ways of life.
the map below shows where european nations claimed land in north america.
to satisfy french demand for furs american indians in regions claimed by france began to hunt more.
the spanish tried to enslave indians and along with the english wanted their land.
increased hunting flight from slavery and loss of land pushed some indian groups into territory occupied by other indians.
as the british colonies became a nation and as that nation grew this population shift continued.
eventually almost no indian lands remained.
however the names of many places in north america are reminders of those lands.
the ohio mississippi and missouri rivers get their names from american indian words as do about half the states.
north american land claims 1750 our colonial heritage 3 chapter 1 chapter 1 the first americans how did the first americans adapt to their environments.
1 1 introduction as a cold winter wind howls outside the children huddle under thick fur blankets.
they listen to their grandmothers soothing voice.
in the beginning there was the great spirit grandmother begins who ruled over a world of sky and water then the great spirit says grandmother created land plants and animals.
finally from living wood the great spirit carved people for the new world.
these abenaki a buh nah key children of new england are learning how their people began.
most groups have beliefs about where they came from.
you may have heard stories about how your own relatives first arrived in the united states.
but do you know where your ancestors were living 10 000 years ago.
only if you are american indian did you have relatives in the united states that long ago.
europeans and other groups did not start arriving in north america until a little more than 500 years ago.
for thousands of years the first americans had the american continents to themselves.
in this chapter you will learn about these resourceful people and the creative ways they adapted to their environments.
even today scientists are still trying to find out more about the first americans.
these early people left few written records so researchers study other items they left behind.
not much has survived except for a few animal and human bones some stone and metal tools and bits of pottery.
like detectives scientists sift through these clues trying to imagine how these people lived and how their lives changed over time.
they come up with ideas about the many ways in which american indians adapted to their physical surroundings.
when scientists find a new object they try to figure out whether it supports their current ideas or suggests new ones.
in your lifetime we will probably learn much more about how the first americans adapted to their environments and may revise many of our conclusions.
the anasazi indians of the southwestern united states made pottery such as this pitcher from clay and other materials.
the anasazi indians adapted to their environment by building homes in the stone cliffs of the u s southwest.
the first americans 5 migrate to move from one place and establish a home in a new place.
a move of a large number of people is called a migration and the people who move are called migrants.
scientists believe thatthe first americans migrated from siberia to alaska across a land bridge called beringia.
these people were following mammoths and other animals that moved east in search of grazing land.
1 2 migration routes of the first americans scientists believe that the first americans migrated on foot from siberia in asia to present day alaska.
today a strip of ocean called the bering strait separates alaska and asia.
but there was a time when a land bridge connected them.
across a land bridge about 30 000 years ago the most recent ice age began.
as temperatures fell much of earth was covered by glaciers sheets of ice up to a mile thick.
with water locked up in the glaciers the level of the oceans dropped 200 feet.
this exposed a wide bridge of land between asia and north america that scientists call beringia bear in jee uh.
in the summer beringias grasslands attracted large asian mammals such as mammoths which are long haired cousins of the elephant.
over thousands of years the animals slowly spread eastward.
generations of siberian hunter families followed.
armed with only stone tipped spears they killed these huge powerful animals for food.
eventually perhaps between 10 000 and 20 000 years ago some of the hunters reached america.
other migrants may have traveled along the coast of beringia by boat to catch fish seals and other marine mammals.
migrating east and south once in america hunters followed the animals south where spring brought fresh grasses.
then about 10 000 years ago earth warmed again.
as the glaciers melted and the oceans rose the land bridge disappeared.
mammoths and other tra migration routes of the first americans siberia 120e 135e 150e 165e 180 165w 1 ditional prey began to die off perhaps from disease overhunting or the change in climate.
the descendents of siberian hunters then had to find new sources of food and new materials for clothing and shelter.
so these people now known to us as american indians became hunter gatherers catching smaller animals fishing more and collecting edible plants and seeds.
over thousands of years they spread across the two american continents from the pacific to the atlantic and from alaska all the way to the tip of south america.
6 chapter 1 1 3 the first americans adapt to the environment american indians lived in a variety of places from snowy forests to dry deserts and vast grasslands.
each of these kinds of places is an environment.
an environment includes everything that surrounds us land water animals and plants.
each environment also has a climate or longterm weather pattern.
groups of american indians survived by adapting or changing their style of living to suit each environment its climate and its natural resources.
using natural resources american indians learned to use the natural resources in their environments for food clothing and shelter.
in the frigid regions of the far north early americans survived by hunting caribou in the summer and sea mammals in the winter.
they fashioned warm hooded clothing from animal skins.
to avoid being blinded by the glare of the sun shining on snow they made goggles out of bone with slits to see through.
the people of the north lived most of the year in houses made from driftwood and animal skins.
in winter hunters built temporary shelters called igtus ig looz out of blocks of snow.
in warmer climates american indians gathered wild plants.
then about 7 000 years ago they learned to raise crops such as squash chili peppers beans and corn.
growing their own food enabled them to settle in one place instead of following animals or searching for edible plants in the wild.
these early farmers built the first villages and towns in america.
the tents in this inuit in oo it camp in northern alaska were made from seal and caribou skins.
the inuit used the inflated sealskins hanging from the poles as floats.
american indian cultural regions over generations groups of american indians developed their own cultures or ways of life.
many became part of larger groupings that were loosely organized under common leaders.
groups living in the same type of environment often adapted in similar ways.
forest dwellers often lived in houses covered with tree bark while many desert peoples made shelters out of branches covered with brush.
using such artifacts items made by people historians have grouped american indian peoples into cultural regions.
a cultural region is made up of people who share a similar language and way of life.
by the 1400s between 1 and 2 million american indians lived in ten major cultural regions north of mexico.
later in this chapter you will take a closer look at eight of these regions.
they include the northwest coast california the great basin the plateau the southwest the great plains the eastern woodlands and the southeast.
environment all of the physical surroundings in a place including land water animals plants and climate natural resource useful material found in nature including water vegetation animals and minerals culture apeoples way oflife including beliefs customs food dwellings and clothing cultural region an area in which a group of people share a similar culture and language the first americans 7 the first americans lived throughout the north american continent.
historians have grouped these peoples into cultural regions based on their shared languages and ways of life.
where american indians lived also influenced what they wore the type of housing they built and the food they ate.
american indian cultural regions 8 chapter 1 rectangular house made of long flat pieces of wood cone shaped teepee made of bark branches or leaves other teepee or cone shaped structure made of animal skins house shaped like a dome and covered with bark mats animal hides and leaves rectangular house with a pointed leaf roof pit house built partially underground rectangular house with a flat roof rectangular house with a barrel shaped roof merican indian food the first americans 9 american indians believed that humans animals plants and even inanimate objects had their own spirits.
because of this belief indians felt related to all parts of nature.
1 4 how american indians viewed their environment wherever they lived american indians had a strong connection to their surroundings.
they viewed themselves as a part of the community of plants animals and other natural objects.
as a sioux soo said from wakan tanka the great spirit there came a great unifying life force that flowed in and through all things the flowers of the plains blowing winds rocks trees birds animals and was the same force that had been breathed into the first man nature s spirits american indians generally believed that each part of nature had its own spirit.
each person had to maintain a balance with these spirits.
these beliefs were expressed in various customs.
southwest farmers for example made corn a part of every ceremony.
hunters gave thanks to the animals they killed.
using the land unlike europeans american indians did not believe that land could be owned as private property.
but each group was deeply connected to its homeland the area where its people lived most of the year.
if necessary american indians would fight to protect their right to this land.
american indians modified the land to suit their needs.
woodlands people set fires to clear heavy forest growth so deer could browse and berries could grow.
southwest farmers built ditches to carry water to dry fields.
these practices seldom harmed the environment.
as one american indian historian explains we dug our clams here caught our salmon over there got seagull eggs on another island by the time we came back here this place had replenished itself american indians tried not to waste anything taken from nature.
a california woman recalled when we kill meat we eat it all up.
when we dig roots we make little holes we shake down acorns and pine nuts.
we dont chop down the trees 1 5 american indians of the northwest coast the northwest coast cultural region extends from southern oregon into canada.
winters along the ocean are cold but not icy and summers are cool.
to the east thick forests of fir spruce and cedar cover rugged mountains.
the mountains trap pacific storms so there is heavy rainfall much of the year.
abundant food northwest people found food plentiful particularly that taken from the sea.
they built their villages along the narrow beaches and bays of the coastline and on nearby islands.
they gathered c ams other shellfish and seaweed from shallow waters.
they ventured 10 chapter 1 onto the sea in canoes to hunt seals sea lions and whales as well as halibut and other fish.
the forests provided deer moose bear elk beaver and mountain goat.
for each kind of creature hunters developed special weapons.
to catch seals for example they made long wooden harpoons or spears.
the harpoon had a barbed tip made of bone that held firmly in the seals hide once it was struck.
at the other end hunters fastened a long rope so that they would not lose either the weapon or their prey.
in early summer masses of salmon swam from the ocean up the rivers to lay their eggs.
men built wooden fences across the rivers to block the fish making them easier to net.
women dried salmon meat so that it could be eaten all year long.
builders and carvers the forests of the northwest provided materials for houses and many useful objects.
using wedges and stoneheaded sledgehammers men cut long thin boards from logs or living trees.
they joined these planks to build large sturdy houses.
to keep out the rain they made roof shingles out of large sheets of cedar bark.
women cut strips from the soft inner bark and used them to make baskets mats rope and blankets.
they even wove the strips of bark into waterproof capes.
with abundant food nearby the northwest people had time to practice crafts.
women made decorative shell buttons and sewed them onto their clothing with ivory needles.
men used tools such as wooden wedges bone drills stone chisels and stone knives to carve detailed animal masks and wooden bowls.
the oregon coast is part of the northwest coast cultural region.
american indians of the northwest relied on the thick forests abundant seafood and plentiful game to meet their needs.
the first americans 11 the california cultural region contains many different environments.
along the coast huge redwood trees cover coastal mountains.
in the inland areas oaks and berries grow on rolling hills.
1 6 american indians of california the california cultural region stretches from southern oregon through baja california.
ocean storms bring winter rains to this region.
summers are hot and dry particularly inland.
the california region includes not only the coast but also the coastal foothills an inland valley deserts and the western side of the sierra nevada mountain range.
over 100 small groups made their homes in these diverse environments more than in any other cultural region.
many sources of food groups living along the coast of northern california depended on salmon for much of their food.
farther south coastal people relied more on shellfish.
away from the coast groups hunted deer with bows and arrows.
they set snares to trap rabbits and used nets to capture ducks.
california people also gathered roots berries and pine nuts.
most people in the region relied on acorns from oak trees as a basic food.
in the fall women harvested the acorns shelled them and pounded the nuts into meal.
water was rinsed through the meal to remove its bitterness.
women cooked the meal by mixing it with water in tightly woven baskets and then dropping hot cooking stones into the mixture.
clothing houses and baskets as they worked the women wore simple aprons or skirts made from grasses or other plants or sometimes from leather strips.
in colder months men and women wrapped themselves in animal hides.
because the climate was mild california people built simple homes.
in forested areas men used tools made from the antlers of deer and elk to strip large slabs of bark from redwood trees.
they draped these into a cone shape to form a house.
in marshy areas people wove thick mats of reeds to drape over a cone shaped framework of poles.
california people wove plant materials into many useful items.
they made cooking baskets storage baskets sifters and fish traps.
women used fine weaving and elegant patterns to make beautiful baskets decorating their work with clamshells and bird feathers.
12 chapter 1 17 american indians of the great basin to the east of california lies the great basin a low area between the sierra nevada and the rocky mountains.
the mountains on either side of this region block the rain making this land mostly desert.
the types of plants that grow in this area are those that need little water such as low grasses sagebrush and craggy pinon pin yon trees.
only small animals such as rabbits and lizards live in this harsh region.
with limited food and water only a few families could live in a place at one time.
for this reason people of the great basin traveled in small groups and spent much of their time looking for food.
extreme heat and cold wherever people camped they made temporary shelters of willow poles shaped into a cone and covered with brush or reeds.
almost all year they carried water in baskets coated with sap from pine trees.
when winter came temperatures dropped below freezing.
to keep warm people made robes out of rabbit hides.
first they twisted long strips of hide so that only the fur showed.
then they wove these strips on a willow loom.
each adult robe required about 100 rabbit skins.
searching for food in this arid dry environment people followed food sources from season to season.
in spring they camped by valley lakes and streams swollen with melted snow.
men attracted migrating ducks with floating decoys made from reeds.
when birds landed the men chased them into nets.
meanwhile women gathered duck eggs and the tender shoots of cattail plants.
when the streams dried up in summer great basin people enjoyed snakes and grasshoppers as treats.
but mostly they ate plants almost 100 kinds.
women used sharp sticks to dig up roots.
they wove flat baskets called seed beaters which they used to knock seeds loose from plants.
from the mountain slopes they gathered ripe berries.
in autumn bands harvested pine nuts and hunted fat jackrabbits.
as winter arrived the great basin people bundled into their rabbit robes in the warmer hills.
in huts and caves they lived off food they had dried earlier waiting for the ducks to return in spring.
life was difficult for american indians who lived in the great basin.
because of extreme temperatures and sparse rainfall few plants and animals are able to survive there.
the first americans 13 1 8 american indians of the plateau north of the great basin lies the plateau cultural region.
this region is bounded by the cascade range to the west the rockies to the east and the fraser river in present day canada to the north.
the mountains in this area have dense forests.
the flatter central part is drier and covered with grass and sagebrush.
winters are long and cold while summers remain gentle.
the plateau people hunted and gathered with the seasons.
the cool wet climate made it fairly easy to find enough to eat.
so too did the plateaus two mighty river systems the columbia and the fraser.
the plateau cultural region features flatlands rolling hills and steep gorges.
large rivers provide water.
sturdy houses and clothing plateau people built their villages along major rivers.
the rivers provided drinking water fish and driftwood to use for shelter and firewood.
food was so plentiful that some groups were able to live in their villages year round.
to stay cool in summer and warm in winter they built their homes partly underground.
they dug a pit lined it with a frame of logs and covered everything with saplings reeds and mud.
plateau people used their weaving skills to create many kinds of baskets as well as elaborate hats.
as the cold months approached they spent more time making clothes.
in the fall men hunted antelope and deer.
then women scraped and softened the hides for dresses leggings and shirts.
they decorated their work with designs of seeds and shells.
camas and salmon although hunting usually provided plenty of meat in the fall most of the time plateau people relied on fish and plants for food.
in spring they gathered sprouts of wild onions and carrots from the low grasslands.
their particular favorite was camas a starchy root related to lilies.
women uprooted it with willow digging sticks for eating raw for roasting and for grinding into flour.
the food most important to plateau people was salmon.
when the salmon migrated upstream men stood on wooden platforms built over the water.
from there they could spear or net fish easily.
14 chapter 1 1 9 american indians of the southwest the southwest cultural region includes present day arizona new mexico southern utah and colorado and portions of texas oklahoma and california.
this region has many environments canyons mountains deserts and flat topped mesas.
it even has two major rivers the colorado and the rio grande.
but rain seldom falls anywhere.
the heat and lack of water made living in the southwest a challenge.
yet some american indians learned to love this arid land.
the whole southwest was a house made of dawn goes an old indian song.
there were many colors on the hills and on the plain and there was a dark wilderness on the mountains beyond mesa people different groups found different ways of surviving in the southwest.
some lived as nomadic wandering desert hunters.
along the colorado river small groups hunted gathered and farmed.
others planted fields of corn beans and squash on the tops of high flat areas called mesas.
the mesa people lacked trees for building homes.
instead they made homes from the earth itself.
using bricks of adobe sun baked clay they built thick walled houses that protected them from summer heat and winter cold.
their villages looked like apartment houses that reached up to four stories high and had hundreds of rooms.
a single village called a pueblo pweh blo might house 1 000 people.
to protect their bodies from the sun mesa people wore clothes made of cotton that they grew spun and wove into cloth.
using plants and minerals they dyed fabrics with bright colors.
survival in the southwest was a challenge.
the area contains mountains flat topped mesas deserts and canyons such as the one pictured above.
sparse rainfall prevents the growth of many trees and plants.
corn culture despite living in a desert the early mesa people learned to grow corn beans and squash.
corn was by far their most important crop.
to make the most of infrequent rain farmers planted near naturally flooded areas like the mouths of large streambeds or the bases of mesas where rain runoff flowed.
men dug irrigation ditches from the streams to the fields and built small dams to hold summer rain.
girls spent many hours a day grinding corn kernels into cornmeal.
the women cooked the cornmeal into bread in clay ovens.
in clay pots they cooked stews of corn rabbit meat and chili peppers.
the first americans 15 1 10 american indians of the great plains the great plains cultural region is a vast area of treeless grasslands.
the great plains stretch for 2 000 miles from the rockies to the mississippi valley and from canada to the gulf of mexico.
the eastern part of this region has more water and softer soil than the western part.
in the drier west short dense grasses provided perfect grazing for millions of buffalo.
the great plains region is mostly treeless grassland with cold winters and hot summers.
buffalo and other animals grazed freely over a vast territory.
buffalo hunters on the eastern great plains various groups took up farming going on buffalohunting trips only a few months each year.
on the western great plains american indians followed buffalo herds much of the year.
in the spring and early summer small groups lay in ambush where buffalo came to drink.
the hunters gripped hardwood bows reinforced with strips of buffalo tendon.
taking aim each man let loose a wooden arrow tipped with a sharp stone and arrayed with feathers to help it fly straight.
in the fall huge buffalo herds gathered and plains people traveled in larger bands.
the men sometimes made a trap for the buffalo by heaping stones into two short walls to form a v shaped passage.
the walls forced the buffalo closer together as they approached a cliff.
behind the herd people set a grass fire or made loud noises to panic the buffalo.
the animals stampeded between the walls and over the cliff edge.
below waiting hunters finished them off with spears or bows and arrows.
using the buffalo buffalo provided the main food for plains people.
women and children cut up the buffalo with bone knives.
extra meat was dried and kept for winter.
plains people used every part of the buffalo.
buffalo hides were turned into shields waterproof containers warm robes and bedding.
for clothing and bags women softened the hides with bone scrapers and rubbed in buffalo brains and fat.
buffalo hair and sinew tough cords made from the animals tendons were twined into bowstrings and rope.
horns and hooves became spoons and bowls or were boiled down to make glue.
dried buffalo dung provided fuel for fires.
buffalo provided materials for housing as well.
using tendons as thread women sewed 8 to 20 buffalo skins together.
the skins were then fastened around a tall cone of poles to make a tipi a plains word for dwelling plains people became even more successful hunters when span ish explorers introduced horses to the region.
with horses they could bring down more buffalo and move faster and more comfortably to new hunting grounds.
16 chapter 1 i 1 11 american indians of the eastern woodlands the eastern woodlands cultural region reaches from the mississippi river eastward to the atlantic ocean and from canada to north carolina.
winter snows and summer rains produced endless forests lakes and streams.
two language groups emerged in this cultural region.
in most of the territory people spoke algonquian al gon kwee in languages.
in new york and around the southern great lakes lived the iroquoisspeaking groups described in this section.
plentiful woods the forests provided most of what iroquois eer uh kwoi people needed to live.
for food hunters prowled through the forests to track deer.
men also hunted bears trapped beavers caught birds in nets and speared fish.
women gathered fresh greens nuts and berries.
they made syrup by boiling down sap from maple trees.
instead of walking through the thick forests iroquois often paddled log and bark canoes along lakes and rivers.
because waterways also provided fish and drinking water iroquois built their villages nearby.
each village had dozens of sturdy log frame houses covered with elm bark.
such longhouses were usually about 20 feet wide and over 100 feet long.
several related families lived in sections of the longhouse.
women farmers to clear a space for farming iroquois men burned away trees and underbrush.
women did the rest.
after hoeing the soil they planted corn sometimes several varieties.
around the cornstalks they let beans twine.
squash grew near the ground keeping down weeds and holding moisture in the soil.
when the planting was done women tanned deerskin to make skirts capes and moccasins soft shoes.
they scraped corn kernels with bone tools and ground the corn between stones.
in the fall they stored the harvest often in large bark bins in the longhouses.
iroquois crops included sunflowers tobacco and many vegetables that are still planted in american gardens today.
dense forests such as this forest in vermont are home to deer beavers and other wildlife which provided food clothing and shelter for the american indians of the eastern woodlands.
the first americans 17 the southeast cultural region includes river valleys mountains coastal plains and swamps such as this swamp in florida.
the mild climate allowed american indians of the southeast to grow corn beans squash and other crops.
1 12 american indians of the southeast the southeast cultural region stretches from the southern part of the ohio valley to the gulf of mexico and from texas to the atlantic ocean.
this regions fertile coastal plains river valleys mountains and swamps all have long warm humid summers and mild winters.
in this green countryside the people of the southeast found growing crops fairly easy.
towns built around mounds some southeastern peoples built towns dominated by large earthen mounds.
the first mounds were burial sites.
centuries later people made mounds several stories high as platforms for temples.
building these mounds took months even years because people had to move the dirt one basketful at a time.
workers building mounds had no time to help grow or find food.
but southeastern groups had developed a type of corn that grew so fast they could harvest two crops a year.
farmers raised enough food to feed the people building the mounds.
a single southeastern town might have had 2 to 12 mounds arrayed around a central town plaza.
people clustered their houses around these mounds.
they built their homes from strips of young trees woven into a rectangular frame and plastered with clay.
roofs were pointed and made of leaves.
a fertile region beyond their homes fields lay in all directions.
with the regions long growing season southeastern people relied on corn beans squash pumpkins and sunflowers for most of their food.
women worked the fields with hoes made of stone shell or animal shoulder blades fastened to wooden handles.
men sometimes hunted using blowguns for squirrels rabbits and turkeys and bows and arrows for large animals like deer.
they even brought home alligators and turtles.
18 chapter 1 to complete their varied diet women gathered edible plants like sweet potatoes wild rice and persimmons.
as they wore simple short deerskin skirts they didnt have to spend much time making clothing.
instead they had time to fashion rings earrings arm rings and hairpins from stones shells feathers pearls bones and clay.
chapter summary in this chapter you read about the first people to settle in north america and the adaptations they made to the environments they found there.
migration routes of the first americans scientists believe that ancestors of american indians migrated to america from asia across a land bridge during the last ice age.
as their descendants traveled east and south they adapted to the challenges of living in many different environments.
how american indians viewed the environment wherever they settled american indians had a special relationship with the world around them.
they believed they were part of nature and they treated the environment with respect.
adaptations to the local environment depending on where they lived american indians ate different food built different kinds of houses and clothed themselves in different ways.
they also practiced many kinds of crafts making such things as jewelry fine baskets and animal masks.
american indians built the first towns and villages in north america and they were the continents first farmers.
languages and lifestyles american indians living in different cultural regions developed distinctive ways of life that were suited to their environments climate and natural resources.
scientists study these ways of life by examining the artifacts americas first people left behind.
this drawing by john white one of the first english colonists in north america shows the village life of the secotan people who lived in north carolina.
the first americans 19 reading further digging up the past this serpent mound in ohio is more than a quarter of a mile long and about 3 feet high.
scholars believe it was built between 1 000 and 1 500 years ago.
as a boy growing up in southern illinois in the 1960s tim pauketat loved to explore.
there were ancient arrowheads to be found and he collected them.
one day as he rode in his father s delivery truck he saw a great flat topped pyramid.
to tim it looked 100 feet tall all built of earth.
he was instantly hooked on the mysterious mounds of cahokia.
mysteries surround the mounds of cahokia kuh ho key uh.
as an adult tim pauketat would help solve some of them.
the first mystery was who built the mounds.
tens of thousands of mounds have been discovered in the nations interior.
some mounds were shaped as tremendous snakes or birds.
others were cone shaped.
but the great mound of cahokia was the most enormous of all.
more massive than the pyramids of egypt it rose 10 stories high and contained 25 million cubic feet of earth.
early settlers pushing west in the 1700s first discovered the mounds.
surely they thought a lost race of superior beings had built the magnificent mounds.
the settlers believed that the american indians who lived in the area could never have been capable of building such awesome earthworks.
popular books and poems were written about the lost race that had built a great civilization and then vanished.
the mystery gripped the public as they looked to europe asia and africa for ancient mound builders.
some claimed that the mound builders were vikings others were sure they were phoenicians.
hindus greeks romans persians and the lost tribes of israel were each proven incorrectly to be the lost race of mound builders.
the first american to answer the question scientifically was the third president thomas jefferson.
based on the skeletons and artifacts he found when he dug into a mound jefferson was certain that american indians were the builders.
and yet 100 years later the battle over who built the mysterious mounds still raged.
jefferson was wrong people claimed.
finally in 1881 the smithsonian institution hired archaeologist cyrus thomas to find out who the mound builders really were.
like most people thomas thought the mounds were built by a long lost race.
over seven years thomas and his team unearthed thousands of artifacts.
in the end he disproved his own theory.
the mound builders he declared were indeed early american indians.
but many mysteries remained.
what culture had built the monumental works and why had that culture vanished.
these are the mysteries that tim pauketat got hooked on solving.
20 chapt er 1 cahokia uncovered today tim pauketat teaches archaeology and brings his students to cahokia.
there they dig very carefully looking for clues to the past.
what they and other archaeologists have learned helps us imagine what cahokia might have been like in the year 1150 c e.
at dawn the great chief might have stood atop what was the greatest earth mound in the americas.
as he raised his arms to welcome the sun its first rays would have hit his tall feathered headdress.
slowly the sun would have lit his jewelry made of carved shells and copper and the cape of feathers that hung from his shoulders.
the sun was sacred to the people of cahokia for it made the corn grow.
the mound the great chief called home rose 100 feet from the vast flat plain that is now southern illinois.
we know it as monks mound.
from its top the great chief could look down upon a city of some 20 000 subjects.
just beyond the city thousands more people lived in villages.
altogether the chief ruled what was probably the largest urban area in the world at the time.
he could have seen more than 120 other mounds nearby and more in the distance toward what is now st louis missouri.
a towering wall surrounded the citys center.
to the west was a great circle of upright logs a kind of giant solar calendar that priests used to mark the beginning of spring and fall the equinoxes and winter and summer the solstices.
an artist re created what cahokia may have looked like in 1150 c e.
monks mound can be seen nearthe centertop.
rj t j 3 j li the first americans 21 artifacts found at cahokia include fine pottery arrowheads tools and this figure carved from stone.
a huge plaza stretched out over 50 acres from the base of monks mound.
here hundreds or maybe thousands of people gathered for feasts ceremonies or a wild game of chunkey.
this game of skill daring and high stakes gambling involved two spear throwing players and a wheel shaped stone that was rolled across the hardened flat court.
the object was to land a spear closer to the chunkey disk than an opponent did.
the great chief ruled all this and more.
cahokia was not only a cultural and spiritual center it was a trade center for an area stretching a thousand miles in all directions.
cahokia s sphere of influence was enormous.
the great chief was its most powerful ruler.
the archaeologist s toolkit how did archaeologists figure all this out.
the people of cahokia had no system of writing so they left no written records.
how do we know about the great chief and his welcoming of the sun in 1150 c e.
people who have no written histories have oral histories stories that are passed from one generation to the next.
scholars searched for such a story to explain cahokia but strangely never found one.
in 1539 however spanish explorer hernando de soto ehr nan do day soh toh led an expedition through the southeast looking for treasure.
he didnt find gold or silver but he did find mound builders much like the people of cahokia.
written accounts of the expedition describe the mounds and the powerful sun worshiping rulers who lived atop them.
how do we know the date in the story about the great chief.
to determine the date of a site archaeologists look for what they call black gold charcoal.
with a process called radiocarbon dating a piece of charcoal will reveal the date when the wood it was created from burned.
to discover what life in cahokia was like archaeologists search for artifacts.
when they carefully dug into one small mound at cahokia they discovered a wealth of artifacts along with the remains of a chief.
there were thousands of shell beads fine carvings copper and all the things a chief might need in the next life.
from these artifacts we know what the great chief wore.
in the mound were fine chunkey disks too.
but if it were not for witnesses early french explorers who saw the game played and described it in their journals no one would know what the disks were used for.
determining the population of cahokia is harder.
one estimate was made by counting the number of laborers it took to build the homes walls and especially the mounds of cahokia.
monks mound alone required some 14 million baskets of earth dug by hand carried deposited and pounded firmly in place.
this number led to an estimate of as many as 43 000 people who had lived in the local region.
22 chapter 1 how did archaeologists ever figure out there was a solar calendar given that the logs rotted away hundreds of years ago.
they searched for soil stains.
as wood rots it turns the soil a darker color.
the researchers searched the soil very carefully to find this clue.
today we know all this about cahokia and a great deal more.
however many mysteries remain.
cahokia abandoned when the first explorers reached cahokia the mighty city was completely gone.
only the silent mounds remained.
tim pauketat says radiocarbon dating evidence shows that cahokia was abandoned in the 1300s.
he wants to find out why.
there are many theories.
many of them focus on the important relationship of people and the environ ment.
some scholars say a drought or a change in climate caused crop failure.
it took 25 000 to 30 000 pounds of corn a day to feed the ca hokians so a lack of crops would cause a lot of people to leave the area.
others suggest that with so many people packed together in a place without a sewage system the water became contaminated causing disease.
still others think that local resources such as wood and game must have grown scarce.
pauketat agrees these factors would have caused some people to move away.
but that is not what happened.
by 1350 every last person had fled.
pauketat thinks that a great power struggle caused a complete failure of government.
he and his students are finding evidence of protective walls surrounding the homes of the powerful.
this shows the occupants were afraid and felt they needed protection.
pauketat also found several such homes that were burned.
strangely no one returned to these homes after the fire to gather up the fine tools and baskets of stored food.
thats a sign that the occupants had to flee the area.
tim pauketat has not found all the answers yet but he hopes that young people will continue to search for them.
he is optimistic that the mysteries that surround cahokia will one day be solved.
this re creation shows howthe people of cahokia set up their solar calendar.
on the first day of each season certain poles lined up with the sun.
atthe spring and fall equinoxes the sun seemed to rise from monks mound.
artists work with archaeologists and other scholars to re create scenes like this of the great chief and his priests greeting the dawn atop monks mound.
24 chapter.
