chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 27 this image of shows columbus taking his leave from the king and queen of spain to journey across the atlantic on the three ships in the background.
2 1 significant dates 1492 columbus lands on an island in the bahamas 1497 john cabot explores the coast of north america for england a german mapmaker names the new continent america in honor of amerigo vespucci 1509 juan ponce de leon founds san juan puerto rico 1513 juan ponce de leon first explores florida 1514 1566 bartolome de las casas s 50 year campaign for the rights of the indians 1517 martin luther begins protestant reformation 1519 1521 hernan cortes conquers the aztec empire in mexico 1524 giovanni da verrazano explores the atlantic coast of north america for france 1528 1536 cabeza de vaca travels from florida to texas to mexico 1532 francisco pizarro conquers the inca empire 1534 1536 jacques cartier explores the st lawrence river 1534 parliament names henry viii head of the church of england 1540 1542 coronado expedition to the southwest 1539 1542 hernando de soto explores the mississippi river valley 1542 1543 juan rodriguez cabrillo explores the coast of california 1565 st augustine florida founded oldest european city in what is now the united states 1579 francis drake sails along california coast 1587 roanoke virginia first english settlement in north america 1598 first spanish settlement in new mexico not asia but an unknown continent filled with people they had never imagined existed.
the columbian encounter led to unimagined power and wealth for many europeans.
it also led to the creation of new ethnic groups as children were born to american indian european couples.
and it shifted the balance of trade and commerce around the world from land to the worlds oceans.
for the american indians the encounter was even more of a surprise and much more devastating.
suddenly from across the ocean unimagined people arrived with a strange way of talking and dressing a strange religion and a different way of looking at the world.
in part because of differences in technology in part because of differences between european and indigenous peoples understandings of war and conquest and most of all because of differences in the two groups ability to withstand european diseases the encounter led to conquest disease and death for many indians.
understanding what happened in the history of the united states over the next 500 years depends on understanding the differences between those who arrived from europe especially from spain france and england as well as from africa and the diverse peoples who lived in the americas when they arrived.
with the arrival of columbus and the many europeans who followed him once news of his journey spread something new in human history took place a massive transit and mixing of peoples in north and south america.
columbus the columbian exchange and early conquests 2 1 explain the reasons behind the voyages of columbus and early spanish encounters with the peoples of the caribbean mexico and south america.
as delighted as columbus was by the taino welcome and generosity and what seemed to him the easy opportunity to convert them to christianity columbus also noted other things that would be more ominous for their future they do not carry arms nor are they acquainted with them because i showed them swords and they took them by the edge and through ignorance cut themselves.
they have no iron.
their javelins are shafts without iron and some of them have at the end a fish tooth.
conquest columbus came to believe would be easy.
28 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 2 1 american voices the dedication of columbuss log to the king and queen of spain 1493 2 2 eturning from his first voyage in early 1493 columbus understood how much his exploration was linked to ferdinand and isabella s efforts to unify spain into a militant single minded nation.
he spelled out these links when he dedicated his report to the rulers.
whereas most christian and very noble and very excellent and very powerful princes king and queen of the spain s and of the islands of the sea our lords this present year of 1492 after your highnesses had brought to an end the war with the moors who ruled in europe and had concluded the war in the very great city of granada where this present year on the second day of the month of january i saw the royal standards of your highnesses placed by force of arms on the towers of the alhambra and your highnesses as catholic christians and princes lovers and promoters of the holy christian faith and enemies of the false doctrine of mahomet and of all idolatries and heresies you thought of sending me christobal colon to the said regions of india to see the said princes and the peoples and the lands and the characteristics of the lands and of everything and to see how their conversion to our holy faith might be undertaken.
so after having expelled all the jews from all of your kingdoms and dominions in the same month of january your highnesses commanded me to go with a suitable fleet to the said regions of india.
source oliver dunn and james e kelley jr translators the diario of christopher columbus s first voyage to america 1492 1493 abstracted by fray bartolome de las casas norman university of oklahoma press 1988 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what connection did columbus make between spain s defeat of muslim granada the expulsion of the jews from spain and his own voyage across the atlantic.
historical interpretation what does the document suggest about the role of religion in motivating spain s efforts at overseas exploration and expansion.
23 23 23 i i columbus described what would be the terms of much of the european contact with american indians they should be good and intelligent servants for i see that they say very quickly everything that is said to them columbus also looked closely at the ornaments and jewelry that some of the indians were wearing and wrote i was attentive and labored to find out if there was any gold the search for gold and the effort to subjugate the indians in its service had begun.
the four voyages of christopher columbus in spite of the friendly welcome he received columbus took some tainos as captives.
he wanted to teach them spanish and show them to his sponsors in spain.
columbus also wanted guides to the gold he was sure could be found since he had seen some tainos wearing gold ornaments.
led by native guides he sailed on to cuba and sent a party inland to find the local chief or cacique as the taino called their leaders who his guides said had access to gold.
when columbus did not find the leader or the gold he sailed to another island he named hispaniola modern haiti and the dominican republic.
he built a fort and left part of his crew there with instructions to search for gold.
in january 1493 columbus with six taino prisoners turned back to spain.
columbus never fully understood the importance of his voyage.
he set out to discover a route across the atlantic directly to asia and he thought he had indeed reached an unknown part of asia perhaps japan or korea.
thinking the people he met looked like those who came from the part of south asia europeans called the indies he called them indians.
of course he did not really discover a new land because the indians were already there.
columbus certainly discovered a new route across the atlantic but it led to a continent filled with people unknown to europeans.
the rest of columbuss life was a tragedy for himself and for the peoples he had encountered.
to impress the spanish court columbus exaggerated what he had chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 29 2 1 23 23 2 4 2 5 found especially the gold.
isabella and ferdinand gave him seventeen ships and 1 200 men for a second voyage to seek slaves and gold in this supposed part of asia just as the portuguese were finding both in africa.
when he arrived back on hispaniola in 1494 columbus found that the native residents had killed the sailors he had left behind in 1492.
a local chief initially offered protection to the europeans but when the sailors sought to make the tainos slaves they rebelled.
columbus ordered retribution and many tainos were killed.
as word spread of the harsh ways of the europeans the indians became less friendly and columbus found himself discovering deserted villages.
the caribbean had little gold despite columbuss desperate efforts to force the natives to find it and many tainos died from spanish swords or from forced labor that the spanish instituted.
columbus himself was a better explorer than administrator and less vicious than many of his successors see map 2 1.
during his third voyage to the caribbean in 1498 he tried to set up a government on hispaniola.
but many spaniards complained about hard lives there with little reward.
a new governor sent columbus back to spain in chains.
although the spanish monarchs forgave him and allowed him a fourth voyage in 1502 he never governed again.
amerigo vespucci inspires a continent s name columbus was not the first european to reach the americas.
archeologists have discovered evidence of a short lived norse settlement called lanse aux meadows on newfoundland somewhere between 900 and 1000 but the settlement was quickly forgotten on both sides of the atlantic.
if others crossed the atlantic or the pacific their voyages were also soon forgotten.
what was different about the voyage of columbus was that so much of europe took interest and so many europeans followed in his wake.
in the earliest exploration and conquest of the americas spain was the unquestioned leader.
portugal focused primarily on its rich trade routes around africa and iecona voyage third voyage 1498 1500 inset only fourth voyage 1502 1504 north america columbus de 3 total of four voyages starting and ending in the spanish port city of palos and enabling him to see and describe the islands of bahamas where he first landed hisoani modem dominican repul and haiffl cuba jamaica and much c he co a 3 to 30 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 2 1 into the indian ocean.
however portuguese explorers also quickly followed routes across the atlantic similar to those of columbus exploring and claiming much of south america.
in 1494 spain and portugal agreed to the treaty of tordesillas in which a line drawn by the pope separated spanish and portuguese claims in south america.
to this day brazil east of the line is a portuguese speaking country while the rest of south america is spanish speaking.
in april 1495 only two years after columbus returned from his first voyage isabella and ferdinand authorized other spanish voyages across the atlantic.
a young italian merchant amerigo vespucci made three or four trips the historical record is not clear between 1497 and 1504 some authorized by spain others by portugal.
sailing along the coast of brazil much farther south than columbus ever ventured vespucci concluded that the land mass on the other side of the atlantic was much larger than the first reports indicated.
unlike columbus vespucci was convinced that europeans had reached a new continent rather than asia.
as a result a german publisher martin waldseemuller produced a new map of the world in 1507.
he called the new continent that vespucci described america in his honor.
treaty of tordesillas treaty confirmed by the pope in 1494 to resolve the claims of spain and portugal in the americas.
america the name given to the lands europeans encountered across the atlantic after 1492 in honor of the explorer amerigo vespucci.
22 23 24 23 the impact of european arms and disease the spanish governors who came after columbus were more efficient and more cruel.
as they learned more about the lands and peoples that columbus had claimed for them ferdinand and isabella pressed harder for gold.
they also ordered that the indians be treated well and not enslaved.
but spanish governors focused on the gold and ignored the command to show kindness.
nicolas de ovando who became governor on hispaniola in 1502 set a pattern.
he brought 2 500 spanish settlers families not just male explorers to build a permanent settlement.
in the future many spanish explorers also married native women creating new families of mixed ethnic heritage.
ovando attacked the tainos ruthlessly.
in 1502 he responded to a rebellion in higuey by capturing 600 700 indians and then ordering them all to be knifed to death and their bodies displayed.
later in 1503 he convened an ostensibly friendly meeting of the caciques the district chiefs and when some 80 of them had assembled in one building he ordered the doors locked and the building burned with them in it.
with that act the last independent chiefdoms of hispaniola were ended.
however the most devastating thing that columbus and his successors did was unintentional.
they brought european diseases.
the tainos like all natives of the americas had no immunity to smallpox measles or other diseases they had never known.
in europe where these diseases were common and had been for hundreds of years many people had developed immunity to them or at least to their worst effects.
american indians had no such immunity.
as a result while indians died by the hundreds from spanish swords they died by the thousands from disease.
there were probably 1 million people on hispaniola when columbus landed in 1492.
by the early 1500s only 1 000 tainos were left.
within a century all were gone.
the european destruction of the first people of the americas had begun.
from a total population of perhaps 70 80 million no one really knows when columbus arrived native peoples in both the americas dropped to 4 5 million as a result of war and disease in the decades after the first encounter.
however unintentional the introduction of european disease was the staggering numbers of indian deaths made their conquest easy and many europeans were happy to take advantage of their already cleared land.
for the indians tragedy followed tragedy.
soon on the islands where columbus first landed the only indian descendants were people of mixed races.
a spanish census of 1514 indicated that 40 percent of the spanish men had native wives.
the arrival of african slaves in the 1500s added african blood to the mix.
today many of the peoples of the americas are descendants of all three of the groups that met in the columbian encounter.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 31 european diseases especially smallpox killed more of the original inhabitants of the americas than any other cause.
this illustration originally done by aztec scribes before their conquest described a great sickness that came with sores so terrible that the victims could not lie face down nor on their backs nor move from one side to the other.
the making of an ocean world the atlantic and columbian exchange silk road the overland trading route first established by the venetian trader marco polo in the late 1200s.
news of the new contact with the americas changed the way many people looked at the world.
most educated europeans already believed that the world was round and not flat.
but until 1492 they were concerned primarily with the land.
traders had long gone over land on the silk road established between venice and china by marco polo between 1271 and 1295 that brought luxury goods to europe from asia.
portuguese sailors stayed close to the coast of africa as they sailed around that continent to asia.
norse sailors had explored the far north atlantic hopping from iceland to greenland and on to the nearest parts of north america seeking new fishing opportunities.
but columbus and his successors did something different they sailed directly across the ocean with no landmarks to guide their journey.
soon after that journey the oceans the atlantic the indian and very soon the pacific became the primary trade routes for europeans americans and increasing numbers of unwilling africans.
nations that had ports on the atlantic especially spain portugal and england moved from the margins of a land focused europe to become the key points of contact with an ocean focused world.
ihe shift from primarily land based or near shore sea trade to trade spanning the worlds oceans was a revolution in the way people thought and it had winners and losers.
i the trade and cultural exchanges across the interconnected continents of europe j asia and africa and did not end after 1492 but the relationships were different.
portugal and spain replaced genoa and venice as the primary european links to asia.
portuguese and spanish ships dominated the indian ocean.
many other spanish explorers followed columbus in very short order.
in addition to those who explored the atlantic i coast vasco nunez de balboa reached the isthmus of panama in 1513 and became the first european to view the pacific.
in 1519 five ships and their crews commanded by ferdinand magellan began a journey that led them around the tip of south america in 1520 and across the pacific to the philippines where magellan himself was killed.
three years after they had departed a handful of the explorers on one ship became the first contact and exploration 1491 1607 people to circumnavigate the globe arriving back in spain in 1522.
spanish galleons not only brought silver mined in the americas across the atlantic to spain but soon also brought silver across the pacific to manila in the philippines.
manila itself was founded by spanish traders in 1571.
the world of the 1500s was becoming an oceanic world including the atlantic the indian ocean and the pacific.
the atlantic ocean that had been the great barrier on the western edge of europe suddenly became the great highway connecting known and previously unknown continents.
portugal and spain were the first european states to establish trading routes across the oceans but during the 1500s england france and holland also assumed major roles in the new trade.
as europeans came to terms with the americas the people of the americas also had to come to terms with europe.
for each there were gains and losses.
what became known as the columbian exchange the interchange of diseases plants animals and human cultures between new and old worlds after 1492 reflected some of these changes.
the most tragic loss occurred with the transmission of disease bearing microbes that devastated populations in the americas.
new populations began to emerge after 1492 when the peoples who met in the americas produced offspring that carried the biological traits and the cultures of their ancestors from vastly different parts of the world.
the exchange also changed the eating habits of almost every person on the planet.
in europe asia and africa foods such as corn beans peanuts potatoes cassava columbian exchange the transatlantic exchange of plants animals and diseases that occurred after the first european contact with the americas.
table 2 1 the columbian exchange from the americas to europe africa arid asia from europe africa and asia to the americas from the americas to europe africa and asia from europe africa and asia to the americas plants corn maize wheat animals turkeys chickens potatoes barley llamas donkeys i i sweet potatoes rye cattle peanuts oats goats pumpkins apples horses pineapples peaches pigs guava pears sheep squash plums cats tomatoes apricots peppers cherries disease syphilis syphilis was also smallpox the single most deadly disease among papayas bananas american indians known in the ancient avocados coffee eurasian world and has measles beans tea been found in egyptian mummies but a new influenza cassava sugarcane melons and virulent form of the disease was brought yellow fever blueberries to europe from the typhus tobacco lemons americas.
scarlet fever cocoa oranges diphtheria vanilla cabbage carrots sometimes multiple diseases from this list affected an american grapes indian community at the same time.
lettuce onions garlic chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 33 23 24 2 5 new spain the name of spain s first empire in the americas.
sweet potatoes avocados pineapples tomatoes chilies vanilla and cocoa from the americas enriched peoples diets.
rice wheat barley oats and many new fruits and vegetables from europe africa and asia fed the american indians as did chickens cattle sheep and pigs see table 2 1.
horses changed the way many american indians lived.
a world without this variety is unimaginable today.
the conquest of the aztec and inca empires besides european diseases the peoples of the americas faced another threat armed conquest.
hernan cortes sailed from cuba to mexico with 600 soldiers in 1519.
within 2 years he conquered tenochtitlan the aztec capital and renamed it mexico city.
when he first arrived some of the aztecs may have thought cortes might be their lost god quetzalcoatl who was said to have vanished from the place where cortes landed.
in their initial encounter the aztec emperor motecuhzoma often written as montezuma welcomed cortes.
they exchanged gifts which cortes saw as a sign of submission to spain.
the relationship soured quickly.
cortes took the emperor prisoner but allowed him to maintain a facade of rule.
in july 1520 the aztecs turned on cortes and he and his soldiers fled the capital.
but they did not go far.
with support from thousands of non aztec tribes people who hated aztec dominance and who hated having their people being used for the human sacrifices that aztec religion demanded the spanish army regrouped and began a long bloody siege of tenochtitlan.
motecuhzoma himself was killed probably by his own people and cortes completed his conquest of the city in august 1521.
with tenochtitlan destroyed cortes set about building a new and grander city on the same spot.
on the site of the main aztec temple he ordered the building of a massive new catholic cathedral modeled on the one at granada which had recently been built in the former muslim stronghold in southern spain.
in both cases the religious architecture symbolized the defeat of the infidels within a generation a thriving new mexico city filled with great churches and government palaces had become the home of the spanish viceroy the kings representative and the capital of new spain as the spanish called their empire in mexico and central america.
one of the earliest images of hernan cortes on horseback fighting with aztec warriors.
contact and exploration 1491 1607 in 1532 in peru francisco pizarro and his army of 168 spanish soldiers defeated the inca emperor atahuallpa and his army of 80 000 soldiers.
within a few years the inca empire of 32 million people much larger than the aztec empire had become the viceroyalty of peru a second major outpost of distant spain.
its primary purpose was to supply gold and silver to finance spains european ambitions.
at potosi in bolivia 45 000 slaves at first indians then also africans worked the mines that created the wealth that made king charles v and his son philip ii the richest and most powerful rulers in europe.
the swiftness of the spanish conquest of the aztec and inca empires was possible for many reasons.
aztec resistance was undermined by a sense of fatalism fueled by early visions of their own defeat.
many non aztecs joined with cortes more than happy to be rid of the aztecs.
the incas could not imagine and therefore did not fear pizarros initial surprise attack since he claimed to come in the name of friendship.
pizarros dishonesty in announcing that he was coming in friendship followed by his surprise attack was simply inconceivable to people reared in the long history of inca civilization.
and both empires found spanish horses swords and armor terrifying.
the ruthless military skill of cortes and pizarro and the spanish mastery of guns steel swords and horses created an enemy who was simply unimaginable to aztec and inca armies and therefore very difficult to resist.
the aztecs and the incas could not match the spanish strategies and tools of war.
perhaps the most significant spanish advantage was smallpox.
the aztecs may have lost half of their population to smallpox during the 2 years of attack by cortes on their capital and the incas faced the same terrifying losses.
an inca emperor had died from smallpox shortly before pizarro arrived.
the disease traveled at a far faster pace than even spanish armies could march and often preceded them.
for people used to living in harmony with nature the terrible ravishing of the disease that occurred along with the arrival of these frightening white skinned bearded and horse mounted soldiers tore apart their world militarily culturally and spiritually all in a very short time.
2 1 thinking historically pizarro and atahuallpa in his popular book guns germs and steel the fate of human societies jared diamond traces the unequal competition between different groups of humans from the beginning of recorded history to the present.
his core question is why people of european origin came to dominate the planet despite the many advances asians africans and the peoples of the americas made.
in one chapter he focuses on the early encounter of europeans and americans describing why the inca emperor atahuallpa did not capture king charles i of spain.
the analysis focuses on the development of ideas technology and disease before 1492 that allowed atahuallpa and some 80 000 followers to be defeated by just 168 spaniards led by pizarro.
this kind of questioning is an important part of accurately understanding historical events.
thinking critically 1.
chronological reasoning what ideas in inca society prior to 1492 contributed to their defeat.
what developments in european society contributed to spanish victory.
crafting an argument in trying to explain the rapid european conquest of the americas how much emphasis would you place on advanced technology.
what about disease.
how about cultural differences.
since the inca empire was much larger than that of spain in the 1530s why did atahuallpa not consider sailing across the atlantic to conquer spain.
source jared diamond guns germs and steel the fates of human societies new york w w norton 1997 2005.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 35 this statue of bartolome de las casas stands in a prominent place in modern mexico city as recognition of the respect in which he is held by many of the indigenous people of mexico and the americas.
encomienda in the spanish colonies the grant to a spanish settler of a certain number of american indian subjects who would pay him tribute in goods and labor.
conquistadores the name given to the early spanish conquerors of mexico and peru.
bartolome de las casas and the voices of protest spains treatment of the american indians did not occur without protest.
on hispaniola it was denounced within less than 20 years.
in 1511 on a sunday before christmas antonio de montesinos a dominican priest asked his spanish congregation tell me by what right do you keep these indians in cruel servitude.
you are in mortal sin for the cruelty and tyranny you deal out to these innocent people bartolome de las casas 1484 1566 may have heard montesinoss sermon.
certainly he had heard of it.
las casas edited the log of columbuss journey and moved to hispaniola to make his own fortune in 1502.
although he became a priest in 1510 he participated in the conquest of cuba in 1512 and was rewarded with a large ranch or encomienda worked by indian slaves.
but his conscience bothered him.
in 1514 he gave up the land and the slaves and began preaching and writing against the oppression of the indians which he continued to do for the next 50 years.
las casas documented in detail the cruelty of the spanish conquerors begging the spanish crown to stop the conquistadores the soldiers who were creating the spanish empire in the americas.
las casas also left an important record of the life and customs of the first peoples of the americas.
he wrote that among them marriage laws are nonexistent men and women alike choose their mates and leave them as they please without offense jealousy or anger they live he wrote in large communal bell shaped buildings housing up to 600 people at one time made of very strong wood and roofed with palm leaves they prize bird feathers of various colors beads made offish bones and green and white stones with which they adorn their ears and lips but they put no value on gold and other precious things they are extremely generous with their possessions and by the same token covet the possessions of their friends and expect the same degree of liberality.
if they worshipped at all it was not in a form that this catholic priest recognized.
nevertheless the key purpose of all of las casass writings was to ask the spanish authorities to intervene to protect the indians.
he described seeing native people worked although he never left europe theodore de bry 1528 1598 spent many years drawing illustrations of european indian encounters based on first hand reports including this one showing the attack by spanish soldiers on an indian village.
36 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 to death in the mines when moderate labor turned into labor fit only for iron men mountains are stripped from top to bottom and bottom to top a thousand times they dig split rocks move stones and carry dirt on their backs to wash it in rivers while those who wash gold stay in the water all the time with their backs bent so constantly it breaks them las casas always believed or at least hoped that if the spanish monarchs only knew the truth spain s rulers would intercede.
at times the distant monarchs seemed to heed him.
shortly before her death isabella ordered that the indians must be treated as freemen and not as slaves they must be given wages they must be treated well christians should receive better treatment than non christians las casas was determined to show just how far reality departed from these orders.
while las casas may have led the spanish authorities to make a few reforms the biggest effect of his work was not what he expected.
he was writing during the protestant reformation and protestants far more than catholics republished his words creating what came to be known as the black legend for the color of the priests robes of unique spanish cruelty.
history would show that the spanish were not unique in their treatment of american indians but the legend of their special cruelty persisted even as other europeans adopted the same techniques and attitudes.
2 1 quick review which factor do you believe was most responsible for the destruction of native populations.
justify your answer with evidence from the chapter.
american voices bartolome de las casas the history of the indies 1550 tr he publication of the history of the indies along with the many speeches and other writings from priests like las casas had multiple results.
las casas clearly documented for all time just how cruel the first europeans were in their treatment of the indigenous people of the americas.
on a few occasions it led spanish authorities to end some abuses or replace vicious officials but such steps were rare and seldom had lasting effect.
in the hands of enemies of catholic spain the documents were used to create a long lasting story of unique spanish cruelty.
ultimately the careful documentation created one of the best reports even if a romanticized one on the experience of american indians at the time of their first encounter with europeans.
the following is an excerpt from las casas s history the men were sent out to the mines as far as 80 leagues away while their wives remained to work the soil not with hoes or plowshares drawn by oxen but with their own sweat and sharpened poles that were far from equaling the equipment used for similar work in castile.
they had to make silo like heaps for cassava plants by digging 12 square feet 4 palms deep and 10 000 or 12 000 of such hills a giant s work next to one another had to be made and they had other tasks of the same magnitude of whatever nature the spaniards saw as fittest to make more money.
thus husbands and wives were together only once every 8 or 10 months and when they met they were so exhausted and depressed on both sides that they had no mind for marital communication and in this way they ceased to procreate.
as for the newly born they died early because their mothers overworked and famished had no milk to nurse them and for this reason while i was in cuba 7 000 children died in 3 months.
some mothers even drowned their babies from sheer desperation while others caused themselves to abort with certain herbs that produced stillborn children.
in this way husbands died in the mines wives died at work and children died from lack of milk while others had not time or energy for procreation and in a short time this land which was so great so powerful and fertile though so unfortunate was depopulated.
if this concatenation of events had occurred all over the world the human race would have been wiped out in no time.
source bartolome de las casas history of the indies.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what kinds of abuses did las casas identify.
what motives did he imply were behind spanish brutality.
contextualization who might las casas have been hoping to influence by publicizing spanish abuses in the new world.
what allies might he have found for his cause within spanish society.
how might the protestant focus on his work have unintended consequences for las casas.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 37 martin luther s challenge to catholic teachings and practices in his day led to a decisive split in the unity among christians that had been known in western europe for centuries.
soon thereafter john calvin also challenged some of luther s teachings leading to a three way split between catholics lutherans and calvinists followed by further splits among protestants.
a divided europe the impact of the protestant reformation 22 explain how the protestant reformation and the development of the nation state changed europe and european ideas about how best to settle and govern america.
ninety five theses a document with 95 debating points that a young monk martin luther hoped would lead to a series of reforms within the catholic church.
protestant reformation the process that began with martin luther s efforts to reform the catholic church s practices in the early 1500s and that eventually led followers of luther calvin and others to completely break from the catholic church.
nation state a relatively new development in europe during the 1300s and 1400s in which nations became the major political organizations replacing both the smaller kingdoms and city states.
when columbus sailed in 1492 he did so with a commission from the rulers of a newly unified spain.
spanish explorers and conquerors brought the same quest for unity to the americas.
they sought to convert all native peoples to catholic christianity as part of the expansion of spains realm.
in 1492 few western europeans would disagree with that mission.
soon however europes religious unity would disappear.
less than 30 years after columbus made his voyage across the atlantic the protestant reformation changed the way europeans thought about the world whether they became protestant or remained catholic.
the initial european encounter with the americas was led by representatives of a religiously united europe.
but nearly all of the subsequent exploration and settlement of north america was conducted by europeans who represented particular groups from a continent deeply divided by religious hostility.
that divide shaped the way they understood their efforts on both sides of the atlantic.
the birth of protestantism in 1517 before hernan cortes began his conquest of mexico a young german monk martin luther 1483 1546 asked for a debate about religious doctrine by posting his ninety five theses on the door of a church in wittenberg in the small independent german speaking state of saxony.
at this time some within the roman catholic church began to challenge some of the churchs practices prompted partly by new translations of the bible and by new attention to the writings of saint augustine a theologian of the early church.
the challenges questioned the catholic churchs insistence that bishops and not everyday christians should interpret the bible and the idea that one could reach salvation through good works in particular the challenge that luther posted questioned the catholic practice of using indulgences that granted forgiveness to sinners to raise money.
his action quickly led to a religious split first in germany and then across europe.
that split known as the protestant reformation would shape the cultural and political development of the future united states.
as word of luthers protests spread many germans including significant members of the nobility who controlled many of the small independent states of germany were drawn to the lutheran cause.
in the century that followed other protestants developed their own religious ideas including followers of the french swiss reformer john calvin 1509 1564 who were known as calvinists while other protestants went in other directions.
part of what fueled the extraordinary response to luthers challenge was the cumulating effect that the technology of printing had produced during the previous 62 years.
johannes gutenbergs creation of a printing press that used moveable type in 1455 and the subsequent rapid spread of printing hugely expanded literacy beyond a small educated elite mostly clergy who had monopolized literacy in the medieval world.
by 1500 at least 10 million individual books had been printed and many people learned to read thus new ideas could spread with a rapidity not known before.
sermons and pamphlets by catholics lutherans and calvinists circulated rapidly.
the printing press prompted a free flow of ideas that most people in europe had not experienced before.
religion and the nation state the idea of the nation state developed more or less at the same time as the protestant catholic split.
the modern idea that the world should be governed by independent nations or nation states was new in the europe of the 1500s.
indeed a world divided into separate independent nations clashed with a long standing ideal held by many of a unified europe unified in religion and government.
in reality the europe of the 1400s was not united at 9 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 1 united scandinavia scotland north sea united ireland netherlands england amsterdam 5 s a bristol dublin plymouth german and other states london holy roman empire atlantic ocean normandy paris swltz.
genoa pisa vienna ever ice florence aragon lisbon palos madrid castile spain editerranee granada n italian rome states map 2 2 europe on the eve of the columbian encounter.
in the years before columbus made his 1492 voyage across the atlantic western europe was being divided into nation states including england france and spain.
central europe remained a series of separate states loosely united in the holy roman empire.
real power rested in very local territories.
frederick elector or duke of saxony was luthers protector and had enough power to ensure luthers safety in spite of hostility from the holy roman emperor the pope and the kings of nearby france.
but most of europes modern nations did not exist.
even within the church distance and the difficulty of travel gave local catholic bishops great independence from papal authorities in rome.
by the late 1400s however something new was emerging in european views of the best forms of government.
ferdinand and isabella united spain by 1492.
kings in france sweden scotland and england had done the same earlier in the 1400s.
the idea of being part of a nation was taking on new importance see map 2 2.
virtually no one argued in favor of religious freedom for the citizens of these nations.
instead different religious parties catholics and assorted protestants lutherans calvinists and others sought to impose their religious beliefs on as many others as possible.
each party argued that it was defending truth and saw no reason to tolerate those they believed were defending error.
this belief in the absolute rightness of ones cause led to more than a century of bloody persecution and religious wars from ireland and scotland to france germany and hungary.
the peace of augsburg in 1555 that addressed divisions between lutherans and catholics and the treaty of westphalia that concluded the thirty years war between catholics and protestants in central europe in 1648 each provided that in each nation covered by the treaty the ruler would decide the faith of the people and that foreign armies would no longer intervene in the religious affairs of another state.
it was a long way from religious freedom but it brought an end to the worst religious bloodshed while linking national unity and religious uniformity more tightly together than ever.
the protestant reformation and the divisions that followed had a huge impact on european settlement in the americas.
different nations from a divided europe battled with each other for control of those new lands.
in addition the wars and divisions in europe led many to seek asylum in a new place preferably as far away from the old as possible.
peace of augsburg in 1555 an agreement among different smaller kingdoms in germany that no ruler would attack the kingdom of another on religious grounds.
treaty of westphalia a 1648 peace treaty between a number of european powers that significantly extended the ideas of the peace of augsburg.
quick review why might religious changes inspire people in europe to look outward to the rest of the world.
how would the link of religious and national unity in spain and other parts of europe affect the behavior of europeans when they conquered other people.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 39 exploration and encounter in north america the spanish 23 kntiylq early spanish exploration of america north of mexico.
23 conquests of the aztec and inca empires produced extraordinary wealth for spain.
exploration further north in the americas in the future united states was secondary for the conquistadores and much less lucrative for spain.
in spite of the wealth being generated from the empires in mexico and peru for more than a century most europeans showed more interest in getting through or around north america and on to asia than in exploring the lands north of new spain.
nevertheless the unknown lands north of mexico beckoned to some spaniards in the 1500s even if they were not considered as exciting as central and south america see map 2 3.
ponce de leon in florida 1513 1521 juan ponce de leon who had been part of the spanish army that conquered muslim granada in 1492 led the first known european expeditions to puerto rico and florida.
in 1508 1509 he founded the first spanish community near what would become san juan and was named governor of puerto rico.
in 1513 he led an expedition from puerto rico that arrived in what he thought was another island which he named la florida.
legend says he was seeking a fountain of youth that would keep him forever young.
certainly he was seeking an expansion of spains empire in the americas and greater wealth for himself.
ponce de leon was accompanied by free africans whose families were slaves in spain.
europeans africans and the native peoples of the americas first met on the soil of the future united states when ponce de leon landed.
in 1521 ponce de leon returned to florida with some 200 followers europeans africans and indians from puerto rico.
the native americans in florida did not welcome them.
ponce de leon was wounded by a poisoned arrow and died soon thereafter.
but the first of many contacts between native peoples and travelers from europe and africa in what are now the 50 united states had been made in florida.
narvaez 1528 coronado 1540 1542 cabeza de vaca drake 1577 1580 and esteban 1528 1536 map 2 3 north american exploration.
in the first one hundred years after columbus european exploi trave ed alon9 doth the atlantlc and pacific coasts and through much of the interior of what almost two hundred years later would become the united states.
by 1592 however most europeans had concluded that there was no easy route through north america to asia and little gold to be found so they lost intere in the regions north of mexico.
7 artl contact and exploration 1491 1607 1 exploring texas by accident cabeza de vaca 1528 1536 in 1528 there was another ill fated effort to colonize florida.
panfilo de narvaez sailed to tampa bay with about 400 men europeans and a few africans.
the narvaez expedition was a disaster.
leaving the ships in tampa bay about 300 men spent months tramping through swamps seeking gold and soon merely food and water.
along the way american indians attacked them shooting arrows that penetrated their heavy spanish armor.
the attackers quickly vanished into the forests and swamps while the surviving spaniards tramped on wearing 50 to 60 pounds of heavy armor.
finally ill under attack and starving the survivors decided to build new boats and leave.
years later one of them remembered this seemed impossible to all because we did not know how to build them nor were there one of all the things that are necessary nor anyone who would know any way to apply ingenuity.
and above all there was nothing to eat.
nevertheless they built five barges and 250 men set out for what they hoped would be home.
instead the currents winds and a hurricane took them west.
two or three of the five barges survived the storm and came ashore near what is now galveston texas.
american indians gave the survivors food water and shelter.
of the 80 explorers who survived the journey across the gulf of mexico only 15 lived through the first winter on the texas coast see map 2 2.
the others died of cold and disease.
many of the american indian hosts also died of european diseases that the spanish brought with them and the surviving indians grew hostile to these intruders who had brought so much disease and trouble.
while others from the narvaez expedition may have lived out their lives among the american indians of the texas coast only four of them three spaniards alvar nunez cabeza de vaca andres dorantes alonso del castillo maldonado and an african muslim slave from north africa named esteban decided to literally walk home to mexico city.
thus like florida texas was explored by europeans and africans together providing the indians there with their first exposure to both.
the foursomes 8 year adventure took them through southern texas the northern states of mexico and eventually to the pacific coast and on to mexico city.
the four travelers found villages developed a reputation as healers and traders and collected a trove of information about american indians who lived in permanent houses and had a good supply of corn and beans.
later cabeza de vaca described the ways of the people he met when indian men get into an argument in their villages they fist fight until exhausted then separate.
sometimes the women will go between and part them but men never interfere.
no matter what the disaffection they do not resort to bows and arrows all these plains tribes are warlike and have as much strategy for protection against enemies as if they had been reared in italy in continual feuds whoever fights them must show no fear and no desire for anything that is theirs.
i believe these people see and hear better and have keener sense in general than any in the world.
they know great hunger thirst and cold as if they were made for enduring these more than other men by habit and nature.
cabeza de vaca also described a big copper rattle that was given to them it had a face represented on it and the natives prized it highly it had been brought from the north where there was a lot of it replied the natives who considered copper very valuable.
wherever it came from we concluded the place must have a foundry to have cast the copper in hollow form.
the american indians refused to believe these men were of the same race as the spaniards they had previously known.
as cabeza de vaca wrote the four explorers appeared to be distinct from earlier spanish invaders because we cured the sick and they killed those who were healthy and that we came naked and barefoot and they 1 i i chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 41 were clothed and on horseback and with lances and.
had no other purpose but to steal everything they found when the four explorers finally reached mexico city in 1536 their story inspired further exploration.
ihe expeditions that followed however did not heed the four explorers peaceful approach to interactions but were instead motivated by suggestions of astounding riches.
23 i seven cities of cibola the name given by early spanish explorers to a number of native american pueblos.
exploring the southwest esteban de niza and coronado 1539 1542 the four texas explorers found great interest as they told their story in mexico city.
in their 8 years living with american indians the spaniards heard stories of seven wealthy and powerful cities with buildings of four or five stories and copper silver and gold everywhere upriver on the rio grande.
for the spaniards stories of fabulous wealth were alluring.
a spanish legend seemed to further validate what the four texas explorers shared.
the legend told about seven christian bishops who had fled from the muslim invasion of spain in the 700s and established seven wealthy cities far to the west.
as the spanish community in mexico city heard the stories brought from texas many of them remembered both the wealth that cortes had found and the ancient stories of the fleeing bishops.
the texas survivors showed the copper rattle they had been given which added to the allure.
many in mexico city now wanted to explore the territory to their north.
in 1539 a franciscan brother marcos de niza led an expedition to find the fabled cities.
de niza asked esteban the african who had walked across texas to scout for them.
thus an african was the first non indian many of the pueblo peoples met.
esteban knew that the native americans had never seen a black person.
from his years in texas he also thought he knew what would impress them he wore feathers bells and turquoise and took on aspects of a god.
he sent messages back to de niza indicating that he had come to wealthy towns.
esteban enjoyed his role until he came to the zuni pueblo of hawikuh.
the zuni told esteban to leave.
when he threatened them they killed him.
de niza came far enough north to see hawikuh from a distance but he did not want to risk estebans fate.
he returned to mexico city and reported to the viceroy that the city is better seated than any i have seen in these parts and he said i was told that there is much gold there and the natives make it into vessels and jewels for their ears and into little blades with which they wipe away their sweat de niza was careful not to claim more than he had seen.
he had seen irrigated fields buffalo hides and from a distance populous towns and he had only heard reports of gold and great wealth.
nevertheless such a report was enough to launch further expeditions.
de niza had also heard a name for the region cibola.
from then on the search for the seven cities of cibola became the stuff of legend.
in 1540 francisco vazquez de coronado led a large expedition across what is now the u s mexican border into modern arizona.
at the zuni pueblo of hawikuh in the confederation of cibola they had their first battle with the american indians of the southwest.
the zunis did not take kindly to the demand that they submit to previously unheard of spanish authority.
coronados men had gone without adequate food for quite some time by this point and they attacked the village primarily to gain access to food.
the coronado expedition then turned east to central new mexico.
although the spanish found many communities along the rio grande the pueblo indians of the area were no more enthusiastic about submitting to spanish power or supplying the spanish with food and provisions than the zuni had been.
the pueblos quickly found that rather than fight the best solution seemed to be to keep the spanish moving by assuring them that the real wealth was just over the horizon.
in 1541 the expedition set off into what are now northern texas oklahoma and kansas.
the spaniards met teya indians seminomadic peoples who had found ways to live well in a harsh countryside far better than the spaniards could.
coronado and his men did not however find gold or european style cities.
finally discouraged and with their supplies gone they returned to mexico city in 1542 with little to show for their efforts.
it was decades before spanish authorities would try again to settle in arizona or new mexico.
art i contact and exploration 1491 1607 exploring the mississippi river valley the de soto expedition 1539 1542 while coronado was roaming the southwest another spanish adventurer hernando de soto was exploring even more of the future united states.
de soto had won fame and gold through military exploits in panama in the 1520s and had been a part of pizarros conquest of the inca empire in the 1530s.
he was then given a royal charter to settle la florida and the lands beyond.
he would try again where ponce de leon and de narvaez had failed.
in 1539 he sailed to florida with some 500 to 600 spaniards and about 100 captive american indians and africans.
the expedition also brought blacksmiths to make chains for the new slaves they expected to capture.
in northern florida near modern day tampa they saw fields of corn and large towns led by powerful rulers.
in 1540 the expedition moved into georgia and the carolinas.
in a place they called cofitachiqui probably a creek indian village the ruler a young woman greeted de soto and presented unto him great store of clothes of the country and took from her own neck a great cordon of pearls and cast it about the neck of the governor entertaining him with very gracious speeches of love and courtesy de soto responded by taking the princess prisoner and demanding that she guide his expedition over the appalachian mountains to the gold he sought.
she did lead them over the mountains but then escaped taking the pearls that she had given de soto home with her.
other indians who happened to be in de sotos path would not be so fortunate.
as the expedition crossed the appalachian mountains into tennessee and on into alabama and mississippi they were met by native americans bringing gifts the spaniards quickly tried to make the natives into guides and slaves.
but as word of the spaniards spread they found fewer gifts and more hostility.
de soto reported well populated lands.
later european explorers however found far fewer indians most likely because of diseases unintentionally brought by de sotos expedition.
in 1541 de soto crossed the mississippi river and explored what is now arkansas and probably modern day texas.
when they turned back to the mississippi river de soto demanded that a nearby native american town provide supplies and porters to help with the river crossing.
when the village chief refused de soto ordered his soldiers to destroy the town his journal reports that the cries of the women and children were such as to deafen those who pursued them 2 3 jacques le moyne an early french colonist in florida drew this picture of an indian queen being carried by high ranking men.
while the picture is from the later 1500s in florida the princess that the de soto expedition met a few years earlier may well have been treated with similar respect.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 43 de soto himself died of fever on june 20 1542.
his fellow explorers sunk his body in the mississippi river so the now hostile indians would not know their leader was gone.
then they built rafts and drifted down the river.
after considerable hardship 311 survivors about half the original group reached mexico.
they had not found much in north america that interested them.
exploring california the cabrillo voyage 1542 1543 while coronado was exploring new mexico and de soto the mississippi valley the spanish authorities commissioned juan rodriguez cabrillo to investigate the pacific coast.
cabrillo had come to new spain as a young man and amassed a fortune which he was prepared to use to outfit his own expedition in hopes of great returns.
in 1542 cabrillo sailed north from mexico along the pacific coast with three ships to discover 2j the coast of new spain and continue until he reached china which was assumed to be not far distant.
cabrillo s three ships left navidad mexico in june 1542 and by september had reached san diego bay in california.
they exchanged gifts with friendly american indians and reported seeing a beautiful land of valleys savannas high mountains and smoke that indicated a large native population.
cabrillo called california a good country where you can make a settlement he continued north along the pacific coast as far as the russian river in northern california.
like many after him cabrillo overlooked the area of what is now san francisco because of the heavy fog.
he did however realize that in monterey bay the future capital of spanish and mexican california there was a fine harbor.
after cabrillo died of an injury while trying to rescue some of his men from an attack the expedition returned to mexico.
they had found neither china nor the gold they sought.
early settlements in florida fort caroline and st augustine 1562 1565 after all these failed efforts spanish interest in the lands north of mexico waned.
the first actual european settlements in north america reflected the growing divisions in europe itself.
catholic spain now had to compete with france a nation divided between catholicism and protestantism and with protestant england and holland.
only when these other european powers showed an interest in north america did spain set up permanent settlements there.
no nation was more deeply split by the protestant catholic divide than france which had a large protestant minority and a strong catholic majority.
it was from the french protestants that the first settlers in florida were recruited.
in 1562 gaspard de coligny a french protestant nobleman and admiral commissioned expeditions to florida.
although there was no european settlement in florida it seemed to be a strategic location on the sea lanes between spains empire in mexico and south america and spain itself.
as a loyal subject of the french king coligny wanted to secure lands for france.
he also wanted to create a safe haven for his fellow protestants.
in 1562 coligny commissioned jean ribault to make an initial trip to florida and then commissioned a larger french expedition including many families with their livestock supplies and tools which sailed in 1564.
the settlers moved to the mouth of the st johns river where jacksonville florida is today and built a town they named fort caroline after king charles ix of france.
they meant to stay and build their lives there.
it would be a useful outpost for france yet far enough away to avoid the political and religious turmoil of their homeland.
the spanish however considered this colony a major religious political and commercial threat to spain s control of the americas.
pedro menendez de aviles was given jurisdiction of a new spanish colony to reach from florida to newfoundland and told to establish cities in florida and oust the french protestants.
he did both.
in 1565 menendez de aviles founded st augustine today the oldest city of european origin in the united states.
all the lands north and west of it he declared now belonged to the king of spain.
he began a friendly trade with the timuca indians part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 this illustration by jacques le moyne shows the french led by jean ribault landing at the st johns river in florida in may 1562 and being greeted by friendly timuca indians.
who lived in northern florida and sought to convert them to catholicism.
the timucas valued spanish goods and provided the colony with food root vegetables wild fruit fish oysters game and corn but they resisted religious conversion.
having established st augustine de aviles attacked fort caroline killing all its inhabitants.
when the french fleet coming to aid fort caroline was shipwrecked along the coast by a hurricane de aviles killed the survivors too.
florida would remain in spanish hands for centuries and its bloody european beginnings mirrored europes divisions.
ihe founders of spains first colonies in north america like those who settled in latin america reflected the spirit of the reconquista or reconquest of spain itself when both muslims and jews were driven out of the country and religious and national unity were seen as one and the same.
for hundreds of years soldiers of christian spain fought against muslims whom they considered infidels seeking to win military glory wealth and spiritual honor on the battlefield.
it was a worldview in which religious fervor and military bravery were united in the service of the nation.
after the victory over the last muslim stronghold in spain in 1492 the next generation of spanish men could not hope for the success of their fathers grandfathers and great grandfathers in spain itself but they brought the same mixture of military heroics and religious fervor to the americas.
in the 1500s a way of looking at the world and especially at conquest that had been reshaping spain itself for hundreds of years became the key to creating an ever expanding empire in the americas.
cultural practices in spain and other parts of europe at the time may have also played a role in how ruthless the early europeans were.
under a system of primogeniture land was typically passed on to the oldest son.
younger sons then would not chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 45 23 have the same opportunities to acquire land and the wealth that went with it.
some would opt to spend their lives in the church but many would opt to spend their lives as soldiers where through conquest of new lands they might be rewarded.
unlike mexico and peru the spanish colonies in florida were settled by soldiers who did not want to create a vast empire but valued the independence that distance from imperial authorities gave them and by families of artisans and farmers who meant to build a richer life than they could have in spain.
as citizens on the border between european settlement and american indian territory these settlers wanted to enjoy the municipal liberties that the free cities of castile had enjoyed when they had represented the border between christian and muslim spain.
they also wanted to avoid the tightly ordered hierarchical society that was evolving in mexico.
the cities and the farms in florida prospered.
one settler recorded i have planted with my own hands grapevines pomegranates orange trees and figs wheat barley onions garlic and many vegetables that grow in spain the colonists quickly took to the corn that was the staple of the indian diet.
there were also slaves in st augustine from the beginning.
although his royal commission had authorized him to bring up to 500 african slaves to st augustine de aviles actually brought only about 50.
in time spanish florida had a black militia and included both african slaves and free africans.
there was also intermarriage and more casual sexual encounters among europeans native americans and africans in spanish florida.
in this outpost the races blended creating a new culture and new bloodlines.
in addition st augustine became a place where europeans from other nations settled.
some settled of necessity after their ships were wrecked on the florida coast.
others came to escape legal problems military commitments or families.
despite strict rules issued in madrid isolated places like st augustine reflected considerable diversity including jews escaping an increasingly intolerant europe as well as french flemish and german immigrants escaping religious persecution or simply wanting a new start in life.
after its founding in 1565 and up until 1705 st augustine was home to a large scale effort to send franciscan missionaries into the surrounding native american territories.
the franciscans who traveled into the interior of florida and georgia to make converts also sought alliances with the indians.
tribal leaders came to st augustine to trade and negotiate and they accepted however casually spanish rule.
eventually about 80 mission centers were established from the savannah river in georgia to as far south as modern daytona beach.
the franciscans however also brought european diseases along with their preaching and the american indian population fell drastically.
nevertheless for a century native americans missionaries and soldiers traded religious and cultural ideas as well as the tools of commerce and war.
they intermarried and substantially influenced each other and their offspring in florida.
despite occasional battles with the american indians raids by european navies and hurricanes life in spanish florida continued more or less uninterrupted well into the 1700s.
while the english focused their efforts further north and the spanish empire centered on mexico central and south america those who were in florida were left alone.
except for a brief period of british rule between 1763 and 1784 florida remained a spanish colony until it was ceded to the united states in 1821 256 years after the founding of st augustine.
settling new mexico 1598 after coronados expedition to explore the north american southwest returned to mexico city in 1542 there was little further exploration of new mexico for over half a century.
then in 1598 the spanish viceroy in mexico city decided it was time for another look at the lands of the north and appointed a new governor for what was called new mexico the rumors that great wealth existed there had never died.
more pragmatically the spanish were worried about the protestant english.
in 1579 francis 46 exploration 1491 1607 drake an english privateer a pirate working for the government sailed up the coast of california duplicating cabrillos route and his failure to find san francisco.
drake then turned west and duplicated the route of an earlier spanish explorer ferdinand magellan sailing across the pacific and on around the world before returning to london in 1580.
to the authorities in spain this achievement was a real threat.
settling the interior of north america suddenly seemed imperative.
don juan de onate was appointed governor of new mexico with instructions not to follow the harsh policies of cortes or pizarro.
the kings appointment letter said you will endeavor to attract the natives with peace friendship and good treatment and to induce them to hear and accept the holy gospel a succession of spanish monarchs never approved of the viciousness of the conquistadors though they accepted the gold and silver that flowed back to spain without asking too many questions about how it was acquired.
onates expedition included 400 men women and children among them a few spanish soldiers franciscan friars and indians along with supply wagons cattle sheep and mules.
onates wife isabel tolosa cortes montezuma was herself a granddaughter of cortes and a great granddaughter of the aztec emperor montezuma.
on april 30 1598 the expedition stopped on the banks of the rio grande and claimed all of the lands and peoples to the north for spain.
onate named the place where he crossed the river el paso del norte the pass to the north since coronados day the pueblo indians had seen spanish soldiers and missionaries come and go.
the spanish could be ruthless but they also seemed to have little staying power.
with the onate expedition spanish occupation of new mexico would come closer to being permanent.
onate sought political allegiance from the pueblos of southern new mexico.
in july 1598 he asked pueblo chiefs to swear allegiance to spain and convert to christianity.
onate chose to interpret their lack of hostility as agreement.
he also built a capital which he named san gabriel.
something resembling a permanent settlement of 400 europeans in the middle of thousands of pueblo indians took shape.
at first all was peaceful.
onate divided new mexico into administrative districts each with a priest in each to try to convert the american indians to christianity.
he allowed self government to continue in each pueblo he had little choice but insisted that each one must have a political governor.
he was more interested in exploring for the gold silver or pearls which he was sure were just over the horizon and did not try to force the native americans to labor for the spanish.
the peace did not last however.
zutucapan the leader of the acoma pueblo had avoided meeting onate because he did not want to cede any authority to the spaniards.
late in 1598 he attacked a spanish scouting party and in 1599 onate struck back.
after a fierce battle the spaniards whose guns swords and horses gave them a huge advantage burned acoma to the ground.
one thousand of its residents were killed and the remaining 500 were taken as slaves.
the male captives had one foot cut off.
when the jumano indians also resisted onate he hanged their chiefs and burned their village.
onates cruelty and his failure to find riches led to his recall in 1609.
the new royal governor don pedro de peralta moved the capital further north to a new town that he created and named santa fe inl610.
there peralta built the oldest public building still standing in the united states the governors mansion.
the colonys attention turned from gold to farming.
churches were built at the center of each pueblo.
the spanish hoped these churches would become new centers of indian life and faith but tensions would continue that would eventually culminate some 50 years later in a surprising revolt.
quick review how did spanish exploration in north america change overtime.
what was different between the exploration that took place between 1513 and 1543 and the latter developments between 1565 and 1598.
identify and explain factors that most contributed to this evolution.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 47 2 4 exploration and encounter in north america the french analyze early french exploration and claims in north america.
king francis i of france r 1515 1547 did not want to leave the americas to spain or portugal which was quickly developing its own empire in brazil.
in 1524 some 30 years after columbus made his journey the french king commissioned an italian sailor giovanni da verrazano to explore the atlantic coast and find a sea route to asia for france.
verrazano sailed from florida to newfoundland but concluded that an entire continent divided the atlantic from the pacific.
after verrazano french interest in north america focused further north on the st lawrence river valley and what became canada especially after jacques cartiers visit of 1534 to that region and after the destruction of fort caroline in 1565 as well as on islands in the caribbean.
eventually while the spanish explored the mississippi river valley north from the gulf of mexico the french would explore the same river coming south from their settlements near the mississippis headwaters and tributaries in what is today the midwest.
first french visit to the atlantic coast of the united states verrazano 1524 verrazanos ship la dauphine left france in january 1524 and landed on what is now cape fear north carolina 2 months later.
he described the people he met there as of color russet and not much unlike the saracens their hair black thick and not very long he wondered if they might be chinese.
on april 17 1524 verrazano became the first european to sail into new york harbor describing how the inhabitants of manhattan came towards us very cheerfully making shouts of admiration showing us where we might come to land most safely with our boat he continued north visiting rhode islands narragansett bay maine and newfoundland and he mapped much of the atlantic coast of the future united states and canada before returning to france.
jacques cartier seeks a sea route to asia 1534 in 1534 france tried again to find a northern sea route to asia.
jacques cartier was authorized to make the effort for france.
cartier did not find the route which did not exist except through then frozen arctic ice but he explored newfoundland and the gulf of the st lawrence river laying the basis for future french claims to these lands.
he also began a trade in furs that would have great significance for french and english relations with american indians.
on a second voyage in 1535 1536 cartier explored the st lawrence river far upstream see map 2 2 coming to the sites of quebec and montreal.
more than a thousand friendly indians came to the river to greet him.
he traded european goods including knives for food beginning a trading relationship that would transform the lives of native tribes and europeans.
but cartier stayed too long and when the winter closed in he could not return to france because the river froze over.
cartier spent a terrible winter on the st lawrence buried in deep snow and losing a quarter of his crew to disease and cold.
although cartiers travels would be the basis for future french land claims it would be another half century before the french developed a serious interest in north america after they discovered that there was no quick way around it to the asian lands they really wanted to find.
2 4 quick review how did early french exploration differ from the spanish.
how was it similar.
48 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 1 exploration and encounter in north america the english 2 5 explain english explorers privateers and reasons for settlement.
although spanish conquistadors were the leading explorers of the americas an english led expedition was among the first to follow columbus.
king henry vii of england commissioned another italian giovanni caboto or john cabot to sail across the atlantic in 1497.
cabot made landfall in north america most likely in newfoundland and may have traveled as far south as maine.
he did not meet any people but erected a cross and banner to claim the lands for england.
when he returned to london he was given a rich reward.
in 1498 cabot set out on a second voyage but he and his companions disappeared most likely their ships were sunk in a storm and there is no clear evidence of further english discoveries or claims in the americas until more than 50 years later when a very different england found new reasons to look more carefully across the atlantic.
england s reformation shapes the country in the early years of the protestant reformation few would have predicted that england would break with the roman catholic church.
when he became king in 1509 henry viii was a good catholic.
he even wrote a defense of traditional catholic doctrine that led the pope to give him the title defender of the faith he had married catherine of aragon daughter of the devoutly catholic ferdinand and isabella of spain.
his closest advisor was catholic cardinal thomas wolsey.
but henrys marriage problems would eventually reshape the country and help it gain a powerful role in the atlantic world.
by the late 1520s henry wanted to end his marriage with catherine.
five of their six children had died.
only a daughter named mary survived and henry wanted a male heir.
he had also fallen in love with anne boleyn a young woman at the court.
under pressure from the king the english clergy had agreed to dissolve the marriage.
but pope clement vii needed political support from catherines nephew charles v king of spain and holy roman emperor who opposed the divorce.
the pope stalled and refused to approve the divorce.
a century even a decade earlier henry would have had little room to maneuver.
now the protestant reformation gave him an opening.
in 1534 parliament passed legislation ending papal authority in england and declared henry and his successors to be the only supreme head in earth of the church of england henry annulled his marriage to catherine married anne and celebrated the birth of a new daughter elizabeth though he still longed for a son.
he closed monasteries and sold off church land or used it to reward loyal followers.
henry did not embrace many protestant teachings.
other than substituting his own authority for that of the pope official christianity in england remained closer to catholicism than to the protestantism of luther or calvin a fact that would become especially significant in the next century.
when henry died in 1547 england had three major religious groups.
some known as anglicans were perhaps a majority and supported henry s arrangement including independence from the pope and preserving traditional catholic religious forms.
however a growing protestant minority known as puritans wanted more radical religious change to purify the church of england of catholic practices especially the leadership of bishops.
in addition many roman catholics could not agree to the break with rome and remained loyal to the catholic church.
henrys successor was his 9 year old son edward vi r 1547 1553 from the kings marriage to his third wife jane seymour after he tired of anne and had her executed.
in the end henry had six wives but only three children.
the boy kings regents sought to make the english church more protestant in its doctrines and rituals.
but when edward died at age 15 his half sister mary i became queen and returned england briefly to catholicism.
however mary also died after a reign of only 5 years.
in 1558 elizabeth i r 1558 1603 daughter of henry viii and anne boleyn succeeded her.
anglicans within the church of england one group of protestants who wanted to establish a church that was led by the english monarchy.
puritans individuals who believed that reforms of the church of england had not gone far enough in improving the church.
23 23 23 24 23 chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 49 queen elizabeth ruled england from 1558 to 1603 during which time the country prospered internally and emerged as a major sea power in the world.
elizabeths reasons for embracing protestantism were strong.
if england were catholic then henrys marriage to her mother would be illegal and elizabeth would be an illegitimate child and unable to assume the throne.
if england were protestant she had every right to be queen of england.
and elizabeth meant to be queen.
she did not want her subjects fighting with each other however.
in the act of uniformity of 1559 parliament declared that she was supreme governor of the church of england.
worship should follow the book of common prayer which preserved many catholic rituals within a protestant theology.
every person in england was required to attend church once a week or face a fine.
catholics who refused to break with rome were persecuted.
but as long as protestants agreed to the act of uniformity and to attend church services that followed the book of common prayer elizabeths government left them free to disagree about their beliefs to their hearts content.
during elizabeths long reign england became a major power in europe and the world.
spain under king philip ii grandson of ferdinand and isabella was at the center of a catholic revival and philips spain and elizabeths england became bitter rivals.
queen elizabeth subsidized protestant rebels against spains rule of the netherlands and even engaged in a correspondence with ottoman sultan murad iii about a possible joint protestant muslim attack on catholic spain.
king philip in return plotted elizabeths overthrow and made plans to invade england to secure spains power and protect catholic unity.
when spain attacked england in july 1588 spains navy known as the spanish armada was defeated by the english navy and destroyed by storms.
after 1588 englands navy dominated the atlantic and eventually all of the worlds oceans.
english sailors grew more skilled the countrys shipbuilders became more sophisticated in their designs and its navigators gained new understanding of winds and currents as well as their charts and instruments.
for elizabeth and many of her subjects the defeat of the threatened spanish catholic invasion linked the protestant religion and english patriotism indissolubly in their minds.
a small nation on the margins of europe was suddenly a major player in an emerging atlantic world.
elizabethan explorers and pirates while elizabeth i ruled england english adventurers with her support set out to make a place for themselves in the new oceanic world.
english and other european fishermen had fished off the north atlantic coast of north america since the early 1500s.
by the 1580s however warfare and piracy became the dominant role of the english who visited the americas.
building settlements at that time was not a priority.
if powerful catholic spain was exploiting the continents for gold and silver england saw no reason not to relieve the spanish ships of some of their treasure without going to the trouble of mining it themselves.
francis drake was perhaps the most famous pirate or privateer as they were known when their exploits were commissioned by the government.
drake was licensed for piracy by queen elizabeth.
licensing individual captains to harass the spanish treasure fleets was far cheaper than supporting a large royal navy and the english government at minimal risk kept a fifth of whatever the pirates brought to england.
indeed pirates may have supplied 10 percent of english imports in the 1590s.
the decades of legalized piracy also helped expand the technical knowledge of english mariners.
the role of this piracy was instrumental in laying a foundation for englands sea power.
50 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 exploration on myhistorylab how did global exploration change the old and new world.
beginning in the 1400s explorers left europe and headed west in search of faster trade routes to asia to keep up with the growing european demand for luxury goods such as silk and spices.
in the process they encountered huge civilizations in the americas complex societies that often had high levels of economic and social interconnectedness.
over the next 2 centuries europeans attempted to conquer these native american societies by force set up colonies and establish trade ties connecting the old world europe asia and africa with the new world the americas.
this age of global exploration had a profound impact on world history and was especially destructive to societies in the americas as vast numbers of people in new world succumbed to old world diseases.
this illustration c 1500 of italian origin is said to show the first european representation of people in the new world.
sadly it does not reflect much respect for the people who had so recently come to the attention of europe.
populations of precontact native american and colonial powers c 1500 the americas colonial powers 23 12 23 23 the americas 60 70 million colonial powers 29 7 million note each figure represents a million people.
colonial powers england spain portugal france.
24 key questions use myhistorylab explorer to answer these questions analysis what global trade routes existed in the old world prior to the age of global exploration.
map the late medieval trade contacts between europe asia and north africa.
comparison in what ways were societies in the americas interrelated before the arrival of the europeans.
map the economic interconnectedness of the new world.
consequence how did the new trans atlantic trade connect different parts of the world.
map the integration of the old and new worlds into a single trading network.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 51 2 1 22 23 2a john white himself an early english settler drew this picture of a woman and child of pomelooc in an effort to describe the algonquians with whom the first english explorers came into contact.
francis drake was an explorer as well as a privateer.
during his voyage around the globe from 1577 to 1580 the first commander of such an expedition to survive he confirmed the contours of the americas for the english.
he then continued across the pacific and around africa before returning to london.
in 1585 he attacked and burned st augustine florida.
in 1588 he helped defeat the spanish armada.
his exploits brought considerable wealth to queen elizabeths england while weakening spanish control of the seas.
by the time drake died in 1596 while again harassing the spanish in central america english sailors were confident that they could travel anywhere without trouble even if spain still controlled the most valuable land in the americas.
walter raleigh and the lost colony of roanoke in 1584 an ambitious young man walter raleigh was authorized by england to use his own funds to occupy lands in north america.
raleighs role was to fund and authorize the missions.
at the time england and raleigh himself were most interested in establishing a base from which privateers like drake could easily operate and profit financially from these missions.
ihe first mission in 1584 was a reconnaissance trip to identify potential sites.
ihe small group discovered roanoke island and was received warmly by the algonquian people two of whom manteo and wanchese returned to england with the crew.
in 1585 raleigh sent 100 young men back to roanoke on the outer banks of north carolina along with the two algonquian emissaries.
it was the first english colony in what is now the united states.
it was also short lived.
when the men landed one of their ships ran aground and most of the food they had brought was ruined.
ihe roanoke indians were not happy to feed the colonists whom they began to suspect of trying to dominate them and a battle broke out in 1586 in which the roanoke chief wingina was killed.
when francis drake arrived later that spring to rest his crews and refit his ships he found the survivors in disarray.
instead of refitting he agreed to take the survivors back to england when they decided to abandon the colony.
raleigh was not discouraged however.
if a colony of men could not succeed then perhaps one composed of families could.
in 1587 he convinced english investors to create a new colony in a location on the chesapeake bay which would have more navigable waters than the shallows around roanoke.
colonists were promised 500 acres per family a huge estate for the times though one might question englands authority to give away land claimed by the algonquians.
some 100 people left england to create this new colony but events along the way landed them instead back at roanoke amid the algonquians who had fought their predecessors.
nevertheless the colony was established houses built and the settlers began their new lives in this isolated place.
virginia dare was born and baptized in this colony soon after the families arrived.
she was the first english child known to be born in what is now the united states.
but the 1587 roanoke colony also failed.
indeed it came to be known as the lost colony the settlers had been left in what seemed like reasonably good shape with a promise that resupply ships would arrive the following spring.
however no ships were allowed to leave england in 1588 because of the threatened spanish attack.
the government commandeered every ship to oppose the mighty spanish armada.
nor did weather help the colony.
between 1587 and 1589 the worst drought in the area in 800 years struck.
if the experience of later col onies is any guide drought increased tensions with nearby american indians who became much more reluctant to provide food when they faced their own shortages.
when john white finally returned to roanoke with the promised supplies in 1590 52 parti contact and exploration 1491 1607 he found the colony abandoned.
whether the colonists were massacred or simply melted into the surrounding indian tribes is unknown.
quick review how did francis drake contribute to english wealth and power without establishing any colonies.
why were the english slower to establish colonies in the americas than the spanish or the french.
conclusion through most of the 1500s cabrillos de sotos and coronados expeditions for spain verrazanos and cartier s voyages for france and raleighs colonizing efforts for england were considered total failures.
fortunes had been spent but few permanent settlements had been made.
the explorers had found no gold and no quick route to china in the lands north of mexico.
nevertheless spain france and england now had a much clearer picture of the geography of north america.
many of the native peoples of north america also had at least a vague knowledge of the militaristic europeans whose presence would change everything for future generations.
half a century after columbus had first landed the atlantic and pacific coasts and most of the southern half of the united states had been the scene of many contacts between american indians europeans and often africans.
even more than 100 years after columbus settlement was limited to a few spanish posts in florida and new mexico.
for the american indians europeans were people who came quickly and left almost as quickly while disease decimated some tribes for most of the surviving native peoples of north america daily life in the early 1550s even in 1600 was barely different from what it had been a century before.
they might have a few new trade goods or may have engaged in an occasional skirmish with europeans but that was about it.
that situation would change quickly after 1600 however as three great european powers spain france and england and smaller ones including the netherlands and sweden would establish permanent settlements and vie for control of north america.
chapter review 2 5 how did european politics economics and religious issues lead to exploration and settlement in america.
of these three which is the single most important category.
chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 53 chapter 2 chapter review 24 columbus the columbian exchange and early conquests explain the reasons behind the voyages of columbus and describe early spanish encounters with the peoples of the caribbean mexico and south america.
review questions 1.
contextualization what do columbuss words and actions on arriving in the new world tell us about his motives for making his voyages.
crafting an argument why did native populations decline so rapidly after 1492.
which cause for this was most important.
historical interpretation who were the winners and losers in the shift toward an ocean focused global trade system.
a divided europe the impact of the protestant reformation explain how the protestant reformation and the development of the nation state changed europe and european ideas about how best to settle and govern america.
review question 4.
historical interpretation how did political and religious developments in 16th century europe shape the course of european settlement in the americas.
exploration and encounter in north america the spanish 23 analyze early spanish exploration of america north of mexico.
review questions 5.
contextualization why did the french try to colonize florida.
why did the spanish respond to these efforts as they did.
historical interpretation how do you account for the failure to follow up on the de soto coronado and cabrillo expeditions.
why did spanish authorities remain uninterested in the future united states for so long.
contextualization how did the pueblos respond to early spanish efforts to find gold in their territory.
what does their response tell us about their strategies for dealing with these newcomers.
exploration and encounter in north america the french 2 4 analyze early french exploration and claims in north america.
review question 8.
comparison compare french lack of interest in a permanent settlement in the northern parts of the future united states and canada in the 1500s with french and spanish interest in settlement in florida.
how do you account for the differences.
2 5 exploration and encounter in north america the english explain english explorers privateers and reasons for settlement.
review questions 9.
chronological reasoning how did events in the decades before elizabeth i came to the throne shape her religious policies.
contextualization why did contemporaries see most of the european expeditions in north america during the 1500s as failures.
part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 settlements old and new 1607 1754 part part outline why did paleo indians migrate to the americas.
european civilization in turmoil p 10 how did economic and political changes in europe facilitate overseas expansion.
columbus and the columbian exchange p 16 what was the columbian exchange and how did it affect societies in the americas and europe.
west african worlds p 20 what were the chief similarities and differences between the civilizations of africa and the americas.
european colonization of the atlantic world p 24 how did the different labor systems employed by the spanish french and english affect the indigenous populations of the americas.
c hapter the first americans p 4 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 to the people who had lived in the americas for millennia the idea that theirs was a new world would have seemed strange.
scientists continue to debate when the first people arrived in the americas from asia but estimates range from between 40 000 and 14 000 years ago.
in the millennia that followed the peoples of the americas fanned out and established a range of societies.
yet to the europeans who arrived in the americas toward the end of the fifteenth century america was indeed a brave new world as william shakespeare wrote inhabited by exotic plants animals and peoples.
in images and words europeans portrayed this extraordinary land in the most fantastic terms.
some accounts spoke of america as an eden like earthly paradise inhabited by good natured but primitive peoples.
others emphasized themes like those featured in this engraving amerigo vespucci awakens a sleeping america.
vespucci an italian spanish navigator from whose first name the new world came to be called the americas gazes upon a naked native woman rising from her hammock.
her nudity symbolizes the wild sexuality europeans believed characterized the native inhabitants of the americas.
the cannibals behind her devouring human flesh represent savagery a second prominent element of the european vision of the new world.
neither vision of the americas was accurate but both would greatly complicate europeans understanding of the american civilizations they encountered leading to a legacy of violence exploitation and conquest.
the european arrival in the americas was part of a process of exploration and colonization pursued primarily by portugal spain france and england.
this impulse was driven both by a hunger for riches as well as by profound changes in european society religion economics and politics brought on by the renaissance and reformation.
africa was eventually drawn into this vast trading network encompassing the entire atlantic world.
colonization almost always involved the severe exploitation of native peoples including dispossession of land and coerced labor.
eventually europeans turned to the international slave trade and the labor of enslaved africans to draw the wealth from the mines and fields of the new world.
your magnificence must know that herein they are so inhuman that they outdo every custom even of beasts for they eat all their enemies whom they kill or capture.
and are libidinous beyond measure amerigo vespucci 1497 chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 the first americans in one sense america was the new world or at least a newer one in terms of human habitation.
the oldest traces of human life have been found in africa where the earliest human fossil remains unearthed date to somewhere between 190 000 and 160 000 years ago.
in contrast the oldest human fossils found in north america are roughly 14 000 years old far more recent than those found in europe asia or australia.
the ancient inhabitants of america paleo indians were an ice age people who survived largely by hunting big game and to a lesser extent by fishing and collecting edible plants.
within a few thousand years of their arrival in america from asia they had fanned out across the americas.
1 1 migration from asia to america most scholars believe the first inhabitants of america migrated from asia across the bering strait by way of the land bridge that once connected asia and north america.
be r in gia b eri ng s trai t n orth a me r ica pacific ocean head smashed in alberta kennewick wa meadowcroft pa present day shore lines land migration theory ancient shore lines pacific coast route theory glacial ice sheets key archeological sites migration settlement and the rise of agriculture most scholars agree that humans first migrated to north america from asia across a land bridge that formed during the ice age 1 1 about 20 000 years ago.
this land bridge lasted from about 28 000 to 10 000 bce before melting glacial waters submerged it below rising sea levels.
an alternative theory holds that humans may have traveled to the new world by boat even earlier this has attracted some support but most scholars favor the land bridge theory.
with much of the worlds oceans frozen in massive glaciers ocean levels during the ice age were almost 360 feet lower than present day levels resulting in dry land where the bering strait is now.
nomadic hunters simply crossed what to them appeared an endless 600 mile wide tundra in pursuit of migratory big game animals like the woolly mammoths huge long tusked members of the elephant family that provided furs for warm clothing and ample stocks of meat.
what theories have been proposed to account for the migration of paleo indians to north america.
folsom nm clovis nm cactus hill va topper sc aucilla river fl atl antic ocean temperatures slowly warmed as the ice age passed causing the great glaciers to melt and sea levels to rise.
the so ut h rising waters covered the beram eri ca ing strait land bridge cutting off migration from asia.
but the recession of the glaciers also opened the way for human migration southward and eastward into what is now canada and the united states.
over time this migration reached the very tip of south monte verde america.
chile armed with spears tipped with flint a hard dark stone paleo indians roamed in search of big game.
these spear heads called clovis points named after the new mexico town in which scientists first discovered them were one of the stone age tools used by the ancient the first americans inhabitants of america.
clovis point arrowheads like those shown in 1 2 were lashed to poles to make simple spears.
paleo indians also used other simple stone tools such as stone axes and scrapers for hunting and preparing meat a variety of bone tools such as antler harpoons for fishing and bone needles for sewing hides.
these ancient peoples generally hunted in small bands of perhaps 20 to 30 people in cooperative kin groups.
hunting parties pursued a wide range of prey including primitive horses and the oversized ancestors of many modern species such as beaver bison caribou and forerunners of the camel.
hunting gathering and other activities among stone age peoples were probably divided along gender lines.
men hunted and fished while women reared children gathered nuts and berries and made clothing.
many of the mammals that paleo indians hunted including horses and camels eventually became extinct the spanish reintroduced modern horses from europe thousands of years later.
three competing scientific theories attempt to explain the mass extinctions of large mammals in the americas.
some scientists believe overhunting led to the demise of the large mammals.
others argue that dramatic climate change the rising temperatures that accompanied the passing of the ice age killed off animals that were unable to adapt to the new warmer environments.
the most recent explanation focuses on diseases that may have been brought to the new world by humans and the animals that accompanied them most notably dogs and possibly rats.
whatever the cause of the mass extinctions the decline in large game eventually led paleoindians to search for new food sources and develop new modes of providing food and other necessities.
approximately 9 000 years ago a period known as the archaic era began.
lasting approximately 6 000 years it ushered in significant social changes that began with increased efforts by native peoples to shape the environment to enhance food production.
at first these efforts were primitive.
archaic era indians for example burned forest underbrush to provide better habitats for smaller mammals such as deer which they hunted.
they also relied increasingly on gathering nuts and berries and in some cases on harvesting shellfish from lakes streams or coastal waters.
the gendered division of labor found in stone age societies persisted into the archaic era women cared for children and did much of the gathering and preparing of food while men hunted and fished.
some archaic era indians even took the first steps toward agriculture.
at first they encouraged the growth of edible plants such as sunflowers and wild onions by simply weeding out inedible plants around them.
over time archaic era indians learned how to collect and plant seeds and developed basic ideas about irrigation.
these primitive cultivation techniques led to increased food supplies and diminished reliance on hunting.
by about 5000 bce fixed agricultural settlements appeared in what is now mexico.
there native people learned how to grow maize corn squash and beans leading to the development of food surpluses and consequently large increases in population.
planting tending and defending crops necessitated the creation of larger permanent settlements leading to urbanization the creation of towns and cities.
increased food surpluses allowed the ancient peoples of the americas to devote more resources to a variety of cultural artistic and engineering projects.
the combination of agriculture urbanism and increasing social complexity set the foundation for the emergence of the first great civilizations of the southern region of north america an area stretching from modern mexico to nicaragua known as mesoamerica.
the most advanced societies in mesoamerica included the olmecs 1150 bce to about 800 bce maya peaked in 300 bce 900 ce and toltecs 900 ce 1200 ce.
these complex societies developed written languages systems of mathematics sophisticated irrigation techniques and 1 2 clovis point the range of tools available to paleo indians was limited but included stone tools such as arrowheads axes scrapers bone needles and harpoons.
clovis point arrowheads were attached to spears for hunting.
what impact did agriculture have on the evolution of the societies of the americas.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 mesa verde chaco canyon cahokia indians of the ancient southwest spiro serpent mound etowah hohokam moundville anasazi mogollon yucatan peninsula mound builders and eastern woodland indians hopewell lake texcoco teotihuacan tenochtitln mississippian northern iroquoian indians of mesoamerica maya 1 3 early american civilizations civilizations in the americas ranged from the aztec in mesoamerica to the anasazi in the southwest and the mound builders of the midwest.
toltec aztec central plaza of the aztec capitol was dominated by pyramid like temples that towered over the landscape reaching a height of close to 200 feet.
as it developed aztec society became extremely stratified.
at the top of the social pyramid sat a powerful emperor.
below the emperor were a class of nobles a priestly class a warrior class and an administrative class that collected taxes and tributes.
the foundation of this vast pyramid comprised merchants artisans and farmers.
at the very bottom were slaves.
some were aztec born and became slaves temporarily as punishment for crime.
prisoners of war also added to the slave population and human chattel was provided as part of tax debts owed to the aztec empire by its many conquered peoples.
gender roles were sharply defined among the aztec.
women helped men tend the fields but were primarily responsible for child rearing cooking weaving cloth and shopping in the markets.
although the priests were invariably men aztec religion accorded women an important role in the family including making religious offerings to the gods.
cuzco indians of south america monumental architecture.
they moche inca also experienced increased social stratification the division of a society into classes of people ranked from low to high according to status wealth and power.
one of the most important of these societies the aztec 1300 ce to 1521 ce created a powerful empire in what is now mexico 1 3.
the aztec the rise of the immensely powerful aztec confederacy transformed mesoamerica.
by the time the spanish arrived in the early sixteenth century the aztecs controlled a vast empire of between 10 and 20 million people.
the aztec empires capital the great city of tenochtitln was built on an island in lake texcoco in 1325 on the site of todays mexico city.
causeways connected the city to the mainland.
an elaborate system of dams controlled the water level of the lake while aqueducts carried fresh water to the city.
a sophisticated system of floating gardens produced food to feed the large urban population which swelled to almost 300 000 over the next two centuries.
the what role did commerce play in aztec culture.
view the closer look images as history blood of the gods the first americans trade and commerce were crucial to the aztec years ago cahokias population ranged between economy.
in the smaller towns daily markets 20 000 and 40 000.
the city was protected by a provided a wide array of goods but these markets huge wooden palisade and featured at its center a were miniscule compared to the great open air massive terraced earthwork mound that covered market in tenochtitln.
countless foods textiles 16 acres and rose over 100 feet above the ground.
ceramics and other goods were available for trade capping this mound was a wooden temple that illustrating the richness and complexity of the would have been among the tallest human made aztec economy.
structures in the the aztecs were americas exa war like society.
ceeded only by conquered peoples the pyramids of were forced to pay mesoamerica.
tribute in the form of other mississiptextiles agricultural pian communiproducts precious ties developed stones and ceramin present day ics and even provide alabama georgia slaves for human and oklahoma.
sacrifices.
for the in the ameriaztecs human saccan southwest rifice was a central the anasazi religious ritual necpeoples created bernal diaz del castillo essary to appease the spanish historian of the conquest of mexico 1568 another comgods especially the plex civilization gods of rain and war.
marked by a sophisticated urban culture that included a series of towns inter connected by roads 1 3.
to survive in the arid climate of the southwest the anasazi developed impressive engineering skills to build their cities and construct urban settlements also appeared in other regions complex irrigation systems to supply water for of north america 1 3.
one group the mounddrinking and agriculture.
using adobe clay building societies created monumental earthen bricks they built large dwellings later known burial mounds as part of their religious practices.
by their spanish name pueblos.
at chaco cansome 2 000 years ago the adena of what is now yon in what is now northwest new mexico southern ohio built the great serpent mound.
the anasazi built pueblo bonito.
this dwellstill visible it resembles a giant snake.
excavations ing contained hundreds of rooms including of this and other mounds have unearthed a host of dozens of kivas or circular rooms intended artifacts used for religious purposes and personal for religious ceremonies.
until the developadornment.
we can also conclude that these inment of modern apartment buildings in the late land people acquired the conch shells and shark nineteenth century this was the largest human teeth found at their sites from other cultures as dwelling in history.
part of a trade network that extended to the atlanthe anasazi also developed skills in making tic coast.
pottery and textiles some of which they used in the most complex mound building society the a vast trade network that stretched hundreds of mississippian developed in the mississippi valley miles to the south.
the most valuable commod 1 3.
the central city of this civilization cahokia ity they traded was turquoise a bright blue green arose in what is now southern illinois near st stone used to make jewelry.
in exchange for it louis.
cahokia developed a stratified society with the anasazi acquired prized luxuries such as sea a chief at the top followed by an elite class and a shells from as far away as the gulf of california lower class that provided labor for agriculture and to the west and carved images and feathers from building projects.
at its height about 700 1 000 mesoamerica.
begin with the dealers in gold silver precious stones feathers mantles and embroidered goods.
but why waste so many words in recounting what they sell in their great market.
if i describe everything in detail i shall never be finished mound builders and pueblo dwellers view the image pueblo indian ruins what role did trade play in ancient american societies.
chapter 1 1 4 john whites painting of secoton john whites painting of the eastern woodlands indian village of secoton includes images of wigwams the algonquian word for dwelling place europeans sometimes described these dwellings as longhouses.
people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 eastern woodlands indian societies a different type of society developed in a region encompassing what is now the eastern united states and canada.
in contrast to the native societies of the southwest and mesoamerica eastern woodlands societies were neither highly urban nor stratified.
organized into tribes these eastern how did eastern woodlands indian and mesoamerican societies differ.
woodlands indian peoples lived as hunters and gatherers as well as agriculturalists.
most spoke a dialect of one of two major indian languages iroquois and algonquian.
instead of living in urban settlements eastern woodland indians moved with the seasons to take advantage of different food sources tracking animals in forest regions or fishing in lakes streams and rivers.
consequently as this painting one of the earliest european views of an actual indian village 1 4 shows their villages were composed of wood and bark structures that were easily disassembled and reassembled to make seasonal movement possible.
dwelling in small villages rather than settled urban areas eastern woodlands indians avoided many of the sanitation problems and diseases that periodically afflicted ancient cities such as tenochtitln and cahokia.
the complex religious life of eastern woodlands indians embraced the concept of a supreme being the great manitou but also included animism or the belief that everything in nature possessed a spirit that had to be respected.
rather than seeking to own land and subdue the world around them in the manner of european societies eastern woodlands indians sought to inhabit the land and to live in dynamic relationship with it.
these beliefs however did not keep them from actively altering or managing their environments to their advantage.
indians adopted strategies such as controlled burning of brush a technique that encouraged the growth of habitats for the deer they hunted.
this type of strategy contrasted with european agriculture which used clear cutting to make land available for farming.
the tribal societies of the eastern seaboard had a relatively egalitarian political and social structure.
apart from the chief and a religious figure known as a shaman most members of a tribe enjoyed a rough equality.
while many indigenous societies in the americas particularly the more hierarchical ones of mesoamerica were patrilineal with inheritance and decision making residing in the male view the map native american peoples to 1450 the first americans line some eastern woodlands societies were matrilineal tracing descent and determining inheritance from ancestors on the female side.
in some tribes women enjoyed significant roles in tribal governance.
when captives were taken in war for example women often decided whether to adopt or execute them.
nonetheless woodland indians divided labor along gender lines with women consigned to the fields planting beans corn and squash while men tracked and hunted animals for food hides and pelts.
they are not delighted in baubles but in useful things i have observed that they will not be troubled with superfluous commodities thomas morton english lawyer 1637 eastern woodland indians were more communal than individualistic in outlook.
although trade was important and individuals might own some goods accumulating material wealth was not an important goal as it was in the more stratified mesoamerican societies.
individual tribes controlled territory but the notion of owning land as private property was alien to most of these tribal societies.
warfare among many eastern woodlands tribes was intermittent but common.
they often fought over control of tribal territory or hunting rights.
warfare typically consisted of skirmishes between rival war parties a style of combat that usually kept causalities low.
causalities suffered in war however might trigger further military actions or mourning wars intended to replenish the population reduced by fighting.
in such a war some prisoners taken captive might be tortured and killed while others deemed suitable were adopted by the tribe.
the persistent warfare among tribes led to the creation of the powerful iroquois league of five nations an organization that sought to reduce conflict among its members the seneca mohawk onondaga cayuga and oneida nations.
women played a significant role in the governance of the league.
female elders from each of the individual read the document iroquois creation story nations selected the men who formed the leagues great council a body that met to discuss matters of common concern especially war and peace.
american societies on the eve of european contact american indian societies were socially and culturally diverse ranging from the highly stratified and urban aztec in mesoamerica to the relatively egalitarian hunter farmer iroquois in the northeast.
the peoples of the americas spoke a host of different languages developed distinctive religious traditions and created different political models to govern themselves.
these societies shared many characteristics among themselves and with peoples in other parts of the world.
like their asian and european contemporaries the societies of the americas were pre modern with limited scientific knowledge and widespread belief in magic.
most people worked the land struggling to provide the basics needed to support life.
except for the privileged few life was hard sometimes brutal and short.
in the andes mountains of south america alpaca and llamas were domesticated providing wool or food and in the case of the llama serving as a pack animal.
but in contrast to africa asia or europe in north america and mesoamerica there were no large domesticated animals such as horses extinct after the paleo indian period cattle or camels.
without such animals the people of these regions lacked the mobility and power that horses afforded europeans africans and asians and that camels provided for north africans and asians.
american societies on the eve of contact with europeans were distinctive in another way.
while african and asian societies had developed considerable trade with europe the peoples of the americas had remained largely cut off from contact with other parts of the world for thousands of years.
this isolation had prevented their exposure to a host of diseases.
by the time of the first contact between europe and america in the late 1400s many of the inhabitants of asia africa and europe long exposed to a common pool of diseases because of their extensive trade contacts had developed immunity to many virulent pathogens.
in their relative isolation however the indigenous societies of the americas were highly susceptible to the microbial invaders introduced by europeans.
what were some of the distinctive characteristics shared by all of the societies of the americas.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 european civilization in turmoil as the aztec empire was reaching the height of its power at the close of the fifteenth century european society was in the midst of a profound transformation.
this period of cultural intellectual scientific and commercial flourishing is known as the renaissance.
the revival of interest in ancient greek and latin not only led to renewed interest in the civilizations of greece and rome but also caused renaissance thinkers to re examine the early history of the church and its teachings.
reformers drawing on these traditions and reacting to the corruption of the roman catholic church challenged the authority of the church.
the rise of a new strain of christian thought protestantism led to creation of a host of new christian sects.
amid this tumult powerful monarchs across europe forged new nation states out of the relatively weak decentralized governments of europe.
modern nations such as england france and spain were born in this era.
state building required money and the monarchs of these nations were eager to increase their wealth and power a desire that ultimately led to the colonization and exploration of africa and the americas.
the allure of the east and the challenge of islam the leading european powers decision to explore conquer and exploit lands in the atlantic world was facilitated by a host of economic technological and cultural changes.
contact with asia led to major changes in taste and patterns of consumption during the early modern period from the fifteenth through the seventeenth centuries.
europeans looked beyond their borders particularly to china and the far east for spices to enrich their bland foods and for luxury goods especially exotic textiles such as silk and cotton to enliven their fashions.
these commodities not native to europe had to be obtained from asia.
the overland trade routes to the east were controlled by muslims adherents of islam a monotheistic faith shaped by the teachings of the prophet muhammad.
since its emergence in the seventh century middle east muslim influence spread stretching from europe to parts of africa and asia.
europeans resented the economic power of muslim rulers who controlled the lucrative trade routes to the east.
european antagonism toward the muslim world also sprang from an intense religious animosity.
for almost 300 years christian europe had waged a holy war against islam launching crusades to regain control of jerusalem a city sacred to jews christians and muslims.
islams influence in europe was what trade goods from asia were most sought after by europeans.
most pronounced in the ottoman empire whose power eventually spread across the eastern mediterranean and balkans.
trade commerce and urbanization among the important changes in europe during this period was the dramatic growth of the economy.
the black death 1347 1352 ce a pandemic that spread to europe between 1347 and 1352 wiped out about half of europes population.
in the centuries following the black death europes population began to expand again eventually becoming larger than it had been before the epidemic.
the economies of europe also recovered.
by 1400 the italian city states especially venice dominated trade and finance particularly trade with the east.
in part venices dominance resulted from its proximity to the lucrative eastern trade routes.
italy also dominated textile production and florence became europes leading producer of woolen cloth.
slowly the economic center of europe shifted west and north.
by about 1500 the city of antwerp in what is today belgium had become the leading commercial center of europe but was eventually surpassed by the dutch port of amsterdam.
as trade and commerce expanded innovative financial practices and services facilitated continued economic growth.
new accounting methods helped european civilization in turmoil merchants keep track of inventories and profits and losses.
marine insurance reduced the risks of maritime trade.
a more elaborate banking system also helped finance trade.
the growth of deposit banking a system in which merchants could deposit funds with bankers and then draw on written checks instead of presenting gold or silver coins for payment of goods greatly bolstered trade and commerce.
all these developments made economic ventures more secure and encouraged investment some of which was directed toward overseas trade and exploration.
together the new commercial and financial practices were key elements in the growth of capitalism.
simply put capitalism is an economic system in which a market economy geared toward the maximization of profit determines the prices of goods and services.
this new profit driven capitalist ethos slowly transformed european life beginning in the fifteenth century.
capitalism also transformed rural europe.
european culture had always viewed nature as something to be tamed and exploited see competing visions european and huron views of nature page 12.
rather than simply produce food for themselves the new capitalist ethos led some farmers to seek the maximum yield from their land and plant crops that would fetch a higher price at market.
in other cases landowners evicted farmers from their lands so that they could graze sheep on the land and produce wool that would be turned into cloth.
this latter change in agriculture forced many to leave the countryside and seek employment in towns and cities.
migration from the countryside and commercial development led to greater urbanization in europe.
in the two centuries after the black death the population of london increased from 50 000 to more than 200 000.
outside of london englands changes were less dramatic but no less significant.
populations mushroomed in ports such as bristol regional market towns such as cambridge and the new textile centers such as norwich.
view the map spread of printing technological improvements and new inventions also spurred economic growth.
the printing press transformed the way knowledge was produced and disseminated.
while a scribe hand copying a book onto parchment might turn out two or three books a year the typical print run of a book produced on paper by a printing press was between 100 and 1 000.
printed books not only made it easier to preserve knowledge but also encouraged advances in science and in geographic exploration by making it easier to collect organize and analyze information.
printed texts and engraved images also whet the appetites of europeans for exploration by making accounts of exotic places such as india and china more accessible.
marco polos 1254 1324 influential text about his adventures in china the travels of marco polo circulated widely in manuscript form for more than a century before a printed edition appeared in 1477.
printing created an entire new industry for the production dissemination and sale of books.
the new technology also transformed visual culture making it possible to create cheap images.
the new technique of engraving 1 5 was a multistep process.
on the right a skilled craftsman gouges out an image on a copper plate.
in the center the plates are inked and then wiped clean.
on the left the final stages in the engraving process are demonstrated including the giant press used to create the final image.
1 5 copper engraving the many steps used to make an engraving from the artists hand to the final drying of the printed page are illustrated in this early image.
how did printing affect european society.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 competing visions european and huron views of nature european capitalism was built on deeply rooted beliefs including the notion of private property and the belief that nature existed as a resource for humans to tame and exploit.
european and eastern woodlands indian cultures had starkly different attitudes toward the natural world.
following a mandate laid down in the biblical book of genesis europeans believed that they had a god given right to rule over nature.
the huron an eastern woodlands indian tribe from canada approached nature in a radically different way that reflected their animist belief that all living things had spiritual power.
what ecological consequences flowed from the huron view of nature.
how might this view have shaped the european impression of indians.
what ecological consequences follow from the western view.
in genesis god gave humans complete control over nature.
according to this view humanity was not simply enjoined to subdue nature but to make sure that the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth and god blessed them and god said unto them be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the air and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
king james bible genesis 1 28 1611 lucas cranach adam and eve how does this painting of adam and eve reflect european views of nature.
one of the best sources for understanding indian views of nature can be found in the writings of jesuit missionaries a catholic order active in the french colonization of canada.
in this selection a jesuit recounts his exchange with a huron indian about the proper treatment of animal bones which hurons believed had to be treated with respect to avoid angering the animal spirits that might take offense and make hunting more difficult.
it is remarkable how they gather and collect these bones and preserve them with so much care that you would say their game would be lost if they violated their superstitions.
as i was laughing at them and telling them that beavers do not know what is done with their bones they answered me thou dost not know how to take beavers and thou wishest to talk about it before the beaver was entirely dead they told me its soul comes to make the round of the cabin of him who has killed it and looks very carefully to see what is done with its bones if they are given to the dogs the other beavers would be apprised of it and therefore they would make themselves hard to capture.
paul le jeune 1633 the jesuit relations and allied documents travels and explorations expl ex plor orat atio ions ns of of the the jesuit jesu je suitit missionaries mis missi sion onar arie iess in new new france f fra ranc nce e 1610 1791 10 1 1 1896 1901 189 1 6 19 01 6 211.
11 john white indians fishing view the closer look competing visions european and huron views of nature european civilization in turmoil renaissance and reformation a revival of interest in the cultures of greek and roman antiquity arising first in italy spread across europe at the end of the fifteenth century.
this rebirth of classical learning the renaissance transformed the way europeans thought about art architecture science and political philosophy.
the most significant change was the shift from theology the primary scholarly subject in the middle ages to the study of the liberal arts including poetry history and philosophy.
much like the ancient greeks renaissance scholars emphasized the human capacity for self improvement and exalted the beauty of the human body in painting and sculpture.
for these scholars known as humanists humans were the masters of their world and obligated to study it.
these renaissance values in particular the spirit of exploration would soon inspire explorers to seek out new lands and trade routes.
in contrast to medieval europe with its cloistered monasteries where monks prayed and copied texts for their own libraries the renaissance placed a high value on public art architecture and philosophical thought aimed at civilizing humanity.
civic humanism the new philosophy of the renaissance encouraged artists and philosophers to participate in public life especially in cities which replaced monasteries as the ideal place to encourage learning and glorify god.
the study of ancient languages fostered a new interest in the early church and inspired some religious figures to call for reforms in the roman catholic church.
one church practice that drew intense criticism was the sale of indulgences.
in essence money donated to the church could buy forgiveness for sin in this life and after death.
in 1517 a young german monk named martin luther attacked the sale of indulgences and other key elements of catholic doctrine and practice.
luther eventually developed a new theological alternative to catholicism.
rejecting the catholic churchs focus on good works as the key to achieving salvation luther argued that only faith could bring salvation.
luther also argued that ordinary people did not need to depend on the clergy to gain access to gods word they could and should read the bible themselves.
luther translated the bible from greek and latin to german and the newly invented printing press made it widely accessible.
anyone who could read could now receive the word of god in his or her own home.
luther championed the idea of the priesthood of all true believers the notion that everyone could experience salvation directly.
priests would continue to preach the word of god and perform rituals such baptizing infants and marriage ceremonies but luther would dispense with the catholic ritual of going to a priest for confession penance and absolution for sins.
luther also rejected monasticism.
the place for the committed christian was in this world not cloistered away in a monastery.
luther also urged christian monarchs to take up the cause of religious reform and reject the authority of the pope.
his attack on the political power of the roman catholic church appealed to some european rulers eager to strengthen their power.
luther was summarily excommunicated by the church but his calls for reform had wide appeal especially in what is now germany and scandinavia.
his supporters known as protestants began a movement for religious reform known as the reformation.
protestantism found an especially receptive home in geneva a french speaking city in switzerland.
here the french reformer john calvin 1509 1564 articulated a new variant of protestantism with a different theological emphasis from luthers version.
calvins theology stressed the doctrine of pre destination the notion that god had destined people to salvation or damnation prior to their birth no matter how righteously or wickedly they lived.
he also maintained that the true church was not embodied in any official organization including the roman catholic church but rather in a group of the elect or those chosen by god for salvation.
according to this ideal the elect could continue to act as a reformed church even if they had no physical place of worship or formal ministry to serve their spiritual needs.
with the bible and personal faith argued calvin protestants could constitute a true church wherever they lived including eventually a wilderness like america.
calvinists in switzerland and elsewhere took their critique of catholic worship a step further than lutherans becoming iconoclasts or image breakers.
they took the biblical injunction in exodus to avoid graven or carved images literally decrying them as sacrilegious and a form of idolatry calvinists smashed the stained glass windows and religious carvings that adorned churches.
one catholic nun described a protestant rampage in geneva in these terms like enraged wolves they destroyed those fine images with great axes and hammers especially going after the blessed crucifix and the image of our lady mary this contemporary image of one such rampage shows protestants pulling down sculptures and smashing stained glass what were the essential teachings of calvinism.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 1 6 protestants stripping a church of images this image depicts calvinist iconoclasm the destruction of graven images such as religious statues and stained glass windows.
windows 1 6.
once purged of all such catholic images religious worship calvinists believed could focus on the words of the bible alone.
in 1560 english calvinists published the geneva bible a text that would become the most important text for englishspeaking protestants.
new monarchs and the rise of the nation state by 1500 the kingdoms of france england portugal and spain had evolved into sovereign nation states.
powerful monarchs consolidated their power eliminated rivals to their thrones created administrative bureaucracies to rule and built larger more effective armies.
paying for these required huge sums of money and if they could not raise what they needed at home some monarchs began to look why did calvinists wish to remove all icons from their churches.
territorial expansion and exploration of new regions they reasoned would increase both trade and revenues.
in england henry vii r 1485 1509 established the house of tudor as the ruling family of england.
his son henry viii r 1509 1547 expanded the power of the monarchy.
his most important act as king of england was his break with rome when the pope refused to dissolve his marriage to the spanish princess catherine of aragon.
after failing to obtain a divorce henry declared himself head of his own independent english church.
he rejected the authority of the roman catholic church confiscated the monastic lands and sold them for a handsome profit or gave them to favored supporters.
the intensity of henrys anti catholic feeling and his particular hostility to the pope is evident in this portrait painted by an unknown artist in 1570 1 7.
henry viii lies in bed pointing to his european civilization in turmoil son and successor edward vi r 1547 1553.
the pope collapses in the foreground and two monks flee the scene while a monastery is sacked in the background.
perhaps the most ambitious of the new monarchies was spains created by the marriage of ferdinand of aragon and isabella of castile in 1469.
when they became joint rulers of spain ferdinand and isabella followed a strategy common to all the new monarchs they reduced the power of the nobility and strengthened their own control over the military.
they also boosted crown revenue by raising taxes and making tax collection more efficient.
as part of their effort to transform spain into a world power ferdinand and isabella sought to strengthen the power of the roman catholic church and ally its interests with the state.
in 1478 the spanish monarchy sought the popes approval to create the spanish inquisition a religious tribunal charged with finding and punishing heresy or unorthodox beliefs among christians and for eliminating nonchristians most notably muslims and jews from spain.
thousands of suspected heretics were arrested tortured and imprisoned.
hundreds were executed.
eventually in 1492 the government ordered all jews except those who converted to christianity expelled from spain.
that same year ferdinand and isabella achieved another goal in their effort to strengthen church and state by conquering granada the last remaining islamic state in spain.
the conquest of the last muslim kingdom in spain in 1492 was the final phase of this reconquista re conquest.
spains holy war united state and church in a single purpose.
this partnership between a militant clergy and an equally aggressive military would serve spain well when its attention moved beyond europe to the wider atlantic world.
1 7 henry viii and edward the vi in this unfinished painting englands henry viii passes on his authority to his son edward vi including his role as head of the new church of england.
in the upper right english protestant iconoclasts attack a monastery.
at the bottom of the image the pope collapses and monks flee from the worde of the lorde view the map western europe during the renaissance and reformation how was the english reformation different than the continental reformation.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 columbus and the columbian exchange in 1492 queen isabella agreed to outfit a small expedition to find a quicker route to asia.
the expeditions leader an italian sailor named christopher columbus was an experienced mariner who had worked in the portuguese seagoing trade to africa and the atlantic islands.
familiar with marco polos written accounts of china columbus believed he could find a faster and more direct route to asia than traveling around the tip of africa by simply crossing the atlantic.
he first asked the king of portugal to fund the voyage but the kings advisors warned columbus that he had greatly underestimated the circumference of the earth and would certainly perish long before he reached asia.
undeterred columbus turned to queen isabella who consented to fund his expedition.
columbus encounters the indians after sailing for 33 days columbus reached the caribbean islands most likely the bahamas.
mistakenly convinced that he had arrived in india he called the native peoples indians columbus claimed all the lands he visited for spain.
concluding that the native people were savages he believed that they were fit to be ordered about and made to work plant and do everything else that may be needed and build towns and be taught our customs returning to spain with captive indians exotic plants and gold columbus was greeted as a hero and secured funding for additional voyages of exploration.
columbus was not the first european to cross the atlantic nor was he the first to create a small european outpost in america.
the vikings had sailed from iceland almost 400 years earlier establishing small fishing outposts in what is now newfoundland canada.
nevertheless columbuss voyage to the americas brought the two worlds together in ways that viking ventures had not.
europes printing presses would make accounts of his voyage widely available providing a model for later explorers conquerors and settlers.
columbuss voyage also began one of the most complex ecological changes in modern history.
the worlds on both sides of the atlantic were suddenly reconnected a development that would have far reaching biological consequences for europe africa and america.
modern scholars have described the biological encounter between the two sides of the atlantic as the columbian exchange 1 8 a name that acknowledges the crucial role that columbus played in instigating this transformation.
this exchange involved a range of foods plants animals and diseases.
moving from the americas to europe by way of columbus and the europeans who followed him were a host of foods now closely identified with european cuisine.
before columbus italian cuisine had no tomatoes irish and german food no potatoes and switzerland no chocolate.
moving in the other direction were animals including the horse long extinct in the americas but reintroduced by the spanish sheep cattle and swine.
as soon as i arrived in the indies in the first island which i found i took by force some of them in order that they might learn and give me information christopher columbus 1493 what was the columbian exchange.
columbus and the columbian exchange from the new world to the old world from the old world to the new world plants potatoes maize sweet potatoes peanuts tomatoes beans squash and pumpkins sweet peppers and chilies cassava vanilla cacao tobacco blueberries pineapples avocados concord grapes guava cranberries wheat barley oats sugar cane apples pears peaches cherries melons apricots figs bananas citrus fruits olives wine grapes lettuces cabbage and other green vegetables lentils onions garlic carrots cucumbers eggplant coconuts almonds walnuts spices animals turkeys horses cattle pigs sheep goats chickens domestic cats rats diseases new strains of tuberculosis and syphilis evidence of infection with syphilis has been found in mummies from ancient egypt but columbuss crews may have brought more virulent varieties of the disease and of tuberculosis back to europe from the americas smallpox chickenpox measles mumps diphtheria typhus whooping cough infl uenza plague 1 8 columbian exchange this table shows the most important crops and animals involved in the columbian exchange.
a host of pathogens mostly of old world origin were also part of the columbian exchange.
diseases also crossed the atlantic.
europeans may have brought back a plague in the form of a more deadly strain of the sexually transmitted disease syphilis that sailors picked up on the caribbean islands.
far more devastating were the diseases like smallpox brought to the new world.
these diseases killed huge numbers of indian men women and children.
european technology in the era of the columbian exchange columbus and the europeans who led the exploration of the atlantic world benefited from technological changes developed in europe in the fifteenth century.
improvements in map making and the introduction of navigational devices that allowed mariners to calculate latitude more accurately aided exploration.
europeans borrowed technology from the islamic world and asia to improve their ships.
the portuguese also made important strides in ship building with the caravel a vessel whose lateen triangular sails were better suited to catching wind than were those of traditional european ships.
watch the video what is columbuss legacy.
europeans enjoyed a clear technological and military advantage over the peoples of america a disparity that would profoundly affect european interactions with the aztec and later with eastern woodlands indian peoples.
foremost among these advantages were the metallurgical techniques that allowed europeans to forge iron weapons that were stronger than those of the aztec and other indians.
domesticated horses allowed europeans to support their armies with swiftmoving cavalry.
through trade with china europeans had learned about gunpowder and developed powerful cannons and firearms such as the arquebus a forerunner of the musket and rifle.
among the inventions depicted in this engraving nova reperta new discoveries 1584 by artist johannes stradanus are the compass the mechanical clock cannons and gunpowder and a saddle with stirrups 1 9.
the conquest of the aztec and inca empires columbuss successful voyage in 1492 was followed by waves of spanish explorers and conquerors conquistadores in spanish who soon seized control of the islands of the caribbean.
the harsh labor what role did disease play in the columbian exchange.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 1 9 nova reperta in this drawing the artist links new scientific and technological discoveries with the exploration of the new world a printing press stands between a map of the americas and a compass.
the image is anchored by a cannon and casks of gunpowder symbolic of european military technology.
regime and the deadly diseases the spanish brought nearly wiped out these indigenous populations.
on the island of hispaniola present day haiti and the dominican republic 95 percent of the native peoples died within 25 years.
faced with the loss of this indigenous labor force the spanish turned to the african slave trade to supply the labor they demanded for the production of lucrative cash crops such as sugar.
spanish conquistadores lured by rumors of a fabulous empire possessing great wealth eventually turned their attention to the mainland of what is now mexico.
in 1519 eager to acquire this wealth for himself and spain hernn corts a brash and ambitious protg of the spanish governor of hispaniola embarked on an expedition to find the famed capital what technological advances facilitated european expansionism.
of the aztec empire and conquer it.
landing on mexicos southeast coast with over 500 men and 16 horses he burned his ships depriving his men of any opportunity to retreat.
he forced his men to push forward to conquer or die in the attempt.
although vastly outnumbered by the aztecs corts and his men had military advantages.
first they possessed horses firearms and steel weapons.
second they quickly gained allies among the peoples conquered by the aztecs.
after years of subjugation in which they were forced to provide the aztecs with victims for human sacrifice these exploited peoples now willingly sided with the spanish.
finally the spanish unknowingly carried with them a host of diseases in particular the deadly smallpox virus that infected and killed vast numbers of aztecs.
by 1521 view the map native american population loss 1500 1700 columbus and the columbian exchange just two years after his arrival corts had subdued the once mighty aztec empire.
a decade later other spanish conquistadors led by francisco pizarro toppled the similarly powerful inca empire which stretched from present day ecuador to what is now chile.
to many people of the americas who had never seen anything like firearms before the spanish did seem to have god like power.
european firearms left an indelible impression on south american cultures.
created centuries after european contact this peruvian painting 1 10 shows an angel carrying an arquebus the type of firearm used by the spanish during their conquest of central and south america.
the spanish took advantage of the existing systems of tribute and taxation created by the aztec to extract the maximum amount of wealth from the region.
spanish america yielded a glittering array of valuable items from gold to pearls.
the spanish also began exporting prized dyes such as the brilliant red cochineal and indigo.
the latter blue dye became closely associated with a type of cloth associated with the italian city of genoa.
the french name for this cloth bleu de gnes is the origin of the modern word blue jeans.
among the agricultural products exported cacao the key ingredient in chocolate helped spur a spanish obsession with drinking chocolate.
in contrast to the aztecs the spanish preferred to drink their chocolate with an added sweetener such as honey and eventually sugar.
in the 1540s the discovery of silver in what is now peru generated what became the most profitable american commodity for export.
silver would become the cornerstone of spains new found wealth.
silver was a mixed blessing for the spanish economy.
the influx of large amounts of silver into the spanish economy helped some become rich but others suffered as prices were inflated as more and more of the precious metal was introduced into the economy.
1 10 heavenly militia this south american painting done hundreds of years after the conquest shows an angel with an arquebus a precursor of the modern rifle.
the image shows the awesome power that spanish weaponry had on the consciousness of the conquered peoples of central and south america.
cacao by itself largely being eaten raw causes all this harm of which we spoke but that toasted and incorporated with warm spices as it is mixed in chocolate it has great benefits for everything juan de crdenas marvelous problems and secrets of the indies 1591 what role did disease play in the spanish conquest of the aztecs.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 west african worlds africa the worlds second largest continent in terms of land mass is home to some of the most ancient civilizations in the world.
the range of societies in africa in the sixteenth century rivaled those of the americas in social complexity and cultural and religious diversity.
africa featured class stratified urban civilizations alongside more simple egalitarian societies.
monotheistic faiths including christianity and islam flourished in parts of africa as did religions closer in principle to the animist beliefs of eastern woodlands indians.
the north african states on the mediterranean had been trading with europe since the founding of the great ancient port of carthage 814 bce near modern tunis.
africans possessed many commodities sought by europeans including salt gold ivory and exotic woods.
but the development of a direct sea route from europe to west africa in the fifteenth century greatly increased trade and contact between europeans and africans.
the most profound consequence of the sea routes to west africa was the development of the international slave trade a process that changed virtually every society in the atlantic world.
west african societies islam and trade the civilizations of africa south of the sahara desert including those with atlantic ports were socially and culturally diverse.
the powerful songhai empire 1370 1591 extended from the atlantic inward to the sudan.
primarily agricultural the empire included urban centers and a highly organized military and administrative bureaucracy.
in the great city of timbuktu an islamic university rivaled many european centers of learning.
other peoples such as the igbos of west africa lived in smaller autonomous villages.
these simpler more egalitarian societies were organized mainly around kinship more like americas eastern woodlands indians than the empires of mesoamerica or the rising nation states of europe.
local rulers consulted with a council of elders before making decisions affecting the community.
societies such as the igbos were matrilineal whereas other african societies traced descent and organized inheritance through the paternal line.
before the seventh century most societies of west africa practiced animist religions.
these polytheistic faiths considered aspects of nature such as the sun wind and animals to be gods and spirits.
ancestor worship also played a prominent role in many west african religious traditions.
but beginning in the mid seventh century the faith of islam what were the major religious traditions of africa.
first established in arabia by muhammad in 622 ce began spreading via trade routes through northern western and eastern africa.
islam eventually became the dominant religion in these areas especially in trading centers.
trade played a key role in the economic life of both north and west africa.
trade goods included salt ivory and precious metals.
while salt was an essential ingredient for cooking and preserving food the other items were sought by artists and artisans who fashioned them into luxury goods such as jewelry.
an extensive network of caravan routes linked west africa to the north african ports of tangier tunis tripoli and alexandria.
but portuguese exploration of the african coast in the late 1400s soon led to the development of direct trade between europeans and africans 1 11.
the portuguese african connection portugal took the lead in exploring an atlantic route to asia which provided europe with spices and exotic fabrics such as silk and cotton.
prince henry the navigator 1394 1460 a member of the portuguese royal family used his wealth and power to encourage exploration of the west african coast.
even after his death portugal continued to explore the west african coast leading to vasco da gamas voyage 1497 1499 around the horn of africa and arrival on the southwest west african worlds portugal azores spain s pa n i s h p o rt u g u e s e lisbon tunis tangier persia madeiras canary is.
morocco china alexandria tripoli egypt diu cape verde is.
timbuktu guinea macao india goa calicut lake chad ethiopia benin pacific ocean cochin ceylon malacca lake victoria mombasa brazil indian atlantic ocean celebes sumatra java timor ocean angola sofala madagascar demarcation line treaty of tordesillas 1494 portuguese trade routes dagama exploration route internal african trade igbo land songhai empire 1 11 internal african trade routes and portuguese trade with africa west african kingdoms were linked by several different inland trade routes to north africa and the mediterranean.
the portuguese traded with the atlantic islands and the west coast of africa.
coast of india 1 11.
portuguese traders then established a lucrative trade with india and began to explore trading possibilities with africa seeking such prized goods as ivory and gold.
after 1470 portuguese trade with west africa increased and within a decade the portuguese had established forts along the african coasts to facilitate further trading opportunities.
at approximately the same time that the portuguese were exploring the african coast they were embarking on an ambitious but ruthless plan of conquest and colonization in the atlantic island groups of the madeiras azores and cape verde 1 11.
these atlantic outposts were converted into sugarproducing plantation economies.
the portuguese also vied with the spanish for pre eminence in the canary islands.
the pope eventually brokered a treaty between these two iberian powers giving control to the spanish.
the biggest losers were the indigenous populations of the canary islands the guanche a north african people who had settled the islands thousands of years earlier.
the semitropical climate of the canaries was ideal for sugar cultivation.
the pope blessed the guanche enslavement which was entirely justified because the guanche were in his words infidels and savages the model developed in the canaries foreshadowed european interactions with the peoples of the americas.
with no previous exposure to the diseases carried by europeans thousands of guanche people became ill and died.
unable to rely on an indigenous source of labor europeans eventually turned to africa for slaves to provide the back breaking labor they demanded for cultivating harvesting and processing sugar.
african slavery slavery was widely practiced in africa long before the arrival of the portuguese.
rival tribes usually took slaves as spoils of war but some prisoners attained privileged positions as petty officials military leaders and in rare cases political advisors to rulers.
in africa slavery was not always a permanent or hereditary condition and slaves were sometimes absorbed into the societies that held them.
what arguments were used to justify the enslavement of the guanche.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 plantations prompted rival european powers to compete with one another for a share of this lucrative trade.
as the value of slaves increased africans began raiding neighboring territories with the express purpose of obtaining slaves.
european involvement in the african slave trade transformed this centuries old institution into one of the most exploitative labor systems in world history.
europeans developed a racist conception of slavery that declared people of dark skin to be inferior beings for whom slavery was a natural and proper condition.
as a consequence europeans treated slaves as property with few legal rights or protections.
masters were free to extract the maximum amount of labor from them with minimal regard for their humanity.
slaves taken by europeans to the americas were often worked literally to death in the sugar fields.
those who survived found that slavery in the new world was a permanent and hereditary condition.
they and their descendants faced a lifetime of slavery with no hope of ever obtaining freedom.
some west african nations managed to fend off the ravages of the slave trade.
benin a well organized nation state ruled by a powerful monarch traded slaves captured during war to the portuguese in the fifteenth century but gradually withdrew from the slave trade see choices and consequences benin portugal and the international slave trade page 23.
benin continued to trade with the portuguese on its own terms.
among the goods sought by the portuguese were a type of pepper and ivory the benin sought bronze from the portuguese.
among the most visually impressive uses of this bronze were the finely crafted panels created for the walls of the royal palace.
in the panel pictured here 1 12 a portuguese soldier with a pike is surrounded by five manilas the bronze bars that were among the most important trade goods brought by the portuguese.
t hey kidnap even noblemen and the sons of noblemen and our relatives and take them to be sold to the white men who are in our kingdoms.
and as soon as they are taken.
they are immediately ironed and branded with fire nzinga mbemba king afonso of the kongo central africa 1526 initially controlled by muslim traders the slave trade after 1600 came increasingly under european domination.
the ever rising demand for labor in the americas fueled by extraordinary profits from slave based sugar 1 12 benin bronze panel the artists of benin were widely admired for their finely crafted bronze plaques and sculptures which decorated the walls of the royal palace.
the panel depicts a portuguese soldier and the bronze bars used as a common trade item.
what roles did slaves play in african societies.
view the map benin empire west african worlds choices and consequences benin portugal and the international slave trade the portuguese took advantage of ethnic and tribal rivalries and the traditional african practice of taking captured opponents as slaves.
africans were eager to trade with the portuguese who offered highly prized goods such as bronze cloth horses and in limited cases firearms.
the kingdom of benin one of the more powerful west african kingdoms initially participated in this trade but by 1516 the oba king faced a momentous decision about whether to continue the slave trade.
choices cut off all trade with the portuguese continuing controversies what does the kingdom of benins experiences with the slave trade reveal about the nature of african slavery.
few scholars believe benins actions were motivated by humanitarian concerns about the evils of slavery which the african kingdom continued to tolerate.
scholars disagree over benins motivation for ending its involvement in the slave trade.
some argue that benins economy required a large supply of labor which meant it could ill afford to export slaves.
others argue that benins rulers wisely calculated that continued expansion and warfare would only weaken their power and lead to political instability.
continue to trade with the portuguese and participate fully in the expanding international slave trade continue to trade with the portuguese but end their involvement in the international slave trade decision benins king continued to trade with the portuguese but restricted the trade in male slaves the most sought after slaves for heavy agricultural labor.
benin allowed women to be traded eventually prohibiting this trade too and continued to tolerate slavery within its own kingdom.
consequences benins decision allowed it to prosper and preserve its political autonomy far longer than many neighboring states.
benin obtained the benefits of trade by selling cloth instead of slaves.
by refusing to become a major supplier of slaves benin avoided the costly and potentially destabilizing warfare needed to obtain large numbers of slaves.
city of benin what theories account for benins ability to resist involvement in the international slave trade.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 european colonization of the atlantic world by the early sixteenth century portugal spain and france had established permanent outposts in the atlantic world with england soon to follow.
each of these nations concentrated on a particular region of the atlantic world 1 13.
portugal focused primarily on west africa and brazil where trade in slaves and production of sugar generated enormous profits.
spains massive empire in the atlantic extended from the tip of south america to southwestern north america.
the spanish empires chief export was silver.
meanwhile france directed its attention northward toward canada where the fur trade produced a lucrative commodity for export and south to the caribbean islands where plantations could produce sugar and tobacco.
finally england a relative latecomer to colonization established its first outposts on the east coast of north america in present day north carolina and virginia.
hudson bay the black legend and the creation of new spain frobish er journeys 1576 newfoundland england cabot 1497 cartier 1534 cartier 1535 1541 bristol europe st lawrence r france atlantic ocean north america verrazano azores portugal lisbon spain palos madeiras gulf of mexico canary is.
columbus 149 bahamas cuba hispaniola puerto jamaica rico caribbean s 149 mbu colu us columb sea s 149 mbu colu africa cape verde is.
so tom south america pacific ocean atlantic ocean english voyages spanish voyages portuguese voyages dias french voyages g am a 149 1 1 13 major european explorations of the atlantic the european nations that explored the atlantic took different arcs.
the portuguese turned toward africa the spanish explored central and south america and the english and french focused on the north atlantic.
what was the black legend.
the spanish had used images of aztec human sacrifice to justify their conquest and spains rivals particularly protestant nations such as england used the power of images for their own political advantage.
tales of spanish brutality during the conquest of the americas gave rise to the black legend this indictment of spanish cruelty toward the native peoples of the americas first appeared in the writings of the spanish bishop bartolom de las casas in the 1550s.
the new medium of print allowed copies of his scathing critique of spanish colonialism to be distributed throughout europe it was soon translated into french dutch and english.
some of these translations contained gruesome wood cut images such as those that appeared in the english edition the tears of the indians 1656.
the four scenes depicted on the front cover of the book the massacre and slaughter of the indian inhabitants of the view the image torturing native amerindians european colonization of the atlantic world americas are described in las casass narrative.
the title page shows scenes of torture and punishment including being hacked to death and burnt alive 1 14.
within two decades the spanish had conquered much of central and south america.
inspired by tales of fabulously wealthy civilizations to the north they launched expeditions to explore the vast continent of north america.
hernando de sotos expedition to florida explored much of the southeastern united states in 1539.
another expedition in 1540 under the command of francisco vasquez de coronado traversed a huge swath of western america from what is now kansas to colorado.
subsequent settlements in florida and the southwest greatly extended the spanish empire.
within 60 years of conquering the aztecs and incas spains north american colonial empire extended from santa fe present day new mexico in the west to st augustine present day florida in the east and then all the way south to what are now chile and argentina an area larger than ancient romes vast empire.
the spanish crown had taken an active role in colonizing these regions and the government it created to rule its american empire reflected the investment of time money and resources.
the empire was divided into a series of administrative units and was staffed by a large number of bureaucrats and administrative officials.
of crucial importance was spains board of trade headquartered in the spanish port of seville.
it granted licenses for trade with spains colonies enforced commercial laws and collected customs taxes and any revenues due the crown.
along with the colonial government the roman catholic church exercised enormous power and influence in spanish america.
spain granted the church sizeable amounts of land and money and priests and church officials enjoyed a privileged status.
they also bore responsibilities such as establishing churches schools and hospitals converting native people to the faith and enforcing religious conformity through the inquisition.
the spanish established a network of interconnected urban centers to aid them in the administration of the peoples and territories they conquered.
in part this policy reflected the relatively high degree of urbanization the spanish found among the civilizations of mesoamerica and south america.
however this model of organization also reflected spanish values and interests allowing them to project the power of the church and state in highly visible ways.
by 1600 there were 225 towns in spanish america all laid out according to renaissance models of urban 1 14 illustration from bartolom de las casas the tears of the indians this illustration from the tears of the indians the english translation of las casass work portrays spanish cruelty toward indians.
the spread of these images gave credence to the black legend of spanish conquest and violence.
planning in a grid like pattern.
the grand central plazas in the larger towns and cities afforded both a place for commerce and a symbolic space for monumental civic and church architecture.
this painting of the central plaza in mexico city 1 15 captures the use of urban planning and monumental architecture to reinforce the power of the state and the church.
the cathedral and the viceroys local governor and archbishops palaces tower over the central square vivid reminders of the dominance of church and state.
what does the architecture of the central plaza of mexico city tell us about spains approach to colonization.
chapter 1 1 15 central square of mexico city spanish urban planners sought to project imperial power onto the colonial landscape.
in this painting of the town square in mexico city the buildings most closely identified with church and state the cathedral and the headquarters of the government tower over the central plaza.
people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 much of the economy of new spain was based on a highly exploitive system of labor.
ensuring an adequate labor supply for the arduous mining and agricultural work became a top economic priority of spanish colonial officials.
rather than enslave the inhabitants of central and south america as they had done to the native peoples in the caribbean islands the spanish developed a system of forced labor the encomienda that was only marginally less exploitive than slavery itself.
the crown declared indians vassals who owed their labor to noblemen who in turn were required to provide for the indians spiritual welfare.
the system provided labor and in theory demonstrated the spanish commitment to saving the souls of the indians by converting them.
in reality it led to what types of labor systems were employed in the spanish colonies.
the brutal exploitation of indians.
criticism of the system by religious reformers such as las casas combined with high mortality among the indigenous population which easily succumbed to diseases brought by the spanish eventually led to the use of other types of labor including conscript enrolled by compulsion labor wage labor and slavery.
fishing and furs frances north atlantic empire in 1493 the pope had settled a colonial dispute between spain and portugal by dividing the atlantic world between them a decision later ratified by a treaty between both countries in 1494.
france view the map spanish america to 1610 european colonization of the atlantic world rejected the authority of the treaty and sent fleets to take advantage of the abundant cod fisheries in the waters off what is now newfoundland.
in 1524 france dispatched giovanni da verrazano an italian mariner working for the king of france to find the so called northwest passage that would allow ships to sail through the waterways of the americas to asia.
although verrazano failed to find such a route it did not exist his mapping of the north american coast aroused the interest of the french monarch who decided to commit additional resources for further exploration of north america.
in the 1530s french explorer jacques cartier made a more extensive and detailed investigation of the north atlantic eventually traveling up the st lawrence river where he encountered a group of micmac indians an algonquian speaking eastern woodlands indian nation.
their offer of furs in exchange for european goods such as 1 16 two europeans show a religious painting to a group of native americans this image from an early french traveler account of new france underscores the way in which images were used to help indians understand christianity.
knives kettles and beads led the french to recognize the potential of furs as a lucrative commodity.
furs could be sold to europeans who valued their warmth and treated them as a high status luxury item.
in 1604 the french established port royal in nova scotia and four years later founded the city of quebec now the capital of the province of quebec on the banks of the st lawrence river.
located on a high ridge at a strategic bend in the river quebec was well placed to allow the french to trade with the local indians who were skilled fur trappers.
the beaver pelts traded to the french fetched a good price in the european markets.
the french encounter with native americans differed from that of the spanish and portuguese in three significant ways.
first the relatively small size of the settlement in new france and the dependence of the french on indians to provide furs necessitated maintaining good relations with local tribes.
second the predominantly male french population intermarried with local indians.
eventually the french government even encouraged intermarriage believing it would lead to the gradual assimilation of the indian population into the french culture of new france.
third the french like the spanish were committed to converting the indians to their catholic faith but rather than trying to impose catholicism by force french jesuit missionaries lived among indians and learned their languages and customs.
the french jesuits were just as eager as the spanish to convert the indians but they recognized the need to understand the culture of those they wished to convert.
the french also took advantage of religious art and images to help convert the indians.
this early account of life in new france includes an image that shows how religious painting was used to introduce indians to christian ideas 1 16.
what were the most important differences between new france and new spain.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 english expansion ireland and virginia although england took advantage of the rich opportunities for fishing provided by the atlantic ocean its exploration of the americas was a relatively low priority for most of the sixteenth century.
three factors explain this lack of interest.
first england faced less economic pressure to find export markets because its primary export wool was in high demand on the european continent.
second england faced a crisis of leadership after the death of henry viii in 1547.
he was succeeded by his sickly ten year old son edward vi who died in 1553 only six years into his reign.
next came henrys daughter mary i who tried to reestablish catholicism a campaign that included the intense persecution of protestants.
her reign was also short she died in 1558.
finally england was bogged down in a colonial venture closer to home the subjugation of ireland.
spain easily conquered the last moors in spain before moving on to atlantic exploration in 1492.
irish resistance to english colonization by contrast tied up english resources for decades.
yet even as the english struggled to colonize ireland these experiences provided a distinctive model for future colonial policy in the new world.
while the spanish set out to conquer and convert the inhabitants of the americas absorbing them into spanish society as a subordinate class at the bottom of the social order the english took a different approach.
rather than attempt to incorporate the irish the english expelled them from their land.
they then repopulated the land with colonists from england and scotland creating plantations or fortified outposts dedicated to producing agricultural products for export.
originally the term plantation simply meant any english settlement in a foreign land but it later became synonymous with a distinctive slave based labor system used in much of the atlantic world.
one source of this policy of exclusion can be traced to the intense religious animosity between protestants and catholics.
the english not only detested the catholic faith of the irish but they also feared the irish would support efforts to reimpose catholicism on england and would assist catholic nations like france and spain if they went to war with england.
expelling the irish and transplanting loyal protestant farmers from england and scotland therefore promised to boost the english economy what lessons did the english learn from their experiences in ireland.
and secure control of a potentially troublesome neighboring island.
this colonial model developed in parts of ireland expulsion and plantation would shape subsequent english experiments in colonization.
economic pressures eventually impelled england to follow its european rivals and engage in the exploration and colonization of the atlantic.
the profitable wool trade with the continent began to decline in the 1550s prompting english merchants to seek new commercial opportunities.
these merchants founded scores of new companies devoted to overseas trade with europe africa and the mediterranean.
in 1558 englands entry into exploration and colonization was also helped when another of henry viiis daughters elizabeth i succeeded bloody mary as protestants called her and quickly established herself as a strong leader determined to project english power overseas.
she eagerly pursued an aggressive policy of expansion challenging spains dominance in the atlantic.
a committed protestant elizabeth viewed spanish power as a threat to her realm.
her religious convictions and foreign policy objectives eventually brought england into direct conflict with spain.
englands support for spains enemies on the continent including the protestant dutch the raids of english pirates and english anticatholicism finally drove king philip ii of spain to take decisive action.
in 1588 spain launched a mighty armada or fleet of warships to invade england and destroy europes most powerful protestant monarchy.
the spanish considered their ships invincible but the armada was routed by the smaller faster ships of the english navy.
weather conditions at sea favored the english and hampered the spanish fleet.
the defeat of the armada shifted the balance of power in the atlantic as england eventually emerged as the major force in the atlantic world.
to commemorate the stunning victory queen elizabeth commissioned a portrait that symbolized englands rise to power in the atlantic world.
in the painting elizabeths hand rests prominently on a globe and the crown a symbol of the monarchy sits perched above the globe 1 17.
in the background the artist includes two scenes depicting the defeat of the armada a further reminder of englands power and naval supremacy.
among the most ardent supporters of expanding englands role in the atlantic world were former privateers.
these were englishmen who engaged in read the document thomas hariot a briefe and true report of the new found land of virginia 1590 european colonization of the atlantic world state sanctioned piracy in the atlantic against spanish treasure fleets returning from south america.
a number of them had grown rich and influential from their successes.
john hawkins for example earned himself a fortune and a knighthood for his daring seizures of spanish ships.
one of the most dashing of these buccaneers sir walter raleigh had participated in the english conquest of ireland and became a favorite of queen elizabeth.
raleigh sought support for a more ambitious plan of colonization in the lands north of spanish america and south of french canada.
queen elizabeth bestowed her blessing on the enterprise but not money.
as a result raleigh and the colonial ventures that followed had to turn to private capital to finance his plan.
in contrast to france and spains state financed model of exploration and colonization england adopted a more capitalist model with private investors forming companies and issuing stock to finance exploration and settlement.
having raised the funds to outfit two ships raleighs expedition arrived in the outer banks regions of what is now north carolina in july 1585.
naming the new settlement virginia in honor of elizabeth known widely as the virgin queen because she never married england had finally established its first colony in the new world.
unfortunately for raleigh and the original colonists the first colony at roanoke an algonquian indian name for shell money ended in disaster.
to begin with although the location near the treacherous region of cape hatteras protected the settlement from possible spanish raids it also deterred passing ships from stopping which made reprovisioning the colony difficult.
then conflict with local indians erupted when the colonists accused them of stealing a silver cup.
all the while relief for the colonists was delayed by the outbreak of war with spain.
the english required every available ship to repulse the spanish armada.
when a ship finally arrived three years later the new settlers found the colony deserted.
all 1 17 elizabeths armada portrait in this portrait commemorating englands victory over the spanish armada queen elizabeths hand rests on the globe reaching out to cover much of what is now north america.
in the upper left the spanish fleet sets out toward england while in the upper right the defeated spanish armada flounders.
what is the symbolic importance of the position of queen elizabeths hand in the armada portrait.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 1 18 john whites painting whites depiction of an indian religious ritual involving an elaborate dance is one of the first visual representations of indian religious practices.
the residents had disappeared leaving behind only one clue the word croatoan carved into a door post.
the fate of roanoke remains a mystery but scholars suspect that the term croatoan was a vague reference to an indian village some 50 miles south of the settlement that may have been the colonists destination before they disappeared.
although the first english attempt to create a fixed settlement was a dismal failure the information gained by the colonists about the algonquian tribes who inhabited north carolina proved invaluable.
the governor of the colony john white was an accomplished artist who captured scenes from indian life in vivid paintings 1 18.
in his visual representation of the village of secoton john white included a scene of indians engaged in a religious ritual.
white includes a brief description in the painting noting that it was a ceremony in their prayers with strange iesturs and songs dansing about post carved on the topps lyke mens faces a number of his images were popularized by the flemish engraver theodore de bry who in some cases made subtle but important alterations to make them more appealing to european tastes.
in the case of the village of secoton these changes were fairly minor.
in other cases de bry altered the images in significant ways.
representing america posed a number of challenges for de bry for a more detailed discussion of these issues see images as history marketing the new world theodore de brys engravings of the americas.
in respect to us they are a people poore and for want of skill and juegement in the knowledge and use of our things doe esteeme our trifles before things of greater value nothwithstanding in their proper maner considering the want of such meanes as we have they seeme to be very ingenious.
for although they have no suche tooles nor any such crafts sciences and artes as wee yet in those things they doe they shew excellence of wit.
and in short time bee brought to civilitie and the imbracing of true religion thomas hariot a briefe and true report of the newfound land of virginia 1588 how did the english model of financing colonial projects differ from the spanish model.
view the closer look an early european image of native americans european colonization of the atlantic world images as history marketing the new world theodore de brys engravings of the americas theodore de bry an engraver and printer from the city of antwerp in what is today belgium published a multi volume series entitled america 1590 1634 that provided many europeans with their first glimpse of the exotic new world.
the first volume of this series was published in english french german and latin.
subsequent volumes were published only in german and latin.
although a calvinist de bry cut out material that he believed would offend catholics to make the latin edition truly universal and appealing to both catholics and protestants.
in particular he eliminated portrayals of catholic explorers as brutally exploitive of the indigenous populations of the a monstrous pagan sculpture dominates the image a visible reminder that the inhabitants of the new world were un christian savages.
given the expense of producing copper plate engravings de bry concluded it was simply too costly to create separate images for the latin and german editions of his later volumes in the series.
instead he tried to make the images appealing to catholics and protestants by exaggerating the otherness of the indigenous populations.
the most striking example of this strategy occurred in an engraving in which de bry conjured up an exotic pagan ritual in which halfnaked indians parade before a grotesque five headed two tailed deer god an image that would have struck his audience as the epitome of an unholy and demonic religious practice.
the natives lack of clothing demonstrates that they are primitive peoples who lack the most basic attributes of a civilized society.
the latin text underscores the barbarism of the new world.
the author describes the pagan idol as a horrible effigy made in the form of a misshapen evil demon how did de bry represent the religious beliefs of the americas.
chapter 1 people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 peninsula lake texcoco teotihuacan tenochtitln indians of mesoamerica maya toltec aztec 1519 1521 founding of tenochtitln gutenberg invents printing press hernn corts conquers aztecs henry viii breaks with rome chapter review aztec empire becomes dominant power in mesoamerica print revolution transforms the way knowledge is organized and spread founding of spanish empire in what is now mexico henry becomes the leader of a new english church review questions 1.
what were the chief advantages of fixed agriculture and how did it contribute to the rise of more complex civilizations.
how did new technology affect european overseas expansion in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
what role did food and animals play in the columbian exchange.
compare the impact of spanish french and english approaches to colonization on the indigenous populations of the americas.
what were the most important ideas associated with the renaissance.
key terms paleo indians the name given by scientists to the first inhabitants of the americas an ice age people who survived largely by hunting big game and to a lesser extent by fishing and collecting edible plants.
archaic era period beginning approximately 9 000 years ago lasting an estimated 6 000 years.
it was marked by more intensive efforts by ancient societies to shape the environment to enhance food production.
aztec led by the mexica tribe the aztec created a powerful empire whose capital the great city of tenochtitln was built on an island in lake texcoco in 1325 ce.
capitalism an economic system in which the market economy determines the prices of goods and services.
humanists individuals who advocated a revival of ancient learning particularly ancient greek and roman thought and encouraged greater attention to secular topics including a new emphasis on the study of humanity.
reformation the movement for religious reform started by martin luther.
spanish inquisition a tribunal devoted to finding and punishing heresy and rooting out spains jews and muslims.
columbian exchange the term used by modern scholars to describe the biological encounter between the two sides of the atlantic including the movement of plants animals and diseases.
plantation an english settlement or fortified outpost in a foreign land dedicated to producing agricultural products for export.
later the term would become synonymous with a distinctive slave based labor system used in much of the atlantic world.
privateer a form of state sponsored piracy usually directed against spanish treasure fleets returning from the americas.
chapter review publication of the geneva bible english establish colony of roanoke on north carolinas outer banks english defeat spanish armada quebec founded england defeats spain challenging spanish dominance of the atlantic world frances major settlement in north america established english protestant exiles living in switzerland publish the geneva bible which becomes the central text for english calvinists.
englands first permanent settlement in america fails and no trace is found of the settlers when new supplies are brought to the colony myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of people in motion.
questions for analysis 1.
what role did human sacrifice play in mesoamerican societies and how did europeans view these practices.
view the closer look images as history blood of the gods p 6 other resources from this chapter read the document iroquois creation story p 9 thomas hariot a briefe and true report of the new found land of virginia 1590 p 28 view the image pueblo indian ruins p 7 2.
how did european views of nature differ from those of eastern woodland indians.
view the closer look competing visions european and huron views of nature p 12 3.
what was columbuss legacy.
watch the video what is columbuss legacy p 17 4.
what was the black legend.
view the image torturing native amerindians p 24 5.
what do early european artistic representations of the americas tell us about europeans in the period after columbus.
view the closer look an early european image of native americans p 30 view the map native american peoples to 1450 p 8 spread of printing p 11 western europe during the renaissance and reformation p 15 native american population loss 1500 1700 p 18 benin empire p 22 spanish america to 1610 p 26 how did tobacco agriculture shape the evolution of chesapeake societies.
new england p 42 how did the religious ideals of new england society shape its early history.
the caribbean colonies p 50 why did slavery take root in the caribbean earlier than in the mainland colonies of british north america.
the restoration era and the proprietary colonies p 52 how did the restoration colonies differ from earlier efforts at colonization in british north america.
the crises of the late seventeenth century p 55 what does the outbreak of witchcraft accusations in salem tell us about the crisis of the late seventeenth century.
the whig ideal and the emergence of political stability p 60 what political and legal concepts defined whig ideology.
chapter the chesapeake colonies p 36 34 chapter 2 world 1416 prince henry the navigator establishes a center for naval exploration at sagres portugal.
j the arrival of the history spanish 71 video att v y i g 1 the ships of explorer christopher qolumbus sail again in the form of these replicas.
1492 christopher columbus lands in the bahamas.
1609 henry hudson makes his first voyage to north america.
mt 1600 sjiii 1533 francisco pizarro and his men kill inca leader atahualpa.
1609 galileo galilei becomes the first person to use a telescope to view the heavens.
1619 the first africans in north america arrive at jamestown virginia.
1644 the qing dynasty begins in china and rules until 1912.
new empires in the americas 35 reading social studies economics geography politics society and culture science and technology focus on themes in this chapter you will read about european exploration of the sea and of north and south america.
as you read you will learn about how politics encouraged the desire to explore new trade routes and lands.
you will also read about how geography affected the race for empires in the new world.
european nations began exploring the newly discovered continents in an effort to establish colonies.
outlining and history focus on reading how can you make sense of all the facts and ideas in a chapter.
one way is to take notes in the form of an outline.
outlining a chapter here is an example of a partial outline for section 4 of this chapter.
compare the outline to the information on pages 52 57.
notice how the writer looked at the headings in the chapter to determine the main and supporting ideas.
the writer picked up the first heading in the section p 52 as the first main idea.
she identified it with roman numeral i.
section 4 the race for empires the writer identified three facts that supported iii b.
she listed them as numbers 1 2 and 3.
events in europe a.
the protestant reformation b spain and england co to war 1.
sea dogs 2.
spanish armada ii.
search for a northwest passage iii.
european presence in north america a english presence in the new world b french presence in the new world 1.
huguenots 2.
explorers a cartier b champlain c jolliet and marquette d la salle c dutch presence in the new world the writer saw two smaller headings under the bigger heading on pages 52 53 and listed them as a and b.
the writer decided it was important to note some individual facts under b 3.
that s why she added points a through d s s i outlining a few paragraphs when you need to outline only a few paragraphs you can use the same outline form.
just look for the main idea of each paragraph and give each one a roman numeral.
supporting ideas within the paragraph can be listed with a b and so forth.
you can use arabic numbers for specific details and facts.
6 chapter 2 you try it.
read the following passage from this chapter.
then complete the activities below.
conquest of the aztec empire moctezuma ruled the aztec empire which was at the height of its power in the early chapter 2 1500s.
moctezuma s capital tenochtitlan p 46 was built in the middle of lake texcoco near the present day site of mexico city.
tenochtitlan was a large city with temples a palace and buildings that were built on an island in the middle of the lake.
the buildings and riches of the city impressed the spaniards.
they saw the aztec empire as a good source of gold and silver.
they also wanted to convert the aztec to christianity.
the aztec had thousand of warriors.
in contrast cortes had only 508 soldiers about 100 sailors 16 horses and some guns.
cortes hoped that his superior weapons would bring him victory.
after you read the passage complete the following activities.
complete this outline based on the passage you just read.
i moctezuma and the aztec empire were at the height of power in the 1500s.
a tenochtitlan was the capital 1.
built in lake texcoco 2.
once you have completed the outline organize the information into topics to research.
then write a question you want to answer about each topic.
interpret the information in your outline list of topics and list of questions to determine the main ideas that you would write into chapter 2 section 1 leif eriksson p 38 henry the navigator p 39 astrolabe ip.
40 caravels ip.
40 section 2 christopher columbus p 42 line of demarcation p 44 treaty of tordesillas ip.
44 ferdinand magellan p 44 circumnavigate p 44 columbian exchange ip.
45 section 3 conquistadors p 46 hernan cortes p 46 moctezuma ii p 46 francisco pizarro p 47 encomienda system p 50 plantations p 50 bartolome de las casas ip.
51 section 4 protestant reformation ip.
53 protestants p 53 spanish armada p 53 northwest passage p 54 jacques cartier ip.
54 charter p 54 section 5 immune p 58 middle passage p 59 african diaspora p 60 academic vocabulary success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions.
in this chapter you will learn the following academic words.
effect p 40 structure ip.
59 an essay.
new empires in the americas 37 l 1.
vikings were skilled sailors and they were the first europeans to reach north america.
prince henry the navigator established a school for sailors and provided financial support that enabled the portuguese to start exploring the oceans.
portuguese sailors sailed around africa and found a sea route to asia.
europeans sat sail if you were there you are a sailor living in portugal in the mid 1400s.
several of your friends are excited about joining an expedition to sail to new lands.
although portuguese navigators have made improvements to sailing ships and advancements in ocean travel you have heard about the dangers other sailors have faced on the open seas.
will you join the expedition or stay behind.
building background europeans were interested in the goods of africa and asia.
in order to find new routes to these goods and to find new lands to settle many european nations sent explorers on voyages.
europeans explored the world searching for new lands and new trade routes.
j key terms and people leif eriksson p 38 henry the navigator p 39 astrolabe p 40 caravels p 40 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on viking and portuguese voyages of exploration.
viking sailors reach north america the vikings were the first europeans to make contact with north america.
they came from scandinavia a peninsula that includes the present day countries of denmark norway and sweden.
the vikings were skilled sailors who developed a new style of ship called the longship that curved up at both ends.
viking vessels traveled the rough north atlantic seas better than earlier ships because their designs were more stable.
the vikings raided countries throughout europe but they also developed large trading networks.
viking ships sailed to the british isles and the mediterranean and black seas.
eventually the vikings sailed west into the north atlantic.
there they founded a settlement on the island of iceland in about 874.
more than 100 years later viking erik the red left iceland to settle greenland.
leif eriksson the son of erik the red shared his father s love of adventure.
in the year 1000 he was sailing from west norway to greenland when strong winds blew his ship off course and carried his ship all the way to the north american coast.
eriksson and his crew landed on the labrador peninsula in present day canada.
the vikings then sailed farther south to the island of newfoundland and perhaps to what is now new england.
according to their myths vikings saw forests meadows and rivers that held larger salmon than they had ever seen.
38 chapter 2 eriksson settled in a coastal area he called vinland but the vikings left after only a few years.
attacks by native americans posed a constant threat and the area may have been too far from other viking settlements to be supported.
after the vikings left north america europeans did not return to the continent for centuries.
in the 1400s however a growing interest in discovery and exploration spread across europe.
reading check sequencing list the stages of exploration that led to the vikings landing in north america.
prince henry the navigator in the early 1400s portugal became a leader in world exploration.
one man in particular prince henry the navigator was responsible for advances that would make exploration more successful.
although he never set out on a voyage himself henry greatly advanced portugal s exploration efforts.
in the early 1400s prince henry built an observatory and founded a school of navigation to teach better methods of sailing.
he also financed research by mapmakers and shipbuilders.
finally he paid for expeditions to explore the west coast of africa.
riches in asia during the 1400s europeans had several reasons to explore the world.
first they wanted asian spices.
they hoped to bypass the merchants who had a monopoly on or economic control of the asian products that reached the mediterranean.
if a sea route to asia could be found countries could buy spices and other items directly.
second religion played a role in exploration.
christians in europe wanted to convert more people to their faith.
third many europeans had become interested in asian cultures.
explorer marco polo s book about his travels throughout asia remained popular in europe long after his death in 1324.
many europeans wanted to learn more about asia and its cultures.
history close up new empires in the americas 39 flck causes and effects of the cts discovery of a sea route to asia several factors led to the discovery of a sea route from europe to asia.
financial backing from prince henry the navigator new technology caravel and mariner s astrolabe seeking trade with asia and financial gain converting people to christianity curiosity effects discovery of a sea route to asia face to face contact with traders in distant lands awareness of different cultures and ways of life analysis skill i analyzing information why was trade with asia so important to europeans.
academic vocabulary effect the result of an action or decision focus oh reaoiho make an outline for the heading a sea route to asia.
technological advances new technology played a major role in advancing world exploration.
sailors began to use tools such as the magnetic compass and the astrolabe a device that enabled navigators to learn their ship s location by charting the position of the stars.
better instruments made it possible for sailors to travel the open seas without landmarks to guide them.
the portuguese also made advances in shipbuilding.
they began designing ships that were smaller lighter and easier to steer than the heavy galleons they had used before.
these new ships called caravels ker uh velz used triangular sails that unlike traditional square sails allowed ships to sail against the wind.
by placing rudders at the back of the ship the portuguese also improved the steering of ships.
reading check.
analyzing how did henry the navigator promote exploration.
a sea route to asia by the 1400s portugal had several motives financial support and the technology necessary for exploration.
portuguese explorers set out to find new lands.
rounding africa even with new technology travel on the open seas was dangerous and difficult.
one person described the effect on sailors of a voyage south from portugal.
those which survived could hardly be recognized as human.
they had lost flesh and hair the nails had gone from hands and feet.
they spoke of heat so incredible that it was a marvel that ships and crews were not burnt sailor quoted in world civilizations edited by edward mcnall burns et al.
in spite of the dangers portuguese explorers continued sailing south setting up trading posts along the way.
in 1488 portuguese navigator bartolomeu dias led an expedition from portugal southward along the african coast.
a storm blew his ships around the southern tip of africa.
this point became known as the cape of good hope.
dias wanted to continue his voyage but his men did not.
since supplies were very low dias decided to call off the voyage and return to portugal.
later king manuel of portugal sent another explorer vasco da gama on an expedition around the cape of good hope.
da gama left lisbon portugal in july 1497 and arrived in southwestern india the next year.
portugal had won the european race for a sea route to asia.
when da gama reached the indian port of calicut muslim traders met him and his men.
the muslims surprised the sailors by speaking to them in portuguese.
soon da gama and his crew learned that the people of india had been trading with muslim and italian merchants who knew portuguese.
da gama made two more trips back to india.
he even governed a small colony there.
40 chapter 2 results of exploration portugal s explorations would have major results including the start of the atlantic slave trade.
as portuguese sailors explored the west coast of africa they negotiated for gold ivory and slaves.
the slave trade devastated african communities.
it led to increased warfare among kingdoms and broke up many families.
the portuguese sent many enslaved africans to europe and to islands in the atlantic where they lived and worked under brutal conditions.
the other nations of europe watched as new trade routes brought increased wealth and power to portugal.
they soon launched voyages of exploration to find their own water routes to asia.
reading check predicting how would continued exploration affect africans.
i summary and preview in the 1400s i the portuguese started a new era of exploration.
in the next section you will learn how europeans reached the american continents.
section 1 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
identify who was leif eriksson.
b summarize how did the vikings eventually establish vinland.
c draw inferences why do you think the vikings did not try to colonize the americas.
identify who was prince henry the navigator.
compare why were caravels able to sail against the wind while other ships could not.
recall who was the first explorer to find a sea route from europe to asia.
explain how did muslims living in india learn portuguese.
c draw conclusions how did the slave trade affect west africa.
geography skills interpreting maps 1.
movement which explorer was the first to reach the cape of good hope.
human environment interaction about how many miles was da gama s 1497 1499 voyage.
ww 1wl t 1flmi critical thinking 4.
summarizing review your notes on european exploration.
then copy the chart below and use it to explain the reason for the explorations the technology that made explorations possible and the results of the explorations.
taking notes on early explorers review the section and make notes on groups of explorers.
make sure to list the differences and similarities between the groups where they traveled and why.
new empires in the americas 41 what you will learn europeans reach the americas 1.
christopher columbus sailed across the atlantic ocean and reached a continent that was previously unknown to him.
after columbus s voyages other explorers sailed to the americas.
christopher columbus s voyages led to new exchanges between europe africa and the americas.
key terms and people christopher columbus p 42 line of demarcation p 44 treaty of tordesillas p 44 ferdinand magellan p 44 circumnavigate p 44 columbian exchange p 45 f taking notes.
use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the explorers their journeys and the effects of european voyages to the americas.
if you were there you are a european explorer who just returned to your homeland from the americas.
while you were gone you tried new and different foods including corn potatoes and cocoa.
you have brought some of these foods back with you.
you want your friends and family to sample these items but they resist.
what will you say about these new foods.
ibuildingbackground europeans africans and asians i had traded with each other for centuries using land and sea routes.
i native american groups also knew of each other through trade routes i although sailors often explored new areas before 1492 the two worlds had no communication with each other.
columbus sails across the atlantic stories of fabulous kingdoms and wealth in asia captured the imagination of christopher columbus a sailor from genoa italy.
columbus was convinced that he could reach asia by sailing west across the atlantic ocean.
the journey begins columbus asked king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain to pay for an expedition across the atlantic.
he promised them great riches new territory and catholic converts.
it took columbus several years to convince the king and queen but they finally agreed to help finance the journey.
ferdinand and isabella ordered columbus to bring back any items of value and to claim for spain any lands he explored.
on august 3 1492 columbus s three ships set sail.
the nina and the pinta were caravels.
columbus sailed in the larger santa maria.
the ships carried about 90 sailors and a year s worth of supplies.
they made a stop in the canary islands and then on september 6 they resumed their journey.
soon they passed the limits of columbus s chapter 2 2.
human environment interaction why do you think columbus saw only the coastal area of mesoamerica.
maps and sailed into uncharted seas.
after more than a month with no sight of land the crew grew restless.
soon the crew saw signs of land birds and floating tree branches.
columbus promised a reward to him who first sang out that he saw land.
on october 12 1492 a lookout cried land.
ending the long journey from the canary islands.
the ships landed on an island in the bahamas.
columbus thought he had found a new route to asia.
instead he had reached another continent that was unknown to him.
columbus called the island san salvador which means holy savior.
columbus also visited another island he called hispaniola.
there he met the taino ty noh.
at that time europeans called asia the indies so columbus believing he was in asia called these native american people indians.
the taino lived in small farming communities.
in his journal columbus wrote that the taino were so generous that no one would believe it who has not seen it.
however columbus and his crew were not interested in taino culture but in gold.
after three months of exploring looking for gold and collecting exotic plants and animals columbus returned to spain.
columbus made three more journeys to the americas during his lifetime.
in 1504 he returned to spain in poor health.
columbus died two years later still believing that he had reached asia.
impact of columbus s voyages the voyages of columbus changed the way europeans thought of the world and their place in it.
a new era of interaction between europe and the americas had begun.
columbuss discovery also created conflict between european countries.
both spain and portugal wanted to add these lands to their growing empires.
in 1493 pope alexander vi originally from spain issued a decree that drew a new boundary for spain and portugal.
new empires in the americas 43 primary source letter christopher columbus 1494 two years after discovering the island of hispaniola columbus wrote a letter to the spanish king and queen outlining his ideas of its colonization.
most high and mighty sovereigns in the first place as regards the island of espanola inasmuch as the number of colonists who desire to go thither there amounts to two thousand owing to the land being safer and better for farming and trading 1.
that in the said island there shall be founded three or four towns 2.
that for the better and more speedy colonization of the said island no one shall have liberty to collect gold in it except those who have taken out colonists papers that each town shall have its alcalde mayor that there shall be a church and parish priests or friars to administer the sacraments to perform divine worship and for the conversion of the indians.
christopher columbus letter to the king and queen of spain 1494 analysis skills analyzing primary sources what were columbus s main concerns in founding a colony on hispaniola.
this imaginary line of demarcation divided the atlantic ocean.
spain could claim all land west of the line.
the portuguese king believed that this arrangement favored spain.
to prevent war the leaders of the two nations signed the treaty of tordesillas which moved the line of demarcation 800 miles further west.
this gave portugal more opportunity to claim lands unexplored by other europeans.
reading check.
identifying points of view why did columbus want to sail across the atlantic.
other explorers sail to the 1 americas j columbus s discoveries inspired others to sail i across the atlantic ocean.
in 1501 explorer i amerigo vespucci vuh spoo chee led a spanish fleet to the coast of present day j south america.
he was convinced the land he reached was not asia.
instead vespucci believed he had found a new world.
a ger man mapmaker labeled the continents across the ocean america in honor of vespucci.
europeans began using the names north america and south america for these lands.
in a spanish settlement in present day panama another explorer vasco nunez de balboa noon yays day bahl boh uh heard stories from local native americans about another ocean farther west.
balboa set out to find it.
for weeks he and his men struggled through thick jungle and deadly swamps.
in 1513 they reached the top of a mountain.
from this spot balboa saw a great blue sea the pacific ocean stretching out before him.
in 1519 ferdinand magellan muh jehl uhn a portuguese navigator set out with a spanish fleet to sail down the east coast of south america.
after sailing around the southern tip of the continent magellan continued into the pacific even though his ships were dangerously low on food and fresh water.
magellan s fleet sailed across the pacific ocean.
in the philippines magellan was killed in a battle with native peoples.
down to three ships the expedition continued sailing west into the indian ocean.
in 1522 the voyage s only remaining ship returned to spain.
only 18 members of magellan s original crew survived.
these sailors were the first people to circumnavigate or go all the way around the globe.
their entire journey was some 40 000 miles long.
european explorers and settlers took plants and animals with them to the americas.
they also brought back a variety of new plants and animals to europe asia and africa.
44 chapter 2 this transfer became known as the columbian exchange because it started with columbus s explorations.
the columbian exchange dramatically changed the world.
european explorers found many plants in the americas that were unknown to them including corn potatoes tobacco and cocoa.
they brought these items to europe where they were highly valued.
the explorers also introduced horses cattle and pigs to the americas.
native americans came to use these animals for food and transportation.
they also started to farm european grains such as wheat and barley.
without intending to do so the explorers also introduced deadly new diseases to the americas.
native americans had no natural resistance to european diseases and often died as a result of their exposure to them.
over time a trading pattern involving the exchange of raw materials manufactured products and slaves developed among europe africa and the americas.
europeans shipped millions of enslaved africans to work in the colonies in the new world.
evaluating what were the negative aspects of the columbian exchange.
reading check.
the columbian exchange items brought from the americas cocoa corn potatoes squash tobacco turkeys analysis skill.
analyzing visuals which side of the atlantic did cattle come from.
items brought from europe cattle i citrus fruits diseases i grains horses sugarcane i summary and preview columbus s i voyages to america inspired other europeans to explore the new world.
this led to new exchanges between both sides of the atlantic.
in the next section you will learn about spain s empire in the americas.
section 2 assessment online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
recall what agreement did christopher colum bus make with queen isabella and king ferdinand of spain.
explain where did columbus think he had landed when he reached the bahamas.
c evaluate how did columbus s voyage lead to a dispute between spain and portugal.
identify who was the first european explorer to see the pacific ocean.
b summarize what route did ferdinand magellan s t ships take to circumnavigate the globe.
c draw conclusions how did the columbian exchange and the slave trade affect the economies and the people of europe africa and the americas.
critical thinking j 3.
supporting a point of view review your notes on i european exploration.
then copy the graphic orga j nizer below and use it to rank in order the two most.
important results of european voyages to the ameri j cas.
explain your choices in the why column.
understanding christopher columbus write j some notes about what life might have been like j for columbus and his crew as they sailed across the atlantic.
note ways in which their voyage changed i life for many europeans.
new empires in the americas 45.
teks 1a 2a spain builds an what you will learn.
if you were there 1.
spanish conquistadors conquered the aztec and inca empires.
spanish explorers traveled through the borderlands of new spain claiming more land.
spanish settlers treated native americans harshly forcing them to work on plantations and in mines.
you are an aztec warrior living in central mexico in the 1500s.
you are proud to serve your ruler moctezuma ii.
one day several hundred foreigners arrive on your shores.
they are pale bearded men and they have strange animals and equipment.
from where do you think these strangers have come.
spain established a large empire in the americas.
building background spain sent many expeditions to the j americas.
like explorers from other countries spanish explorers.
claimed the land they found for their country.
much of this land was already filled with native american communities however.
j key terms and people conquistadors p 46 hernan cortes p 46 moctezuma ii p 46 francisco pizarro p 47 encomienda system p 50 plantations p 50 bartolome de las casas p 51 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on spanish conquest and settlement in the americas.
spanish conquistadors the spanish sent conquistadors kahn kees tuh dawrs soldiers who led military expeditions in the americas.
conquistador hernan cortes left cuba to sail to present day mexico in 1519.
cortes had heard of a wealthy land to the west ruled by a king named moctezuma ii mawk tay soo mah.
conquest of the aztec empire moctezuma ruled the aztec empire which was at the height of its power in the early 1500s.
moctezuma s capital tenochtitlan was built in the middle of lake texcoco near the present day site of mexico city.
tenochtitlan was a large city with temples a palace and buildings that were built on an island in the middle of the lake.
the buildings and riches of the city impressed the spaniards.
they saw the aztec empire as a good source of gold and silver.
they also wanted to convert the aztec to christianity.
the aztec had thousands of warriors.
in contrast cortes had only 508 soldiers about 100 sailors 16 horses and some guns.
cortes hoped that his superior weapons would bring him victory.
cortes also sought help from enemies of the aztec.
an indian woman named malintzin mah lint suhn helped cortes win allies.
6 chapter 2 at first moctezuma believed cortes to be a god and welcomed him.
cortes then took moctezuma prisoner and seized control of tenochtitlan.
eventually tenochtitlan was destroyed and moctezuma was killed.
smallpox and other diseases brought by the spanish quickened the fall of the aztec empire.
conquest of the inca empire another conquistador francisco pizarro puh zahr oh heard rumors of the inca cities in the andes of south america.
the inca ruled a large territory that stretched along the pacific coast from present day chile to northern ecuador.
pizarro had fewer than 400 men in his army.
but the inca like the aztec had no weapons to match the conquistadors swords and guns.
though outnumbered pizarro s troops captured the great inca capital at cuzco in present day peru and killed the inca leaders.
by 1534 pizarro and his native american allies had conquered the entire inca empire.
in only a few years the spanish had conquered two great american empires.
during the conquest the spanish and their linking armored warfare the armor of the spanish conquistadors helped them defeat the aztec and inca.
spanish soldiers and their horses wore armor made of steel.
the steel protected the soldiers from enemy weapons but was heavy and hard to wear.
armored weapons of today s soldiers include tanks and other large vehicles.
inside these vehicles soldiers are safer from enemy gunfire.
allies killed thousands of inca and aztec and looted their settlements.
moreover possibly more than three quarters of the aztec and inca populations were killed by the diseases the europeans brought.
spanish settlements the spanish began to settle their vast empire which they called new spain.
spain s government wanted to control migration to the americas.
most of the emigrants were spanish though a few non spanish subjects of the king also migrated.
jews muslims and non christians were forbidden to settle in new spain.
at first most emigrants were men.
the government then encouraged families to migrate.
eventually women comprised one quarter of the total emigration from spain.
spain ruled its large american empire through a system of royal officials.
at the top was the council of the indies formed in 1524 to govern the americas from spain.
the council appointed two viceroys or royal governors.
the viceroyalty of peru governed most of south america.
the viceroyalty of new spain governed all spanish territories in i i new empires in the americas 47 central america mexico and the southern part of what is now the united states.
the spanish established three kinds of settlements in new spain.
pueblos served as trading posts and sometimes as centers of government.
priests started missions where they converted local native americans to catholicism.
the spanish also built presidios or military bases to protect towns and missions.
to connect some of the scattered communities of new spain spanish settlers built el camino real or the royal road.
this network of roads ran for hundreds of miles from mexico city to santa fe.
the roads later stretched to settlements in california.
analyzing how did the span ish conquer the great aztec and inca empires.
reading check reasons for spanish f ct victory several advantages helped the spanish defeat the aztec and inca.
causes of the aztec and inca defeat spanish steel armor and weapons spanish horses european diseases spanish alliances with aztec and inca enemies effects reduced native american population spanish rule of the americas columbian exchange analysis skill.
analyzing information which cause do you think was most important to the spanish victory.
exploring the borderlands of new spain spain s american empire was not limited to lands taken from the conquered aztec and inca empires.
many other spanish explorers came to north america.
they explored the borderlands of new spain and claimed many new lands for the spanish crown.
exploring the southeast in 1508 explorer juan ponce de leon landed on the caribbean island of puerto rico.
by 1511 he had conquered the island for spain and founded the city of san juan.
de leon also discovered gold on puerto rico.
spanish officials appointed him governor of the colony.
in 1512 ponce de leon discovered the coast of present day florida.
the next year he searched florida for a mythical fountain of youth.
though he never found the fabled fountain ponce de leon acquired royal permission to colonize florida.
however he failed to colonize the area.
two decades later another explorer traveled through florida.
royal officials gave hernando de soto permission to explore the coastal region of the gulf of mexico.
in 1539 his expedition landed in an area near the present day city of tampa bay florida.
de soto then led his men north through what is now georgia and the carolinas.
the expedition then turned west and crossed the appalachian mountains.
de soto discovered the mississippi river in 1541.
the explorers then traveled west into present day oklahoma.
de soto died in 1542 on this journey.
exploring the southwest the spanish also explored what is now the southwestern united states.
in 1528 explorer alvar nunez cabeza de vaca joined conquistador panfilo de narvaez on an expedition to north america.
their group of 300 men first landed on the florida coast.
they faced many severe problems including a shortage of food.
chapter 2 the group built boats which made it possible for them to travel around the florida panhandle.
the explorers continued along the gulf coast and eventually reached the mississippi river.
severe weather hit this group hard and many members of the expedition died.
cabeza de vaca s boat shipwrecked on what is now galveston island in texas.
only four men survived cabeza de vaca a moroccan bom slave named estevanico his spanish slaveholder and one other sailor.
each of the four survivors was captured and enslaved by native american groups living in the area.
after six years of captivity the men finally escaped.
they journeyed on foot throughout the north american southwest receiving help from native americans they met along the way.
in 1536 after turning south the group reached spanish settlements in mexico.
soon after their journey ended estevani co s slaveholder sold him to a spanish viceroy.
the viceroy assigned estevanico to serve as a guide for a new expedition he was sending into the southwest.
native americans killed the enslaved african in 1539.
de vaca eventually returned to spain where he called for better treatment of native americans.
de vaca later wrote about his experiences in the first european book exclusively devoted to north america.
de vaca s book increased spanish interest in the new world.
his writings fueled the rumors that riches could be found in north america.
for two thousand leagues did we travel on land and by sea in barges besides ten months more after our rescue from captivity untiringly did we walk across the land during all that time we crossed from one ocean to the other we heard that on the shores of the south there are pearls and great wealth and that the richest and best is near there.
cabeza de vaca the journey of alvar nunez cabeza de vaca de vaca s account inspired other explorers to travel to north america.
in 1540 francisco vasquez de coronado set out estevanico was an enslaved african who traveled with cabeza de vaca.
to explore the north american southwest.
he wanted to find the legendary seven cities of gold that were rumored to exist there.
his expedition went through present day new mexico and arizona where a group of his men discovered the grand canyon.
coronado trekked through texas and 120a v geography skills interpreting maps 1.
location what was the capital of the viceroyalty of peru.
place which viceroyalty included modern day mexico.
viceroyalty of new spain viceroyalty of peru capital of viceroyalty 0 1 000 2 000 miles 0 1 000 2 000 kilometers 100 w the impact today today christianity is the most commonly practiced religion in latin america.
the majority of latin american christians are roman catholics but an increasing number have joined protestant faiths.
through texas and oklahoma going as far north as kansas before turning around.
he never found the fabled cities of gold.
reading check comparing how were the expeditions of ponce de leon and coronado similar.
spanish treatment of native americans the journeys of the spanish explorers allowed spain to claim a huge empire in the americas.
spain s american colonies helped make the country very wealthy.
from 1503 to 1660 spanish fleets loaded with treasure carried 200 tons of gold and 18 600 tons of silver from the former aztec and inca empires to spain.
mexico and peru also grew food to help support spain s growing empire.
however these gains came with a price for native americans.
native peoples suffered greatly at the hands of the spanish.
forced labor by 1650 the spanish empire in the americas had grown to some 3 to 4 million people.
native americans made up about 80 percent of the population.
the rest were whites africans and people of mixed racial background.
settlers who came from spain were called peninsulares pay neen soo lahr ays and usually held the highest government positions.
to reward settlers for their service to the crown spain established the encomienda en koh mee en duh system.
it gave settlers the right to tax local native americans or to make them work.
in exchange these settlers were supposed to protect the native american people and convert them to christianity.
instead most spanish treated the native americans as slaves.
native americans were forced to work in terrible conditions.
they faced cruelty and desperate situations on a daily basis.
the spanish operated many plantations large farms that grew just one kind of crop.
plantations throughout the caribbean colonies made huge profits for their owners.
it took many workers to run a plantation however so colonists forced thousands of native americans to work in the fields.
indians who were taken to work on haciendas the vast spanish estates in central and south america had to raise and herd livestock.
other native americans were forced to endure the backbreaking work of mining gold and silver.
the forced labor and harsh treatment killed many native people in new spain.
0 chapter 2 the role of the catholic church the catholic church played a major role in the interactions of the spanish with native americans.
the spanish king commanded priests to convert the local people to the christian faith.
some native americans combined spanish customs with their own.
others rejected spanish ideas completely.
some european settlers in the americas protested the terrible treatment of native americans.
a priest named bartolome de las casas said that the spanish should try to convert native americans to christianity by showing them love gentleness and kindness.
the spanish monarchs agreed but the colonists did not always follow their laws.
reading check finding main ideas how did the encomienda system strengthen spanish rule.
i summary and preview in the isoos i spain built a vast empire in the americas.
the spanish treated the native americans harshly in their new empire.
in the next section you will learn about other european empires in the americas.
primary source book brief account of the devastation of the indies bartolome de las casas a catholic priest in new spain encouraged better treatment of native americans.
when they spaniards have slain all those who fought for their lives or to escape the tortures they would have to endure that is to say when they have slain all the native rulers and young men since the spaniards usually spare only the women and children who are subjected to the hardest and bitterest servitude slavery ever suffered by man or beast they enslave any survivors.
with these infernal devilish methods of tyranny they debase and weaken countless numbers of those pitiful indian nations bartolome de las casas from brief account of the devastation of the indies analysis skill analyzing points of view how did las casas s view of the treatment of native american groups differ from the views of other spaniards.
section 3 assessment ti reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
identify why did the spanish begin exploring north america.
b analyze how was hernan cortes able to conquer the aztec empire.
c elaborate what advantages did the spanish have over native americans.
what role did disease play.
recall which spanish explorer received permission to colonize florida.
b analyze why do you think cabeza de vaca wrote of great riches that could be found in the americas.
c evaluate why do you think de vaca called for better treatment of native americans after having been held prisoner by them.
identify what was the encomienda system.
b analyze why do you think the king of spain commanded catholic priests to teach native americans about christianity.
critical thinking 4.
categorizing review your notes on spanish conquest and settlement in the americas.
then copy the following graphic organizer and use it to explain the impact spain had on the americas.
spanish america government religion labor vwritesmart 5.
taking notes on the spanish empire take notes on the spanish conquest of the aztec empire and the founding of the spanish empire.
how did this empire affect native americans.
new empires in the americas 51 the race for empires what you will learn j if you were there 1.
events in europe affected settlement of north america.
several explorers searched for a northwest passage to the pacific ocean.
european nations raced to establish empires in north america.
the people of your village in france have always belonged to the same church.
now in the 1600s your village is divided over religious beliefs.
you have heard about the dutch colony of new netherland in america where people can practice any religion freely.
you would like to leave for america but your parents are unwilling to leave their home.
how would you persuade your family to emigrate.
other european nations challenged spain in the americas.
key terms and people protestant reformation p 53 protestants p 53 spanish armada p 53 northwest passage p 54 jacques cartier p 54 charter p 54 building background during the 1400s the catholic church was one of the most powerful institutions in europe.
not everyone agreed with all of its teachings however.
disagreement and sometimes violence led some people to search for new places to settle.
events in europe i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the reasons for european voyages to north america the search for a northwest passage and the development of european empires in north america.
many significant events took place in europe in the 1500s.
disagreements about religion threw europe into turmoil.
some of these disagreements eventually led to wars.
at the same time several european nations began to compete for land and power overseas.
key events in european history 1450 1588 c 1450 johannes gutenberg develops his movable type printing press.
the protestant reformation spain and england go to war in 1517 a german priest named martin luther publicly criticized the roman catholic church.
luther charged that the church was too wealthy and that it abused its power.
criticisms like luther s started the protestant reformation.
this religious movement began in small german towns but quickly spread to most of europe.
it became a part of many political disputes as well.
the protestants were reformers who protested some of the catholic church s practices.
many protestants believed god meant for religion to be simple.
the printing press a machine that produces printed copies using movable type helped spread the ideas of the reformation.
protestants printed large numbers of bibles as well as short essays explaining their ideas.
this let more people read and think about the bible on their own rather than relying solely on the teachings of a priest.
conflicts between catholics and protestants took place throughout europe often leading to civil war.
in the late 1500s french catholics fought french protestants known as huguenots hyoo guh nahts.
many huguenots eventually emigrated to the americas in search of religious freedom.
in 1534 king henry viii founded the church of england or the anglican church.
by making himself the head of the church henry challenged the authority of the pope and angered catholics.
political issues soon became mixed with the religious struggles.
in the late 1500s king philip ii used spain s great wealth to lead a catholic reformation against the protestant movement.
he hoped to drive the protestants out of england.
standing in his way was the protestant english queen elizabeth i and her sea dogs.
sea dogs was the name given to english sailors who raided spanish treasure ships.
the most successful and daring was sir francis drake.
philip was angered by english piracy.
he began gathering the spanish armada a huge fleet of warships meant to end english plans.
the armada had about 130 ships and some 27 000 sailors and soldiers.
this mighty fleet was launched to invade england and overthrow queen elizabeth and the anglican church.
but in july 1588 the smaller but faster english fleet defeated the armada in a huge battle.
the armada s defeat shocked the spanish.
in addition to the naval defeat spain s economy was in trouble.
the gold and silver that spain received from the americas caused high inflation.
inflation is a rise in the price of goods caused by an increase in the amount of money in use.
economic problems in spain combined with the defeat of the spanish armada led countries such as england france and the netherlands to challenge spanish power overseas.
reading check analyzing what led to the decline ofthe spanish empire.
il 53 search for a northwest passage europeans wanted to find a northwest passage a water route through north america that would allow ships to sail from the atlantic to the pacific.
the english began sending explorers to find it.
italian sailor john cabot knew that the king of england wanted to find such a route.
cabot offered to pay for his own expedition asking only that the king of england grant him a royal charter to any lands he found.
the king agreed and cabot made voyages to north america for england in 1497 and 1498.
cabot sailed to north america but he left very few records of his journeys.
it is believed that he traveled along the coast of present day newfoundland in canada.
although cabot did not find a passage to the pacific ocean his voyages were successful.
they became the basis of england s claim to land in north america.
in 1524 france sent an italian captain giovanni da verrazano vayr raht sahn oh to seek a northwest passage.
verrazano sailed along the coast of north america from present day north carolina to maine.
jacques cartier kahr tyay a french sailor led france s next major exploration of north america.
he made two trips to what is now canada.
cartier sailed into the saint lawrence river and traveled all the way to present day montreal claiming the areas he explored for france.
the dutch also entered the race.
they hired english captain henry hudson to find a northwest passage.
hudson first sailed to present day new york in 1609.
the following year hudson returned to north america sailing under the english flag.
he traveled far to the north.
eventually he reached a strait that he hoped would lead to the pacific ocean.
instead it led into a huge bay later named hudson bay.
none of these explorers ever found a northwest passage.
their explorations however led to increased european interest in north america.
finding main ideas why did european explorers seek a northwest passage.
j reading check european colonization the spanish and the portuguese were the early leaders in overseas exploration.
they dominated the beginning of the era of european colonization of the new world which lasted from the 1500s through the 1700s.
however spain and portugal focused on central america the caribbean and south america.
they left much of north america unexplored.
the english french and dutch explored and colonized north america seeking to expand their colonial empires there.
english colonies in the new world the period of english colonization began in the late 1500s when england decided to set up a permanent settlement in north america.
this colony was to establish an english presence in the new world.
sir walter raleigh received a charter a document giving him permission to start a colony.
in 1584 he sent an expedition that landed in present day virginia and north carolina.
raleigh named the entire area virginia.
the following year raleigh sent another group to found a colony on roanoke island off the coast of north carolina.
the english colonists at roanoke found life hard.
they fought with native americans and had trouble finding and growing food.
they did not have the wilderness survival skills needed to combat the new environment they faced.
after only a year the remaining colonists returned to england.
john white and 150 colonists resettled roanoke in 1587.
white s granddaughter virginia dare was the first english colonist born in north america.
after a few months white went back to england to get more supplies.
war with spain prevented white from returning for three years.
when he came back white found the colony deserted.
the only clue he found to the fate of the colonists was the word croatoan the name of a nearby island carved into a post.
did the colonists try to escape a native american attack by fleeing to the island.
white never found out.
to this day no one is certain what happened to the lost colony at roanoke.
chapter 2 1.
movement according to the map which explorers made two voyages to find a northwest passage.
place which explorer started farthest south in searching for a northwest passage.
french colonies in the new world france built its first north american settlement in florida when huguenots started a few small colonies there in 1564.
the spanish soon destroyed these settlements and drove out the french.
religious wars in france slowed further french efforts to colonize north america.
when the fighting ended the french renewed efforts to settle present day eastern canada.
the explorations of jacques cartier and samuel de champlain gave france a claim to this region.
nearly 70 years after cartier sailed up the saint lawrence french sailor samuel de champlain began exploring north america.
he recorded his ideas about european exploration in his journal.
through exploration we gain knowledge of different countries regions and kingdoms through it we attract and bring into our countries all kinds of riches through it christianity is spread in all parts of the earth samuel de champlain quoted in the canadian frontier 1534 1760 by w j eccles champlain followed cartier s old paths.
over the years he made many journeys along the saint lawrence river.
he also visited the great lakes led by native american guides.
in 1608 champlain founded a small colony named quebec on the saint lawrence river.
this trading post opened fur trading routes for the french throughout the region.
champlain s explorations became the basis of france s claim to much of canada.
in the late 1600s the french began spreading out from the saint lawrence river.
calling their north american territory new france french fur traders explorers and missionaries were all on the move.
in the 1650s french missionaries told stories about a beautiful river large broad and deep.
in 1673 explorer louisjolliet jahl ee et and missionary jacques marquette set out to find this great river the mississippi.
hernando de soto was the first european to find the mississippi river in 1541.
they reached the river and traveled down it as far as present day arkansas.
nine years later rene robert de la salle followed the mississippi river to the gulf of mexico.
he claimed the mississippi valley for king louis xiv of france.
to honor the king la salle named the region louisiana.
new empires in the americas 55 starting in the 1700s the french built new outposts.
these included detroit on the great lakes and saint louis and new orleans along the mississippi river.
most towns in the french territory were small.
as late as 1688 there were only about 12 000 french settlers in new france.
the french focused on trapping the wild animals they found instead of establishing agriculture.
beaver pelts used in hatmaking became especially profitable.
new france s small population and the value of the fur trade led french settlers to ally and trade with local native american groups.
because of their close trading relationships the french treated the native americans with more respect than some other european settlers had done.
many french settlers learned native american languages and they even adopted their ways of life.
dutch colonies in the new world the english and the french were not the only european powers to seek colonial empires in north america.
the dutch who had merchant fleets around the world came in search of trade.
they also exploited the fur resources in the area.
they claimed the land between the delaware and hudson rivers and called it new netherland.
this area included parts of what are now new york new jersey connecticut and delaware.
in 1624 the newly formed dutch west india company sent about 30 families to settle in new netherland.
two years later peter minuit bought manhattan island from local native americans for about 24.
minuit then founded the town of new amsterdam now new york city.
to attract colonists the dutch allowed members of all religions to settle in their colony.
minuit also helped swedish settlers found new sweden along the delaware river.
the first settlement fort christina was begun in 1638.
the swedish settlement was small but the dutch felt that it threatened dutch lands and fur trading.
the two sides fought a series of battles.
finally the governor of new netherland peter stuyvesant sty vi suhnt conquered new sweden in 1655.
he allowed the swedes to continue their colony but he called it the swedish nation.
reading check drawing conclusions were the french explorers in north america successful.
i summary and preview the english i french dutch and swedish explored the north american continent and later established colonies there.
in the next section you will learn about the establishment of slavery in the americas.
section 4 assessment writesmart 5.
learning about the french empire and other settlements take notes about the french dutch swedish and english people who settled in america.
why did they come.
what did they want and need in their new home.
new empires in the americas 57 reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
identify what was the protestant reformation.
explain what role did the printing press play in the protestant reformation.
c summarize what were martin luther s reasons for protesting the catholic church.
identify who was the first european to search for the northwest passage.
describe why did french and dutch explorers try to find the northwest passage.
identify identify the era of european colonization.
what event began the period of english colonization.
what happened to the first english settlements in north america.
evaluate describe the locations of european colonies in north america during the 17th century.
which do you think was most successful.
critical thinking 4.
sequencing review your notes on the era of european colonization.
then create a time line like the one below and place the four events you think were most important to the development of european empires in north america on the time line.
be sure to include the date of the event as well as a description of it and its significance.
what you will learn.
beginnings of lav iry m th americas 1.
european diseases wiped out much of the native american population causing colonists to look for a new labor force.
europeans enslaved millions of africans and sent them to work in their colonies.
slaves in the americas created a distinct culture.
if you were there you are an enslaved african living in north america.
your family is all that you have.
you help each other and your family provides some relief from the forced labor and harsh life on the plantation.
still you long for your freedom.
a fellow slave has told you of a plan to escape.
will you stay with your family or try to flee.
europeans forced millions of african slaves to work in their colonies.
key terms and people immune p 58 middle passage p 59 african diaspora p 60 i building background european settlers in the americas relied i on support from their home countries to establish trade and provide protection.
in return the colonies were expected to produce money for the home country.
many colonies did this through plantations mines and other ventures that required a large labor force.
itakincn0t6s j use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the beginnings of slavery in the americas.
the need for a new labor force european diseases had a devastating effect on the native american population.
measles smallpox and typhus were common in europe.
as a result most adult europeans were immune or had a natural resistance to them.
native americans however had never been exposed to such diseases and had no immunity to them.
as a result many native americans became terribly sick after their first encounters with europeans.
millions of them died in the years after columbus reached the new world.
no one knows exactly how many native americans died from european diseases but the loss of life was staggering.
spanish author fernandez de oviedo reported in 1548 about the destruction of the native americans of hispaniola.
he reported that of the estimated 1 million indians who had lived on the island in 1492 there are not now believed to be at the present time five hundred persons left.
in north america the native american population north of mexico was about 10 million when columbus arrived.
this i8 chapter 2 number would drop to less than a million.
the drop in the native population played a major role in the emerging need for an alternative labor force.
plantation agriculture was a mainstay of the colonial economic structure.
spain and portugal established sugar plantations that relied on large numbers of native laborers.
in the 1600s english tobacco farmers in north america also needed workers for their plantations.
with a lack of native american workers they too needed another source of labor.
plantation owners in both north and south america wanted a cheap work force.
some colonists including spanish priest bartolome de las casas suggested using enslaved africans as workers.
africans had already developed immunity to european diseases.
the colonists soon agreed that slaves from west africa could be the solution to their labor needs.
analyzing how did disease contribute to the slave trade.
reading check the slave trade in 1510 the spanish government legalized the sale of slaves in its colonies.
the first full cargo ship of africans arrived in the americas eight years later.
over the next century more than a million enslaved africans were brought to the spanish and portuguese colonies in the new world.
the dutch and english also became active in the slave trade.
middle passage enslavement was a horrible experience for the slaves.
most enslaved people had been captured in the interior of africa often by africans who profited from selling slaves to europeans.
the captives were chained around the neck and then marched to the coast.
this journey could be as long as 1 000 miles.
the middle passage was the voyage across the atlantic ocean that enslaved africans were forced to endure.
africans were packed like cargo in the lower decks of the slave ships.
the slaves were chained together and crammed academic vocabulary structure the way something is set up or organized king afonso to king joao iii i king afonso of the african nation of kongo wrote a letter to the king of portugal in 1526 asking him to do what he could to stop the practice of taking african slaves.
sir your highness should know how our kingdom is being lost in so many ways merchants are taking every day our natives sons of the land and the sons of our noblemen and vassals and our relatives because the thieved and men of bad conscience grab them t hey grab them and get them to be sold and so great sir is the corruption and licentiousness law breaking that our country is being completely depopulated and your highness should not agree with this nor accept it as in your service.
and to avoid it we need from those your kingdoms no more than some priests and a few people to teach in schools and no other goods except wine and flour for the holy sacrament religious service.
king afonso of kongo letter to the king of portugal 1526 analysis skill analyzing primary sources 1.
why does afonso ask the portuguese king to help stop the slave trade.
what does afonso request from the king.
i new empires in the americas 59 1.
location which state has the highest percentage of african americans.
human environment interaction why might the modern african american population be centered in the south.
the impact today more than half of brazil s current population is of african descent.
into spaces about the size of coffins.
the height between the decks was sometimes only 18 inches.
in this confinement disease spread quickly killing many africans.
others suffocated or died from malnutrition.
some slaves took their own lives to end their suffering.
it is estimated that one out of every six africans died during the middle passage.
african diaspora between the 1520s and 1860s about 12 million africans were shipped across the atlantic as slaves.
more than 10 million of these captives survived the voyage and reached the americas.
the slave trade led to the african diaspora.
a diaspora is the scattering of a people.
enslaved africans were sent all across the new world.
more than a third of the enslaved africans nearly 4 million people were sent to brazil.
most of those slaves were forced to work on portuguese sugar plantations.
nearly 2 million slaves went to the colonies of new spain.
some worked on plantations in the caribbean while others were taken to the mines of peru and mexico.
some 3 million slaves worked in british and french colonies in the caribbean and latin america.
more than 600 000 slaves went to britain s north american colonies that later became the united states.
colonial leaders across the americas developed laws that regulated slave treatment and behavior.
slaves were given few rights in the colonies.
the law considered enslaved africans to be property.
in some colonies a slaveholder was not charged with chapter 2 murder if he killed a slave while punishing him.
enslaved africans on the other hand received harsh penalties for minor offenses such as breaking a tool.
runaways were often tortured and sometimes killed.
the treatment of enslaved africans varied.
some slaves reported that their masters treated them kindly.
to protect their investment some slaveholders provided adequate food and clothing for their slaves.
however severe treatment was very common.
whippings brandings and even worse torture were all part of american slavery.
generalizing how were enslaved africans treated in the americas.
reading check.
many slaves expressed themselves through art and dance.
dances were important social events in slave communities.
like most elements of slave culture art and dance were heavily influenced by african traditions.
identifying points of view why was religion important to slaves in the americas.
reading check i summary i wiped out and preview after disease much of the native american population colonists turned to slave labor.
in the next chapter you will learn about english colonies in the americas.
slave culture in the americas slaves in the americas came from many different parts of africa.
they spoke different languages and had different cultural backgrounds.
but enslaved africans also shared many customs and viewpoints.
they built upon what they had in common to create a new african american culture.
families were a vital part of slave culture.
families provided a refuge a place not fully under the slaveholders control.
however slave families faced many challenges.
families were often broken apart when a family member was sold to another owner.
in latin america there were many more enslaved males than females.
this made it difficult for slaves there to form stable families.
religion was a second refuge for slaves.
it gave enslaved africans a form of expression that was partially free from their slaveholders control.
slave religion was primarily christian but it included traditional elements from african religions as well.
religion gave slaves a sense of self worth and a hope for salvation in this life and the next.
spirituals were a common form of religious expression among slaves.
slaves also used songs and folktales to tell their stories of sorrow hope agony and joy.
section 5 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
recall why did so many native americans die after coming into contact with europeans.
j b summarize why did plantation owners turn to enslaved j africans as a labor force.
how did this lead to the creation j of the transatlantic slave trade.
identify what was the middle passage.
describe explain how enslaved africans were treated i after they reached the colonies in the americas j 3 a.
explain what are spirituals.
s b analyze how did religion and family provide a i refuge from the harsh life enslaved africans were forced to endure.
critical thinking f 4.
identifying cause and effect review your notes on the slave trade.
use a chart like the one below to explain the causes and the effects of the slave trade.
writing about slavery add information about the f beginnings of slavery in the americas to your notes j include notes about slave culture.
what refuges did t enslaved people have from their suffering.
new empires in the americas 61 111 the slave system that arose in the american colonies was strongly influenced by geographic forces.
the climate of the southern colonies was suited to growing certain crops like cotton tobacco and sugarcane.
these crops required a great deal of labor to grow and to process.
to meet this great demand for labor the colonists looked to one main source enslaved africans.
v 1 tth america.
colonial slave ports slave ships sailed to slave ports where they unloaded their human cargo.
slave ports like boston newport and charleston were located near farming areas and the mouths of rivers.
south amerfc t1 the middle passage the terrifying and deadly voyage across the atlantic was known as the middle passage.
enslaved africans were chained and crowded together under ships decks on this long voyage as this drawing shows.
20 s the west indies africans were brought to the west indies to work on large sugar plantations.
sugarcane thrived in the west indies but it required huge amounts of labor to grow.
1 i slave forts began as trading posts.
r they were built near river mouths to provide easy access to both the sea and inland areas.
luis de senegal j africa james fort accra hl il l why assinie new england traders exchanged goods for slaves on the west african coast and then transported the slaves to the american colonies or to the west indies.
elmina slave fort west africa africa a slaves brought to the americas u 1493 1810 i kidnapped and taken to a slave ship mahommah 6.
baquaqua was captured and sold into slavery as a young man.
in this 1854 account he recalls being taken to the african coast to board a slave ship.
i was taken down to the river and placed on board a boat the river was very large and branched off in two different directions previous to emptying itself into the sea we were two nights and one day on this river when we came to a place where the slaves were all put into a pen and placed with our backs to the fire.
when all were ready to go aboard we were chained together and tied with ropes round about our necks and were thus drawn down to the sea shore.
e 5 u 4 ililssiss of capricorn bsp 1493 1600 1601 1700 1701 1810 years geography skills i interpreting maps are i 1.
location why were slave forts located where they were.
human environment interaction what geographic factors influenced the development of the atlantic slave trade.
social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation study framing historical questions define the skill j one of the most valuable ways that people gain knowledge is by asking effective questions.
an effective question is one that obtains the kind of information the person asking the question desires.
the ability to frame or construct effective questions is an important life skill as well as a key to gaining a better understanding of history.
asking effective historical questions will aid you in studying history and in conducting historical research.
learn the skill effective questions are specific straightforward and directly related to the topic.
when we do not obtain the information we want or need often it is because we have asked the wrong questions.
asking effective questions is not as easy as it seems.
it requires thought and preparation.
the following guidelines will help you in framing effective questions about history and other topics as well.
determine exactly what you want to know.
decide what questions to ask and write them down.
having written questions is very important.
they will help guide your study or research and keep you focused on your topic and goal.
you want to know.
for example if you wanted to know more about trade and the voyages of exploration that are discussed in chapter 2 what were the voyages of exploration.
may not be a good question to ask.
this question is too broad.
its answer would not give you the information you want.
asking why was trade the most important cause of the voyages of exploration.
would not be an effective question either.
this question is biased because it assumes trade was the main reason for the voyages when that might not have been true.
good historical investigation assumes nothing that is not known to be fact.
a more effective question which would get the information you want is were trade and the voyages of exploration connected and if so in what ways.
do you see now why wording is so important in asking effective questions and why you should write out and review your questions beforehand.
practice the skill reread the information about cortes and the aztec on pages 46 47 then complete the activities below.
suppose you wanted to learn more about cortes s defeat of the aztec.
decide whether each of the following would be an effective question to ask about this topic.
explain why or why not.
3 review each of your questions to make sure it is specific straightforward and directly related to your topic.
rewrite any questions that are vague too broad or biased.
questions that are vague or too broad are likely to produce information not directly related to what a.
what happened when the aztec and the spanish met.
why did other indians betray the aztec.
c what resources did cortes have that helped him conquer the aztec.
frame five questions that would be effective in helping you to learn more about this topic.
chapter 2 chapter review visual summary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter.
early exploration and settlement reviewing vocabulary terms and people 1.
the first europeans to reach the east coast of north america were the.
established a navigation school and financed expeditions to the west coast of africa.
one of the most important european explorers was who was the first person to claim lands in the americas for spain.
the first voyage that sailed completely around the world was headed by.
sir walter raleigh founded the colony of virginia after receiving a a grant to set up a colony from the queen of england.
large farms or that specialize in growing one type of crop for profit were common in spanish america.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 38 41 7 a.
recall on which two islands did the vikings establish settlements before coming to north america.
b analyze what factors led europeans to begin their voyages of exploration.
c evaluate what do you think motivated sailors to sign on for voyages of exploration.
section 2 pages 42 45 8 a.
recall why was columbus s first voyage important.
b summarize explain the conflict that emerged between spain and portugal over their empires in the americas and how it was resolved.
c evaluate do you think the columbian exchange improved life or made life worse in the americas.
explain your answer.
new empires in the americas 65 section 3 pages 46 51 9 a.
identify what territories in the americas did spain control.
b analyze what factors enabled the spanish to defeat the aztec and the inca.
c elaborate why was the encomienda system important to spanish settlers.
section 4 pages 52 57 10 a.
describe what were the results of the defeat of the spanish armada.
contrast how did the reasons for french settlement in the americas differ from that of the english and spanish.
what was each of their economies based on.
c predict what problems might arise among the different empires with settlements in north america.
section 5 pages 58 61 11 a.
explain why did the spanish turn to enslaved africans as a labor force in the americas.
b analyze in what ways did enslaved africans create their own unique culture in the americas.
c evaluate what effects do you think slavery had on the populations and cultures of west african countries.
through your online textbook choose an explorer and then research the explorer s route and discoveries.
present your research in an annotated and illustrated map or log book.
write from the explorer s point of view and include information about the areas he explored.
7 reading skills outlining and history use f ie reading social studies skill taught in this chapter to answer the following question.
make a short but complete outline of the section on pages 50 51 under the heading spanish treatment of native americans.
then use your outline to organize the topics covered in a list.
use the outline to write one or two sentences that describe each of these topics.
social studies skills framing historical questions use the social studies skill taught in this chapter to answer the following question.
write a historical question for each of the five sections of this chapter.
reviewing themes 12.
geography what geographic features in north america helped and hindered the exploration and colonization of the continent.
politics in what way were the expansions of empires motivated by the politics among european nations.
using the internet 14.
activity illustrated map columbus s successful return from the new world sparked an interest in exploration that resulted in a dramatic increase in voyages of exploration.
each explorer mapped his route and the lands that he explored.
our knowledge of the new world increased quickly as explorers made maps and kept detailed logs to catalog what they chapter 2 17.
writing your letter first review your notes and decide which group you want to write about.
which details from your notes will your friends and family be most interested in.
which do you find most important.
what do you want to tell your family and friends about the americas.
directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 which of the following best illustrates the process known as the columbian exchange.
a christopher columbus sailed west to reach asia and encountered the americas.
b corn and tomatoes were introduced to europe from america.
c asian goods moved long distances along the silk road to reach europe.
d advances in technology allowed sailors to better navigate on the open seas.
2 the decimation of the native population of the americas and the need for plantation labor resulted in the f encomienda system.
g establishment of religious tolerance.
h transatlantic slave trade.
j columbian exchange.
3 the desire to convert people to christianity and the demand for asian trade goods led to a increased interest in exploration.
b the renaissance.
c the conquest of the americas.
d efforts to end the slave trade.
4 spains empire in the americas included which of the following.
f new york g virginia h mexico j canada 5 which of the following established colonies in north america.
a the portuguese b the dutch c the greeks d the romans 6 the voyage of enslaved africans across the atlantic to the americas was known as the f northwest passage.
g african diaspora.
h triangular trade.
j middle passage.
7 examine the following passage from bernal diaz del castillos account of an aztec marketplace.
then answer the question below.
z the bustle and noise caused by this large crowd of people was so great that it could be heard more than four miles away.
some of our men who had traveled through italy said that they never had seen a marketplace that covered so large an area which was so well regulated and so crowded with people as this one at mexico.
bernal diaz del castillo adapted from the memoirs of the conquistador bernal diaz del castillo document based question what is the authors impression of the aztec marketplace.
how can you tell.
new empires in the americas 67 history multimedia connections click through 1 i i irvuuvi i inter activities 1 caribbean island encounters watch the video to learn about the first encounters between spanish explorers and the people of the caribbean.
claiming florida for spain watch the video to learn about ponce de leon s first landing on the coast of what is now florida.
llili a r isn cape c v ssbsws sb the spanish conquistador juan ponce de leon was the first european to set foot on land that later became part of the united states.
ponce de leon first sailed to the americas with christopher columbus on his second voyage in 1493.
once in the caribbean region he helped conquer what is now puerto rico and was named ruler of the island.
in puerto rico ponce de leon heard about a nearby island that supposedly held the legendary fountain of youth.
its waters were said to make old people young again.
in 1513 ponce de leon set out to find the island but instead landed in what is now florida.
he named florida and claimed it for spain.
explore important events in the life of ponce de leon online you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources activities and more at i 71 jin.
ponce de leon s 1513 route study the map to learn about the region of the americas that ponce de leon explored in 1513.
1620 the pilgrims sign the mayflower compact.
section 5 conflict in the colonies 98 the big idea tensions developed as the british government placed tax after tax on the colonies.
on writing llohs writing an infomercial what if television had been invented during the time that the english colonies were being founded in north america.
instead of relying on printed flyers and word of mouth to attract settlers the founders of colonies might have made infomercials.
in this chapter you will read about life in the american colonies during different times.
you will choose one time period and colony and write an infomercial encouraging english citizens to settle in the colony of your choice.
1648 work is finished on india s taj 1 mahal.
save our history history secrets of jamestown 71 video jex 1 m 11 a.
f plymouth colony thrives again in this highly accurate re creation.
1681 william penn establishes the colony of pennsylvania.
1682 peter the great becomes czar of russia.
1 1763 i pontiac an y american indian leads a rebellion on the western frontier.
1773 patriots stage the boston tea party.
1768 british explorer james cook sets sail on his first trip to the south pacific meeting people like this sandwich islander.
the english colonies 69 reading social studies 1 economics geography politics society and culture science and technology focus on themes in this chapter you will read about the people who settled the early colonies of north america.
you will learn about the problems they faced.
you will see how they settled political differences sometimes peacefully other times not and learned how to trade goods and grow crops to establish a thriving economy.
you will discover that the economy often influenced their politics.
evaluating sources focus on reading historians study both primary and secondary sources to learn about the past.
by studying both types they can get a better picture of what life was like.
assessing primary and secondary sources however not all sources are accurate or reliable.
checklists like the ones below can help you judge which sources are reliable and worth using in your research.
be sure to confirm facts in one source with other reliable sources.
when you use facts in a report you should always cite the source where you located the information.
evaluating language if a source uses biased or emotional language or has many factual or grammatical errors it may not be valid.
if the author states opinions as if they were facts the source may be inaccurate.
visual sources visual sources may be invalid if they contain factual errors or depictions of biased stereotypes.
remember that sometimes videos or photographs are fake or created for entertainment.
a movie about the colony at jamestown for example may not be historically accurate.
not everyone who writes about history is a good historian.
try to use sources by qualified writers.
good historians will always tell you where they got their information.
if information isn t documented you can t always trust that it is true or accurate.
checklist for secondary sources who is the author or creator.
what are his or her credentials or qualifications.
where did the author get his or her information.
is the information in the source properly documented.
has the author or creator drawn valid conclusions from his or her sources.
americas history transformations of north america 1450 1700 p a r t chapter 1 colliding worlds 1450 1600 chapter 2 american experiments 1518 1700 in 1450 north america europe and africa were each home to complex societies with their own distinctive cultures.
but their histories were about to collide bringing vast changes to all three continents.
european voyagers sailing in the wake of christopher columbus set in motion one of the most momentous developments in world history sustained contact among native americans europeans and africans in dozens of distinct colonial settings.
before the arrival of europeans a wide range of complex native american societies claimed the continent as their own.
although colonization brought profound change it did not erase what had come before because native american societies interacted with colonizers from the beginning.
they shaped colonial enterprise in important ways enabling some forms of colonization while preventing others.
native americans europeans and africans were surprisingly similar in many ways though the differences among them were important as well.
their distinctive ideas about gods and the spirit world informed their political systems and animated their approaches to trade and warfare.
whether they met in peace or war or whether peaceful interactions quickly turned violent native americans europeans and africans viewed one another through lenses that were shaped by these ideas.
in part 1 we compare native american european and african societies on the eve of colonization and then explore how europeans experimented with various models of colonization in the first two centuries of sustained transatlantic contacts.
the story in chapters 1 and 2 addresses three main developments that are central to this period native american diversity and complexity colonial settlement and the columbian exchange popular culture can lead us to think of native american societies as being substantially the same everywhere in north america they were organized into tribes with few material possessions and primitive beliefs and cultures and reliant mostly on hunting for their subsistence.
this impression distorts a much more complicated picture.
native american political organization ran the gamut from vast complex imperial states to kin based bands of hunters and gatherers.
patterns of political organization varied widely and the familiar label of tribe does more to obscure than to clarify their workings.
native americans economic and social systems were adapted to the ecosystems they inhabited.
many were extremely productive farmers some hunted bison and deer while others were expert salmon fishermen who plied coastal waters in large oceangoing boats.
native american religions and cultures also varied widely though they shared some broad characteristics.
these variations in native american societies shaped colonial enterprise.
europeans conquered and coopted native american empires with relative ease but smaller and more decentralized polities were harder to exploit.
mobile hunter gatherers appeared politically amorphous but they became especially formidable opponents of colonial expansion.
european colonization triggered a series of sweeping changes that historians have labeled the columbian exchange at the same time that people crossed the atlantic in large numbers so too did plants animals and germs.
old world grains like wheat and barley were planted in the americas for the first time and weeds like dandelions were carried across the ocean as well.
potatoes maize corn and tomatoes among other foods crossed the atlantic in the other direction and transformed dietary practices in asia as well as europe.
native americans domesticated very few animals the columbian exchange introduced horses pigs cattle and a variety of other creatures to the american landscape.
germs also made the voyage especially the deadly pathogens that had so disordered life in europe in the centuries prior to colonization.
smallpox influenza and bubonic plague among others took an enormous toll on native american populations.
inanimate materials made the voyage as well enough gold and silver traveled from the americas to europe and asia to transform the worlds economies intensifying competition and empire building in europe.
old world diseases devastated native american peoples.
on average they lost ninety percent of their numbers over the first century of contact forcing them to cope with european and african newcomers in a weakened and vulnerable state.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 transformations of north america 1450 1700 experimentation and transformation thematic understanding the collisions of american european and african worlds challenged the beliefs and practices of all three groups.
colonization was above all a long and tortured process of experimentation.
over time europeans carved out three distinct types of colonies in the americas each shaped by the constraints and opportunities presented by american landscapes and peoples.
where native american societies were organized into densely settled empires europeans conquered the ruling class and established tribute based empires of their own.
in tropical and subtropical settings colonizers created plantation societies that demanded large imported labor forces a need that was met through the african slave trade.
and in the temperate regions of the mainland north america where neither the landscape nor the native population yielded easy wealth european colonists came in large numbers hoping to create familiar societies in unfamiliar settings.
everywhere in the americas core beliefs and worldviews were shaken by contact with radically unfamiliar peoples.
native americans and africans struggled to maintain autonomy in their relations with colonizers while europeans labored to understand and profit from their relations with nonwhite peoples.
these transformations are the subject of part 1.
this timeline arranges some of the important events of this period into themes.
look at the entries for ideas beliefs and culture from 1450 to 1700.
how did the protestant reformation and the response of the catholic church influence the colonization of the americas in these years.
in the realm of work exchange and technology how did colonial economies evolve and what roles did native american and african labor play in them.
work exchange technology diversified economies of native america rise of the ottoman empire blocks asian trading routes of the italian city states europeans fish off north american coast portuguese traders explore african coast growth of the outwork system in english textile industry spanish encomienda system organizes native labor in mexico inca mita system is co opted by the spanish in the andes first staple exports from the english mainland colonies furs and tobacco subsistence farms in new england transition to sugar plantation system in the caribbean islands tobacco trade stagnates maturing yeoman economy and emerging atlantic trade in new england peopling politics power christopher columbus explores the bahamas and west indies 1492 1504 pedro alvares cabral makes landfall in brazil 1500 spanish conquest of mexico and peru 1519 1535 rise of monarchical nation states in europe aztecs and incas consolidate their empires ideas beliefs culture protestant reformation 1517 sparks century of religious warfare henry viii creates church of england 1534 identity castile and aragon joined to create spain the inquisition helps create a sense of spanishness founding of jesuit order 1540 john calvin establishes a protestant commonwealth in geneva switzerland elizabeths sea dogs plague spanish shipping philip ii defends the roman catholic church against protestantism english conquest and persecution of native irish english monarchs adopt mercantilist policies elizabeth i adopts protestant book of common prayer 1559 growing protestant movement in england persecuted english puritans and catholics migrate to america pilgrims and puritans seek to create godly commonwealths established churches set up in puritan new england and anglican virginia powhatan and virginia company representatives attempt to extract tribute from each other probable founding of the iroquois confederacy rise of the songhai empire in africa castilians and africans arrive in spanish america in large numbers english colonies in newfoundland maine and roanoke fail defeat of the spanish armada 1588 first set of anglo indian wars james i claims divine right to rule england african servitude begins in virginia 1619 virginias house of burgesses 1619 caribbean islands move from servitude to slavery english puritan revolution native americans rise up against english invaders 1622 1640s dissenters settle in rhode island growing gentry immigration to virginia restoration of the english crown 1660 metacoms war in new england 1675 1676 white indentured servitude shapes chesapeake society english conquer new netherland 1664 bacons rebellion calls for removal of indians and end of elite rule africans defined as property rather than people in the chesapeake social mobility for africans ends with collapse of tobacco trade and increased power of gentry salem witchcraft crisis 1692 part 1 part 1 thematic timeline 1450 1700 transformations of north america 1450 1700 colliding worlds 1450 1600 c h a p t e r the native american experience the first americans american empires chiefdoms and confederacies patterns of trade sacred power western europe the edge of the old world hierarchy and authority peasant society expanding trade networks myths religions and holy warriors west and central africa origins of the atlantic slave trade empires kingdoms and ministates trans saharan and coastal trade the spirit world exploration and conquest portuguese expansion the african slave trade sixteenth century incursions i n april 1493 a genoese sailor of humble identify the big idea origins appeared at the court of queen how did the political economic and isabella of castile and king ferdinand religious systems of native ameriof aragon along with six caribbean natives cans europeans and africans comnumerous colorful parrots and samples of pare and how did things change as finest gold and many other things never a result of contacts among them.
before seen or heard tell of in spain the sailor was christopher columbus just returned from his first voyage into the atlantic.
he and his party entered barcelonas fortress in a solemn procession.
the monarchs stood to greet columbus he knelt to kiss their hands.
they talked for an hour and then adjourned to the royal chapel for a ceremony of thanksgiving.
columbus now bearing the official title admiral of the ocean sea remained at court for more than a month.
the highlight of his stay was the baptism of the six natives whom columbus called indians because he mistakenly believed he had sailed westward all the way to asia.
in the spring of 1540 the spanish explorer hernando de soto met the lady of cofachiqui ruler of a large native american province in present day south carolina.
though an epidemic had carried away many of her people the lady of the province offered the spanish expedition as much corn and as many pearls as it could carry.
as she spoke to de soto she unwound a great rope of pearls as large as hazelnuts and handed them to the spaniard in return he gave her a gold ring set with a ruby.
de soto and his men then visited the temples of cofachiqui which were guarded by carved statues and held storehouses of weapons and chest upon chest of pearls.
after loading their horses with corn and pearls they continued on their way.
a portuguese traveler named duarte lopez visited the african kingdom of kongo in 1578.
the men and women are black he reported some approaching olive colour with black curly hair and others with red.
the men are of middle height and excepting the black skin are like the portuguese the royal city of kongo sat on a high plain that was entirely cultivated with a population of more than 100 000.
the city included a separate commercial district a mile around where portuguese traders acquired ivory wax honey palm oil and slaves from the kongolese.
three glimpses of three lost worlds.
soon these peoples would be transforming one anothers societies often through conflict and exploitation.
but at the moment they first met europeans native americans and africans stood on roughly equal terms.
even a hundred years after columbuss discovery of the americas no one could have foreseen the shape that their interactions would take in the generations to come.
to begin we need to understand the three worlds as distinct places each home to unique societies and cultures.
village of secoton 1585 english colonist john white painted this view of an algonquian village on the outer banks of present day north carolina.
its cluster of houses surrounded by fields of crops closely resembled european farming communities of the same era.
white captured everyday details of the towns social life including food preparation and a ceremony or celebration in progress lower right.
service historique de la marine vincennes france giraudon the bridgeman art library.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 the native american experience when europeans arrived perhaps 60 million people occupied the americas 7 million of whom lived north of mexico.
in mesoamerica present day mexico and guatemala and the andes empires that rivaled the greatest civilizations in world history ruled over millions of people.
at the other end of the political spectrum hunters and gatherers were organized into kinbased bands.
between these extremes semisedentary societies planted and tended crops in the spring and summer fished and hunted made war and conducted trade.
though we often see this spectrum as a hierarchy in which the empires are most impressive and important while hunter gatherers deserve scarcely a mention this bias toward civilizations that left behind monumental architecture and spawned powerful ruling classes is misplaced.
regardless of size or political complexity the energies and innovations of native american societies everywhere profoundly transformed american landscapes.
to be fully understood the americas must be treated in all their complexity with an appreciation for their diverse societies and cultures.
the first americans archaeologists believe that migrants from asia crossed a 100 mile wide land bridge connecting siberia and alaska during the last ice age sometime between 13 000 and 3000 b c.
and thus became the first americans.
the first wave of this migratory stream from asia lasted from about fifteen thousand to nine thousand years ago.
then the glaciers melted and the rising ocean submerged the land bridge beneath the bering strait map 1 1.
around eight thousand years ago a second movement of peoples traveling by water across the same narrow strait brought the ancestors of the navajos and the apaches to north america.
the forebears of the aleut and inuit peoples the eskimos came in a third wave around five thousand years ago.
then for three hundred generations the peoples of the western hemisphere were largely cut off from the rest of the world.
during this long era migrants identify causes dispersed through the continents what factors allowed as they hunted and gathered availfor the development of able resources.
the predominant empires in central mexico flow was southward and the densand the andes.
est populations developed in central mexico home to some 20 million people at the time of first contact with europeans and the andes mountains with a population of perhaps 12 million.
in north america a secondary trickle of migration pushed eastward across the rockies and into the mississippi valley and the eastern woodlands.
around 6000 b c some native american peoples in present day mexico and peru began raising domesticated crops.
mesoamericans cultivated maize into a nutritious plant with a higher yield per acre than wheat barley or rye the staple cereals of europe.
in peru they also bred the potato a root crop of unsurpassed nutritional value.
the resulting agricultural surpluses encouraged population growth and laid the foundation for wealthy urban societies in mexico and peru and later in the mississippi valley and the southeastern woodlands of north america map 1 2.
american empires in mesoamerica and the andes the two great empires of the americas the aztecs and incas dominated the landscape.
dense populations productive agriculture and an aggressive bureaucratic state were the keys to their power.
each had an impressive capital city.
tenochtitln established in 1325 at the center of the aztec empire had at its height around 1500 a population of about 250 000 at a time when the european cities of london and seville each had perhaps 50 000.
the aztec state controlled the fertile valleys in the highlands of mexico and aztec merchants forged trading routes that crisscrossed the empire.
trade along with tribute demanded from subject peoples comparable to taxes in europe brought gold textiles turquoise obsidian tropical bird feathers and cacao to tenochtitln.
the europeans who first encountered this city in 1519 marveled at the citys wealth and beauty.
some of the soldiers among us who had been in many parts of the world wrote spanish conquistador bernal daz del castillo in constantinople and all over italy and in rome said that they had never seen so large a market place and so full of people and so well regulated and arranged see american voices p 32.
ruled by priests and warrior nobles the aztecs subjugated most of central mexico.
captured enemies were brought to the capital where aztec priests brutally sacrificed thousands of them.
the aztecs believed that these ritual murders sustained the cosmos ensuring fertile fields and the daily return of the sun.
cuzco the inca capital located more than 11 000 feet above sea level had perhaps 60 000 residents.
a dense network of roads storehouses and administrative chapter 1 colliding worlds 1450 1600 using a global projection the cartographer has placed north america in the center of the map but parts of four other continents appear.
i a a s i a b e r scandinavian ice sheet 160e greenland ice sheet evidence indicates that peoples came from asia to the americas during the ice age when the sea level was much lower than today and a large land bridge labeled beringia on the map connected the continents.
w co as scholars learn more about the advances and retreats of the ice sheets the camping sites of the migrating peoples and changes in vegetation zones a more complete picture of the peopling of the americas will emerge.
rd ill mou gulf of mexico s tundra conifer forest deciduous forest prairie desert migration route 20n app rox i s florida e ice sheets c 16 000 b c.
ice sheets c 12 000 b c.
vegetation zones atl a n t i c o cean m n ta i n w o a s tli n cky n et a te ice ag ec ro heet ce s n i current scholarship holds that the migrating peoples initially traveled on a narrow strip of ice free land along the pacific coast.
as the area between the cordilleran and laurentide ice sheets lost its cover of ice probably between 14 000 and 12 000 b c migrants may also have used the inland routes from present day alaska to the american interior.
she laurentide ice e era pacific ocea n n o r t h a m e r i c a 0 80 60n 120w 40n w 0 i alaska w l beringia bering sea pack ice caribbean sea south america many groups accustomed to living at the oceans edge probably continued along this route pushing ever southward into south america.
a i c f r ri 25 000 12 000 b c.
land bridge open 0 ku s e u r o p e e a s i japan 80e e 0 1 000 miles 500 1 000 kilometers after tanner map 1 1 the ice age and the settling of the americas some sixteen thousand years ago a sheet of ice covered much of europe and north america.
the ice lowered the level of the worlds oceans which created a broad bridge of land between siberia and alaska.
using that land bridge hunting peoples from asia migrated to north america as they pursued woolly mammoths and other large game animals and sought ice free habitats.
by 10 000 b c the descendants of these migrant peoples had moved south to present day florida and central mexico.
in time they would settle as far south as the tip of south america and as far east as the atlantic coast of north america.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 arctic o cean inuit al eu t inuit inuit dene tlingit inuit dogrib tsimshian salish nootka kootenai ut chumash papago s cochimi abenaki passamaquoddy iroquois wampanoag mohegan sauk narragansett pawnee pequot potawatomi susquehannock iowa munsee lenni delaware lenape powhatan illinois arapaho shawnee tuscarora navajo kiowa s ute pima coahuiltec zacatec dominant economic activity at l a n t i c ocean gulf of mex ico calusa seminole lucayo ciboney sub taino taino toltec nahuatl aztec agriculture hunting gathering fishing gathering cherokee chickasaw yamasee creek choctaw timucua te zu was ac i caddo ho oma comanche etcpi.
apache blo k yo southern paiute algonquian ojibwa hidatsa mandan sioux cheyenne crow pomo n micmac cree assiniboine northern paiute shoshone w beothuk blackfeet nez perc pac i f i c ocean montagnais cree kwakiutl e naskapi chipewyan haida pue caribbean sea maya mixtec zapotec miskito 1 000 miles 1 000 kilometers cuna guaymi map 1 2 native american peoples 1492 having learned to live in many environments native americans populated the entire western hemisphere.
they created cultures that ranged from centralized empires the incas and aztecs to societies that combined farming with hunting fishing and gathering the iroquois and algonquians to nomadic tribes of hunter gatherers the micmacs and shoshones.
the great diversity of native american peoples in language tribal identity and ways of life and the longstanding rivalries among neighboring peoples usually prevented them from uniting to resist the european invaders.
centers stitched together this improbable high altitude empire which ran down the 2 000 mile long spine of the andes mountains.
a king claiming divine status ruled the empire through a bureaucracy of nobles.
like the aztecs the empire consisted of subordinate kingdoms that had been conquered by the incas and tribute flowed from local centers of power to the imperial core.
chiefdoms and confederacies nothing on the scale of the aztec and inca empires ever developed north of mexico but maize agriculture spread from mesoamerica across much of north america beginning around a d 1000 laying a foundation for new ways of life there as well.
chapter 1 colliding worlds 1450 1600 understanding the cosmos of the aztecs using aztec sources german geographers drew this map of tenochtitln in 1524.
recent scholarship suggests that the aztecs viewed their city as a cosmic linchpin where the human world brushed up against the divine.
in the center of the city stand two elevated temples that represent coatepec the serpent mountain and the mythic birthplace of the aztecs tribal god huitzilopochtli.
priests sacrificed thousands of men and women here a ritual the aztecs believed transformed the temples into the sacred mountain and sustained the cosmos.
bildarchiv preussischer kulturbesitz art resource ny.
the mississippi valley the spread of maize to the mississippi river valley around a d 1000 led to the development of a large scale northern native american culture.
the older adena and hopewell cultures had already introduced moundbuilding and distinctive pottery styles to the region.
now residents of the mississippi river valley experienced the greater urban density and more complex social organization that agriculture encouraged.
the city of cahokia in the fertile bottomlands along the mississippi river emerged around 1000 as the foremost center of the new mississippian culture.
at its peak cahokias population exceeded 10 000 smaller satellite communities brought the regions population to 20 000 to 30 000.
in an area of 6 square miles archaeologists have found 120 mounds of varying size shape and function.
some contain extensive burials others known as platform mounds were used as bases for ceremonial buildings or rulers homes.
cahokia had a powerful ruling class and a priesthood that worshipped the sun.
after peaking in size around 1350 it declined rapidly.
scholars speculate that its decline was caused by an era of ruinous warfare exacerbated by environmental factors that made the site less habitable.
it had been abandoned by the time europeans arrived in the area.
mississippian culture endured however and was still in evidence throughout much of the southeast at the time of first contact with europeans.
the lady of cofachiqui encountered by hernando de soto in 1540 ruled over a mississippian community and others dotted the landscape between the carolinas and the lower part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 mississippi river.
in florida sixteenth century spanish explorers encountered the apalachee indians who occupied a network of towns built around mounds and fields of maize.
eastern woodlands in the eastern woodlands the mississippian influenced peoples of the southeast interacted with other groups many of whom adopted maize agriculture but did not otherwise display mississippian characteristics.
to the north algonquian and iroquoian speakers shared related languages and lifeways but were divided into dozens of distinct societies.
most occupied villages built around fields of maize beans and squash during the summer months at other times of the year they dispersed in smaller groups to hunt fish and gather.
throughout the eastern woodlands as in most of north america women tended crops gathered plants and oversaw affairs within the community while men were responsible for activities beyond it especially hunting fishing and warfare.
in this densely forested region indians regularly set fires in new england twice a year in spring and fall to clear away underbrush open fields and make it easier to hunt big game.
the catastrophic population decline accompanying european colonization quickly put an end to seasonal burning but in the years before europeans arrived in north america bison roamed east as far as modern day new york and georgia.
early european colonists remarked upon landscapes that resemble d a stately parke where men could ride among widely spaced trees on horseback and even a large army could pass unimpeded america compared p 14.
algonquian and iroquoian peoples had no single style of political organization.
many were chiefdoms with one individual claiming preeminent power in a community.
some were paramount chiefdoms in which numerous communities with their own local chiefs banded together under a single more powerful ruler.
for example the powhatan chiefdom which the great serpent mound scholars long believed that this mound was the work of the adena peoples 500 b c a d.
200 because of its proximity to an adena burial site in present day southern ohio.
recent research places the mound at a much later date a d.
950 1200 and because of the serpent imagery ties it to the fort ancient culture which is closely related to the mississippian complex.
the head of the serpent is aligned with the sunset of the summer solstice june 20 or 21 in the northern hemisphere an event of great religious significance to a sun worshipping culture.
bettmann corbis.
chapter 1 colliding worlds 1450 1600 the kincaid site located on the north bank of the ohio river 140 miles from cahokia the kincaid site was a mississippian town from c a d.
1050 to 1450.
it contains at least nineteen mounds topped by large buildings thought to have been temples or council houses.
now a state historic site in illinois it has been studied by anthropologists and archaeologists since the 1930s.
artist herb roe depicts the town as it may have looked at its peak.
herb roe chromesun productions.
dominated the chesapeake bay region embraced more than thirty subordinate chiefdoms and some 20 000 people by the time englishmen established the colony of virginia in powhatan territory.
powhatan himself according to the english colonist john smith was attended by a guard of 40 or 50 of the tallest men his country affords elsewhere especially in the mid atlantic region the power of chiefs was strictly local.
along the delaware and hudson rivers lenni lenape or delaware and munsee indians lived in small independent communities without overarching political organizations.
early european maps of this region show a landscape dotted with a bewildering profusion of indian names.
european colonization would soon drive many of these groups into oblivion and force survivors to coalesce into larger groups.
some native american groups were not chiefdoms at all but instead granted political authority to councils of sachems or leaders.
this was the case with the iroquois confederacy.
sometime shortly before the arrival of europeans probably around 1500 five nations occupying the region between the hudson river and lake erie the mohawks oneidas onondagas cayugas and senecas banded together to form the iroquois.
these groups had been fighting among themselves for years caught in a destructive cycle of wars of retribution.
then according to iroquois legend a mohawk man named hiawatha lost his family in one of these america c o m pa r e d altered landscapes in the eastern woodlands native americans set fires once or twice a year to clear underbrush and open up landscapes that would otherwise have been densely wooded.
the burnings made it easier to plant corn beans and squash and drew big game animals into the clearings where hunters could fell them.
as european colonization displaced indian populations this practice ended.
some scholars have even suggested that the decline in burning caused a drop of carbon in the atmosphere large enough to account for the little ice age an episode of global cooling that lasted from about 1550 to 1850 though the claim is controversial.
thomas morton of the custome in burning the country and the reason thereof 1637 the savages are accustomed to set fire of the country in all places where they come and to burne it twize a yeare viz at the spring and the fall of the leafe.
the reason that mooves them to doe so is because it would other wise be so overgrowne with underweedes that it would be all a coppice wood and the people would not be able in any wise to passe through the country out of a beaten path.
the meanes that they do it with is with certaine minerall stones that they carry about them in baggs made for that purpose of the skinnes of little beastes which they convert into good lether carrying in the same a peece of touch wood very excellent for that purpose of their owne making.
these minerall stones they have from the piquenteenes which is to the southward of all the plantations in new england by trade and trafficke with those people.
the burning of the grasse destroyes the underwoods and so scorcheth the elder trees that it shrinkes them and hinders their grouth very much so that hee that will looke to finde large trees and good tymber must not depend upon the help of a woodden prospect to finde them on the uplandground but must seeke for them as i and others have done in the lower grounds where the grounds are wett when the country is fired by reason of the snow water that remaines there for a time untill the sunne by continuance of that hath exhaled the vapoures of the earth and dried up those places where the fire by reason of the moisture can have no power to doe them any hurt and if he would endevoure to finde out any goodly cedars hee must not seeke for them on the higher grounds but make his inquest for them in the vallies for the savages by this custome of theirs have spoiled all the rest for this custome hath bin continued from the beginninge.
and least their firing of the country in this manner should be an occasion of damnifying us and indaingering our habitations wee our selves have used carefully about the same times to observe the winds and fire the grounds about our owne habitations to prevent the dammage that might happen by any neglect thereof if the fire should come neere those howses in our absence.
for when the fire is once kindled it dilates and spreads it selfe as well against as with the winde burning continually night and day untill a shower of raine falls to quench it.
and this custome of firing the country is the meanes to make it passable and by that meanes the trees growe here and there as in our parks and makes the country very beautifull and commodious.
source thomas morton the new english canaan boston john wilson and son 1883 orig.
1637 172 173.
questions for analysis 1.
what benefits and dangers does morton attribute to the practice of indian burning.
how did he and his fellow colonists respond to the practice.
since europeans did not practice widespread burning in the indian manner they achieved deforestation only slowly through many years of backbreaking labor.
thinking comparatively about european and native american approaches to landscape management how would you assess the benefits and challenges of each approach.
chapter 1 wars.
stricken by grief he met a spirit who taught him a series of condolence rituals.
he returned to his people preaching a new gospel of peace and power and the condolence rituals he taught became the foundation for the iroquois confederacy.
once bound by these rituals the five nations began acting together as a political confederacy.
they avoided violence among themselves and became one of the most powerful native american groups in the northeast.
the iroquois did not recognize chiefs instead councils of sachems made decisions.
these were matriarchal societies with power inherited through female lines of authority.
women were influential in local councils though men served as sachems made war and conducted diplomacy.
along the southern coast of the region that would soon be called new england a dense network of powerful chiefdoms including the narragansetts wampanoags mohegans pequots and others competed for resources and dominance.
when the dutch and english arrived they were able to exploit these rivalries and play indian groups against one another.
farther north in northern new england and much of present day canada the short growing season and thin rocky soil were inhospitable to maize agriculture.
here the native peoples were hunters and gatherers and therefore had smaller and more mobile communities though they were no less complex than their agriculturally oriented cousins.
the great lakes to the west algonquian speaking peoples dominated the great lakes.
the tribal groups recognized by europeans in this region included the ottawas ojibwas and potawatomis.
but collectively they thought of themselves as a single people the anishinaabe.
clan identities beaver otter sturgeon deer and others crosscut tribal affiliations and were in some ways more fundamental.
the result was a social landscape that could be bewildering to outsiders.
here lived one french official remarked an infinity of undiscovered nations the extensive network of lakes and rivers and the use of birchbark canoes made great lakes peoples especially mobile.
they seem to have as many abodes as the year has seasons wrote one observer.
they traveled long distances to hunt and fish to trade or to join in important ceremonies or military alliances.
groups negotiated access to resources and travel routes.
instead of a map with clearly delineated tribal territories it is best to imagine the great lakes as a porous region where political power and social identity took on multiple forms as one scholar has written.
colliding worlds 1450 1600 the great plains and rockies farther west lies the vast arid steppe region known as the great plains which was dominated by the hunting and gathering activities of small dispersed groups.
the geopolitics of the plains indians was transformed by a european import the horse long before europeans themselves arrived.
livestock was introduced in the spanish colony of new mexico in the late sixteenth century and from there horses gradually dispersed across the plains.
bison hunters who had previously relied on stealth became much more successful on horseback.
indians on horseback were also more formidable opponents than their counterparts on foot and some plains peoples leveraged their control of horses to gain power over their neighbors.
the comanches were a explain small shoshonean band on the consequences northern plains that migrated how did landscape south in pursuit of horses.
they climate and resources became expert raiders captur influence the developing people and horses alike and ment of native american trading them for weapons food societies.
clothing and other necessities.
eventually they controlled a vast territory.
from their humble origins their skill in making war on horseback made the comanches one of the regions most formidable peoples.
similarly horses allowed the sioux a confederation of seven distinct peoples who originated in present day minnesota to move west and dominate a vast territory ranging from the mississippi river to the black hills.
the crow indians moved from the missouri river to the eastern slope of the rocky mountains where they became nomadic bison hunters.
beginning in the mideighteenth century they became horse breeders and traders as well.
in some places farming communities were embedded within the much wider geographical range of hunter gatherers.
thus the hidatsa and mandan indians maintained settled agricultural villages along the missouri river while the more mobile sioux dominated the region around them.
similarly the caddo indians who lived on the edge of the southern plains inhabited agricultural communities that were like islands in a sea of more mobile peoples.
three broad swaths of numic speaking peoples occupied the great basin that separated the rockies from the sierra mountains bannocks and northern paiutes in the north shoshones in the central basin and utes and southern paiutes in the south.
resources were varied and spread thin on the land.
kin based bands traveled great distances to hunt bison along the part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 yellowstone river where they shared territory with the crows and bighorn sheep in high altitudes to fish for salmon and to gather pine nuts when they were in season.
throughout the great basin some groups adopted horses and became relatively powerful while others remained foot borne and impoverished in comparison with their more mobile neighbors.
the arid southwest in the part of north america that appears to be most hostile to agriculture the canyon laced country of the arid southwest surprisingly large farming settlements developed.
anasazi peoples were growing maize by the first century a d earlier than anywhere else north of mexico and pueblo cultures emerged around a d 600.
by a d 1000 the hohokams mogollons and anasazis all pueblo peoples had developed irrigation systems to manage scarce water enabling them to build sizable villages and towns of adobe and rock that were often molded to sheer canyon walls.
chaco canyon in modern new mexico supported a dozen large anasazi towns while beyond the canyon a network of roads tied these settlements together with hundreds of small anasazi villages.
extended droughts and soil exhaustion caused the abandonment of chaco canyon and other large settlements in the southwest after 1150 but smaller communities still dotted the landscape when the first europeans arrived.
it was the spanish who called these groups pueblo indians pueblo means town in spanish and the name refers to their distinctive building style.
when europeans arrived pueblo peoples including the acomas zuis tewas and hopis were found throughout much of modern new mexico arizona and western texas.
the pacific coast hunter gatherers inhabited the pacific coast.
before the arrival of the spanish california was home to more than 300 000 people subdivided into dozens of small localized groups and speaking at least a hundred distinct languages.
this diversity of languages and cultures discouraged intermarriage and kept these societies independent.
despite these differences many groups did share common characteristics including clearly defined social hierarchies separating elites from commoners.
they gathered acorns and other nuts and seeds caught fish and shellfish and hunted game.
the pacific northwest also supported a dense population that was divided into many distinct groups who controlled small territories and spoke different languages.
their stratified societies were ruled by wealthy families.
to maintain control of their territories the more powerful nations including the chinooks coast salishes haidas and tlingits nurtured strong warrior traditions.
they developed sophisticated fishing technologies and crafted oceangoing dugout canoes made from enormous cedar trees that ranged up to 60 feet in length.
their distinctive material culture included large longhouses that were home to dozens of people and totem poles representing clan lineages or local legends.
patterns of trade expansive trade networks tied together regions and carried valuable goods hundreds and even thousands of miles.
trade goods included food and raw materials tools ritual artifacts and decorative goods.
trade enriched diets enhanced economies and allowed the powerful to set themselves apart with luxury items.
anasazi ladle crafted between a d.
1300 and 1600 and found in a site in central arizona this anasazi dipper was coiled and molded by hand and painted with a geometric motif.
anasazi pottery is abundant in archaeological sites thanks in part to the southwests dry climate.
clay vessels and ladles helped anasazi peoples handle water one of their most precious resources with care.
national museum of the american indian smithsonian institution.
chapter 1 colliding worlds 1450 1600 chilkat tlingit bowl this bowl in the form of a brown bear which dates to the mid nineteenth century is made of alder wood and inlaid with snail shells.
the brown bear is a tlingit clan totem.
animal form bowls like this one which express an affinity with nonhuman creatures are a common feature of tlingit culture.
national museum of the american indian smithsonian institution.
in areas where indians specialized in a particular economic activity regional trade networks allowed them to share resources.
thus nomadic hunters of the southern plains including the navajos and apaches conducted annual trade fairs with pueblo farmers exchanging hides and meat for maize pottery and cotton blankets.
similar patterns of exchange occurred throughout the great plains wherever hunters and farmers coexisted.
in some parts of north america a regional trade in war captives who were offered as slaves helped to sustain friendly relations among neighboring groups.
one such network developed in the upper mississippi river basin where plains indian captives were traded or given as diplomatic gifts to ottawas and other great lakes and eastern woodlands peoples.
across longer distances rare and valuable objects traveled through networks that spanned much of the continent.
great lakes copper rocky mountain mica jasper from pennsylvania obsidian from new mexico and wyoming and pipestone from the midwest have all been found in archaeological sites hundreds of miles from their points of origin.
seashells often shaped and polished into beads and other artifacts traveled hundreds of miles inland.
grizzly bear claws and eagle feathers were prized high status objects.
after european contact indian hunters often traveled long distances to european trading posts to trade for cloth iron tools and weapons.
within native american groups powerful leaders controlled a disproportionate share of wealth and redistributed it to prove their generosity and strengthen their authority.
in small kin based bands the strongest hunters possessed the most food and sharing it was essential.
in chiefdoms rulers filled the same role often collecting the wealth of a community and then redistributing it to their followers.
powhatan the powerful chesapeake bay chief reportedly collected nine tenths of the produce of the communities he oversaw skins beads copper pearls deer turkeys wild beasts and corn but then gave much of it back to his subordinates.
his generosity was considered a mark of good leadership.
in the pacific northwest the chinook word potlatch refers to periodic festivals in which wealthy residents gave away belongings to friends family and followers.
sacred power most native north americans were animists who believed that the natural world was suffused with spiritual power.
they sought to understand the world by interpreting dreams and visions and their rituals appeased guardian spirits that could ensure successful hunts and other forms of good fortune.
although their views were subject to countless local variations certain patterns were widespread.
women and men interacted differently with these spiritual forces.
in agricultural communities women grew crops and maintained hearth home and village.
native american conceptions of female power linked their bodies generative functions with the earths fertility and rituals like the green corn ceremony a summer ritual of purification and renewal helped to sustain the life giving properties of the world around them.
for men spiritual power was invoked in hunting and war.
to ensure success in hunting men took care part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 not to offend the spirits of the animals they killed.
they performed rituals before during and after a how did native americans hunt to acknowledge the power of conceptions of the spiritual those guardian spirits and they world influence their daily believed that when an animal had lives.
been killed properly its spirit would rise from the earth unharmed.
success in hunting and prowess in war were both interpreted as signs of sacred protection and power.
ideas about war varied widely.
war could be fought for geopolitical reasons to gain ground against an enemy but for many groups warfare was a crucial rite of passage for young men and raids were conducted to allow warriors to prove themselves in battle.
motives for war could be highly personal war was often more like a blood feud between families than a contest between nations.
if a community lost warriors in battle it often retaliated by capturing or killing a like number of warriors in response a so called mourning war.
some captives were adopted into new communities while others were enslaved or tortured.
understand points of view western europe the edge of the old world in 1450 western europe lay at the far fringe of the eurasian and african continents.
it had neither the powerful centralized empires nor the hunter gatherer bands and semisedentary societies of the americas it was instead a patchwork of roughly equivalent kingdoms duchies and republics vying with one another and struggling to reach out effectively to the rest of the world.
no one would have predicted that europeans would soon become overlords of the western hemisphere.
a thousand years after the fall of the roman empire europes populations still relied on subsistence agriculture and were never far from the specter of famine.
moreover around 1350 a deadly plague introduced from central asia the black death had killed one third of europes population.
the lives of ordinary people were afflicted by poverty disease and uncertainty and the future looked as difficult and dark as the past.
hierarchy and authority in traditional hierarchical societies american or european authority came from above.
in europe kings and princes owned vast tracts of land forcibly conscripted men for military service and lived off the peasantrys labor.
yet monarchs were far from supreme local nobles also owned large estates and controlled hundreds of peasant families.
collectively these nobles challenged royal authority with both their military power and their legislative institutions such as the french parlements and the english house of lords.
just as kings and nobles ruled society men governed families.
these were patriarchies in which property and social identity descended in male family lines.
rich or poor the man was the head of the house his power justified by the teachings of the christian church.
as one english clergyman put it the woman is a weak creature not embued with like strength and constancy of mind law and custom subjected her to the power of man once married an englishwoman assumed her husbands surname submitted to his orders and surrendered the right to her property.
when he died she received a dower usually the use during her lifetime of one third of the familys land and goods.
men also controlled the lives of their children who usually worked for their father into their middle or late twenties.
then landowning peasants would give land to their sons and dowries to their daughters and choose marriage partners of appropriate wealth and status.
in many regions fathers bestowed all their land on their eldest son a practice known as primogeniture forcing many younger children to join the ranks of the roaming poor.
few men and even fewer women had much personal freedom.
hierarchy and authority prevailed in traditional european society because of the power held by established institutions nobility church and village and because in a violent and unpredictable world they offered ordinary people a measure of security.
carried by migrants to america these security conscious institutions would shape the character of family and society well into the eighteenth century.
peasant society in 1450 most europeans were peasants farmworkers who lived in small villages surrounded by fields farmed cooperatively by different families.
on manorial lands farming rights were given in exchange for labor on the lords estate an arrangement that turned peasants into serfs.
gradually obligatory manorial services gave way to paying rent or as in france landownership.
once freed from the obligation to labor for their farming rights european farmers began to produce surpluses and created local market economies.
chapter 1 as with native americans the rhythm of life followed the seasons.
in march villagers began the exhausting work of plowing and then planting wheat rye and oats.
during the spring the men sheared wool which the women washed and spun into yarn.
in june peasants cut hay and stored it as winter fodder for their livestock.
during the summer life was more relaxed and families repaired their houses and barns.
fall brought the harvest followed by solemn feasts of thanksgiving and riotous bouts of merrymaking.
as winter approached peasants slaughtered excess livestock and salted or smoked the meat.
during the cold months they threshed grain and wove textiles visited friends and relatives and celebrated the winter solstice or the birth of christ.
just before the cycle began again in the spring they held carnivals celebrating with drink and dance the end of the long winter figure 1 1.
for most peasants survival meant constant labor and poverty corroded family relationships.
malnourished mothers fed their babies sparingly calling them greedy and gluttonous and many newborn girls were helped to die so that their brothers would have enough to eat.
half of all peasant children died before the age of twenty one victims of malnourishment and disease.
many peasants drew on strong religious beliefs counting blessings and accepting their harsh existence.
others hoped for a better life.
it was the peasants of spain germany and britain who would supply the majority of white migrants to the western hemisphere.
colliding worlds 1450 1600 expanding trade networks in the millennium before contact with the americas western europe was the barbarian fringe of the civilized world.
in the mediterranean basin arab scholars carried on the legacy of byzantine civilization which had preserved compare and the achievements of the greeks contrast and romans in medicine philos in what ways were ophy mathematics astronomy the lives of europeans and geography while merchants similar to and different controlled trade in the mediter from those of native ranean africa and the near east.
this control gave them access to spices from india and silks magnetic compasses water powered mills and mechanical clocks from china.
in the twelfth century merchants from the italian city states of genoa florence pisa and especially venice began to push their way into the arabdominated trade routes of the mediterranean.
trading in alexandria beirut and other eastern mediterranean ports they carried the luxuries of asia into european markets.
at its peak venice had a merchant fleet of more than three thousand ships.
this enormously profitable commerce created wealthy merchants bankers and textile manufacturers who expanded trade lent vast sums of money and spurred technological innovation in silk and wool production.
italian moneyed elites ruled their city states as republics states that had no prince or king but instead figure 1 1 the yearly rhythm of rural life and death the annual cycle of nature profoundly affected life in the traditional agricultural world.
the death rate soared by 20 percent in february from viruses and september from fly borne dysentery.
summer was the healthiest season with the fewest deaths and the most successful conceptions as measured by births nine months later.
a value of 100 indicates an equal number of deaths and conceptions.
conceptions winter.
deaths spring summer.
dec jan feb mar.
may june july aug sept oct nov part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 procession in st marks square in venice 1496 venice was one of the worlds great trading centers in the fifteenth century.
its merchant houses connected europe to asia and the middle east while its complex republican government aroused both admiration and mistrust.
here venetian painter gentile bellini c 1429 1507 depicts a diplomatic procession celebrating the league of venice a union of european states opposed to french expansion into italy.
galleria dell accademia venice italy giraudon the bridgeman art library.
were governed by merchant coalitions.
they celebrated civic humanism an ideology that praised public virtue and service to the state and in time profoundly influenced european and american conceptions of government.
they sponsored great artists michelangelo leonardo da vinci and others who produced an unprecedented flowering of genius.
historians have labeled the arts and learning associated with this cultural transformation from 1300 to 1450 the renaissance.
the economic revolution that began in italy spread slowly to northern and western europe.
englands principal export was woolen cloth which was prized in the colder parts of the continent but had less appeal in southern trace change europe and beyond.
northern over time europe had its own trade system how did the growth of controlled by an alliance of mercommerce shift the strucchant communities called the ture of power in european societies.
hanseatic league centered on the baltic and north seas which dealt in timber furs wheat and rye honey wax and amber.
as trade picked up in europe merchants and artisans came to dominate its growing cities and towns.
while the italian city states ruled themselves without having a powerful monarch to contend with in much of europe the power of merchants stood in tension with that of kings and nobles.
in general the rise of commerce favored the power of kings at the expense of the landed nobility.
the kings of western europe established royal law courts that gradually eclipsed the manorial courts controlled by nobles they also built bureaucracies that helped them centralize power while they forged alliances with merchants and urban artisans.
monarchs allowed merchants to trade throughout their realms granted privileges to guilds or artisan organizations that regulated trades and safeguarded commercial transactions thereby encouraging domestic manufacturing and foreign trade.
in return they extracted taxes from towns and loans from merchants to support their armies and officials.
myths religions and holy warriors the oldest european religious beliefs drew on a form of animism similar to that of native americans which held that the natural world the sun wind stones animals was animated by spiritual forces.
as in north america such beliefs led ancient european peoples to develop localized cults of knowledge and spiritual practice.
wise men and women developed rituals to protect their communities ensure abundant harvests heal illnesses and bring misfortunes to their enemies.
chapter 1 the pagan traditions of greece and rome overlaid animism with elaborate myths about gods interacting directly with the affairs of human beings.
as the roman empire expanded it built temples to its gods wherever it planted new settlements.
thus peoples throughout europe north africa and the near east were exposed to the roman pantheon.
soon the teachings of christianity began to flow in these same channels.
the rise of christianity christianity which grew out of jewish monotheism the belief in one god held that jesus christ was himself divine.
as an institution christianity benefitted enormously from the conversion of the roman emperor constantine in a d 312.
prior to that time christians were an underground sect at odds with the roman empire.
after constantines conversion christianity became romes official religion temples were abandoned or remade into churches and noblemen who hoped to retain their influence the last judgment 1467 1471 death and their fate in the afterlife loomed large in the minds of fifteenth century christians and artists depicted their hopes and fears in vividly rendered scenes.
in this painting by the german flemish artist hans memling c 1433 1494 christ and his apostles sit in judgment as the world ends and the dead rise from their graves.
the archangel michael weighs the souls of the dead in a balance to determine their final fate either eternal life with god in heaven or everlasting punishment in hell.
erich lessing art resource ny.
colliding worlds 1450 1600 converted to the new state religion.
for centuries the roman catholic church was the great unifying institution in western europe.
the pope in rome headed a vast hierarchy of cardinals bishops and priests.
catholic theologians preserved latin the language of classical scholarship and imbued kingship with divine power.
christian dogma provided a common understanding of god and human history and the authority of the church buttressed state institutions.
every village had a church and holy shrines served as points of contact with the sacred world.
often those shrines had their origins in older animist practices now largely forgotten and replaced with christian ritual.
christian doctrine penetrated deeply into the everyday lives of peasants.
while animist traditions held that spiritual forces were alive in the natural world christian priests taught that the natural world was flawed and fallen.
spiritual power came from outside nature from a supernatural god who had sent his divine son jesus part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 christ into the world to save humanity from its sins.
the christian church devised a religious calendar that transformed animist festivals into holy days.
the winter solstice which had for millennia marked the return of the sun became the feast of christmas.
the church also taught that satan a wicked supernatural being was constantly challenging god by tempting people to sin.
people who spread heresies doctrines that were inconsistent with the teachings of the church were seen as the tools of satan and suppressing false doctrines became an obligation of christian rulers.
the crusades in their work suppressing false doctrines christian rulers were also obliged to combat islam the religion whose followers considered muhammad to be gods last prophet.
islams reach expanded until it threatened european christendom.
following the death of muhammad in a d 632 the newly converted arab peoples of north africa used force and fervor to spread the muslim faith into subsaharan africa india and indonesia as well as deep into spain and the balkan regions of europe.
between a d 1096 and 1291 christian armies undertook a series of crusades to reverse the muslim advance in europe and win back the holy lands where christ had lived.
under the banner of the pope and led by europes christian monarchs crusading armies aroused great waves of popular piety as they marched off to combat.
new orders of knights like the knights templar and the teutonic knights were created to support them.
the crusaders had some military successes but their most profound impact was on european society.
religious warfare intensified europes christian identity and prompted the persecution of jews and their expulsion from many european countries.
the crusades also introduced western european merchants to the trade routes that stretched from constantinople to china along the silk road and from the mediterranean sea through the persian gulf to the indian ocean.
and crusaders encountered sugar for the first time.
returning soldiers brought it back from the middle east and as europeans began to conquer territory in the eastern mediterranean they experimented with raising it themselves.
these early experiments with sugar would have a profound trace change impact on european enterprise over time in the americas and european how did the growing involvement with the african influence of the christian slave trade in the centuries to church affect events in come.
by 1450 western europe europe.
remained relatively isolated from the centers of civilization in eurasia and africa but the crusades and the rise of italian merchant houses had introduced it to a wider world.
the reformation in 1517 martin luther a german monk and professor at the university in wittenberg took up the cause of reform in the catholic church.
luthers ninety five theses condemned the church for many corrupt practices.
more radically luther downplayed the role of the clergy as mediators between god and believers and said that christians must look to the bible not to the church as the ultimate authority in matters of faith.
so that every literate german could read the bible previously available only in latin luther translated it into german.
meanwhile in geneva switzerland french theologian john calvin established a rigorous protestant regime.
even more than luther calvin stressed human weakness and gods omnipotence.
his institutes of the christian religion 1536 depicted god as an absolute sovereign.
calvin preached the doctrine of predestination the idea that god chooses certain people for salvation before they are born and condemns the rest to eternal damnation.
in geneva he set up a model christian community and placed spiritual authority in ministers who ruled the city prohibiting frivolity and luxury.
we know wrote calvin that man is of so perverse and crooked a nature that everyone would scratch out his neighbors eyes if there were no bridle to hold them in calvins authoritarian doctrine won converts all over europe including the puritans in scotland and england.
luthers criticisms triggered a war between the holy roman empire and the northern principalities in germany and soon the controversy between the roman catholic church and radical reformers like luther and calvin spread throughout much of western europe.
the protestant reformation as this movement came to be called triggered a counterreformation in the catholic church that sought change from within and created new monastic and missionary orders including the jesuits founded in 1540 who saw themselves as soldiers of christ.
the competition between these divergent christian traditions did much to shape european colonization of the americas.
roman catholic powers spain portugal and france sought to win souls in the americas for the church while protestant nations england and the netherlands viewed the catholic church as corrupt and exploitative and hoped instead to create godly communities attuned to the true gospel of christianity.
chapter 1 west and central africa origins of the atlantic slave trade homo sapiens originated in africa.
numerous civilizations had already risen and fallen there and contacts with the near east and the mediterranean were millennia old when western europeans began sailing down its atlantic coast.
home to perhaps 100 million in 1400 africa was divided by the vast expanse of the sahara.
north africa bordered on the mediterranean and its peoples fell under the domination of christian byzantium until the seventh century when muslim conquests brought the region under islamic influence.
in its coastal seaports the merchandise of asia the near east africa and europe converged.
south of the sahara by contrast the societies of west and central africa bordering on the atlantic were relatively isolated.
after 1400 that would quickly change.
empires kingdoms and ministates west africa the part of the continent that bulges into the atlantic can be visualized as a broad horizontal swath divided into three climatic zones.
the sahel is the mostly flat semiarid zone immediately south of the sahara.
below it lies the savanna a grassland region dotted with trees and shrubs.
south of the savanna in a band 200 to 300 miles wide along the west african coast lies a tropical rain forest.
a series of four major watersheds the senegal gambia volta and niger dominate west africa map 1 3.
sudanic civilization took root at the eastern end of west africa beginning around 9000 b c.
and traveled westward.
sudanic peoples domesticated cattle 8500 7500 b c.
and cultivated sorghum and millet 7500 7000 b c.
over several thousand years these peoples developed a distinctive style of pottery began to cultivate and weave cotton 6500 3500 b c.
and invented techniques for working copper and iron 2500 1000 b c.
sudanic civilization had its own tradition of monotheism distinct from that of christians muslims and jews.
most sudanic peoples in west africa lived in stratified states ruled by kings and princes who were regarded as divine.
from these cultural origins three great empires arose in succession in the northern savanna.
the first the ghana empire appeared sometime around a d 800.
ghana capitalized on the recently domesticated camel to pioneer trade routes across the sahara to colliding worlds 1450 1600 north africa where ghana traders carried the wealth of west africa.
the ghana empire gave way to the mali empire in the thirteenth century which was eclipsed in turn by the songhai empire in the fifteenth century.
all three empires were composed of smaller vassal kingdoms not unlike the aztec and inca empires and relied on military might to control their valuable trade routes.
gold abundant in west africa was the cornerstone of power and an indispensable medium of international trade.
by 1450 west african traders had carried so much of it across the sahara that it constituted one half to two thirds of all the gold in circulation in europe north africa and asia.
mansa musa the tenth emperor of mali was a devout muslim famed for his construction projects and his support of mosques and schools.
in 1326 he embarked on a pilgrimage to mecca with a vast retinue that crossed the sahara and passed through egypt.
they spent so much gold along the way that the regions money supply was devalued for more than a decade after their visit.
to the south of these empires the lower savanna and tropical rain forest of west africa were home to a complex mosaic of kingdoms that traded among themselves and with the empires to the north.
in such a densely populated resource rich region they also fought frequently in a competition for local power.
a few of these coastal kingdoms were quite large in size but most were small enough that they have been termed ministates by historians.
comparable to the city states of italy they were often about the size of a modern day county in the united states.
the tropical ecosystem prevented them from raising livestock since the tsetse fly which carries a parasite deadly to livestock was endemic to the region as was malaria.
in place of the compare and grain crops of the savanna these contrast peoples pioneered the cultivation how do the states of of yams they also gathered the savanna compare to those of the americas and resources from the rivers and europe.
trans saharan and coastal trade for centuries the primary avenue of trade for west africans passed through the ghana mali and songhai empires whose power was based on the monopoly they enjoyed over the trans saharan trade.
their caravans carried west african goods including gold copper salt and slaves from the south to the north across the sahara then returned with textiles and other foreign goods.
for the smaller states clustered part 1 ine rh vo amsterdam london paris r n w ar.
transformations of north america 1450 1700 lg danube r e venice s aral sea genoa madrid ia n istanbul sp ca black sea s ea atlantic ocean lisbon tunis antioch med fez madeira iterr anean silk road from asia sea alexandria pe r si canary is.
a n timbuktu r kanem bornu guinea yoruba kingdoms oyo benin elmina o cong r indian ocean r senega moors l wolof fulani berbers b i m a a mandingo r g.
from india hausa.
songhay mali rr ge ni cape verde arabian sea bilma daura rr ge ni gao djenn takrur gambia r.
lf e r senega l cape verde is.
d e s e r t ea ds s a h a r a gu re cape bojador n il loango.
volta r susu kr um en grain coast ivory coast ashanti awikam ewe kongo fons yoruba bight of benin gold coast slave coast ibibio ibo efik angola 500 miles 0 250 500 kilometers bight of seke biafra overland trade routes sea trade routes map 1 3 west africa and the mediterranean in the fifteenth century trade routes across the sahara had long connected west africa with the mediterranean region.
gold ivory and slaves moved north and east fine textiles spices and the muslim faith traveled south.
beginning in the 1430s the portuguese opened up maritime trade with the coastal regions of west africa which were home to many peoples and dozens of large and small states.
over the next century the movement of gold and slaves into the atlantic would surpass that across the sahara.
along the west african coast merchandise originating in the world beyond the sahara was scarce and expensive while markets for their own products were limited.
beginning in the mid fifteenth century a newly opening coastal trade with europeans offered many west african peoples a welcome alternative.
as european sailors made their way along the coast of west and then central africa they encountered a bewilderingly complicated political landscape.
around the mouths of the senegal and gambia rivers numerous mande speaking states controlled access to the trade routes into the interior.
proceeding farther along the coast they encountered the akan states a region of several dozen independent but culturally linked peoples.
the akan states had goldfields of their own and this region soon became known to europeans as the gold coast.
east of the akan states lay the bight of benin which became an early center of the slave trade and thus came to be called the slave coast.
bending chapter 1 colliding worlds 1450 1600 africans acknowledged multiple gods as well as spirits that lived in the earth animals and plants.
like animists in the americas and europe african communities had wise men and women adept at manipulating these forces for good or ill.
the sudanic tradition of divine kingship persisted and many people believed that their kings could contact the spirit world.
west africans treated their ancestors with great respect believing that the dead resided in a nearby spiritual realm and interceded in their lives.
most west african peoples had secret societies such as the poro for men and the sande for women that united people from different place events in lineages and clans.
these societies context conducted rituals that celebrated why were west african male virility and female fertility.
leaders eager to engage in without children you are naked trade with europeans.
said a yoruba proverb.
happy was the man with a big household many wives many children and many relatives and in a not very different vein many slaves.
terracotta figure from mali dating to the thirteenth or fourteenth century this terracotta figure came from an archaeological site near djenna.
the rider wears a large ornate necklace while the horse has a decorative covering on its head.
the mali empire relied on a large cavalry to expand and defend its borders and the horse was an important symbol of malis wealth and power.
werner forman art resource ny.
south fifteenth century sailors encountered the kingdom of kongo in central africa the largest state on the atlantic seaboard with a coastline that ran for some 250 miles.
it was here in 1578 that duarte lopez visited the capital city of more than 100 000 residents.
wherever they went ashore along this route european traders had to negotiate contacts on local terms thinking like a historian p 26.
the spirit world some west africans who lived immediately south of the sahara the fulanis in senegal the mandespeakers in mali and the hausas in northern nigeria learned about islam from arab merchants and muslim leaders called imams.
converts to islam knew the koran and worshipped only a single god.
some of their cities like timbuktu the legendary commercial center on the niger river became centers of islamic learning and instruction.
but most west exploration and conquest european engagement with the wider atlantic world began around 1400 when the portuguese monarchy propelled europe into overseas expansion.
portugal soon took a leading role in the african slave trade while the newly unified kingdom of spain undertook europes first conquests in the americas.
these two ventures though not initially linked eventually became cornerstones in the creation of the atlantic world portuguese expansion as a young soldier fighting north african moors with the crusading order of christ prince henry of portugal 1394 1460 learned of arab merchants rich trade in gold and slaves across the sahara.
seeking a maritime route to the source of this trade in west africa henry founded a center for oceanic navigation.
henrys mariners challenged to find a way through the treacherous waters off the northwest african coast designed a better handling vessel the caravel rigged with a lateen triangular sail that enabled the ship to tack into the wind.
this innovation allowed them to sail far into the atlantic where they discovered and colonized the madeira and azore islands.
from there they sailed in 1435 to sub saharan sierra leone where they exchanged salt wine and fish for african ivory and gold.
thinking like a historian colliding cultures carefully consider each of the objects or texts below.
what meanings might you thinking like a historian impart to them.
mississippian warrior gorget neck guard a d 1250 1350.
does he miss what he shoots at.
if the arrow does not find armor it penetrates as deeply as a crossbow.
the bows are very long and the arrows are made of certain reeds like canes very heavy and so tough that a sharpened cane passes through a shield.
some are pointed with a fish bone as sharp as an awl and others with a certain stone like a diamond point.
duarte lopez a report on the kingdom of kongo 1591.
a portuguese explorers account of his travels in southern africa in the sixteenth century.
source the national museum of the american indian george gustav heye center new york ny william e meyer collection 15 853.
portuguese officers account of de sotos expedition 1557.
this excerpt describes indian resistance in the face of de sotos campaign of conquest against indians in the southeastern united states.
spanish soldiers went over a swampy land where the horsemen could not go.
a half league from camp they came upon some indian huts near the river but the people who were inside them plunged into the river.
they captured four indian women and twenty indians came at us and attacked us so stoutly that we had to retreat to the camp because of their being as they are so skillful with their weapons.
those people are so warlike and so quick that they make no account of foot soldiers for if these go for them they flee and when their adversaries turn their backs they are immediately on them.
the farthest they flee is the distance of an arrow shot.
they are never quiet but always running and crossing from one side to another so that the crossbows or the arquebuses can not be aimed at them and before a crossbowman can fire a shot an indian can shoot three or four arrows and very seldom t he kingdom of sofala lies between the two rivers magnice and cuama on the sea coast.
it is small in size and has but few villages and towns.
it is peopled by mohammedans and the king himself belongs to the same sect.
he pays allegiance to the crown of portugal in order not to be subject to the government of monomotapa mutapa.
on this account the portuguese have a fortress at the mouth of the river cuama trading with those countries in gold amber and ivory all found on that coast as well as in slaves and giving in exchange silk stuffs and taffetas.
it is said that from these regions the gold was brought by sea which served for solomons temple at jerusalem a fact by no means improbable for in these countries of monomotapa are found several ancient buildings of stone brick and wood and of such wonderful workmanship and architecture as is nowhere seen in the surrounding provinces.
the kingdom of monomotapa is extensive and has a large population of pagan heathens who are black of middle stature swift of foot and in battle fight with great bravery their weapons being bows and arrows and light darts.
there are numerous kings tributary to monomotapa who constantly rebel and wage war against it.
the emperor maintains large armies which in the provinces are divided into legions after the manner of the romans for being a great ruler he must be at constant warfare in order to maintain his dominion.
amongst his warriors those most renowned for bravery are the female legions greatly valued by the emperor being the sinews of his military strength.
benin figurine of a portuguese soldier from the seventeenth century.
this brass figure would have been kept on an altar or on the roof of the royal palace of benin.
sixteenth or seventeenth century spanish silver real.
spain minted enormous quantities of american silver much of it was shipped to manila where it was exchanged for asian luxury goods.
source rmn grand palais art resource ny.
source the trustees of the british museum art resource ny.
sixteenth century portuguese coin made from african gold.
before the discovery of the americas half of the old worlds gold came from subsaharan africa.
sources 2 john e worth account of the northern conquest and discovery of hernando de soto by rodrigo rangel trans.
john e worth in lawrence a clayton et al eds the de soto chronicles the expedition of hernando de soto to north america in 1539 1543 university of alabama press 1993 59 3 filippo pigafetta a report of the kingdom of congo trans.
margarite hutchinson london john murray 1881 117 119.
analyzing the evidence 1.
what can you infer about cultural values among mississippian peoples from source 1.
about the cultural values of the spanish and portuguese from sources 5 and 6.
what cant you infer from these objects.
how does de soto describe the native peoples he encounters in florida source 2.
how does that compare to the traits of the african kingdoms that lopez comments upon in source 3.
why might the king of sofala prefer a portuguese alliance to subjection to monomotapa.
what does source 4 suggest about benin relations with the portuguese.
putting it all together what do these sources tell us about the ways native americans europeans and africans thought about themselves perceived one another and capitalized on cross cultural exchanges as they came into sustained contact.
write a short essay that considers the connection between the impulses of warfare and commerce which appear again and again in contact settings.
source the trustees of the british museum art resource ny.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 banza in the kingdom of kongo c 1670 the city of banza or mbanza kongo was the capital of the kingdom of kongo when portuguese traders first arrived in 1483.
kongos king nzinga a nkuwu chose to be baptized to cement an alliance with portugal and took the name joo i kongo became officially christian and banza came to be known as so salvador.
duarte lopez visited and described the city in 1578 this engraving shows the city as it appeared a century later.
banza in the kingdom of kongo san salvador from olfert dapper ca.
henrys efforts were soon joined to those of italian merchants who were being forced out of eastern mediterranean trade routes by the rising power of the ottoman empire.
cut off from asia genoese traders sought an atlantic route to the lucrative markets of the indian ocean.
they began to work with portuguese and castilian mariners and monarchs to finance trading voyages and the african coast and its offshore islands opened to their efforts.
european voyagers discovered the canaries the cape verde islands and so tom all of them became laboratories for the expansion of mediterranean agriculture.
on these atlantic islands planters transformed local ecosystems to experiment identify causes with a variety of familiar cash how did europes desire crops wheat wine grapes and for an ocean route to asia woad a blue dye plant livestock shape its contacts with and honeybees and where the africa.
climate permitted sugar.
by 1500 madeira was producing 2 500 metric tons a year and madeira sugar was available in small expensive quantities in london paris rome and constantinople.
most of the islands were unpopulated.
the canaries were the exception it took castilian adventurers decades to conquer the guanches who lived there.
once defeated they were enslaved to labor in the canaries or on madeira where they carved irrigation canals into the islands steep rock cliffs.
europeans made no such inroads on the continent of africa itself.
the coastal kingdoms were well defended and yellow fever malaria and dysentery quickly struck down europeans who spent any time in the interior of west africa.
instead they maintained small fortified trading posts on offshore islands or along the coast usually as guests of the local king.
portuguese mariners continued to look for an atlantic route to asia.
in 1488 bartolomeu dias rounded the cape of good hope the southern tip of chapter 1 africa.
vasco da gama reached east africa in 1497 and india in the following year his ships were mistaken for those of chinese traders the last pale skinned men to arrive by sea.
although da gamas inferior goods tin basins coarse cloth honey and coral beads were snubbed by the arab and indian merchants along indias malabar coast he managed to acquire a highly profitable cargo of cinnamon and pepper.
da gama returned to india in 1502 with twenty one fighting vessels which outmaneuvered and outgunned the arab fleets.
soon the portuguese government set up fortified trading posts for its merchants at key points around the indian ocean in indonesia and along the coast of china map 1 4.
in a transition that sparked the momentous growth of european wealth and power the portuguese and then the dutch replaced the arabs as the leaders in asian commerce.
portuguese traders likewise ousted arab merchants as the prime purveyors of african slaves.
coerced labor through slavery serfdom or indentured servitude was the norm in most premodern societies and in africa slavery was widespread.
some africans were trace change held in bondage as security for over time debts others were sold into ser how was the african slave vitude by their kin in exchange trade adapted to eurofor food in times of famine pean needs.
many others were war captives.
slaves were a key commodity of exchange sold as agricultural laborers concubines or military recruits.
sometimes their descendants were freed but others endured hereditary bondage.
sonni ali r 1464 1492 europe n o rth america genoa granada fez arabia tenochtitln inca empire mongolia kaffa venice columbus 1493 94 cc i di as aden bilma jenne ve sp u africa 14 8 8 ansi kashgar china india gam a 1497 98 n w 2 000 2 000 moluccas java indian ocean australia da pacific ocean philippines malabar coast sumatra pacific ocean guangzhou malacca mogadishu sofala japan ceylon zanzibar cuzco beijing hangzhou surat cambay masulipatam calicut mecca timbuktu south america a s i a kiev constantinople merv balkh antioch tunis mediterranean sea baghdad basra alexandria aleppo persia ormuz de soto 1539 42 aztec empire novgorod bruges atlantic ocean the african slave trade england cabot 1497 colliding worlds 1450 1600 4 000 miles e s trade routes european explorations to 1500 arab trans asian mongol european aztec north american inca andean 4 000 kilometers map 1 4 the eurasian trade system and european maritime ventures c 1500 for centuries the mediterranean sea was the meeting point for the commerce of europe north africa and asia via the silk road from china and the spice route from india.
beginning in the 1490s portuguese spanish and dutch rulers and merchants subsidized christian maritime explorers who discovered new trade routes around africa and new sources of wealth in the americas.
these initiatives undermined the commercial primacy of the arab muslim dominated mediterranean.
dias 1487 88 columbus 1493 94 cabot 1497 da gama 1497 98 vespucci 1501 de soto 1539 1542 part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 the ruler of the powerful songhai empire personally owned twelve tribes of hereditary agricultural slaves many of them seized in raids against stateless peoples.
slaves were also central to the trans saharan trade.
when the renowned tunisian adventurer ibn battuta crossed the sahara from the kingdom of mali around 1350 he traveled with a caravan of six hundred female slaves destined for domestic service or concubinage in north africa egypt and the ottoman empire.
between a d 700 and 1900 it is estimated that as many as nine million africans were sold in the trans saharan slave trade.
europeans initially were much more interested in trading for gold and other commodities than in trading for human beings but gradually they discovered the enormous value of human trafficking.
to exploit and redirect the existing african slave trade portuguese merchants established fortified trading posts like those in the indian ocean beginning at elmina in 1482 where they bought gold and slaves from african princes and warlords.
first they enslaved a few thousand africans each year to work on sugar plantations on so tom cape verde the azores and madeira they also sold slaves in lisbon which soon had an african population of 9 000.
after 1550 the atlantic slave trade a forced diaspora of african peoples expanded enormously as europeans set up sugar plantations in brazil and the west indies.
sixteenth century incursions as portuguese traders sailed south and east the spanish monarchs ferdinand ii of aragon and isabella i of castile financed an explorer who looked to the west.
as renaissance rulers ferdinand r 1474 1516 and isabella r 1474 1504 saw national unity and foreign commerce as the keys to power and prosperity.
married in an arranged match to combine their christian the map behind columbuss voyage in 1489 henricus martellus a german cartographer living in florence produced this huge 4 feet by 6 feet view of the known world probably working from a map devised by christopher columbuss brother bartholomew.
the map uses the spatial projection of the ancient greek philosopher claudius ptolemy a d.
90 168 and incorporates information from marco polos explorations in asia and bartolomeu diass recent voyage around the tip of africa.
most important it greatly exaggerates the width of eurasia thereby suggesting that asia lies only 5 000 miles west of europe rather than the actual distance of 15 000 miles.
using martelluss map columbus persuaded the spanish monarchs to support his westward voyage.
bildarchiv preussischer kulturbesitz art resource ny.
chapter 1 kingdoms the young rulers completed the centurieslong reconquista the campaign by spanish catholics to drive muslim arabs from the european mainland by capturing granada the last islamic territory in western europe in 1492.
using catholicism to build a sense of spanishness they launched the brutal inquisition against suspected christian heretics and expelled or forcibly converted thousands of jews and muslims.
columbus and the caribbean simultaneously ferdinand and isabella sought trade and empire by subsidizing the voyages of christopher columbus an ambitious and daring mariner from genoa.
columbus believed that the atlantic ocean long feared by arab merchants as a 10 000 mile wide green sea of darkness was a much narrower channel of water separating europe from asia.
after cajoling and lobbying for six years columbus persuaded genoese investors in seville influential courtiers and finally ferdinand and isabella to accept his dubious theories and finance a western voyage to asia.
north america 110w 100w columbus set sail in three small ships in august 1492.
six weeks later after a perilous voyage of 3 000 miles he disembarked on an island in the present day bahamas.
believing that he had reached asia the indies in fifteenth century parlance columbus called the native inhabitants indians and the islands the west indies.
he was surprised by the crude living conditions but expected the native peoples easily to be made christians he claimed the islands for spain and then explored the neighboring caribbean islands and demanded tribute from the local taino arawak and carib peoples.
buoyed by stories of rivers of gold lying to the west columbus left forty men on the island of hispaniola present day haiti and the dominican republic and returned triumphantly to spain map 1 5.
to see a longer excerpt of columbuss views of the west indies along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
90w 80w gulf of mexico.
hispaniola g.
500 miles w e trinidad 10n g pac i f i c o c e a n south america g inca empire south america puerto rico g s area of main map galpagos is.
aztec empire mayan empire inca empire 20n caribbean sea n 500 kilometers 60w 70w at l a n t i c o ce a n cuba s.
colliding worlds 1450 1600 mining area s silver g gold columbuss voyages 1498 1500 1502 1504 map 1 5 the spanish conquest of americas great empires the spanish first invaded the islands of the caribbean largely wiping out the native peoples.
rumors of a gold rich civilization led to cortss invasion of the aztec empire in 1519.
by 1535 other spanish conquistadors had conquered the mayan temple cities and the inca empire in peru completing one of the great conquests in world history.
cortss conquest 1519 1521 pizarros conquest 1524 1535 american voices the spanish conquest of mexico how could a spanish force of 600 men take control of an empire of 20 million people.
that the spanish had steel swords armor some guns horses and attack dogs certainly gave them a military advantage.
still concerted attack by the armies of the aztecs and their allies would have overwhelmed the invaders before they reached the capital of tenochtitln.
why was there no such attack.
one reason was that cortss force was bolstered by a sizable army from tlaxcala an independent kingdom hostile to the aztecs.
a later tradition also suggests that some aztecs including moctezuma thought that corts might be an emissary of their god quetzalcoatl.
these documents come from people who experienced the conquest.
consider them first as sources how trustworthy are they.
are they biased in any way.
then think about their contents do their accounts agree.
do they explain why the spaniards reached the city unmolested.
bernal daz del castillo corts and moctezuma meet bernal daz was an unlikely chronicler of great events.
born poor he went to america as a common soldier in 1514 and served under conquistadors in panama and cuba.
in 1519 bernal daz joined cortss expedition fought in many battles and as a reward received an estate in present day guatemala.
in his old age daz wrote the true history of the conquest of new spain a compelling memoir written from the perspective of a common soldier.
in fresh and straightforward prose it depicts the conquest as a divinely blessed event that saved the non aztec peoples of mexico from a barbarous regime.
the great moctezuma had sent these great caciques in advance to receive us and when they came before corts they bade us welcome in their language and as a sign of peace they touched their hands against the ground.
when we arrived near to tenochtitln.
the great moctezuma got down from his litter and those great caciques aristocrats supported him with their arms beneath a marvelously rich canopy of green coloured feathers with much gold and silver embroidery.
which was wonderful to look at.
the great moctezuma was richly attired according to his usage and he was shod with sandals the soles were of gold and the upper part adorned with precious stones.
many other lords walked before the great moctezuma sweeping the ground where he would tread and spreading cloths on it so that he should not tread on the earth.
not one of these chieftains dared even to think of looking him in the face but kept their eyes lowered with great reverence.
when corts was told that the great moctezuma was approaching and he saw him coming he dismounted from his horse and when he was near moctezuma they simultaneously paid great reverence to one another.
moctezuma bade him welcome and our corts replied through doa marina malinali also called malinche cortss indian interpreter who bore him a child wishing him very good health.
and then corts brought out a necklace which he had ready at hand made of glass stones.
which have within them many patterns of diverse colours these were strung on a cord of gold and with musk so that it should have a sweet scent and he placed it round the neck of the great moctezuma.
then corts through the mouth of doa marina told him that now his heart rejoiced having seen such a great prince and that he took it as a great honour that he had come in person to meet him.
thus space was made for us to enter the streets of mexico without being so much crowded.
but who could now count the multitude of men and women and boys who were in the streets and in canoes on the canals who had come out to see us.
it was indeed wonderful.
coming to think it over it seems to be a great mercy that our lord jesus christ was pleased to give us grace and courage to dare to enter into such a city and for the many times he has saved me from danger of death.
i give him sincere thanks.
they took us to lodge in some large houses where there were apartments for all of us for they had belonged to the father of the great moctezuma who was named axayaca.
corts thanked moctezuma through our interpreters and moctezuma replied malinche you and your brethren are in your own house rest awhile and then he went to his palaces which were not far away and we divided our lodgings by companies and placed the artillery pointing in a convenient direction and the order which we had to keep was clearly explained to us and that we were to be much on the alert both the cavalry and all of us soldiers.
a sumptuous dinner was provided for us according to their use and custom and we ate it at once.
so this was our lucky and daring entry into the great city of tenochtitlan mexico on the 8th day of november the year of our saviour jesus christ 1519.
source bernal daz del castillo the true history of the conquest of new spain trans.
a p maudslay 1632 london routledge 1928 272 275.
friar bernardino de sahagn aztec elders describe the behavior of moctezuma during the 1550s friar bernardino de sahagn published general history of the things of new spain.
his history compiled the stories of aztec elders who lived through the conquest.
they told their stories to sahagn in a repetitive style according to the conventions of aztec oral histories and he translated them into spanish.
moctezuma enjoyed no sleep no food no one spoke to him.
whatsoever he did it was as if he were in torment.
ofttimes it was as if he sighed became weak felt weak.
wherefore he said what will now befall us.
who indeed stands in charge.
alas until now i.
in great torment is my heart as if it were washed in chili water it indeed burns and when he had so heard what the messengers reported he was terrified he was astounded.
especially did it cause him to faint away when he heard how the gun at the spaniards command discharged how it resounded as if it thundered when it went off.
it indeed bereft one of strength it shut off ones ears.
and when it discharged something like a round pebble came forth from within.
fire went showering forth sparks went blazing forth.
and its smoke smelled very foul it had a fetid odor which verily wounded the head.
and when the shot struck a mountain it was as if it were destroyed dissolved.
as if someone blew it away.
all iron was their war array.
in iron they clothed themselves.
with iron they covered their heads.
iron were their swords.
iron were their crossbows.
iron were their shields.
iron were their lances.
and those which bore them upon their backs their deer horses were as tall as roof terraces.
and their bodies were everywhere covered only their faces appeared.
they were very white they had chalky faces they had yellow hair though the hair of some was black.
and when moctezuma so heard he was much terrified.
it was as if he fainted away.
his heart saddened his heart failed him.
but he made himself resolute he put forth great effort he quieted he controlled his heart he submitted himself entirely to whatsoever he was to see at which he was to marvel.
he then greeted corts as described above.
and when the spaniards were well settled they thereupon inquired of moctezuma as to all the citys treasure.
the devices the shields.
much did they importune him with great zeal they sought gold.
thereupon were brought forth all the brilliant things the shields the golden discs the devils necklaces the golden nose crescents the golden leg bands the golden arm bands the golden forehead bands.
source from friar bernardino de sahagn florentine codex general history of new spain translated by arthur o anderson and charles e dibble.
copyright 1975.
reprinted by permission of utah press.
questions for analysis 1.
both dazs account and that of the aztec elders were written in retrospect and both reflect their authors awareness of the impending conquest.
compare the tone of these accounts.
how does each reflect the authors knowledge of what is to come.
why does moctezuma pay great reverence to corts.
why does corts return the honor.
what is the strategy of each leader.
what is dazs explanation for the easy entry of the spanish into the city.
what explanation is suggested by the elders account.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 although columbus brought back no gold the spanish monarchs supported three more of his voyages.
columbus colonized the west indies with more than 1 000 spanish settlers all men and hundreds of domestic animals.
but he failed to find either golden treasures or great kingdoms and his death in 1506 went virtually unnoticed.
a german geographer soon labeled the newly found continents america in honor of a florentine explorer amerigo vespucci.
vespucci who had explored the coast of present day south america around 1500 denied that the region was part of asia.
he called it a nuevo mundo a new world the spanish crown called the two continents las indias the indies and wanted to make them a new spanish world.
the spanish invasion after brutally subduing the arawaks and tainos on hispaniola the spanish probed the mainland for gold and slaves.
in 1513 juan ponce de len explored the coast of florida and gave that peninsula its name.
in the same year vasco nez de balboa crossed the isthmus of darien panama and became the first european to see the pacific ocean.
rumors of rich indian kingdoms encouraged other spaniards including hardened veterans of the reconquista to invade the mainland.
the spanish monarchs offered successful conquistadors noble titles vast estates and indian laborers.
with these inducements before him in 1519 hernn corts 1485 1547 led an army of 600 men to the yucatn peninsula.
gathering allies among native peoples who chafed under aztec rule he marched on tenochtitln and challenged its ruler moctezuma.
awed by the spanish invaders moctezuma received corts with great ceremony american voices p 32.
however corts soon took the emperor captive and following a prolonged siege he and his men captured the city.
the conquest took a devastating toll the mexican counterattack this image which comes from a history of the aztecs written in 1570 by the spanish dominican monk diego durn illustrates a successful counterattack by mexica warriors against spanish soldiers prior to the final conquest of tenochtitln.
the spaniards try to hold their position as the mexicans prepare to strike.
institut amatller dart hispanic arxiu mas.
chapter 1 conquerors cut off the citys supply of food and water and the residents of tenochtitln suffered spectacularly.
by 1521 corts and his men had toppled the aztec empire.
the spanish had a silent ally disease.
having been separated from eurasia for thousands of years the inhabitants of the americas had no immunities to common european diseases.
after the spaniards arrived a massive smallpox epidemic ravaged tenochtitln striking everywhere in the city according to an aztec source and killing moctezumas brother and thousands more.
they could not move they could not stir.
covered mantled with pustules very many people died of them subsequent outbreaks of smallpox influenza and measles killed hundreds of thousands of indians and sapped the survivors morale.
exploiting this demographic weakness corts quickly extended spanish rule over the aztec empire.
his lieutenants then moved against the mayan city states of the yucatn peninsula eventually conquering them as well.
in 1524 francisco pizarro set out to accomplish the same feat in peru.
by the time he and his small force of 168 men and 67 horses finally reached their destination in 1532 half of the inca population had already died from european diseases.
weakened militarily and divided between rival claimants to the throne the inca nobility was easy prey.
pizarro killed atahualpa the last inca emperor and seized his enormous wealth.
although inca resistance continued for a generation the conquest was complete by 1535 and spain was now the master of the wealthiest and most populous regions of the western hemisphere.
the spanish invasion changed life forever in the americas.
disease and warfare wiped out virtually all of the indians of hispaniola at least 300 000 people.
in peru the population of 9 million in 1530 plummeted to fewer than 500 000 a century later.
mesoamerica suffered the greatest losses in one of the great demographic disasters in world history its population of 20 million native americans in 1500 had dwindled to just 3 million in 1650.
cabral and brazil at the same time portuguese efforts to find a sailing route around the southern tip of africa led to a surprising find.
as vasco da gama and his contemporaries experimented with winds and currents their voyages carried them ever farther away from the african coast and into the atlantic.
on one such voyage in 1500 the portuguese commander pedro alvares cabral and his fleet were surprised to see land loom up in the west.
cabral named his discovery ihla da vera cruz the island of the true cross and colliding worlds 1450 1600 america a not so new world pa r t one history is filled with ironies.
luck and accidents the unexpected and unplanned happenings of life often shape events more than intentions.
long before christopher columbus lucked upon the caribbean sea and an unexpected continent in his effort to find a westward passage to the indies east asia the native peoples he mislabeled indians had occupied and transformed the lands of the western hemisphere also called the americas north central and south.
initially everyone in what came to be called america came from somewhere else.
by 1492 when columbus began his voyage west from spain across an uncharted ocean there were millions of native americans living in the western hemisphere.
the new world he found was new only to the europeans who began exploring conquering and exploiting the region at the end of the fifteenth century.
over thousands of years native american peoples had developed highly sophisticated societies.
some were rooted in agriculture others focused on trade or the conquest of others.
many native americans were healthier better fed and lived longer than europeans but they and their cultures were almost destroyed by the arrival of europeans and africans.
as the two different societies european and native a merican collided each having its own distinct heritage and worldview indian peoples were exploited infected enslaved displaced and exterminated.
yet the conventional story of invasion and occupation oversimplifies the complex process by which indians europeans and africans interacted in the colonial period.
the native americans also called first peoples were more than passive victims of european power they were also trading partners and military allies of the transatlantic newcomers.
they became neighbors and advisers religious converts and loving spouses.
as such they participated actively in the creation of the new society known as america.
the europeans who risked their lives to settle in the western hemisphere were themselves a diverse lot.
young and old men and women they came from spain portugal france the british isles the netherlands holland scandinavia italy and the german states germany would not become a united nation until the mid nineteenth century.
a variety of motives inspired europeans to undertake the o ften harrowing transatlantic voyage.
some were fortune seekers lusting for gold silver and spices.
others were passionate christians eager to create kingdoms of god in the new world.
still others were adventurers convicts debtors servants landless peasants and political or religious exiles.
many were simply seeking opportunities for a better way of life.
a settler in pennsylvania noted that poor people of all kinds can here get three times the wages for their labor than they can in england yet such wages never attracted sufficient numbers of workers to keep up with the rapidly expanding colonial economies so europeans early in the seventeenth century turned to africa for their labor needs.
in 1619 a dutch 3 warship brought the first twenty africans to the english settlement at jamestown near the coast of virginia and exchanged that human cargo for food and supplies.
this first of many transactions involving enslaved people in british america would transform american society in ways that no one at the time e nvisioned.
few europeans during the colonial era saw the contradiction between the promise of freedom in america for themselves and the bondage of slavery for africans and indians.
the intermingling of people cultures plants animals germs and diseases from the continents of africa europe and the western hemisphere gave colonial american society its distinctive vitality and variety.
in turn the diversity of the environment and the varying climate spawned different economies and patterns of living in the various regions of north america.
as the original settlements grew into prosperous and populous colonies the transplanted europeans had to create new communities and political systems to manage growth and control rising tensions.
at the same time bitter rivalries among the spanish french english and dutch triggered costly wars in europe and around the world.
the monarchs of europe struggled to manage o ften unruly colonies which they discovered played crucial roles in their frequent wars.
many of the colonists had brought with them to america a feisty independence which led them to resent government interference in their affairs.
a british official in north carolina reported that the colonists were without any law or order.
impudence is so very high as to be past bearing the americans and their british rulers maintained an uneasy partnership throughout the seventeenth century.
but as the royal authorities tightened their control during the m id eighteenth century they met resistance from colonists which exploded into revolution.
the collision of cultures de soto and the incas this 1596 color engraving shows spanish conquistador hernando de sotos first encounter with king atahualpa of the inca empire.
although artist theodor de bry never set foot in north america his engravings helped shape european perceptions of native americans in the sixteenth century.
a merica was born in melting ice.
tens of thousands of years ago during a long period known as the ice age vast glaciers some two miles thick inched their way southward from the arctic circle at the top of the globe.
their awesome power crushed hills rerouted rivers and scraped bare all the land in their path.
vast glacial ice sheets eventually covered much of north america canada alaska the upper midwest new england montana and washington.
then as the continents climate began to warm the ice started to melt year after year century after century.
so much of the worlds water was bound up in glacial ice that the slow melt ultimately caused sea levels to rise more than 400 feet.
as the ice sheets receded they left behind in the midwest a thick blanket of fertile topsoil that had been scoured from canada and pushed down the continent creating what would become the worlds richest farmland.
the shrinking glaciers also opened valley pathways for the first immigrants to begin a process of crossing the continent.
the american past belongs to many different peoples.
debate still rages about when and how humans first arrived in north america.
until recently archaeologists and anthropologists had assumed that ancient peoples risk takers from northeast asia clothed in animal hides and furs began following big game animals across the bering strait a sixty mile wide waterway that now connects the arctic and pacific oceans.
during the ice age however the bering strait was dry a vast treeless windswept landmass beringia that served as a wide inviting bridge connecting eastern siberia with alaska.
the oldest place in the bering region with traces of early human activity is broken focus questions 1.
why were there so many diverse societies in the americas before europeans arrived.
what were the major developments in europe that enabled the age of exploration.
how were the spanish able to conquer and colonize the americas.
how did the columbian exchange between the old and new worlds affect both societies.
in what ways did the spanish form of colonization shape north american history.
6 chapter 1 the collision of cultures the first migration asia land bridge ber ing s ea north america atlantic ocean pa c i f i c middle america ocean ofisth pa m u s nam a south america principal migration routes bering land bridge when did people first cross the bering sea.
what evidence have archaeologists wwn64 america 10e found from the lives of the first people in america.
and anthropologists 26593 01map 01 why did those people travel to north america.
first proof mammoth a 14 000 year old site in central alaska where the first aboriginal peoples called p aleo indians old indians arrived in north america.
more recently archaeologists in central texas unearthed evidence of people dating back almost 16 000 years.
over hundreds of years as the climate kept warming and the glaciers continued to melt small hunting groups carrying their few possessions with them crossed into alaska and then fanned out during the summers southward across the entire western hemisphere from the arctic circle to the tip of south america.
some of them may also have traveled by boats hugging the coast.
one major land pathway followed the pacific coast while the other used an open land corridor between two ice sheets east of the rocky mountains.
early cultures in america 7 aleo indians were risk taking pioneers skilled hunters and gatherers who p moved in search of large grazing mammals rabbits whales seals fish and wild plants berries nuts roots and seeds.
as they moved southward toward warmer weather they trekked across the prairies and the plains encountering massive animals unlike any found there today mastodons giant sloths camels bison buffalos lions s aber toothed tigers cheetahs and giant wolves beavers and bears.
recent archaeological discoveries in pennsylvania virginia and chile however suggest that prehistoric humans may have arrived much earlier from various parts of a sia and some may even have crossed the atlantic ocean from southwestern europe.
regardless of when humans first set foot in north america the continent eventually became a crossroads for various adventurous peoples from around the world europeans africans asians and others all bringing with them distinctive backgrounds cultures technologies religions and motivations that helped form the multicultural society known as america.
early cultures in america archaeologists have labeled the earliest humans in north america the clovis peoples named after a site in new mexico where ancient hunters around 9500 b c e.
before the common era killed tusked woolly mammoths using distinctive clovis stone spearheads.
they also used a wooden device called an atlatl which gave them added leverage to hurl spears farther and more accurately.
over many centuries as the climate warmed days grew hotter and many of the largest m ammals mammoths mastodons giant bison and s ingle hump c amels died and grew extinct.
skeletal remains of paleo indians reveal that the women were much smaller than the men who were bold aggressive and hypermasculine.
more than half of the male skeletons show signs of injuries caused by violence.
four out of ten have fractured skulls.
the physical evidence is clear paleo indian men assaulted and killed each other with regularity.
over time the ancient indians adapted to their diverse environments coastal forests grassy plains southwestern deserts eastern woodlands.
some continued to hunt large animals others fished and trapped small game.
some gathered wild plants and herbs and collected acorns and seeds others farmed.
many did some of each.
contrary to the romantic myth of early indian civilizations living in perfect harmony with nature and one another they in fact often engaged in warfare exploited the environment by burning large wooded areas to plant fields and overhunted large game animals.
they also mastered the use of fire improved 8 chapter 1 the collision of cultures technology such as spear points basketry and pottery and developed their own nature centered religions.
by about 5000 b c e native americans had adapted to the warmer climate by transforming themselves into farming societies.
agriculture provided reliable nutritious food which accelerated population growth and enabled a once nomadic wandering people to settle down in villages.
indigenous peoples became expert at growing the plants that would become the primary food crops of the entire hemisphere chiefly maize corn beans and squash but also chili peppers avocados and pumpkins.
many of them also grew cotton.
the annual cultivation of such crops enabled indian societies to grow larger and more complex with their own distinctive social economic and political institutions.
the mayas incas and mexica around 1500 b c e farming towns first appeared in what is now mexico.
agriculture supported the development of sophisticated communities complete with gigantic t emple topped pyramids palaces and bridges in middle mayan society a fresco depicting the social divisions of mayan society.
a mayan lord at the center receives offerings.
early cultures in america 9 america mesoamerica what is now mexico and central america where north and south america meet.
the mayas who dominated central america for more than 600 years developed a rich written language and elaborate works of art.
they also used sophisticated mathematics and astronomy to create a yearly calendar more accurate than the one the europeans were using at the time of columbus.
the incas much farther south as many as 12 million people speaking at least twenty different languages made up the sprawling inca empire.
by the fifteenth century the incas vast realm stretched some 2 500 miles along the andes mountains in the western part of south america.
the mountainous inca empire featured irrigated farms enduring stone buildings and interconnected networks of roads made of stone.
the mexica aztecs during the twelfth century the mexica me shee ka whom europeans later called aztecs people from aztln the place they claimed as their original homeland began drifting southward aztec sacrifices to the gods renowned for their military prowess aztecs preferred to capture and then sacrifice their enemies.
10 chapter 1 the collision of cultures from northwest mexico.
disciplined determined and energetic they eventually took control of the sweeping valley of central mexico where they started building the city of tenochtitln in 1325 on an island in lake tetzcoco the site of present day mexico city.
tenochtitln would become one of the largest cities in the world.
warfare was a sacred ritual for the mexica but it was a peculiar sort of fighting.
the mexica fought with wooden swords intended to wound rather than kill since they wanted captives to sacrifice to the gods and to work as slaves.
gradually the mexica conquered many of the neighboring societies forcing them to pay tribute taxes in goods and services and developing a thriving trade in gold silver copper and pearls as well as agricultural products.
towering stone temples broad paved avenues thriving marketplaces and some 70 000 adobe huts dominated the dazzling capital city of tenochtitln.
when the spanish invaded mexico in 1519 they found a vast aztec empire connected by a network of roads serving 371 city states organized into thirty eight provinces.
as their empire had expanded across central and southern mexico the aztecs had developed elaborate urban societies supported by detailed legal systems efficient new farming techniques including irrigated fields and engineering marvels and a complicated political structure.
their arts were flourishing their architecture was magnificent.
aztec rulers were invested with godlike qualities and nobles priests and warrior heroes dominated the social order.
the emperor lived in a huge palace the aristocracy lived in large stone dwellings practiced polygamy multiple wives and were exempt from manual labor.
like most agricultural peoples the mexica were intensely spiritual.
their religious beliefs focused on the interconnection between nature and human life and the sacredness of natural elements the sun moon stars rain mountains rivers and animals.
to please the gods especially huitzilopochtli the lord of the sun and bring good harvests and victory in battle the mexica like most mesoamericans regularly offered live human sacrifices captives slaves women and children by the thousands.
in elaborate weekly rituals blood stained priests used stone knives to cut out the beating hearts of sacrificial victims and ceremonially offered them to the sun god to help his fight against the darkness of the night without the blood from human hearts he would be vanquished by the darkness.
the heads of the victims were then displayed on a towering skull rack in the central plaza.
the constant need for more human sacrifices fed the mexicas relentless warfare against other indigenous groups.
a mexica song celebrated their warrior code proud of itself is the city of mexico tenochtitln.
here no one fears to die in war.
this is our glory early cultures in america 11 re columbian indian civilizations in middle and p south america atlantic g u l f o f mexi c o may toltecs teotihuacn a z tenochtitln tec s monte albn ca r ib b ea n s ea as mexico middle america pacific i o f st h pa mu s na ma chibchas south america andes ocean ocean in s in h ta ec u n qu m o as c 500 miles 250 500 kilometers u as what were the major pre columbian civilizations.
wwn64 10e what america factors caused the demise of the mayan civilization.
26593 01map 02 when did the aztecs build tenochtitln.
first proof north american civilizations many indigenous societies existed north of mexico in the p resent day united states.
they shared several basic spiritual myths and social beliefs including the sacredness of land and animals animism the necessity of communal living and the importance of collective labor communal food and respect for elders.
native americans did not worship a single god but believed in many spirits to the sioux the ruling spirit was wakan tanka the great spirit who ruled over all the other spirits.
the navajo believed in the holy people sky earth moon sun thunders winds and changing woman.
12 chapter 1 the collision of cultures p re columbian indian civilizations in north america r o y c k in s pa c i f i c ocean un mo pa la ch y atlantic ocean ian ll we pe ho a e en all ad hio v o p s anasazi pueblo hohokam ta a m e r i c a mississipp ia mississi n p valley pi i n t a u n m o mesa verde n o r t h a 500 miles 250 500 kilometers gulf of mexico what were the 10e dominant wwn64 america pre columbian civilizations in north america.
culture centered.
first proof how was the mississippian civilization similar to that of the mayans or the aztecs.
what made the anasazi culture different from the other north american cultures.
26593 01map 03 where was the a dena hopewell many societies believed in ghosts the spirits of dead people who acted as bodyguards in battle.
war dances the night before a battle invited the spirits to join the combat.
for all of their similarities the indigenous peoples of north america developed in different ways at different times and in different places often as strangers unaware of each other.
in north america alone there were probably 10 million native people organized into 240 different societies speaking many different languages when the europeans first arrived in the early sixteenth century.
early cultures in america 13 native americans owned land in common rather than separately and they had w ell defined social roles.
men were hunters warriors and leaders.
women tended children made clothes blankets jewelry and pottery dried animal skins wove baskets built and packed tipis and gathered grew and cooked food.
indians often lived together in extended family groups in a lodge or tipi a sioux word meaning dwelling.
the tipis were mobile homes made of buffalo skins.
their designs had a spiritual significance.
the round floor represented the earth the walls symbolized the sky and the supporting poles served as pathways from the human world to the spiritual world.
the southwest the dry southwest what is now arizona new mexico nevada and utah hosted corn growing societies elements of which exist today and heirs to which the hopis zunis and others still live in the multistory adobe sunbaked mud c liff side villages called pueblos by the spanish erected by their ancient ancestors.
about 500 c e.
common era the native hohokam those who have vanished people migrated from mexico northward to southern and central arizona where they built hundreds of miles cliff dwellings ruins of anasazi cliff dwellings in mesa verde national park colorado.
14 chapter 1 the collision of cultures of irrigation canals to water crops.
they also crafted decorative pottery and turquoise jewelry and constructed temple mounds earthen pyramids used for sacred ceremonies.
perhaps because of prolonged drought the hohokam society disappeared during the fifteenth century.
the most widespread and best known of the southwest pueblo cultures were the anasazi ancient ones.
they developed extensive settlements in the four corners region where the m odern day states of arizona new mexico colorado and utah meet.
unlike the aztecs and incas anasazi society was remarkable for not having a rigid class structure.
the religious leaders and warriors worked much as the rest of the people did.
the anasazi engaged in warfare only as a means of s elf defense.
hopi means peaceful people environmental factors shaped anasazi culture and eventually caused its decline.
toward the end of the thirteenth century a lengthy drought and the aggressiveness of indian peoples migrating from the north led to the disappearance of anasazi society.
the northwest along the narrow coastal strip running up the heavily forested northwest pacific coast from northern california to alaska where shellfish salmon seals whales deer and edible wild plants were abundant there was little need for farming.
in fact many of the pacific northwest peoples such as the haida kwakiutl and nootka needed to work only two days to provide enough food for a week.
because of plentiful food and thriving trade networks the native american population was larger and more concentrated than in other regions.
such social density enabled the pacific coast peoples to develop intricate religious rituals and sophisticated woodworking skills.
they carved towering totem poles featuring decorative figures of animals and other symbolic characters.
for shelter they built large earthen floored c edar plank houses up to 100 feet long where whole groups of families lived together.
they also created sturdy oceangoing canoes carved out of red cedar tree trunks some large enough to carry fifty people.
socially the indian bands along the northwest pacific coast were divided into slaves commoners and chiefs.
warfare usually occurred as a means to acquire slaves.
the great plains the many different peoples living on the great plains plains indians a vast flat land of cold winters and hot summers west of the mississippi river and in the great basin present day utah and nevada included the arapaho blackfeet cheyenne comanche crow apache and sioux.
as nomadic hunter gatherers they tracked enormous herds of bison early cultures in america 15 across a sea of grassland collecting seeds nuts roots and berries as they roamed.
at the center of most hunter gatherer religions is the animistic idea that the hunted animal is a willing sacrifice provided by the gods spirits.
to ensure a successful hunt these nomadic peoples performed sacred rites of gratitude beforehand.
once a buffalo herd was spotted the hunters would set fires to drive the stampeding animals over cliffs.
the mississippians east of the great plains in the vast woodlands from the mississippi river to the atlantic ocean several mound building cultures flourished as predominantly agricultural societies.
between 800 b c e.
and 400 c e the adena and later the hopewell peoples both names derive from the archaeological sites in ohio developed communities along rivers in the ohio valley.
the a dena hopewell cultures focused on agriculture growing corn squash beans and sunflowers as well as tobacco for smoking.
they left behind enormous earthworks and 200 elaborate burial mounds shaped like great snakes birds and other animals several of which were nearly a quarter mile long.
artifacts buried in the mounds have revealed a complex social structure featuring a specialized division of labor whereby great serpent mound at over 1 300 feet in length and three feet high this s nake shaped burial mound in adams county ohio is the largest of its kind in the world.
16 chapter 1 the collision of cultures different groups performed different tasks for the benefit of the society as a whole.
some were fisher folk others were farmers hunters artists cooks and mothers.
like the adena the hopewell also developed an extensive trading network from the gulf of mexico to canada exchanging exquisite carvings metalwork pearls seashells copper ornaments and jewelry.
by the sixth century however the hopewell culture disappeared giving way to a new phase of native american development east of the mississippi river the mississippian culture which flourished from 800 to 1500 c e.
the mississippians centered in the southern mississippi valley were also mound building and corn growing peoples led by chieftains.
they grew corn beans squash and sunflowers and they built substantial towns around central plazas and temples.
the mississippian peoples the most powerful of which were the natchez developed a far flung trading network that extended to the rocky mountains.
their ability to grow large amounts of corn each year in the fertile flood plains of rivers spurred rapid population growth around regional centers.
cahokia the largest of these advanced regional centers called chiefdoms was cahokia 1050 1250 c e.
in southwest illinois just a few miles across the mississippi river from what is now st louis missouri.
there the mississippians constructed an intricately planned farming settlement with monumental public buildings spacious ceremonial plazas and more than 100 flat topped earthen pyramids with t hatch roofed temples on top.
over the years the cahokians cut whole forests to create their huge village and to protect it with a two mile long stockade built of 15 000 oak and hickory logs t wenty one feet tall.
at the height of its influence prosperous cahokia hosted 15 000 people on some 3 200 acres making it the largest city north of mexico.
outlying towns and farming settlements ranged up to fifty miles in all directions.
cahokia however vanished after 1250 and its people dispersed.
what caused its collapse remains a mystery but environmental changes are the most likely reason.
the overcutting of trees may have set in motion ecological changes that doomed the community when a massive earthquake struck around 1200 c e.
the loss of trees led to widespread flooding and the erosion of topsoil that finally forced people to seek better lands.
as cahokia disappeared however its former residents carried with them its cultural traditions and spread its advanced ways of life to other areas across the midwest and into what is now the american south.
early cultures in america 17 eastern woodlands peoples after the collapse of cahokia the eastern woodlands peoples rose to dominance along the atlantic seaboard from maine to florida and along the gulf coast to louisiana.
they included three regional groups distinguished by their different languages the algonquian the iroquoian and the muskogean.
these were the societies the europeans would first encounter when they arrived in north america.
the algonquians the algonquian speaking peoples stret ched from the new england seaboard to lands along the great lakes and into the upper midwest and south to new jersey virginia and the carolinas.
they constructed no great mounds or temple topped pyramids.
most algonquians lived in small round shelters called wigwams or multifamily longhouses.
their villages typically ranged in size from 500 to 2 000 people but they often moved their villages with the seasons.
the algonquians along the atlantic coast were skilled at fishing and gathering shellfish the inland algonquians excelled at hunting deer moose elk bears bobcats and mountain lions.
they often traveled the regions waterways using canoes made of h ollowed out tree trunks dugouts or birch bark.
all of the algonquians foraged for wild food nuts berries and fruits and practiced agriculture to some extent regularly burning dense forests to improve soil fertility and provide grazing room for deer.
to prepare their vegetable gardens women broke up the ground with hoes tipped with clam shells or the shoulder blades from algonquian in war paint from the deer.
in the spring they planted corn notebook of english settler john white this sketch depicts a native american beans and squash in mounds.
as the chieftain.
cornstalks rose the tendrils from the 18 chapter 1 the collision of cultures climbing bean plants wrapped around them for support.
once the crops ripened women made a nutritious mixed meal of succotash combining corn beans and squash.
the iroquoians west and south of the algonquians were the powerful iroquoian speaking peoples including the seneca onondaga mohawk oneida and cayuga nations as well as the cherokee and tuscarora whose lands spread from upstate new york southward through pennsylvania and into the upland regions of the carolinas and georgia.
the iroquois were farmer hunters who lived together in extended family groups clans sharing bark c overed longhouses in towns of 3 000 or more people.
the oldest woman in each longhouse was deemed the clan mother of the residents.
villages were surrounded by palisades tall fences made of trees intended to fend off attackers.
their most important crops were corn and squash both of which figure prominently in iroquois mythology.
unlike the algonquian culture in which men were dominant women held the key leadership roles in the iroquoian culture.
as an iroquois elder explained in our society women are the center of all things.
nature we believe has given women the ability to create therefore it is only natural that women be in positions of power to protect this function men and women were not treated as equals.
rather the two genders operated in two separate social domains.
no woman could be a chief no man could head a clan.
women selected the chiefs controlled the distribution of property and planted and harvested the crops.
after marriage the man moved in with the wifes family.
in part the iroquoian matriarchy reflected the frequent absence of iroquois men who as skilled hunters and traders traveled extensively for long periods requiring women to take charge of domestic life.
war between rival groups of native americans especially the algonquians and iroquois was commonplace usually as a means of settling feuds or gaining slaves.
success in fighting was a warriors highest honor.
as a cherokee explained in the eighteenth century we cannot live without war.
should we make peace with the tuscaroras we must immediately look out for some other nation with whom we can engage in our beloved occupation eastern woodlands indians the third major native american group in the eastern woodlands included the southern peoples along the gulf coast who spoke the muskogean language the creeks chickasaws and choctaws.
like the iroquois they were often matrilineal societies meaning that ancestry was traced only through the mothers line but they had a more european visions of america 19 rigid class structure.
the muskogeans lived in towns arranged around a central plaza.
in the region along the coast of the gulf of mexico many of their thatch roofed houses had no walls because of the hot humid summers.
over thousands of years the native north americans had displayed remarkable resilience adapting to the uncertainties of frequent warfare changing climate and varying environments.
they would display similar resilience in the face of the challenges created by the arrival of europeans.
european visions of america the european exploration of the western hemisphere resulted from several key developments during the fifteenth century.
in europe dramatic intellectual changes and scientific discoveries transformed religion warfare family life and the economy.
in addition the resurgence of old vices greed conquest exploitation oppression racism and slavery would help fuel european expansion abroad.
a severe population decline caused by warfare famine and plagues the black death left once great noble estates without enough agricultural workers to maintain them.
by the end of the fifteenth century medieval feudalisms static agrarian social system in which serfs worked for local nobles in exchange for living on and farming the land began to disintegrate.
people were no longer forced to remain in the same locality and keep the same social status in which they were born.
a new middle class of profit hungry bankers merchants and investors emerged.
they were committed to a more dynamic commercial economy fueled by innovations in banking currency accounting and insurance.
the growing trade based economy in europe freed monarchs from their dependence on feudal nobles enabling them to unify the scattered cities ruled by princes principalities into large kingdoms with stronger more centralized governments.
the rise of towns cities and a merchant class provided kings and queens with new tax revenues and the once dominant nobility was gradually displaced by powerful new merchants bankers and monarchs.
the renaissance at the same time the rediscovery of ancient greek and roman writings about representative government republics spurred an intellectual revolution known as the renaissance rebirth.
educated people throughout europe began to challenge prevailing beliefs as well as the absolute authority of rulers and churchmen.
they discussed controversial new ideas about politics religion and science engaged in scientific research and unleashed their artistic creativity.
20 chapter 1 the collision of cultures the renaissance also brought the practical application of new ideas that sparked the age of exploration.
new knowledge and new technologies made possible the construction of larger sailing ships capable of oceanic voyages.
the development of more accurate magnetic compasses maps and navigational instruments such as astrolabes and quadrants helped sailors determine their ships location.
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries also brought the invention of gunpowder cannons and firearms and the printing press.
the rise of global trade by 1500 trade between western european nations and the middle east africa and asia was flourishing.
the portuguese blessed with expert sailors and fast t hree masted ships called caravels took the lead roaming along the west coast of africa collecting grains gold ivory spices and slaves.
eventually these mariners continued all the way around africa in search of the fabled indies india and southeast asia and continued on to china and japan where they found what they had dreamed about spices silk cloth and other exotic trade goods.
by the end of the fifteenth century four powerful nations had emerged in western europe england france portugal and spain.
the marriage of king ferdinand of aragon and queen isabella of castile in 1469 led to the unification of their two kingdoms into a single new nation spain.
the spanish king and queen were christian expansionists eager to spread the catholic faith to peoples around the world.
on january 1 1492 after nearly eight centuries of religious warfare between spanish christians and moorish muslims on the iberian peninsula ferdinand and isabella declared victory for catholicism at granada the last muslim stronghold.
the christian monarchs gave the defeated muslims and soon thereafter the jews living in spain and portugal called sephardi the same desperate choice convert to catholicism or leave.
the forced exile of muslims and jews was one of the many factors that prompted europes involvement in global expansion.
other factors urbanization world trade the rise of centralized nations plus advances in knowledge technology and fi repower combined with natural human curiosity greed and religious zeal to spur the exploration and conquest of the western hemisphere.
beginning in the late fifteenth century europeans set in motion the events that as one historian has observed would bind together four continents three races and a great diversity of regional parts the voyages of columbus these were the circumstances that led christopher columbus to pursue his own dream of finding a route to the indies west across the atlantic.
born european visions of america 21 in genoa italy in 1451 the son of a weaver columbus took to the sea at an early age teaching himself geography navigation and latin.
by the 1480s he was eager to spread christianity across the globe and win glory and riches.
the tall red haired columbus eventually persuaded ferdinand and isabella to finance his voyage.
they agreed to award him a o ne tenth share of any riches he gathered they would keep the rest.
crossing the atlantic on august 3 1492 columbus and a crew of ninety men and boys mostly from spain but from seven other nations as well set sail on three tiny ships the santa mara the pinta and the nia respectively about sixty fi fty five and fifty feet long.
they traveled first to lisbon portugal and then headed west.
for weeks they journeyed across the open sea hoping with each dawn to sight the shore of asia only to be disappointed.
by early october the worried sailors rebelled at the madness of sailing blindly and forced columbus to promise that they would turn back if land were not sighted within three days.
then at dawn on october 12 a sailor named rodrigo on watch atop the masthead yelled tierra.
tierra land.
he had spotted a small island in the bahamas east of florida that columbus named san salvador blessed savior.
columbus mistakenly assumed that they must be near the indies so he called the island people indios at every encounter with these peaceful native people known as tainos or arawaks his first question was whether they had any gold.
if they did the spaniards seized it if they did not the europeans forced them to search for it.
the arawaks unable to understand or repel the strange visitors welcomed the europeans by offering gifts of food water and parrots.
columbus described them as well built with good bodies and handsome features.
their hair is short and coarse almost like the hairs of a horses tail he marveled that they would make fine servants boasting that with fifty men we could subjuchristopher columbus a portrait by gate them all and make them do what sebastiano del piombo ca.
1519 ever we want thus began the typical 22 chapter 1 the collision of cultures uropean bias displayed toward the indians they were inferior peoples worthy e of being exploited and enslaved.
exploring the caribbean after leaving san salvador c olumbus continued to search for a passage to the indies.
he went ashore in cuba sword in one hand cross in the other exclaiming that this is the most beautiful land hu man eyes have ever beheld after a few weeks he sailed eastward to the island he named hispaniola now haiti and the dominican republic.
there he found indigenous people who wore gold jewelry and introduced him to smoking tobacco.
at the end of 1492 columbus still convinced he had reached an outer island of japan sailed back to spain after leaving about forty men on hispancolumbuss voyages england north america france portugal spain azores at l a n t i c gulf of mexico bahamas cuba jamaica central america pacific ocean canary islands ocean san salvador africa hispaniola caribbean sea lesser antilles cape verde islands trinidad south america how many voyages did columbus make to the americas.
wwn64 america 10e what is the origin of the name for the caribbean sea.
26593 01map 04 what first proofhappened to the colony that columbus left on hispaniola in 1493.
european visions of america 23 iola and capturing a dozen arawaks to present as gifts to the spanish king and queen.
upon reaching spain he received a heros welcome as he excitedly told people about the new world he had discovered.
he promised ferdinand and isabella that his discoveries would provide them as much gold as they need.
and as many slaves as they ask thanks to the newly invented printing press news of columbuss pathbreaking voyage spread rapidly across europe.
the spanish monarchs told columbus to prepare for a second voyage instructing him to treat the indians very well and lovingly and abstain from doing them any injury columbus and his men would repeatedly defy this order.
spain worked quickly to secure its legal claim to the new world.
with the help of the s panish born pope alexander vi spain and portugal signed the treaty of tordesillas 1494.
with the stroke of a pen it divided the non christian world giving most of the western hemisphere to spain while africa and what would become brazil were granted to portugal.
in practice this meant that while spain developed its american empire in the sixteenth century portugal would provide it with enslaved african laborers.
the treaty of tordesillas was a remarkable illustration of the catholic worldview and the power of the papacy.
pope alexanders effort to give spain his homeland of less than 7 million people control over virtually the entire western hemisphere reflected his desire to convert all the native peoples to catholicism and to train them in good morals this missionary impulse of the catholic church joined with the quest for gold and silver among the explorers to drive the efforts of columbus and others to lay claim to the as yet unknown boundaries of the new world.
in 1493 columbus returned across the atlantic with seventeen ships and 1 400 men.
also on board were catholic priests eager to convert the native peoples to christianity.
upon his arrival back in hispaniola columbus discovered that the men he had left behind had lost their senses raping women robbing villages and as columbuss son later added committing a thousand excesses for which they were mortally hated by the indians the europeans also carried with them to the americas a range of infectious diseases smallpox measles typhus that would prove disastrous for the indigenous peoples who had no natural immunities to them.
the spaniards found little gold so they loaded their ships with hundreds of enslaved indians to be sold in europe half of whom died during the voyage to spain.
naming america columbus would make two more voyages to the caribbean.
to the end of his life he insisted that he had discovered the outlying parts of asia not a new continent.
by one of historys greatest ironies 24 chapter 1 the collision of cultures this led europeans to name the new world not for columbus but for another italian sailor explorer astronomer amerigo vespucci.
in 1499 with the support of portugals monarchy vespucci sailed across the atlantic landing first at brazil and then sailing along 3 000 miles of the south american coastline in hope of finding a passage to asia.
in the end vespucci reported that south america was so large that it must be a new continent rather than asia.
in 1507 a german mapmaker paid tribute to vespuccis navigational skills by labeling the new world using a variant of his first name america.
professional explorers news of the remarkable voyages of columbus and vespucci raced across europe and stimulated other expeditions to the western hemisphere.
over the next two centuries spain portugal france britain the netherlands and russia dispatched ships and claimed territory in the americas by right of discovery the first explorer to sight the north american continent was john cabot an italian sponsored by king henry vii of england.
his landfall in 1497 at what the king called the new founde lande in p resent day canada gave england the basis for a later claim to all of north america.
during the early sixteenth century however the english grew so preoccupied with internal d ivisions and war with france that they failed to follow up on cabots discoveries.
lusting for gold and sudden riches the spanish still sought a passage from the atlantic to the pacific to reach asia.
in 1505 a spanish ship unloaded pigs and goats in puerto rico intending them to grow and multiply in anticipation of settling a colony there.
puerto rico would be the first european settlement on what would become in 1902 a territory of the united states of america.
in 1519 ferdinand magellan a portuguese sea captain hired by the spanish discovered the strait at the southern tip of south america that now bears his name.
magellan then kept sailing north and west across the pacific ocean making landfall on the island of guam and eventually the philippines where indigenous people killed him.
surviving crew members made their way back to spain arriving in 1522.
their dramatic accounts of the voyage around the world quickened spanish interest in global exploration.
religious conflict in europe at the same time that explorers were crossing the atlantic powerful religious conflicts were tearing europe apart in ways that would greatly influence settlement in the new world.
religious conflict in europe 25 when columbus sailed west in 1492 all of europe acknowledged the thousand year old supremacy of the roman catholic church and its pope in rome.
the brutal efforts of the spanish to convert native peoples to roman catholicism illustrated the murderous intensity with which european christians embraced religious life in the sixteenth century.
spiritual concerns inspired comforted and united them.
people fervently believed in heaven and hell devils and witches demons and angels magic and miracles.
and they were willing to kill and die for their beliefs.
martin luther the enforced unity of catholic europe began to crack in 1517 when martin luther a thirty three year old german priest who taught at the university of wittenburg changed the course of history by launching what became known as the protestant reformation.
luther was a genuine spiritual revolutionary who undermined the authority of the catholic church by showing that many of its officials were corrupt.
he called the pope the greatest thief and robber that has appeared or can appear on earth and denounced the catholic church as the kingdom of sin death and hell luthers beliefs luther especially criticized the sale of indulgences whereby priests would forgive sins in exchange for money or goods.
god alone through christ he insisted offered people salvation people could not earn it through their good deeds or buy it from priests.
salvation in other words resulted from belief.
christ is the only savior.
one does not save oneself as luther exclaimed by faith alone are you saved luther tried to democratize christianity by centering faith on the individual believer rather than in the authority of the church and its priests.
he urged believers to read the bible themselves rather than blindly follow the dictates of catholic priests and the distant pope.
the people he claimed represented a priesthood of all believers perhaps his most revolutionary idea.
to help germans be their own priests luther produced the first bible in a german translation and he reassured christians that god was not an angry judge but a forgiving father.
the catholic reaction lutheranism exploded catholic assumptions and certainties like a bomb.
angry catholic officials lashed out at luthers dangerous doctrines luther fought back with equal fury d eclaring 26 chapter 1 the collision of cultures that he was born to war when pope leo x expelled luther a wild boar from the catholic church in 1521 and sentenced him to death civil war erupted throughout the german principalities.
amid the fighting a powerful german prince protected luther from the churchs wrath.
what had begun as a fierce religious drama now became a political reformation too.
luther was no longer simply an outspoken priest he was a spiritual revolutionary a folk hero and a political prophet encouraging german princes and dukes to separate themselves from the italian papacy.
the wars of the reformation were especially brutal conflicts involving tortures and burnings of believers from both sides of the religious divide.
a settlement between warring lutherans and catholics did not come until 1555 when each prince was allowed by the treaty of augsburg to determine the religion of his subjects.
john calvin soon after martin luther began his revolt against the shortcomings of catholicism swiss protestants also challenged papal authority.
they were led by john calvin 1509 1564 a brilliant french scholar who had fled catholic france to more tolerant geneva and brought the swiss city under the sway of his powerful beliefs.
calvinism in his great theological work the institutes of the christian religion 1536 calvin set forth a stern doctrine.
all christians he taught were damned by adams original sin but christs sacrifice on the cross made possible the redemption of those whom god elected to be saved and thus had predestined to salvation from the beginning of time.
intoxicated by godliness calvin insisted that a true christian life practiced strict morality and hard work.
moreover he taught that god valued every form of work however lowly it might be.
calvin also permitted church members a share in the governance through a body of elders and ministers called the presbytery.
calvins doctrines formed the basis for the german reformed church the dutch reformed church the presbyterians in scotland some of the puritans in england and eventually in america and the huguenots in france.
calvins impact through these and other protestant groups john calvin exerted a greater influence upon religious belief and practice in the english colonies than did any other leader of the reformation.
his insistence on the freedom of individual believers as well as his recognition that monarchs and political officials were sinful like everyone else helped contribute religious conflict in europe 27 to the evolving ideas of representative democracy whereby the people elected their rulers and of the importance of separating church power from state governmental power.
the protestant revolution even though the catholic church launched an aggressive c ounter reformation the protestant revolt continued to spread rapidly during the sixteenth century.
most of northern germany along with scandinavia became lutheran the areas that did so often called themselves the protesting estates from which came the label protestants the reformation thus formed in part a theological dispute in part a political movement and in part a catalyst for social change civil strife and imperial warfare.
throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries catholics and protestants persecuted imprisoned tortured and killed each other in large numbers in europe and in the americas.
every major international conflict involved to some extent a religious holy war between catholic and protestant nations.
equally important the protestant worldview with its emphasis on the freedom of the individual conscience and personal bible reading would play a major role in the colonization of america.
the reformation in england in england the reformation followed a unique course blending aspects of protestantism with catholicism.
the church of england or the anglican church emerged through a gradual process of integrating calvinism with english catholicism.
in early modern england the church and government were united and mutually supportive.
the monarchy required people to attend religious services and to pay taxes to support the church.
the english rulers also supervised the church officials two archbishops twenty six bishops and thousands of parish clergy.
the royal rulers often instructed religious leaders to preach sermons in support of particular government policies.
as one english king explained people are governed by the pulpit more than the sword in time of peace king henry viii purely political reasons initially led to the rejection of papal authority in england.
brilliant and energetic henry viii ruled between 1509 and 1547.
the second monarch of the tudor dynasty he had won from the pope the title defender of the faith for refuting martin luthers rebellious ideas.
henrys marriage to catherine of aragon his brothers widow had produced no male heir however and for him to marry again required that 28 chapter 1 the collision of cultures he convince the pope to annul or cancel his marriage.
catherine however was the aunt of charles v king of spain and ruler of the holy roman empire whose support was vital to the church in rome.
the pope refused to grant an annulment.
henry angrily responded by severing englands nearly 900 year old connection with the catholic church.
he then named a new archbishop of canterbury who granted the annulment thus freeing henry to marry his mistress the lively anne boleyn.
in one of historys greatest ironies anne boleyn gave birth not to the male heir that henry demanded but to a remarkable daughter named elizabeth.
the disappointed king took vengeance on his wife.
he accused her of adultery ordered her beheaded and declared the infant elizabeth a bastard.
yet elizabeth received a first rate education and grew up to be quick witted and nimble cunning and courageous.
the reign of elizabeth after the bloody reigns of her protestant half brother edward vi and her catholic half sister mary i she ascended the throne in 1558 at the age of twenty five.
over the next forty five years elizabeth proved to be the greatest female ruler in history.
her long reign over the troubled island kingdom was punctuated by frequent political turmoil religious strife between protestants and catholics economic crises and foreign wars.
yet queen elizabeth came to rule confidently over englands golden age.
born into a traditionally mans world and given a traditionally mans role elizabeth could not be a catholic for her birth was illegitimate.
during her long reign from 1558 to 1603 therefore the church of england became protestant but in its own way.
the anglican organizational structure centered on bishops and archbishops remained much the same as the roman catholic church but the church service changed the clergy were permitted to marry and the popes authority was no longer recognized.
the spanish empire during the sixteenth century spain was creating the worlds most powerful empire at the same time it was trying to repress the protestant reformation.
at its height spain controlled much of europe most of the americas parts of africa and various trading outposts in asia.
but it was the gold and silver looted from the americas that fueled spains golden empire by plundering conquering and colonizing the americas the spanish empire 29 and converting and enslaving its inhabitants the spanish planted christianity in the western hemisphere and gained the resources to rule the world.
spain in the caribbean the caribbean sea served as the gateway through which spanish power entered the americas.
after establishing colonies on hispaniola including santo domingo which became the capital of the west indies the spanish proceeded eastward to puerto rico 1508 and westward to cuba 1511 1514.
their motives as one soldier explained were to serve god and the king and also to get rich bartolom de las casas 1474 1566 a catholic priest whose father sailed with columbus described the native cubans as generally peaceful people who lived in large communal wood buildings roofed with palm fronds.
marriage laws he explained are non existent men and women alike choose their mates and leave them as they please without offense jealousy or anger native cubans wore colorful feathers on their heads fashioned bead necklaces from fish bones and shells and put no value on gold and other precious things they lived lives of simple sufficiency relying solely on nature for their basic needs.
las casas noted with regret that the spaniards committed irreparable crimes against the indians soldiers thought nothing of knifing indians by tens and twenties and of cutting off slices of them to test the sharpness of their blades cuban men were forced to work f ull time in the mountains digging for gold while their wives stayed behind to tend vast fields of cassava a starchy root vegetable known as the bread of the tropics within a few years after the arrival of europeans most of the indians throughout the caribbean had died.
disunity e verywhere civil disorder rebellion and tribal warfare left them vulnerable to foreign conquest.
attacks by w ell armed soldiers and deadly germs from europe overwhelmed entire indian societies.
a clash of cultures the often violent relationship between the spanish and indians involved more than a clash between different peoples.
it also involved contrasting forms of technological development.
the indians of mexico used wooden canoes for transportation while the europeans crossed the ocean in heavily armed sailing vessels.
the spanish with their steel swords firearms explosives and armor terrified most indians whose arrows and tomahawks were seldom a match for guns cannons and warhorses.
a spanish priest in florida observed 30 chapter 1 the collision of cultures that gunpowder frightens the most valiant and courageous indian and renders him slave to the white mans command the europeans enjoyed other cultural advantages.
before their arrival for example the only domesticated four legged animals in north america were dogs and llamas.
the spanish brought with them strange beasts horses pigs sheep and cattle.
horses provided greater speed in battle and gave the spanish a decided psychological advantage.
the most essential thing in new lands is horses reported one spanish soldier.
they instill the greatest fear in the enemy and make the indians respect the leaders of the army even more feared among the indians were the fighting dogs that the spanish used to guard their camps.
cortss conquest the most dramatic european conquest on the north american mainland occurred in mexico.
on february 18 1519 thirty four year old hernn corts driven by dreams of gold and glory set sail for mexico from cuba.
his fleet of eleven ships carried nearly 600 soldiers and sailors.
also on board were 200 indigenous cubans sixteen horses and cannons.
after the invaders landed on the coast of the gulf of mexico corts convinced the totomacs a society conquered by the mexica to join his assault against the dominant mexica their hated rivals.
to prevent any of his heavily armed and helmeted soldiers called conquistadores conquerors from retreating or deserting corts had the ships dismantled.
conquistadores were then widely recognized as the best soldiers in the world loyal to the monarchy and the catholic church.
they received no pay they were pitiless professional warriors willing to risk their lives for a share in the expected plunder.
one conquistador explained that he went to america to serve god and his majesty to give light to those who were in darkness and to grow rich as men desire to do with his small army cannons horses and indian allies corts brashly set out to conquer the sprawling mexica aztec empire which extended from central mexico to what is today guatemala.
the nearly 200 mile march of cortss army through the mountains to the magnificent mexica capital of tenochtitln modern mexico city took nearly three months.
along the way corts used treachery and terror to intimidate and then recruit the native peoples most of whom had been conquered earlier by the mexica.
after entering the city of cholula home to the largest pyramid in the americas as well as 40 000 people corts learned of a plot to ambush his army.
he turned the tables on his hosts by inviting the local chieftains and nobles to the citys ceremonial plaza to talk and exchange gifts.
when they the spanish empire 31 arrived however the spanish and their indian allies the tlaxcalans killed the leaders as well as thousands of other cholulans.
spanish invaders as corts and his invading army continued their march across mexico they heard fabulous accounts of the carefully planned mexica city of tenochtitln.
with some 200 000 inhabitants it was larger than most european cities.
graced by wide canals and bridges stunning gardens and formidable stone pyramids the l ake encircled city and its stone buildings seemed impregnable.
one of the spanish conquistadores described their first glimpse of the great capital city gazing on such wonderful sights we did not know what to say or whether what appeared before us was real for on the one hand there were great cities and in the lake ever so many more and the lake itself was crowded with canoes and in the causeway were many bridges at intervals and in front of us stood the great city of mexico and we we did not number even four hundred soldiers yet the vastly outnumbered spanish made the most of their assets their fighting experience superior weapons numerous indian allies and an aggressive sense of religious and racial superiority.
through a combination of threats and deceptions the invaders entered tenochtitln peacefully and captured the corts in mexico page from the lienzo de tlaxcala a historical narrative from the sixteenth century.
the scene in which corts is shown seated on a throne depicts the arrival of the spanish in tlaxcala.
32 chapter 1 the collision of cultures emperor montezuma ii.
corts explained to the emperor why the invasion was necessary we spaniards have a disease of the heart that only gold can cure montezuma submitted in part because he mistook corts for a god.
after taking the mexicas gold and silver sending 20 percent of it to the spanish king referred to as the royal fifth and dividing the rest among themselves the spanish forced the native mexicans to mine more of the precious metals.
then in the spring of 1520 disgruntled mexica decided that montezuma was a traitor.
they rebelled stoned him to death and armed only with swords and wicker shields they attacked the conquistadores.
forced to retreat the spaniards lost about a third of their men.
the spaniards 20 000 indian allies remained loyal however and cortss forces gradually regrouped.
they surrounded the imperial city the most beautiful city in the world said corts for eighty five days cutting off its access to water and food and allowing a highly infectious smallpox epidemic to devastate the inhabitants.
bernal diaz del castillo a spanish soldier recalled that god saw fit to send the indians small pox one of the mexica reported that the smallpox spread over the people as great destruction.
some it covered on all parts their faces their heads their breasts and so on.
there was great havoc.
very many died of it.
they could not move they could not stir for three months the mexica bravely defended their capital.
then the siege came to a bloody end.
the ravages of smallpox and the support of thousands of a nti aztec indians help explain how such a small force of determined spaniards was able to vanquish a proud nation of nearly 1 million people.
after the aztecs surrendered a merciless corts ordered the leaders hanged and the priests devoured by dogs.
he reported that in the end 117 000 aztecs were killed.
in two years corts and his disciplined army and indian allies had conquered a fabled empire that had taken centuries to develop.
corts became the first governor of new spain and began replacing the mexica leaders with spanish bureaucrats and church officials.
the spanish conquest of mexico established the model for waves of plundering conquistadores to follow.
within twenty years spain had established a vast empire in the new world.
in 1531 francisco pizarro led a band of conquistadores down the pacific coast of south america from panama toward peru where they brutally subdued the huge inca empire.
the spanish invaders seized inca palaces took royal women as mistresses and wives and looted the empire of its gold and the spanish empire 33 spanish explorations of the mainland r iv e o ohi america de s santa fe oto atlantic st augustine rio ocean a gr gul f of m e x i co ne s cort w aztecs tenochtitln veracruz mayas caribbean hispaniola s pa de le n cuba in puerto rico santo domingo sea ocean 500 miles piz ar r pacific on ce p nd e r.
o mis sis sip pi r co ron ad north o 0 250 500 kilometers ponce de len 1513 corts 1519 pizarro 1531 1533 de soto 1539 1542 coronado 1540 1542 south america incas cuzco what were the spanish conquistadores goals for exploring the americas.
wwn64 america 10e how did corts conquer the aztecs.
26593 01map 05 why did the spanish first explore north america and why did they establish first proof st augustine the first european settlement in what would become the united states.
from peru spain extended its control southward through chile by about 1553 and north to present day colombia by 1538 spanish explorers throughout the sixteenth century the spanish expanded their control over much of north america bullying and brutalizing looting and destroying the native peoples then forcing them to work the mines and plantations in return for learning the spanish language and embracing the catholic religion.
34 chapter 1 the collision of cultures juan ponce de len then governor of puerto rico made the e arliest known exploration of what the spanish called la florida the land of flowers in 1513.
meanwhile other spanish explorers skirted the coast of the gulf of mexico scouted the atlantic coast all the way north to canada and established a short lived colony on the carolina coast.
sixteenth century knowledge of the north american interior came mostly from would be conquistadores who plundered the region.
the first pnfilo de narvez landed in 1528 at tampa bay marched northward to alabama and then returned to the gulf coast where he and his crew built crude boats out of animal hides and headed for mexico.
high winds and heavy seas however wrecked the vessels on the texas coast.
some of the survivors worked their way overland.
after eight years including periods of captivity among the indians they wandered into a spanish outpost in mexico.
in 1539 hernando de soto a conquistador who had helped conquer the incas in peru set out to explore florida.
with 600 soldiers a pair of women and a few priests as well as horses mules pigs and fighting dogs he landed on floridas west coast.
de soto and his party traveled north as far as western north carolina and then moved westward becoming the first europeans to see the mississippi river.
along the way they looted and destroyed native american villages and took enslaved indians with them in chains and iron collars.
de soto tried to impress the indians by claiming to be a son of the sun in the spring of 1542 having wandered america for three years de soto died near natchez mississippi.
the next year the survivors among his party floated down the mississippi river and 311 of the original adventurers found their way to spanish mexico.
they left behind them a trail of infectious diseases which continued to ravage the indians for years thereafter.
in 1540 francisco vzquez de coronado led an expedition of 1 500 spaniards and indian allies 1 000 horses 500 cattle and 5 000 sheep northward into new mexico and northeast as far as present day kansas.
new spain the spanish established provinces in north america not so much as commercial enterprises but as protective buffers to defend their empire in mexico and south america.
they were concerned about french traders infiltrating from louisiana english settlers crossing into florida and russian seal hunters wandering down the california coast.
as the sixteenth century unfolded the spanish shifted from looting the native peoples to enslaving them.
to reward the crusading conquistadores the spanish empire 35 spain transferred to america a medieval socioeconomic system known as the encomienda whereby favored army officers were given huge parcels of land.
they were to provide the indians with protection in exchange for tribute goods and labor tending farms or mining for gold and silver.
new spain therefore developed a society of extremes wealthy encomenderos and powerful priests at one end of the spectrum and indians held in poverty at the other.
the spaniards used brute force to ensure that indians accepted their new role as serfs.
nuo de guzman a conquistador who became the governor of a mexican province loved to watch his massive fighting dog tear apart rebellious indians.
after a spaniard talked back to him he had the man nailed to a post by his tongue.
a catholic empire the spanish and later the french launched a massive effort to convert the indians deeming them heathens into catholic servants.
during the sixteenth century hundreds of priests fanned out across new spain and later new france.
many of the catholic missionaries decided that the indians of mexico could be converted only by force.
though they seem to be a simple people a spanish priest declared in 1562 they are up to all sorts of mischief and missionaries in the new world a spanish mission in new mexico established to spread the catholic faith among the indigenous peoples.
36 chapter 1 the collision of cultures are obstinately attached to the rituals and ceremonies of their forefathers.
the whole land is certainly damned and without compulsion they will never speak the religious truth by the end of the sixteenth century there were more than 300 monasteries or missions in new spain and catholicism had become a major instrument of spanish imperialism.
some spanish officials criticized the forced conversion of indians and the encomienda system.
in 1514 the catholic priest bartolom de las casas resolved to spend the rest of his life aiding the indians.
he gave away his land in hispaniola freed his slaves and began urging the spanish to change their approach everything done to the indians thus far he claimed was unjust and tyrannical las casas spent the next fifty years advocating better treatment for indigenous people.
he was officially named protector of the indians las casas insisted that the indians be converted to catholicism only through peaceful and reasonable means.
his courageous efforts aroused furious opposition however.
most colonizers believed as a spanish bishop in mexico declared in 1585 that the indians must be ruled governed and guided to christianity by fear more than by love a leading spanish scholar juan gins de seplveda directly challenged las casass cry for justice.
indians he claimed are as inferior as children are to adults as women are to men as different from spaniards as cruel people are from mild people over time however las casas convinced the monarchy and the catholic church to issue new rules calling for better treatment of the indians in new spain.
at las casass urging pope paul iii declared that indians were human beings deserving of respect and christian salvation.
still the use of fire and the sword continued and angry colonists on hispaniola banished las casas.
on returning to spain las casas said i left christ in the indies not once but a thousand times beaten afflicted insulted and crucified by those spaniards who destroy and ravage the indians in 1564 two years before his death he bleakly predicted that god will wreak his fury and anger against spain some day for the unjust wars waged against the indians the columbian exchange the first european contacts with the western hemisphere began the columbian exchange also called the great biological exchange a worldwide transfer of plants animals and diseases that ultimately worked in favor of the europeans at the expense of the indigenous peoples.
the columbian exchange 37 the plants and animals of the two worlds differed more than the peoples and their ways of life.
europeans had never encountered iguanas bison cougars armadillos opossums sloths tapirs anacondas condors or hummingbirds.
nor had the native americans seen horses cattle pigs sheep goats chickens and rats which soon flooded the americas.
the exchange of plants and foods the exchange of plant life between the western hemisphere and europe africa transformed the diets of both regions.
before columbuss voyage three foods were unknown in europe maize corn potatoes sweet and white and many kinds of beans snap kidney lima and others.
the white potato although commonly called irish is actually native to south america.
explorers brought it back to europe where it thrived.
other western hemisphere food plants included peanuts squash peppers tomatoes pumpkins pineapples sassafras papayas guavas avocados cacao the source of chocolate and chicle for chewing gum.
europeans in turn introduced rice wheat barley oats wine grapes melons coffee olives bananas kentucky bluegrass daisies and dandelions to the americas.
in this biological exchange the food plants were more complementary than competitive.
corn flourished almost anywhere.
the new food crops transferred from the americas helped spur a dramatic increase in the european population that in turn helped provide the restless adventurous young people who would colonize the new world.
an exchange of diseases the most significant aspect of the biological exchange however was not food crops but the transmission of infectious diseases.
during the three centuries after columbuss first voyage europeans and enslaved africans brought with them deadly diseases that native americans had never encountered smallpox typhus diphtheria bubonic plague malaria yellow fever and cholera.
the results were catastrophic.
far more i ndians tens of m illions died from infections than from combat.
smallpox was an especially ghastly killer.
in central mexico alone some 8 million people perhaps a third of the entire indian population died of smallpox within a decade of the arrival of the spanish.
a spanish explorer noted that half the indians died from smallpox and blamed us often there were not enough survivors to bury the dead europeans arrived at villages to discover only rotting corpses strewn everywhere.
unable to explain or cure the diseases native american chieftains and religious leaders often lost their stature and their lives as they were 38 chapter 1 the collision of cultures smallpox aztec victims of the 1538 smallpox epidemic are covered in shrouds center as two others lie dying at right.
usually the first to meet the spanish and thus were the first infected.
as a consequence of losing their leaders the indigenous peoples were less capable of resisting the european invaders.
many europeans however interpreted such epidemics as diseases sent by god to punish those who resisted conversion to christianity.
the spanish in north america throughout the sixteenth century no european power other than spain held more than a brief foothold in what would become the united states.
by the time the english established jamestown in virginia in 1607 the spanish had the spanish in north america 39 already explored the smoky mountains and the great plains and established colonies in the southwest and florida.
spain had the advantage not only of having arrived first but also of having stumbled onto those regions that would produce the quickest profits.
while france and england were preoccupied with political disputes and religious conflicts spain had forged an intense national unity that enabled it to dominate europe as well as the new world.
st augustine the first spanish outpost in the continental united states emerged in response to the french.
in the 1560s spirited french protestants called huguenots established frances first american colonies one on the coast of what became south carolina and the other in florida.
they did not last long.
in 1565 the spanish founded st augustine on the atlantic coast of florida.
it became the first european town in the present day united states.
it included a fort church hospital fish market and more than 100 shops and houses all built decades before the first english settlements in america.
in september 1565 spanish soldiers from st augustine assaulted fort caroline the french huguenot colony in northeastern florida and hanged all the men over age fifteen.
the spanish commander notified his catholic king that he had killed all the french he had found in fort caroline because.
they were scattering the odious lutheran doctrine in these provinces later when survivors from a shipwrecked french fleet washed ashore on florida beaches after a hurricane the spanish commander told them they must abandon protestantism and swear their allegiance to catholicism.
when they refused he killed 245 of them.
the spanish southwest the spanish eventually established other permanent settlements in what are now new mexico texas and california.
from the outset in sharp contrast to the later english experience the spanish settlements were sparsely populated inadequately supplied and dreadfully poor.
these northernmost regions of new spain were so far from the capital in mexico city that they were regularly neglected.
the spanish colonies in america were extensions of the monarchys absolute power.
democratic ideals and notions of equal treatment were nonexistent people were expected to follow orders.
there was no freedom of speech 40 chapter 1 the collision of cultures or religion or movement no local elections no real self government.
the military officers bureaucrats wealthy landowners and priests appointed by the king to govern new spain regulated every detail of colonial life.
settlers could not travel within the colonies without official permission.
new mexico the land that would later be called new mexico was the first center of catholic missionary activity in the american southwest.
in 1595 juan de oate the rich son of a spanish mining family in mexico whose wife was a descendant of both corts and montezuma ii received a land grant for rande el norte the mostly desert territory north of mexico above the rio g texas new mexico arizona california and parts of colorado.
over the next three years he recruited an army of colonists willing to move north with him soldier settlers and hundreds of mexican indians and mestizos the offspring of spanish and indigenous parents.
in 1598 the caravan of colonists including women children and 7 000 cattle horses goats and sheep began moving north from the mountains above mexico city across the harsh desert landscape of parched mesas plateaus and canyons enlivened by lush river valleys.
what a lonely land one of the footsore travelers wrote to relatives in mexico city.
upon crossing the rio grande at what became el paso texas oate claimed the entire region for the spanish monarchy.
indians who resisted were killed.
a priest recorded that oate had butchered many indians human blood has been shed and he has committed thefts sackings and other atrocities after walking more than 800 miles in seven months along ancient indian footpaths that the spanish settlers called the camino real royal road they established the colony of new mexico the farthest outpost of new spain.
the spanish called the local indians pueblos a spanish word meaning village for the city like aspect of their terraced multistoried buildings sometimes chiseled into the walls of cliffs.
they also dug out underground chambers called kivas where they held religious ceremonies and stored sacred objects such as prayer sticks and feathered masks.
the pueblos mostly hopis and zunis were farmers who used irrigation to water their crops.
they were also skilled at making clay pottery and woven baskets.
some of the native americans wore buffalo skins most wore decorative cotton blankets.
their corn and vegetables oate reported are the best and largest to be found anywhere in the world most of their customs resembled those practiced by the mexicans.
their government he noted is one of complete freedom for although they have chieftains they obey them badly and in few matters the spanish in north america 41 unlike the later english colonists in america the spanish officials did not view native americans as racially inferior.
instead they believed that the indians were burdened by culturally inferior ways of life.
the spanish government never intended to establish large colonies of spanish immigrants in america.
the goal of spanish colonialism was to force the native americans to adopt the spanish way of life from catholicism to modes of dress speech work and conduct.
oate new mexicos first governor told the pueblos that if they embraced catholicism and followed his orders they would receive an eternal life of great bliss instead of cruel and everlasting torment oate soon discovered that there cultural conflict this peruvian was no gold or silver in new mexico.
illustration from a 1612 1615 manuscript nor was there enough corn and beans by felipe guamn poma de ayala shows to feed the spanish invaders who had a dominican catholic friar forcing a to be resupplied by expensive caravans native woman to weave.
traveling for months from mexico city.
so eventually oate established a system that forced the indians to pay annual tributes taxes to the spanish authorities in the form of a yard of cloth and a bushel of corn each year.
catholic missions once it became evident that new mexico had little gold the spanish focused their attention on religious conversion.
priests established catholic missions where indians were forced to work the fields they had once owned and perform personal tasks for the priests and soldiers cooking cleaning and even providing sexual favors.
soldiers and priests used whips to herd the indians to church services and to punish them for not working hard enough.
a french visitor to a mission reported that it reminded us of a.
west indian slave colony after about ten years a mission would be secularized stripped of its religious role.
its lands would be divided among the converted indians the 42 chapter 1 the collision of cultures mission chapel would become a parish church and the inhabitants would be given full spanish citizenship including the privilege of paying taxes.
the soldiers who were sent to protect the missions were housed in presidios or forts their families and the merchants accompanying them lived in adjacent villages.
some indian peoples welcomed the spanish missionaries as powerful witches capable of easing their burdens.
others tried to use the european invaders as allies against rival indian groups.
still others rebelled.
before the end of new mexicos first year in december 1598 the acoma pueblos revolted killing eleven soldiers.
oates response to the rebellion was brutal.
over three days spanish soldiers destroyed the entire pueblo killing 500 pueblo men and 300 women and children.
survivors were enslaved.
twenty four pueblo men had one foot cut off to frighten others and keep them from escaping or resisting.
children were taken from their parents into a catholic mission where oate remarked they may attain the knowledge of god and the salvation of their souls the mestizo factor spanish women were prohibited from traveling to the new world unless they were married and accompanied by a husband.
this policy had unexpected c onsequences.
there were so few spanish women in north america that soldiers and settlers often married native americans or otherwise fathered mestizos.
by the eighteenth century mestizos were a majority in mexico and new mexico.
such widespread intermarriage and interbreeding led the spanish to adopt a more inclusive social outlook toward the indians than the english later did in their colonies along the atlantic coast.
once most colonial officials were mestizo themselves they were less likely to belittle the indians.
at the same time many native americans falsely claimed to be mestizo as a means of improving their status and avoiding having to pay annual tribute.
the pueblo revolt the spanish presence in new mexico expanded slowly.
in 1608 the government decided to turn new mexico into a royal province and moved its capital to santa fe holy faith in spanish the first permanent seat of government in the present day united states.
by 1630 there were fifty catholic churches and monasteries in new mexico as well as some 3 000 spaniards.
roman catholic missionaries in new mexico claimed that 86 000 pueblos had been converted to christianity during the seventeenth century.
in fact however resentment among the indians had increased as the spanish stripped them of their ancestral ways of life.
in 1680 a charismatic indian the spanish in north america 43 spiritual leader named pop meaning ripe plantings organized a massive rebellion.
the spanish claimed that he had cast a magical spell over his people making them crazy the indians painted for war burned catholic churches tortured mutilated and executed priests destroyed all relics of christianity and forced the 2 400 survivors to flee the region in humiliation eventually making their way to el paso.
the entire province of new mexico was again in indian hands.
the spanish governor reported that the pueblos are very happy without religion or spaniards the pueblo revolt of 1680 was the greatest defeat that indians ever inflicted on european efforts to conquer the new world.
it took twelve years and four military assaults for the spanish to reestablish control over new mexico.
horses and the great plains another major consequence of the pueblo revolt was the opportunity it gave indian rebels to gain possession of thousands of spanish horses spanish authorities had made it illegal for indians to ride or own horses.
stealing horses became one of the most honored ways for warriors to prove their courage.
horses and indian culture the pueblos established a thriving horse trade with the navajos apaches and others.
by 1690 horses were in texas.
they soon spread across the great plains the vast rolling grasslands extending from the missouri valley in the east to the base of the rocky mountains in the west.
prior to the arrival of european horses indians hunted on foot and used dogs as their beasts of burden.
dogs are carnivores however and it was always difficult to find enough meat to feed them.
the introduction of the horse changed everything.
horses provided the plains indians with a new source of mobility and power.
the vast grasslands of the great plains were the perfect environment for horses since the prairies offered plenty of forage for grazing animals.
horses could also haul up to seven times as much weight as dogs and their speed and endurance made the indigenous people much more effective hunters and warriors.
on the great plains an indian familys status reflected the number of horses it owned.
by the late seventeenth century native american horsemen were fighting the spaniards on more equal terms.
this helps explain why the indians of the southwest and texas unlike the indians in mexico were able to sustain their 44 chapter 1 the collision of cultures plains indians the horse stealing raid depicted in this hide painting demonstrates the essential role horses played in plains life.
cultures for the next 300 years on horseback they were among the most fearsome fighters in the world.
bison hunting horses transformed the economy and ecology of the great plains.
the arapaho cheyenne comanche kiowa and sioux reinvented themselves as horse centered cultures.
they left their traditional woodland villages on the fringes of the plains and became nomadic bison buffalo hunters.
a male bison could weigh over a ton and stand five feet tall at the shoulder.
indians used virtually every part of the bison they killed meat for food hides for clothing shoes bedding and shelter muscles and tendons for thread and bowstrings intestines for containers bones for tools horns for eating utensils hair for headdresses and dung for fuel.
they used tongues for hair brushes and tails for fly swatters.
one scholar has referred to the bison as the tribal department store the spanish in north america 45 the night after a successful hunt the indians would stage a festival feast with singing and dancing throughout the night.
to preserve meat for later it would be cut into long strips and hung over wooden racks to dry in the sun or over a fire.
the dried meat was called jerky.
tougher cuts of buffalo meat would be pounded with a mallet and mixed with fat and berries to make pemmican.
horses eased some of the physical burdens on women but also imposed new demands.
women and girls tended to the horses butchered and dried the bison meat and tanned the hides.
as the value of the bison hides grew indian hunters began practicing polygamy primarily for economic reasons more wives could process more bison carcasses.
the rising value of wives eventually led plains indians to raid other tribes in search of captive brides.
the introduction of horses into the great plains was a mixed blessing.
the horse brought prosperity and mobility to the plains indians but also triggered more conflict among them.
over time the indians on horseback eventually killed more bison than the herds could replace.
further horses competed with the bison for food often depleting the prairie grass.
and as indians on horses traveled greater distances and encountered more people infectious diseases spread more widely.
still by 1800 a white trader in texas would observe that this is a delightful country and were it not for perpetual wars the natives might be the happiest people on earth hispanic america spanish culture etched a lasting imprint upon american ways of life.
spains colonial presence in the americas lasted more than three centuries much longer than either englands or frances.
new spain was centered in mexico but its borders extended from florida to alaska.
hispanic place names san francisco los angeles tucson santa fe san antonio and st augustine survive to this day as do hispanic influences in art architecture literature music law and cuisine.
the spanish encounters with indians and their diverse cultures produced a two way exchange by which the contrasting societies blended coexisted and interacted.
even when locked in mortal conflict and driven by hostility and mutual suspicion the two cultures necessarily affected each other.
in other words new spain while savaged by violence coercion and intolerance eventually produced a mutual accommodation with native americans that enabled two living traditions to persist side by side.
the spanish introduced cattle horses sheep and goats to texas new mexico and california as well as such words as rodeo bronco and ranch rancho and the names of four states california colorado florida and nevada.
46 chapter 1 the collision of cultures challenges to the spanish empire catholic spains successful conquests in the western hemisphere spurred portugal france england and the netherlands holland to begin their own exploration and exploitation of the new world.
the french were the first to pose a serious threat.
spanish treasure ships sailing home from mexico peru and the caribbean offered tempting targets for french pirates.
in 1524 the french king sent italian giovanni da verrazano westward across the atlantic.
upon sighting land probably at cape fear north carolina verrazano ranged along the coast as far north as maine.
on a second voyage in 1528 he was killed by carib indians.
new france unlike the verrazano voyages those of jacques cartier beginning in the next decade led to the first french effort at colonization in north america.
during three voyages cartier explored the gulf of st lawrence and ventured up the st lawrence river now the boundary between canada and new york.
twice he got as far as present day montreal and twice he wintered at the site of quebec near which a short lived french colony appeared in 1541 1542.
france after midcentury however plunged into religious civil wars and the colonization of canada had to await the coming of samuel de champlain the father of new france after 1600.
champlain would lead twenty seven expeditions from france to canada during a thirty seven year period.
the dutch revolt from the m id 1500s greater threats to spanish power in the new world arose from the dutch and the english.
in 1566 the netherlands included seventeen provinces.
the fragmented nation had passed by inheritance to the spanish king in 1555 but the dutch spurned catholicism and had become largely protestant mostly calvinists making up what was called the dutch reformed church.
during the second half of the sixteenth century the dutch began a series of sporadic rebellions against spanish catholic rule.
a long bloody struggle for political independence and religious freedom ensued in which protestant england aided the dutch.
the dutch revolt as much a civil war as a war for national independence was not a single cohesive event but rather a series of different uprisings in different provinces at different times.
each province had its own institutions laws and rights.
although seven provinces joined together to form the dutch republic the spanish did not officially recognize the independence of the entire netherlands until 1648.
challenges to the spanish empire 47 english french and dutch explorations greenland united provinces n so netherlands cartier hud england eu r ope gilbert france cabot gh ralei o an ra z ver newfoundland a t l nc wre e s north champlain america roanoke island mexico atlantic cuba puerto rico a f rica drake ocean drak e sia c a to ifi drake pa c south america oc ea n english french dutch cape of good hope cape horn who were the 10e first european explorers to rival spanish dominance in the new wwn64 america world and why did they cross the atlantic.
26593 01map 06 first proof why was the defeat of the spanish armada important to the history of english exploration.
what was the significance of the voyages of gilbert and raleigh.
the defeat of the armada almost from the beginning of the protestant revolt in the netherlands the dutch captured spanish treasure ships in the atlantic and carried on illegal trade with spains colonies.
while englands strong skillful queen elizabeth steered a tortuous course to avoid open war with spain she encouraged both dutch and english privateers to attack spanish ships and their colonies in america.
48 chapter 1 the collision of cultures the english raids on spanish ships continued for some twenty years before open war erupted between the two nations.
determined to conquer england philip ii the king of spain who was queen elizabeths brother in law and fiercest opponent assembled the massive spanish armada 132 warships 8 000 sailors and 18 000 soldiers.
it was the greatest invasion fleet in history.
on may 28 1588 the armada began sailing for england.
the english navy was waiting for them.
as the two fleets positioned themselves for the battle queen elizabeth donned a silver breastplate and told the english forces i know i have the body of a weak and feeble woman but i have the heart and stomach of a king and a king of england too as the battle unfolded the heavy spanish galleons could not compete with the speed and agility of the english warships.
the english fleet chased the spanish ships through the english channel.
caught up in a powerful protestant wind from the south the spanish fleet was swept into the north sea.
the decimated armada limped home finally scattering wreckage on the shores of scotland and ireland.
the stunning defeat of spains fearsome armada greatly strengthened the protestant cause across europe.
the ferocious storm that smashed the spanish ships seemed to be a sign that god favored the english.
queen elizabeth commissioned a special medallion to commemorate the successful defense of england.
the citation read god blew and they were dispersed spains king philip seemed to agree.
upon learning of the catastrophic defeat he sighed i sent the armada against men not gods winds and waves the defeat of the spanish armada confirmed englands naval supremacy cleared the way for its colonization of america and established queen elizabeths stature as a great ruler.
although she had many suitors eager to marry her she refused to divide her power.
she would have but one mistress england and no master eager to live and die a virgin she married herself to the fate of england.
by the end of the sixteenth century elizabethan england had begun an epic transformation from a poor humiliated and isolated nation into a mighty global empire.
english exploration of america english efforts to colonize america began a few years before the great battle with the spanish armada.
they were driven by a desire to weaken spains control over the americas.
in 1578 queen elizabeth had given sir humphrey gilbert permission to establish a colony in the remote heathen and barbarous lands of america.
english exploration of america 49 gilberts group set out in 1583 intending to settle near narragansett bay in present day rhode island.
they instead landed in fogbound newfoundland canada.
with winter approaching and his largest vessels lost gilbert and the colonists returned home.
while in transit however his ship vanished and he was never seen again.
the next year queen elizabeth asked sir walter raleigh gilberts much younger half brother to organize a colonizing mission.
raleighs expedition discovered the outer banks of north carolina and landed at roanoke island.
one of the colonists reported that the soile is the most plentifull sweete fruitfull and wholesome of all the worlde in fact however the sandy soil of the outer banks was not good for farming.
raleigh named the area virginia in honor of childless queen elizabeth the presumably virgin queen as she once described herself.
after several false starts raleigh in 1587 sponsored another expedition of about 100 colonists including 26 women and children led by governor john white.
white spent a month on roanoke island and then returned to england for supplies leaving behind his daughter elinor and his granddaughter virginia dare the first english child born in the new world.
the english in virginia the arrival of english explorers on the outer banks with roanoke island at left.
50 chapter 1 the collision of cultures whites journey back to virginia was delayed because of the naval war with spain.
when he finally returned in 1590 the roanoke outpost had been abandoned and pillaged much of it having been burned by a lightning ignited fire.
the rude cabins had been dismantled and removed suggesting that the colonists had left intentionally.
on a post at the entrance to the village someone had carved the word croatoan leading white to conclude that the settlers had set out for the island of that name some 50 miles south where friendly indians lived.
the lost colonists were never found.
they may have been killed by indians or spaniards.
the most recent evidence indicates that the lost colony suffered from a horrible drought that prevented the colonists from growing enough food to survive.
while some may have gone south the main body of colonists appears to have gone north to the southern shores of chesapeake bay as they had talked of doing and lived there for some years until they were killed by local indians.
there were no english colonists in north america when queen elizabeth died in 1603.
the spanish controlled the only colonial outposts on the continent.
but that was about to change.
inspired by the success of the spanish in exploiting the new world and emboldened by their defeat of the spanish armada in 1588 the english as well as the french and the dutch would soon develop american colonial empires of their own.
new spain in decline during the one and a half centuries after 1492 the spanish developed the most extensive rich and envied empire the world had ever known.
it spanned southern europe and the netherlands much of the western hemisphere and parts of asia.
the monarchy financed its imperial ambitions with riches looted from the americas.
between 1545 and 1660 the spanish forced native americans and africans to mine 7 million pounds of silver in the new world twice as much silver as existed in all of europe in 1492.
the massive amounts of silver and gold from the new world led spanish kings to mobilize huge armies and the naval armada in an effort to conquer all of protestant europe.
yet the spanish rulers overreached themselves.
the widespread religious wars of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries killed millions created intense anti spanish feelings among the english and the dutch and eventually helped bankrupt the spanish government.
at the same time the spanish empire grew so vast that its sprawling size and complexity eventually led to its disintegration.
during the sixteenth century new spain gradually developed into a settled society with the same rigid class structure of the home country.
from the english exploration of america 51 outset the spanish in the americas behaved more like occupying rulers than permanent settlers carefully regulating every detail of colonial administration and life.
new spain was an extractive empire less interested in creating self sustaining colonial communities than in taking gold silver and copper while enslaving the indigenous peoples and converting them to christianity.
spain never encouraged vast numbers of settlers to populate new spain and with few exceptions those who did travel to the new world rarely wanted to make a living off the land they instead wanted to live off the labor of the native population.
for three centuries after columbus arrived in the new world the spanish explorers conquistadores and priests imposed catholicism on the native peoples as well as a cruel system of economic exploitation and dependence.
that system created terrible disparities in wealth education and opportunity that would trigger repeated revolts and political instability.
as bartolom de las casas concluded the spaniards have shown not the slightest consideration for these people treating them and i speak from first hand experience having been there from the outset.
as piles of dung in the middle of the road.
they have had as little concern for their souls as for their bodies chapter review summary native american societies hunter gatherers came across the bering strait by foot and settled the length and breadth of the americas forming groups with diverse cultures languages and lifestyles.
global warming enabled an agricultural revolution particularly of maize that allowed former hunter gather peoples to settle and build empires such as that of the mexica whose aztec empire included subjugated peoples and a vast system of trade and tribute.
some north american peoples developed an elaborate continental trading network and impressive cities like cahokia their burial mounds reveal a complex and stratified social organization.
the eastern woodlands peoples that the europeans would first encounter included both patriarchal and matriarchal societies as well as extensive l anguage based alliances.
the algonquian iroquoian and muskogean were among the major indian nations.
warfare was an important cultural component leading to shifting rivalries and alliances among tribes and with european settlers.
age of exploration by the 1490s europeans were experiencing a renewed curiosity about the world.
warfare plagues and famine undermined the old agricultural feudal system in europe and in its place arose a middle class that monarchs could tax.
powerful new nations replaced the land estates and cities ruled by princes.
scientific and technological advances led to the creation of better maps and navigation techniques as well as new weapons and ships.
navies became the critical component of global trade and world power.
when the spanish began to colonize the new world the conversion of indians to roman catholicism was important but the search for gold and silver was primary.
the rivalries of the protestant reformation in europe shaped the course of conquest in the americas.
conquering and colonizing the americas spanish conquistadores such as hernn corts were able to exploit their advantages in military technology including steel gunpowder and domesticated animals such as the horse in order to conquer the powerful aztec and inca empires.
european diseases first introduced by columbus did even more to ensure spanish victories.
the spanish encomienda system demanded goods and labor from their new subjects.
as the indian population declined the spanish began to import enslaved africans.
columbian exchange contact between the old world and the new resulted in the columbian exchange sometimes called the great biological exchange.
crops such as maize beans and potatoes became staples in the old world.
native peoples incorporated into their culture such eurasian animals as the horse and pig.
but the invaders also carried infectious diseases that set off pandemics of smallpox plague and other illnesses to which indians had no immunity.
the americas were depopulated and cultures destroyed.
spanish legacy spain left a lasting legacy in the borderlands from california to florida.
catholic missionaries contributed to the destruction of the old ways of life by exterminating heathen beliefs in the southwest a practice that led to open rebellion in new mexico in 1598 and 1680.
spains rival european nation states began competing for gold and glory in the new world.
englands defeat of the spanish armada cleared the path for english dominance in north america.
chronology by 12 000 b c e.
5000 b c e.
1050 1250 c e.
1584 1587 humans have migrated to the americas agricultural revolution begins in mexico the city of cahokia flourishes in north america mexica aztec empire founded in central mexico columbus makes his first voyage of discovery in the americas spaniards bring first african slaves to the americas martin luther launches the protestant reformation corts begins the spanish conquest of mexico pizarro subdues the inca empire in south america for spain spaniards found st augustine the first permanent european outpost in the present day united states raleighs roanoke island venture the english navy defeats the spanish armada pueblo revolt key terms maize p 8 protestant reformation p 25 mexica p 9 conquistadores p 30 aztec empire p 10 encomienda p 35 burial mounds p 15 columbian exchange p 36 cahokia p 16 infectious diseases p 37 eastern woodlands peoples p 17 new mexico p 40 roman catholicism p 25 spanish armada p 48 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
englands colonies ould virginia as one of the earliest explorers and settlers of the jamestown colony john smith put his intimate knowledge of the region to use by creating this seventeenth century map of virginia.
in the upper right hand corner is a warrior of the susquehannock whom smith called a g i ant like people o ver the centuries the island nation of england had developed political practices and governing principles quite different from those on the continent of europe.
englands parliamentary monarchy was unique among european governments.
it began with the magna carta great charter of 1215 a statement of fundamental rights and liberties that nobles forced the king to approve.
the magna carta established the basic principle that everyone was equal before the law and no person not even a king or queen was above the law.
much more than the absolute monarchs of france and spain english rulers shared power with the nobility and a lesser aristocracy known as the gentry whose representatives formed the legislature known as parliament made up of the house of lords and the house of commons.
the most important power allocated to parliament was the authority to impose taxes.
by controlling government tax revenue parliament exercised great leverage over the monarchy.
religious conflict and war when queen elizabeth who never married died in 1603 without a child of her own to inherit the throne james vi of scotland her distant cousin became king james i of england.
while elizabeth had ruled through constitutional authority james ominously claimed to govern by divine right which meant he answered only to god.
james i confronted a divided church of england with the reform m inded puritans in one camp and the anglican establishment headed by the focus questions 1.
what motivated england to establish american colonies.
what were the characteristics of the english colonies in the chesapeake region the carolinas the middle colonies pennsylvania new york new jersey and d elaware and new england prior to 1700.
in what ways did the english colonists and native americans adapt to each others presence.
what role did indentured servants and the development of slavery play in colonial america.
how did the english colonies become the most populous and powerful region in north america by 1700.
give me liberty.
an american history t h i r d e d i t i o n this page intentionally left blank part 1 american colonies to 1763 c t he colonial period of american history was a time of enormous change as the people of four continents north america south america europe and africa were suddenly and unexpectedly thrown into contact with one another.
the period also initiated a new era in the history of freedom.
it was not however a desire for freedom that drove early european explorations of north and south america.
contact between europe and the americas began as a byproduct of the quest for a sea route for trade with asia.
but it quickly became a contest for power between rival empires who moved to conquer colonize and exploit the resources of the new world.
at the time of european contact the western hemisphere was home to tens of millions of people.
within the present border of the united states there existed indian societies based on agriculture hunting or fishing with their own languages religious practices and forms of government.
all experienced wrenching changes after europeans arrived including incorporation into the world market and epidemics of disease that devastated many native groups.
the colonies that eventually came to form the united states originated in very different ways.
virginia the first permanent colony to be established was created by a private company that sought to earn profits through exploration for gold and the development of transatlantic trade.
individual proprietors wellconnected englishmen given large grants of land by the king established maryland and pennsylvania.
new york which had been founded by the dutch came into british hands as the result of a war.
religious groups seeking escape from persecution in england and hoping to establish communities rooted in their understanding of the principles of the bible founded colonies in new england.
in the seventeenth century all the british colonies experienced wrenching social conflicts as groups within them battled for control.
relations with indians remained tense and sometimes violent.
religious and political divisions in england which experienced a civil war in the 1640s and the ouster of the king in 1688 reverberated in the colonies.
so did wars between european powers which spilled over into north america.
nonetheless after difficult beginnings britains mainland colonies experienced years of remarkable growth in population and economic activity.
by the eighteenth century the non indian population of britains north american colonies had far outstripped that of the colonies of france and spain.
in every colony in british america well to do landowners and merchants dominated economic and political life.
nonetheless emigration to the colonies offered numerous settlers opportunities they had not enjoyed at home including access to land the freedom to worship as they pleased and the right to vote.
every british colony had an elected assembly that shared power with a governor who was usually appointed from london.
even this limited degree of self government contrasted sharply with the lack of representative institutions in the spanish and french empires.
all these circumstances drew thousands of english emigrants to north america in the seventeenth century and thousands more from ireland scotland and the european continent in the eighteenth century.
yet the conditions that allowed colonists to enjoy such freedoms were made possible by lack of freedom for millions of others.
for the native inhabitants of the western hemisphere european colonization brought the spread of devastating epidemics and either dispossession from the land or forced labor for the colonizers.
millions of africans were uprooted from their homes and transported to the new world to labor on the plantations of brazil the caribbean and englands north american colonies.
even among european immigrants the majority arrived not as completely free individuals but as indentured servants who owed a prearranged number of years of labor to those who paid their passage.
in colonial america many modern ideas of freedom did not exist or existed in very different forms than today.
equality before the law was unknown women non whites and propertyless men enjoyed far fewer rights than landowning white male citizens.
economic freedom today widely identified with participation in an unregulated market meant independence owning land or a shop and not relying on another person for a livelihood.
most colonies had official churches and many colonists who sought religious liberty for themselves refused to extend it to others.
speaking or writing critically of public authorities could land a person in jail.
nonetheless ideas about freedom played a major role in justifying european colonization.
the spanish and french claimed to be liberating native americans by bringing them advanced civilization and roman catholicism.
england insisted that true freedom for indians meant adopting english ways including protestantism.
moreover the expansion of englands empire occurred at a time when freedom came to be seen as the defining characteristic of the english nation.
slavery existed in every new world colony.
in many it became the basis of economic life.
yet most britons including colonists prided themselves on enjoying british liberty a common set of rights that included protection from the arbitrary exercise of governmental power.
thus freedom and lack of freedom expanded together in the colonies of british north america that would eventually form the united states.
c hapter 1 9000 bc agriculture developed in mexico and peru bc mound builders thrive 1000 ad in mississippi valley 900 hopi and zuni tribes establish towns vikings sail to newfoundland cahokia city empire along the mississippi 1430 chinese admiral zheng he explores coast of east africa 1430s gutenberg invents printing press portuguese explore african coast below the sahara bartholomeu dias reaches the cape of good hope columbuss first voyage to the new world john cabot reaches newfoundland vasco da gama sails to the indian ocean pedro cabral claims brazil for portugal first african slaves transported to caribbean islands nicols de ovando establishes settlement on hispaniola martin luther launches the protestant reformation with his ninety five theses hernn corts arrives in mexico history of the indies 1530s pizarros conquest of peru spain promulgates the new laws 1608 champlain establishes quebec hudson claims new netherland santa fe established pueblo revolt a new world the first americans the spanish empire the settling of the americas indian societies of the americas mound builders of the mississippi river valley western indians indians of eastern north america native american religion land and property gender relations european views of the indians governing spanish america colonists in spanish america colonists and indians justifications for conquest spreading the faith piety and profit las casass complaint reforming the empire exploring north america spanish florida spain in the southwest the pueblo revolt indian freedom european freedom indian freedom christian liberty freedom and authority liberty and liberties the expansion of europe chinese and portuguese navigation portugal and west africa freedom and slavery in africa the voyages of columbus the french and dutch empires french colonization new france and the indians the dutch empire dutch freedom freedom in new netherland settling new netherland new netherland and the indians contact columbus in the new world exploration and conquest the demographic disaster the village of secoton by john white an english artist who spent a year on the outer banks of north carolina in 1585 1586 as part of an expedition sponsored by sir walter raleigh.
a central street links houses surrounded by fields of corn.
in the lower part dancing indians take part in a religious ceremony.
f ocus q uestions what were the major patterns of native american life in north america before europeans arrived.
how did indian and european ideas of freedom differ on the eve of contact.
what impelled european explorers to look west across the atlantic.
what happened when the peoples of the americas came in contact with europeans.
what were the chief features of the spanish empire in america.
what were the chief features of the french and dutch empires in north america.
he discovery of america the british writer adam smith announced in his celebrated work the wealth of nations 1776 was one of the two greatest and most important events recorded in the history of mankind historians no longer use the word discovery to describe the european exploration conquest and colonization of a hemisphere already home to millions of people.
but there can be no doubt that when christopher columbus made landfall in the west indian islands in 1492 he set in motion some of the most pivotal developments in human history.
immense changes soon followed in both the old and new worlds the consequences of these changes are still with us today.
the peoples of the american continents and europe previously unaware of each others existence were thrown into continuous interaction.
crops new to each hemisphere crossed the atlantic reshaping diets and transforming the natural environment.
because of their long isolation the inhabitants of north and south america had developed no immunity to the germs that also accompanied the colonizers.
as a result they suffered a series of devastating epidemics the greatest population catastrophe in human history.
within a decade of columbuss voyage a fourth continent africa found itself drawn into the new atlantic system of trade and population movement.
in africa europeans found a supply of unfree labor that enabled them to exploit the fertile lands of the western hemisphere.
indeed of approximately 10 million men women and children who crossed from the old world to the new between 1492 and 1820 the vast majority about 7 7 million were african slaves.
from the vantage point of 1776 the year the united states declared itself an independent nation it seemed to adam smith that the discovery of america had produced both great benefits and great misfortunes to the nations of western europe the development of american colonies brought an era of splendor and glory the emergence of the atlantic as the worlds major avenue for trade and population movement smith noted enabled millions of europeans to increase the enjoyments of life.
to the natives of the americas however smith went on the years since 1492 had been ones of dreadful misfortunes and every sort of injustice and for millions of africans the settlement of america meant a descent into the abyss of slavery.
long before columbus sailed europeans had dreamed of a land of abundance riches and ease beyond the western horizon.
once the discovery of this new world had taken place they invented an america of the imagination projecting onto it their hopes for a better life.
here many believed would arise unparalleled opportunities for riches or at least liberation from poverty.
europeans envisioned america as a religious refuge a society of equals a source of power lt w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
they searched the new world for golden cities and fountains of eternal youth.
some sought to establish ideal communities based on the lives of the early christian saints or other blueprints for social justice.
some of these dreams of riches and opportunity would indeed be fulfilled.
to many european settlers america offered a far greater chance to own land and worship as they pleased than existed in europe with its rigid unequal social order and official churches.
yet the conditions that enabled millions of settlers to take control of their own destinies were made possible by the debasement of millions of others.
the new world a 1544 engraving of the western hemisphere by sebastian cabot the son of the italian born explorer john cabot and like his father an accomplished mariner.
in the early sixteenth century sailing for england and then spain sebastian cabot led several expeditions to the new world.
the ships depicted are caravels the first european vessels capable of long distance travel and the map also shows stylized scenes of native americans including a battle with spanish conquistadores.
1 a new world the first americans became the site of many forms of unfree labor including indentured servitude forced labor and one of the most brutal and unjust systems ever devised by man plantation slavery.
the conquest and settlement of the western hemisphere opened new chapters in the long histories of both freedom and slavery.
there was a vast human diversity among the peoples thrown into contact with one another in the new world.
exploration and settlement took place in an era of almost constant warfare among european nations each racked by internal religious political and regional conflicts.
native americans and africans consisted of numerous groups with their own languages and cultures.
they were as likely to fight one another as to unite against the european newcomers.
all these peoples were changed by their integration into the new atlantic economy.
the complex interactions of europeans american indians and africans would shape american history during the colonial era.
the first americans the settling of the americas the residents of the americas were no more a single group than europeans or africans.
they spoke hundreds of different languages and lived in numerous kinds of societies.
most however were descended from bands of hunters and fishers who had crossed the bering strait via a land bridge at various times between 15 000 and 60 000 years ago the exact dates are hotly debated by archaeologists.
others may have arrived by sea from asia or pacific islands.
around 14 000 years ago when glaciers began to melt at the end of the last ice age the land link became submerged under water once again separating the western hemisphere from asia.
history in north and south america did not begin with the coming of europeans.
the new world was new to europeans but an ancient homeland to those who already lived there.
the hemisphere had witnessed many changes during its human history.
first the early inhabitants and their descendants spread across the two continents reaching the tip of south america perhaps 11 000 years ago.
as the climate warmed they faced a food crisis as the immense animals they hunted including woolly mammoths and giant bison became extinct.
around 9 000 years ago at the same time that agriculture was being developed in the near east it also emerged in modern day mexico and the andes and then spread to other parts of the americas making settled civilizations possible.
throughout the hemisphere maize corn squash and beans formed the basis of agriculture.
the absence of livestock in the western hemisphere however limited farming by preventing the plowing of fields and the application of natural fertilizer.
w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
the first americans c hukchi peninsula be r in gs t ra i t ale ut ia n isl an ds north america mohawk oneida onondaga cayuga seneca ve r pa c i f i c o ce an i io r oh cherokee chaco canyon hopi pueblo zuni ssi mi ssippi r cahokia chickasaw poverty point a t l an t i c o c ea n choctaw gulf of mexico chichen itz az tec tenochtitln s monte alban ce nt 1000 miles 1000 kilometers s an yu ca t n may pe n i n s u la palenque ral caribbean sea am eric a south america possible migration routes i nc a s indian societies of the americas north and south america were hardly an empty wilderness when europeans arrived.
the hemisphere contained cities roads irrigation systems extensive trade networks and large structures such as the pyramidtemples whose beauty still inspires wonder.
with a population close to a map illustrating the probable routes by which the first americans settled the western hemisphere at various times between 15 000 and 60 000 years ago.
1 a new world map of the aztec capital tenochtitln and the gulf of mexico probably produced by a spanish conquistador and published in 1524 in an edition of the letters of hernn corts.
the map shows the citys complex system of canals bridges and dams with the great temple at the center.
gardens and a zoo are also visible.
the first americans 250 000 tenochtitln the capital of the aztec empire in what is now mexico was one of the worlds largest cities.
its great temple splendid royal palace and a central market comparable to that of european capitals made the city seem like an enchanted vision according to one of the first europeans to encounter it.
further south lay the inca kingdom centered in modern day peru.
its population of perhaps 12 million was linked by a complex system of roads and bridges that extended 2 000 miles along the andes mountain chain.
when europeans arrived a wide variety of native peoples lived within the present borders of the united states.
indian civilizations in north america had not developed the scale grandeur or centralized organization of the aztec and inca societies to their south.
north american indians lacked the technologies europeans had mastered such as metal tools and machines gunpowder and the scientific knowledge necessary for longdistance navigation.
no society north of mexico had achieved literacy although some made maps on bark and animal hides.
they also lacked wheeled vehicles since they had no domestic animals like horses or oxen to pull them.
their backwardness became a central justification for european conquest.
but over time indian societies had perfected techniques of farming hunting and fishing developed structures of political power and religious belief and engaged in far reaching networks of trade and communication.
w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
mound builders mississippi of river the valley remarkable physical remains still exist from some of the early civilizations in north america.
around 3 500 years ago before egyptians built the pyramids native americans constructed a large community centered on a series of giant semicircular mounds on a bluff overlooking the mississippi river in present day louisiana.
known today as poverty point it was a commercial and governmental center whose residents established trade routes throughout the mississippi and ohio river valleys.
archaeologists have found there copper from present day minnesota and canada and flint mined in indiana.
more than a thousand years before columbus sailed indians of the ohio river valley called mound builders by eighteenth century settlers who encountered the large earthen burial mounds they created had traded across half the continent.
after their decline another culture flourished in the mississippi river valley centered on the city of cahokia near presentday st louis a fortified community with between 10 000 and 30 000 inhabitants in the year 1200.
its residents too built giant mounds the largest of which stood 100 feet high and was topped by a temple.
little is known of cahokias political and economic structure.
but it stood as the largest settled community in what is now the united states until surpassed in population by new york and philadelphia around 1800.
western a modern aerial photograph of the ruins of pueblo bonita in chaco canyon in present day new mexico.
the rectangular structures are the foundations of dwellings and the circular ones are kivas or places of religious worship.
indians in the arid northeastern area of present day arizona the hopi and zuni and their ancestors engaged in settled village life for over 3 000 years.
during the peak of the regions culture between the years 900 and 1200 these peoples built great planned towns with large multiple family dwellings in local canyons constructed dams and canals to gather and distribute water and conducted trade with groups as far away as central mexico and the mississippi river valley.
the largest of their structures pueblo bonita in chaco canyon new mexico stood five stories high and had over 600 rooms.
not until the 1880s was a dwelling of comparable size constructed in the united states.
after the decline of these communities probably because of drought survivors moved to the south and east where they established villages and perfected the techniques of desert farming complete with irrigation systems to provide water for crops of corn beans and cotton.
these were the people spanish explorers called the pueblo indians because they lived in small villages or pueblos when the spanish first encountered them in the sixteenth century.
cliff dwellings in caon de chelly in the area of modern day arizona built sometime between 300 and 1300 and photographed in 1873.
1 a new world the first americans another drawing by the artist john white shows ten male and seven female native americans dancing around a circle of posts in a religious ritual.
white was a careful observer of their clothing body markings and objects used in the ceremony.
on the pacific coast another densely populated region hundreds of distinct groups resided in independent villages and lived primarily by fishing hunting sea mammals and gathering wild plants and nuts.
as many as 25 million salmon swam up the columbia river each year providing indians with abundant food.
on the great plains with its herds of buffalo descendants of the prehistoric giant bison many indians were hunters who tracked animals on foot before the arrival of horses with the spanish but others lived in agricultural communities.
indians of eastern north america in eastern north america hundreds of tribes inhabited towns and villages scattered from the gulf of mexico to present day canada.
they lived on corn squash and beans supplemented by fishing and hunting deer turkeys and other animals.
indian trade routes crisscrossed the eastern part of the continent.
tribes frequently warred with one another to obtain goods seize captives or take revenge for the killing of relatives.
they conducted diplomacy and made peace.
little in the way of centralized authority existed until in the fifteenth century various leagues or confederations emerged in an effort to bring order to local regions.
in the southeast the choctaw cherokee and chickasaw each united dozens of towns in loose alliances.
in present day new york and pennsylvania five iroquois peoples the mohawk oneida cayuga seneca and onondaga formed a great league of peace bringing a period of stability to the area.
each year a great council with representatives from the five groupings met to coordinate behavior toward outsiders.
the most striking feature of native american society at the time europeans arrived was its sheer diversity.
each group had its own political system and set of religious beliefs and north america was home to literally hundreds of mutually unintelligible languages.
indians had no sense of w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
native ways of life tlingit ca.
inuit hudson bay inuit tshimshian ro n thin l michig hu an thinly kwakiutls micmac populated shuswap cree penobscot nootkin abenaki kootenay chippewa blackfeet assiniboine algonquian perior skagit l su cheyenne sioux walla walla l chinook flathead chippewa nez wampanoag hidatsa huron ontario mohegan perce cayuse.
ottowa l sioux pequot menominee tillamook mandan neutral iroquois arapaho narragansett klamath ie r kiowa winnebago l e pomo modoc iowa susquehannock pawnee shoshone potawatomi erie mosopelea maidu sauk shawnee costano kickapoo te d illinois pamlico ute kaskaskia wichita cherokee tuscarora southern chemehuevi paiute chumash chickasaw serrano comanche luiseno hopi zuni tewa creek cahuilla caddo yamasee diegueno mescalero timucua choctaw apalachee natchez jumano ly po pu la concho yachi pa c i f i c oc ea n kabankawa gulf of mexico coahuiltec ways of life in north america ad 1515 arctic hunter gatherers subarctic hunter fisher gatherers northwest coast marine economy plains hunter gatherers plains horticulturalists calusa laguerno 500 miles arawak 500 kilometers non horticultural rancherian peoples rancherian peoples with low intensity horticulture rancherian peoples with intensive horticulture pueblos with intensive horticulture seacoast foragers america as a continent or hemisphere.
they did not think of themselves as a single unified people an idea invented by europeans and only many years later adopted by indians themselves.
indian identity centered on the immediate social group a tribe village chiefdom or confederacy.
when europeans first arrived many indians saw them as simply one group among many.
their first thought was how to use the newcomers to marginal horticultural hunters river based horticultural chiefdoms orchard growing alligator hunters tidewater horticulturalists fishers and wild rice gatherers the native population of north america at the time of first contact with europeans consisted of numerous tribes with their own languages religious beliefs and economic and social structures.
this map suggests the numerous ways of life existing at the time.
1 a new world the first americans enhance their standing in relation to other native peoples rather than to unite against them.
the sharp dichotomy between indians and white persons did not emerge until later in the colonial era.
native american religion nonetheless the diverse indian societies of north america did share certain common characteristics.
their lives were steeped in religious ceremonies often directly related to farming and hunting.
spiritual power they believed suffused the world and sacred spirits could be found in all kinds of living and inanimate things animals plants trees water and wind.
through religious ceremonies they aimed to harness the aid of powerful supernatural forces to serve the interests of man.
in some tribes hunters performed rituals to placate the spirits of animals they had killed.
other religious ceremonies sought to engage the spiritual power of nature to secure abundant crops or fend off evil spirits.
indian villages also held elaborate religious rites participation in which helped to define the boundaries of community membership.
in all indian societies those who seemed to possess special abilities to invoke supernatural powers shamans medicine men and other religious leaders held positions of respect and authority.
indian religion did not pose a sharp distinction between the natural and the supernatural or secular and religious activities.
in some respects however indian religion was not that different from popular spiritual beliefs in europe.
most indians held that a single creator stood atop the spiritual hierarchy.
nonetheless nearly all europeans arriving in the new world quickly concluded that indians were in dire need of being converted to a true christian faith.
land and property equally alien in european eyes were indian attitudes toward property.
numerous land systems existed among native americans.
generally however village leaders assigned plots of land to individual families to use for a season or more and tribes claimed specific areas for hunting.
unclaimed land remained free for anyone to use.
families owned the right to use land but they did not own the land itself.
indians saw land the basis of economic life for both hunting and farming societies as a common resource not an economic commodity.
in the nineteenth century the indian leader black hawk would explain why in his view land could not be bought and sold the great spirit gave it to his children to live upon and cultivate as far as necessary for their subsistence and so long as they occupy and cultivate it they have a right to the soil few if any indian societies were familiar with the idea of a fenced off piece of land belonging forever to a single individual or family.
there was no market in real estate before the coming of europeans.
nor were indians devoted to the accumulation of wealth and material goods.
especially east of the mississippi river where villages moved every few years when soil or game became depleted acquiring numerous possessions made little sense.
however status certainly mattered in indian societies.
tribal leaders tended to come from a small number of families and chiefs lived more splendidly than average members of society.
but their w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
a catawba map illustrates the differences between indian and european conceptions of landed property.
the map depicts not possession of a specific territory but trade and diplomatic connections between various native groups and with the colony of virginia represented by the rectangle on the lower right.
reputation often rested on their willingness to share goods with others rather than hoarding them for themselves.
a few indian societies had rigid social distinctions.
among the natchez descendants of the mound building mississippian culture a chief or great sun occupied the top of the social order with nobles or lesser suns below him and below them the common people.
in general however wealth mattered far less in indian society than in european society at the time.
generosity was among the most valued social qualities and gift giving was essential to indian society.
trade for example meant more than a commercial transaction it was accompanied by elaborate ceremonies of gift exchange.
a central part of indian economies gift giving bound different groups in webs of mutual obligation.
although indians had no experience of the wealth enjoyed at the top of european society under normal circumstances no one in indian societies went hungry or experienced the extreme inequalities of europe.
there are no beggars among them reported the english colonial leader roger williams of new englands indians.
gender relations the system of gender relations in most indian societies also differed markedly from that of europe.
membership in a family defined womens lives but they openly engaged in premarital sexual relations and could even choose to divorce their husbands.
most although not all indian societies were matrilineal that is centered on clans or kinship groups in which children became members of the mothers family not the fathers.
tribal leaders were almost always men but women played an important role in certain religious ceremonies and female elders often helped to select male village leaders and took part in tribal meetings.
under english law a married man controlled the familys property and a wife had no independent c h.
1 a new world indians fishing in a 1585 drawing by john white.
the canoe is filled with fish while two men harpoon others in the background.
among the wildlife illustrated are hammerhead sharks and catfish.
the first americans legal identity.
in contrast indian women owned dwellings and tools and a husband generally moved to live with the family of his wife.
in indian societies men contributed to the communitys well being and demonstrated their masculinity by success in hunting or in the pacific northwest by catching fish with nets and harpoons.
because men were frequently away on the hunt women took responsibility not only for household duties but for most agricultural work as well.
among the pueblo of the southwest however where there was less hunting than in the east men were the primary cultivators.
european views of the indians europeans tended to view indians in extreme terms.
they were regarded either as noble savages gentle friendly and superior in some ways to europeans or as uncivilized and brutal savages.
giovanni da verrazano a florentine navigator who sailed up and down the eastern coast of north america in 1524 described indians he encountered as beautiful of stature and build for their part many indians whose diet was probably more nutritious than that of most europeans initially found the newcomers weak and ugly.
over time however negative images of indians came to overshadow positive ones.
early european descriptions of north american indians as barbaric centered on three areas religion land use and gender relations.
whatever their country of origin european newcomers concluded that indians lacked genuine religion or in fact worshiped the devil.
their shamans and herb healers were called witch doctors their numerous ceremonies and rituals at best a form of superstition their belief in a world alive with spiritual power a worship of false gods christianity presented w h a t w e r e t h e m a j o r p a t t e r n s o f na t i v e a m e r i c a n l i f e i n n o r t h a m e r i c a b e f o r e e u r o p e a n s a r r i v e d.
no obstacle to the commercial use of the land and indeed in some ways encouraged it since true religion was thought to promote the progress of civilization.
whereas the indians saw nature as a world of spirits and souls the europeans viewed it as a collection of potential commodities a source of economic opportunity.
europeans invoked the indians distinctive pattern of land use and ideas about property to answer the awkward question raised by a british minister at an early stage of englands colonization by what right or warrant can we enter into the land of these savages take away their rightful inheritance from them and plant ourselves in their places while the spanish claimed title to land in america by right of conquest and papal authority the english french and dutch came to rely on the idea that indians had not actually used the land and thus had no claim to it.
despite the indians highly developed agriculture and well established towns europeans frequently described them as nomads without settled communities.
the land was thus deemed to be a vacant wilderness ready to be claimed by newcomers who would cultivate and improve it.
european settlers believed that mixing ones labor with the earth which indians supposedly had failed to do gave one title to the soil.
in the indians gender division of labor and matrilineal family structures europeans saw weak men and mistreated women.
hunting and fishing the primary occupations of indian men were considered leisure activities in much of europe not real work.
because indian women worked in the fields europeans often described them as lacking freedom.
they were not much better than slaves in the words of one english commentator.
europeans considered indian men unmanly too weak to exercise authority within their families and restrain their wives open sexuality and so lazy that they forced their wives to do most of the productive labor.
throughout north america europeans promoted the ideas that women should confine themselves to household work and that men ought to exercise greater authority within their families.
europeans insisted that by subduing the indians they were actually bringing them freedom the freedom of true religion private property and the liberation of both men and women from uncivilized and unchristian gender roles.
indian freedom european freedom indian freedom and what of liberty as the native inhabitants of the new world understood it.
many europeans saw indians as embodying freedom.
the iroquois wrote one colonial official held such absolute notions of liberty that they allow of no kind of superiority of one over another and banish all servitude from their territories but most colonizers quickly concluded that the notion of freedom was alien to indian societies.
early english and french dictionaries of indian languages contained no entry for freedom or libert.
nor wrote one early trader did indians have words to express despotic power arbitrary kings oppressed or obedient subjects indeed europeans considered indians barbaric in part because they did not appear to live under established governments or fixed laws and had no indian women planting crops while men break the sod.
an engraving by theodor de bry based on a painting by jacques le moyne de morgues.
morgues was part of an expedition of french huguenots to florida in 1564 he escaped when the spanish destroyed the outpost in the following year.
a seventeenth century engraving by a french jesuit priest illustrates many europeans view of indian religion.
a demon hovers over an iroquois longhouse suggesting that indians worship the devil.
1 a new world indian freedom european freedom respect for authority.
they are born live and die in a liberty without restraint wrote one religious missionary.
in a sense they were too free lacking the order and discipline that europeans considered the hallmarks of civilization.
even slavery wrote richard eden an english writer of the mid sixteenth century was preferable to the indians condition before european contact which he described as rather a horrible licentiousness than a liberty when giovanni da verrazano described the indians as living in absolute freedom he did not intend this as a compliment.
the familiar modern understanding of freedom as personal independence often based on ownership of private property had little meaning in most indian societies.
but indians certainly had their own ideas of freedom.
while the buying and selling of slaves was unknown small scale slavery existed in some indian societies.
so too did the idea of personal liberty as the opposite of being held as a slave.
indians would bitterly resent the efforts of some europeans to reduce them to slavery.
although individuals were expected to think for themselves and did not always have to go along with collective decision making indian men and women judged one another according to their ability to live up to widely understood ideas of appropriate behavior.
far more important than individual autonomy were kinship ties the ability to follow ones spiritual values and the well being and security of ones community.
in indian culture group autonomy and self determination and the mutual obligations that came with a sense of belonging and connectedness took precedence over individual freedom.
ironically the coming of europeans armed with their own language of liberty would make freedom a preoccupation of american indians as part and parcel of the very process by which they were reduced to dependence on the colonizers.
christian liberty on the eve of colonization europeans held numerous ideas of freedom.
some were as old as the city states of ancient greece others arose during the political struggles of the early modern era.
some laid the foundations for modern conceptions of freedom others are quite unfamiliar today.
freedom was not a single idea but a collection of distinct rights and privileges many enjoyed by only a small portion of the population.
one conception common throughout europe understood freedom less as a political or social status than as a moral or spiritual condition.
freedom meant abandoning the life of sin to embrace the teachings of christ.
where the spirit of the lord is declares the new testament there is liberty in this definition servitude and freedom were mutually reinforcing not contradictory states since those who accepted the teachings of christ simultaneously became free from sin and servants to god christian liberty had no connection to later ideas of religious toleration a notion that scarcely existed anywhere on the eve of colonization.
every nation in europe had an established church that decreed what forms of religious worship and belief were acceptable.
dissenters faced persecution by the state as well as condemnation by church authorities.
religious uniformity was thought to be essential to public order the modern idea that a persons religious beliefs and practices are a matter of private choice not legal obligation was almost unknown.
the religious wars that racked how did indian and european ideas of freedom differ on the eve of contact.
europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries centered on which religion would predominate in a kingdom or region not the right of individuals to choose which church in which to worship.
freedom and authority in its secular form the equating of liberty with obedience to a higher authority suggested that freedom meant not anarchy but obedience to law.
aristotle had described the law as libertys salvation not its enemy.
the identification of freedom with the rule of law did not however mean that all subjects of the crown enjoyed the same degree of freedom.
early modern european societies were extremely hierarchical with marked gradations of social status ranging from the king and hereditary aristocracy down to the urban and rural poor.
inequality was built into virtually every social relationship.
the king claimed to rule by the authority of god.
persons of high rank demanded deference from those below them.
less than 5 percent of the population monopolized english economic wealth and political power.
within families men exercised authority over their wives and children.
according to the widespread legal doctrine known as coverture when a woman married she surrendered her legal identity which became covered by that of her husband.
she could not own property or sign contracts in her own name control her wages if she worked write a separate will or except in the rarest of circumstances go to court seeking a divorce.
the husband conducted business and testified in court for the entire family.
he had the exclusive right to his wifes company including domestic labor and sexual relations.
everywhere in europe family life depended on male dominance and female submission.
indeed political writers of the sixteenth century explicitly compared the kings authority over his subjects with the husbands over his family.
both were ordained by god.
to justify this argument they referred to a passage in the new testament as the man is the head of the woman so is christ the head of the church neither kind of authority could be challenged without threatening the fabric of social order.
liberty and liberties in this hierarchical society liberty came from knowing ones social place and fulfilling the duties appropriate to ones rank.
most men lacked the freedom that came with economic independence.
property qualifications and other restrictions limited the electorate to a minuscule part of the adult male population.
the law required strict obedience of employees and breaches of labor contracts carried criminal penalties.
european ideas of freedom still bore the imprint of the middle ages when liberties meant formal specific privileges such as self government exemption from taxation or the right to practice a particular trade granted to individuals or groups by contract royal decree or purchase.
one legal dictionary defined a liberty as a privilege.
by which men may enjoy some benefit beyond the ordinary subject only those who enjoyed the freedom of the city for example could engage in certain economic activities.
1 a new world the expansion of europe numerous modern civil liberties did not exist.
the law decreed acceptable forms of religious worship.
the government regularly suppressed publications it did not like and criticism of authority could lead to imprisonment.
in england members of the house of commons enjoyed freedom of speech during parliamentary sessions but the right did not extend to ordinary citizens.
personal independence was reserved for a small part of the population and this was one reason why authorities found masterless men those without regular jobs or otherwise outside the control of their social superiors so threatening.
nonetheless every european country that colonized the new world claimed to be spreading freedom for its own population and for native americans.
t h e e x pa n s i o n o f e u r o p e it is fitting that the second epochal event that adam smith linked to columbuss voyage of 1492 was the discovery by portuguese navigators of a sea route from europe to asia around the southern tip of africa.
the european conquest of america began as an offshoot of the quest for a sea route to india china and the islands of the east indies the source of the silk tea spices porcelain and other luxury goods on which international trade in the early modern era centered.
for centuries this commerce had been conducted across land from china and south asia to the middle east and the mediterranean region.
profit and piety the desire to eliminate islamic middlemen and win control of the lucrative trade for christian western europe combined to inspire the quest for a direct route to asia.
chinese and portuguese navigation at the beginning of the fifteenth century one might have predicted that china would establish the worlds first global empire.
between 1405 and 1433 admiral zheng he led seven large naval expeditions in the indian ocean.
the first convoy consisted of 62 ships that were larger than those of any european nation along with 225 support vessels and more than 25 000 men.
on his sixth voyage zheng explored the coast of east africa.
china was already the worlds most important trading economy with trade routes dotting the indian ocean.
zhengs purpose was not discovery but to impress other peoples with chinas might.
had his ships continued westward they could easily have reached north and south america.
but as a wealthy land based empire china did not feel the need for overseas expansion and after 1433 the government ended support for long distance maritime expeditions.
it fell to portugal situated on the western corner of the iberian peninsula far removed from the overland route to asia to take advantage of new techniques of sailing and navigation to begin exploring the atlantic.
the development of the caravel a ship capable of long distance travel and of the compass and quadrant devices that enabled sailors to determine their location and direction with greater accuracy than in the past made it possible to sail down the coast of africa and return to portugal.
portuguese seafarers initially hoped to locate the source of gold that for centuries had been transported in caravans across the sahara desert to north africa and what impelled european explorers to look west across the atlantic.
the old world on the eve colonization ca.
1500 of american scotland ireland england netherlands holy roman empire france genoa portugal spain az o re s lisbon ma d e i ra i s.
me d venice iter ot tom a ca na ry i s.
rane cre t e ottoman empire an sea cypru s persia china n empire s ah ar a d e s e rt cap e verde is.
india pacific ocean mali d ag am a benin da g ama dias east indies ind i an o cean at la nt ic oce a n ca pe of g ood hope europe.
this commerce which passed through the african kingdom of mali on the southern edge of the sahara provided europe with most of its gold.
around 1400 it rivaled trade with the east in economic importance.
and like trade with asia it was controlled by muslim merchants.
portugal and west africa today africa is the worlds poorest continent.
in the fifteenth century it was known for its wealth.
mansa musa the ruler of mali had literally put his realm on the map in 1324 when he led a great pilgrimage to mecca distributing so much gold along the way that its price was depressed for a decade.
until 1434 however no european sailor had seen the coast of africa below the sahara or the forest kingdoms south of mali that contained the actual gold fields.
but in that year a portuguese ship brought a sprig of rosemary from west africa proof that one could sail beyond 1 000 1 000 2 000 miles 2 000 kilometers in the fifteenth century the world known to europeans was limited to europe parts of africa and asia.
explorers from portugal sought to find a sea route to the east in order to circumvent the italian city states and middle eastern rulers who controlled the overland trade.
1 a new world the expansion of europe an engraving published in 1668 of a procession of the oba king outside benin on the western coast of africa.
the image suggests the extent of the city a center of government trade and the arts.
the desert and return.
little by little portuguese ships moved farther down the coast.
in 1485 they reached benin an imposing city whose craftsmen produced bronze sculptures that still inspire admiration for their artistic beauty and superb casting techniques.
the portuguese established fortified trading posts on the western coast of africa.
the profits reaped by these portuguese factories so named because merchants were known as factors inspired other european powers to follow in their footsteps.
portugal also began to colonize madeira the azores and the canary and cape verde islands which lie in the atlantic off the african coast.
sugar plantations worked by muslim captives and slaves from slavic areas of eastern europe had flourished in the middle ages on mediterranean islands like cyprus malta and crete.
now the portuguese established plantations on the atlantic islands eventually replacing the native populations with thousands of slaves shipped from africa an ominous precedent for the new world.
soon the center of sugar production would shift again to the western hemisphere.
freedom and slavery in africa slavery in africa long predated the coming of europeans.
traditionally african slaves tended to be criminals debtors and captives in war.
they worked within the households of their owners and had well defined rights such as possessing property and marrying free persons.
it was not uncommon for african slaves to acquire their freedom.
slavery was one of several forms of labor not the basis of the economy as it would become in large parts of the new world.
the coming of the portuguese soon followed by traders from other european nations accelerated the buying and selling of slaves within africa.
at least 100 000 african slaves were transported to what impelled european explorers to look west across the atlantic.
spain and portugal between 1450 and 1500.
in 1502 the first african slaves were transported to islands in the caribbean.
the transatlantic slave trade and its impact on africa will be discussed in chapter 4.
having reached west africa portuguese mariners pushed their explorations ever southward along the coast.
bartholomeu dias reached the cape of good hope at the continents southern tip in 1487.
in 1498 vasco da gama sailed around it to india demonstrating the feasibility of a sea route to the east.
with a population of under 1 million portugal established a vast trading empire with bases in india southern china and indonesia.
it replaced the italian city states as the major european commercial partner of the east.
but six years before da gamas voyage christopher columbus had he believed discovered a new route to china and india by sailing west.
the voyages of columbus a seasoned mariner and fearless explorer from genoa a major port in northern italy columbus had for years sailed the mediterranean and north atlantic studying ocean currents and wind patterns.
like nearly all navigators of the time columbus knew the earth was round.
but he drastically underestimated its size.
he believed that by sailing westward he could relatively quickly cross the atlantic and reach asia.
no one in europe knew that two giant continents lay 3 000 miles to the west.
the vikings to be sure had sailed from greenland to newfoundland around the year 1000 and established a settlement vinland at a site now known as lanse aux meadows.
but this outpost was abandoned after a few years and had been forgotten except in norse legends.
columbus sought financial support throughout europe for the planned voyage.
his brother bartholomew even visited henry vii of england to ask for assistance.
most of columbuss contemporaries however knew that he considerably underestimated the earths size which helps to explain why he had trouble gaining backers for his expedition.
eventually king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain agreed to become sponsors.
their marriage in 1469 had united the warring kingdoms of aragon and castile.
in 1492 they completed the reconquista the reconquest of spain from the moors african muslims who had occupied part of the iberian peninsula for centuries.
the capture of grenada the moors last stronghold accomplished spains territorial unification.
to ensure its religious unification ferdinand and isabella ordered all muslims and jews to convert to catholicism or leave the country.
along with the crown much of columbuss financing came from bankers and merchants of spain and the italian city states who desperately desired to circumvent the muslim stranglehold on eastern trade.
columbus set sail with royal letters of introduction to asian rulers authorizing him to negotiate trade agreements.
a detail from the cantino world map depicting the western coast of africa at the beginning of the atlantic slave trade.
created by an anonymous portuguese mapmaker in 1502 the map included europe africa and a small part of the western hemisphere described as the islands lately discovered in the parts of india it was smuggled out of portugal by alberto cantino a diplomat representing an italian city state.
1 a new world contact c o n ta c t columbus columbuss landfall an engraving from la lettera dellisole letter from the islands.
this 1493 pamphlet reproduced in the form of a poem columbuss first letter describing his voyage of the previous year.
under the watchful eye of king ferdinand of spain columbus and his men land on a caribbean island while local indians flee.
in the new world on october 12 1492 after only thirty three days of sailing from the canary islands where he had stopped to resupply his three ships columbus and his expedition arrived at the bahamas.
his exact landing site remains in dispute but it was probably san salvador a tiny spot of land known today as watling island.
soon afterward he encountered the far larger islands of hispaniola today the site of haiti and the dominican republic and cuba.
when one of his ships ran aground he abandoned it and left thirty eight men behind on hispaniola.
but he found room to bring ten inhabitants of the island back to spain for conversion to christianity.
in the following year 1493 european colonization of the new world began.
columbus returned with seventeen ships and more than 1 000 men to explore the area and establish a spanish outpost.
columbuss settlement on the island of hispaniola which he named la isabella failed but in 1502 another spanish explorer nicols de ovando arrived with 2 500 men and established a permanent base the first center of the spanish empire in america.
before he died in 1506 columbus made two more voyages to the new world in 1498 and 1502.
he went to his grave believing that he had discovered a westward route to asia.
the explorations of another italian amerigo vespucci along the coast of south america between 1499 and 1502 made plain that a continent entirely unknown to europeans had been encountered.
the new world would come to bear not columbuss name but one based on vespuccis america.
vespucci also realized that the native inhabitants were distinct peoples not residents of the east indies as columbus had believed although the name indians applied to them by columbus has endured to this day.
exploration and conquest the speed with which european exploration proceeded in the aftermath of columbuss first voyage is remarkable.
the technique of printing with movable type invented in the 1430s by the german craftsman johannes gutenberg had made possible the rapid spread of information in europe at least among the educated minority.
news of columbuss achievement traveled quickly.
one writer hailed him as a hero such as the ancients made gods of others were inspired to follow in his wake.
john cabot a genoese merchant who had settled in england reached newfoundland in 1497.
soon scores of fishing boats from france spain and england were active in the region.
pedro cabral claimed brazil for portugal in 1500.
but the spanish took the lead in exploration and conquest.
inspired by a search for wealth national glory and the desire to spread catholicism spanish conquistadores often accompanied by religious missionaries and carrying flags emblazoned with the sign of the cross radiated outward from hispaniola.
in 1513 vasco nez de balboa trekked across the isthmus of panama and became the first european to gaze upon the pacific ocean.
between 1519 and 1522 ferdinand magellan led the first expedition what happened when the peoples of the americas came in contact with europeans.
voyages of discovery vinland europe cabot 1497 newfoundland north america columbus 1492 rts 151 co pa cif ic oce a n 15 4 9 3 us 1 africa atl anti c o cean columbus 14 98 magell an ves 9 1 puc c i 150 ca 1 15 bra 02 l 15 00 bal bo a 9 b colum 2 bus lum co south america ma ge lla n 15 to sail around the world encountering pacific islands and peoples previously unknown to europe.
magellan was killed in the philippines but his fleet completed the journey correcting once and for all columbuss erroneous assessment of the earths size.
the first explorer to encounter a major american civilization was hernn corts who in 1519 arrived at tenochtitln the nerve center of 1 000 1 000 2 000 miles 2 000 kilometers christopher columbuss first atlantic crossing in 1492 was soon followed by voyages of discovery by english portuguese spanish and italian explorers.
1 a new world engravings from the florentine codex of the forces of corts marching on tenochtitln and assaulting the city with cannon fire.
the difference in military technology between the spanish and aztecs is evident.
indians who allied with corts had helped him build vessels and carry them in pieces over mountains to the city.
the codex a volume formed by stitching together manuscript pages was prepared under the supervision of a spanish missionary in sixteenth century mexico.
contact the aztec empire whose wealth and power rested on domination of numerous subordinate peoples nearby.
the aztecs were violent warriors who engaged in the ritual sacrifice of captives and others sometimes thousands at a time.
this practice thoroughly alienated their neighbors and reinforced the spanish view of americas native inhabitants as barbarians even though in europe at this time thousands of men and women were burned at the stake as witches or religious heretics and criminals were executed in public spectacles that attracted throngs of onlookers.
with only a few hundred european men the daring corts conquered the aztec city relying on superior military technology such as iron weapons and gunpowder as well as shrewdness in enlisting the aid of some of the aztecs subject peoples who supplied him with thousands of warriors.
his most powerful ally however was disease a smallpox epidemic that devastated aztec society.
a few years later francisco pizarro conquered the great inca kingdom centered in modern day peru.
pizarros tactics were typical of the conquistadores.
he captured the incan king demanded and received a ransom and then killed the king anyway.
soon treasure fleets carrying cargoes of gold and silver from the mines of mexico and peru were traversing the atlantic to enrich the spanish crown.
the demographic disaster the transatlantic flow of goods and people sometimes called the columbian exchange altered millions of years of evolution.
plants animals and cultures that had evolved independently on separate continents were now thrown together.
products introduced to europe from the americas included corn tomatoes potatoes peanuts tobacco and cotton while people from the old world brought wheat rice sugarcane horses cattle pigs and sheep to the new.
but europeans also carried germs previously unknown in the americas.
no one knows exactly how many people lived in the americas at the time of columbuss voyages current estimates range between 50 and 90 million.
the european population in 1492 including russia was around 90 million the african population was around 40 million and about 210 million lived in china and modern day india.
most inhabitants of the new world lived in central and south america.
in 1492 the indian population within what are now the borders of the united states was between 2 and 5 million.
whatever their numbers the indian populations suffered a catastrophic decline because of contact with europeans and their wars enslavement and especially diseases like smallpox influenza and measles.
never having encountered these diseases indians had not developed antibodies to fight them.
the result was devastating.
many west indian islands were all but depopulated.
on hispaniola the native population estimated at between 300 000 and 1 million in 1492 had nearly disappeared fifty years later.
the what happened when the peoples of the americas came in contact with europeans.
population of mexico would fall by more than 90 percent in the sixteenth century from perhaps 20 million to under 2 million.
as for the area that now forms the united states its native american population fell continuously.
it reached its lowest point around 1900 at only 250 000.
overall the death of perhaps 80 million people close to one fifth of humankind in the first century and a half after contact with europeans represents the greatest loss of life in human history.
it was disease as much as military prowess and more advanced technology that enabled europeans to conquer the americas.
t h e s pa n i s h e m p i r e by the middle of the sixteenth century spain had established an immense empire that reached from europe to the americas and asia.
the atlantic and pacific oceans once barriers separating different parts of the world now became highways for the exchange of goods and the movement of people.
spanish galleons carried gold and silver from mexico and peru eastward to spain and westward to manila in the philippines and on to china.
the spanish empire included the most populous parts of the new world and the regions richest in natural resources.
stretching from the andes mountains of south america through present day mexico and the caribbean and eventually into florida and the southwestern united states spains empire exceeded in size the roman empire of the ancient world.
its center in north america was mexico city a magnificent capital built on the ruins of the aztec city of tenochtitln that boasted churches hospitals monasteries government buildings and the new worlds first university.
unlike the english and french new world empires spanish america was essentially an urban civilization an empire of towns for centuries its great cities notably mexico city quito and lima far outshone any urban centers in north america and most of those in europe.
governing spanish america spains system of colonial government rivaled that of ancient rome.
alarmed by the destructiveness of the conquistadores the spanish crown replaced them with a more stable system of government headed by lawyers and bureaucrats.
at least in theory the government of spanish america reflected the absolutism of the newly unified nation at home.
authority originated with the king and flowed downward through the council of the indies the main body in spain for colonial administration and then to viceroys in mexico and peru and other local officials in america.
the catholic church also played a significant role in the administration of spanish colonies frequently exerting its authority on matters of faith morals and treatment of the indians.
successive kings kept elected assemblies out of spains new world empire.
royal officials were generally appointees from spain rather than another scene from the florentine codex depicts the smallpox epidemic that ravaged the aztec capital after the arrival of corts.
1 a new world an eighteenth century view of the marketplace in havana cuba a major center of the spanish empire in america.
the spanish empire criollos as persons born in the colonies of european ancestry were called.
the imperial state was a real and continuous presence in spanish america.
but as its power declined in europe beginning in the seventeenth century the local elite came to enjoy more and more effective authority over colonial affairs.
given the vastness of the empire local municipal councils universities merchant organizations and craft guilds enjoyed considerable independence.
colonists in spanish america despite the decline in the native population spanish america remained populous enough that with the exception of the west indies and a few cities large scale importations of african slaves were unnecessary.
instead the spanish forced tens of thousands of indians to work in gold and silver mines which supplied the empires wealth and on large scale farms or haciendas controlled by spanish landlords.
in spanish america unlike other new world empires indians performed most of the labor and although the spanish introduced livestock wheat and sugar the main agricultural crops were the same ones grown before colonization corn beans and squash.
the maxim of the conqueror must be to settle said one spanish official.
the government barred non spaniards from emigrating to its american domains as well as non christian spaniards including jews and moors.
but the opportunity for social advancement drew numerous colonists from spain 225 000 in the sixteenth century and a total of 750 000 in the three centuries of spains colonial rule.
eventually a significant number came in families but at first the large majority were young single men many of them laborers craftsmen and soldiers.
many also came as government officials priests professionals and minor aristocrats what were the chief features of the spanish empire in america.
all ready to direct the manual work of indians since living without having to labor was a sign of noble status.
the most successful of these colonists enjoyed lives of luxury similar to those of the upper classes at home.
colonists and indians although persons of european birth called peninsulares stood atop the social hierarchy they never constituted more than a tiny proportion of the population of spanish america.
unlike in the later british empire indian inhabitants always outnumbered european colonists and their descendants in spanish america and large areas remained effectively under indian control for many years.
like the later french empire and unlike the english spanish authorities granted indians certain rights within colonial society and looked forward to their eventual assimilation.
indeed the success of the spanish empire depended on the nature of the native societies on which it could build.
in florida the amazon and caribbean islands like jamaica which lacked major indian cities and large native populations spanish rule remained tenuous.
the spanish crown ordered wives of colonists to join them in america and demanded that single men marry.
but with the population of spanish women remaining low the intermixing of the colonial and indian peoples soon began.
as early as 1514 the spanish government formally approved of such marriages partly as a way of bringing christianity to the native population.
by 1600 mestizos persons of mixed origin made up a large part of the urban population of spanish america.
in the century that followed mestizos repopulated the valley of mexico where disease had decimated the original inhabitants.
over time spanish america evolved into a hybrid culture part spanish part indian and in some areas part african but with a single official faith language and governmental system.
in an illustration from the huexotzinco codex 1531 depicts mexicans providing products and services as taxes to the spanish conquerors.
the banner of the virgin mary and baby jesus reflects the early spread of christianity.
the people of huexotzinco a town near mexico city had aided hernn corts in his conquest of the aztec empire.
the codex was part of a successful lawsuit endorsed by corts in which the indians challenged excessive taxation by colonial officials.
1 a new world the spanish empire four racial groups taken from a series of paintings by the eighteenth century mexican artist andrs de islas illustrates the racial mixing that took place in the spanish empire and some of the new vocabulary invented to describe it.
top left the offspring of a spaniard and indian is a mestizo.
right a spaniard and a mestiza produce a castizo.
bottom left the child of an indian and a mestiza is a coyote.
right and the child of an indian man and african woman is a chino.
1531 a poor indian juan diego reported seeing a vision of the virgin mary looking very much like a dark skinned indian near a mexican village.
miracles began to be reported and a shrine was built in her honor.
the virgin of guadalupe would come to be revered by millions as a symbol of the mixing of indian and spanish cultures and later of the modern nation of mexico.
justifications for conquest what allowed one nation the seventeenth century dutch legal thinker hugo grotius wondered to claim possession of lands that belonged to someone else.
this question rarely occurred to most of the europeans who crossed the atlantic in the wake of columbuss voyage or to rulers in the old world.
they had immense confidence in the superiority of their what were the chief features of the spanish empire in america.
own cultures to those they encountered in america.
they expected these societies to abandon their own beliefs and traditions and embrace those of the newcomers.
failure to do so reinforced the conviction that these people were uncivilized heathens non christians.
europeans brought with them not only a long history of using violence to subdue their internal and external foes but also missionary zeal to spread the benefits of their own civilization to others while reaping the rewards of empire.
spain was no exception.
the establishment of its empire in america took place in the wake of spains own territorial unification the rise of a powerful royal government and the enforcement of religious orthodoxy by the expulsion of muslims and jews in 1492.
to further legitimize spains claim to rule the new world a year after columbuss first voyage pope alexander vi divided the non christian world between spain and portugal.
the line was subsequently adjusted to give portugal control of brazil with the remainder of the western hemisphere falling under spanish authority.
spreading the fa i t h not surprisingly the pope justified this pronouncement by requiring spain and portugal to spread catholicism among the native inhabitants of the americas.
the missionary element of colonization already familiar because of the long holy war against islam within spain itself was powerfully reinforced in the sixteenth century when the protestant reformation divided the catholic church.
in 1517 martin luther a german priest posted his ninety five theses which accused the church of worldliness and corruption.
luther wanted to cleanse the church of abuses such as the sale of indulgences official dispensations forgiving sins.
he insisted that all believers should read the bible for themselves rather than relying on priests to interpret it for them.
his call for reform led to the rise of new protestant churches independent of rome and plunged europe into more than a century of religious and political strife.
spain the most powerful bastion of orthodox catholicism redoubled its efforts to convert the indians to the true faith national glory and religious mission went hand in hand.
convinced of the superiority of catholicism to all other religions spain insisted that the primary goal of colonization was to save the indians from heathenism and prevent them from falling under the sway of protestantism.
the aim was neither to exterminate nor to remove the indians but to transform them into obedient christian subjects of the crown.
indeed lacking the later concept of race as an unchanging inborn set of qualities and abilities many spanish writers insisted that indians could in time be brought up to the level of european civilization.
of course this meant not only the destruction of existing indian political structures but also a transformation of their economic and spiritual lives.
piety and profit to the spanish colonizers the large native populations of the americas were not only souls to be saved but also a labor force to be organized to extract gold and silver that would enrich the mother country.
the tension a banner carried by the forces of corts conqueror of the aztec kingdom features an image of the virgin mary illustrating how the desire to spread the roman catholic faith provided a justification for conquest.
1 a new world the spanish empire a benign view of spanish colonization.
this engraving from a 1621 book depicts spanish missionaries bringing christianity to new world natives while priests do construction work.
a fortified colonial town is visible in the background.
between these two outlooks would mark spanish rule in america for three centuries.
on the one hand spanish rulers proclaimed the goal of bringing true freedom to the indians by instructing them in christianity.
even enslaving the natives was justified as a means of liberating them from their own backwardness and savagery and enabling them to become part of christian civilization.
religious orders established missions throughout the empire and over time millions of indians were converted to catholicism.
on the other hand spanish rule especially in its initial period witnessed a disastrous fall in indian population not only because of epidemics but also because of the brutal conditions of labor to which indians were subjected.
the conquistadores and subsequent governors who required conquered peoples to acknowledge the catholic church and provide gold and silver saw no contradiction between serving god and enriching themselves.
others however did.
las casass complaint as early as 1537 pope paul iii who hoped to see indians become devout subjects of catholic monarchs outlawed their enslavement an edict never extended to apply to africans.
his decree declared indians to be truly men who must not be treated as dumb beasts fifteen years later the dominican priest bartolom de las casas published an account of the decimation of the indian population with the compelling title a very brief account of the destruction of the indies.
las casass father had sailed on columbuss second voyage and he himself had participated in the conquest of cuba.
but in 1514 las casas freed his own indian slaves and began to preach against the injustices of spanish rule.
las casass writings denounced spain for causing the death of millions of innocent people.
it has been spains practice he reported in every land they have discovered to stage a massacre in order to make the inhabitants tremble with fear he narrated in shocking detail the strange cruelties carried out by the christians including the burning alive of men what were the chief features of the spanish empire in america.
women and children and the imposition of forced labor.
the indians he wrote had been totally deprived of their freedom and were put in the harshest fiercest most terrible servitude and captivity long before the idea was common las casas insisted that indians were rational beings not barbarians and that spain had no grounds on which to deprive them of their lands and liberty.
the entire human race is one he proclaimed and while he continued to believe that spain had a right to rule in america largely on religious grounds he called for indians to enjoy all guarantees of liberty and justice from the moment they became subjects of spain.
nothing is certainly more precious in human affairs nothing more esteemed he wrote than freedom yet las casas also suggested that importing slaves from africa would help to protect the indians from exploitation.
reforming the empire like other spaniards las casas believed that the main justification for empire was converting the indians to christianity.
spanish cruelty he feared undermined this effort.
largely because of las casass efforts spain in 1542 promulgated the new laws commanding that indians no longer be enslaved.
not everyone welcomed the change.
gonzalo pizarro brother of the conqueror of peru organized an unsuccessful rebellion in protest.
in 1550 spain abolished the encomienda system under which the first settlers had been granted authority over conquered indian lands with the right to extract forced labor from the native inhabitants.
in its place the government established the repartimiento system whereby residents of indian villages remained legally free and entitled to wages but were still required to perform a fixed amount of labor each year.
the indians were not slaves they had access to land were paid wages and could not be bought and sold.
but since the requirement that they work for the spanish remained the essence of the system it still allowed for many abuses by spanish landlords and by priests who required indians to toil on mission lands as part of the conversion process.
indeed a long struggle ensued among settlers missionaries and colonial authorities for control of indian labor.
each party proclaimed itself a humane overlord and denounced the others for exploiting the native population.
by the end of the sixteenth century work in the spanish empire consisted largely of forced wage labor by native inhabitants and slave labor by africans on the west indian islands and a few parts of the mainland.
like all empires spains always remained highly exploitative.
over time the initial brutal treatment of indians improved somewhat.
but las casass writings translated almost immediately into several european languages contributed to the spread of the black legend the image of spain as a uniquely brutal and exploitative colonizer.
this would provide a potent justification for other european powers to challenge spains predominance in the new world.
spanish conquistadores murdering indians at cuzco in modern day peru.
the dutch born engraver theodor de bry and his sons illustrated ten volumes about new world exploration published between 1590 and 1618.
a protestant de bry created vivid images that helped to spread the black legend of spain as a uniquely cruel colonizer.
1 a new world a 1791 view of mission san carlos in what is now california depicts the indian community and a corral in the background while missionaries and spanish explorers greet each other in the foreground.
the spanish empire exploring north america while the spanish empire centered on mexico peru and the west indies the hope of finding a new kingdom of gold soon led spanish explorers into territory that now forms part of the united states.
juan ponce de len who had conquered puerto rico entered florida in 1513 in search of slaves wealth and a fabled fountain of youth only to be repelled by local indians.
in 1528 another expedition seeking plunder in florida embarked from spain but after a series of storms only a handful of men reached the gulf coast.
for seven years they traversed the southwest until a few survivors arrived in mexico in 1536.
one lvar nez cabeza de vaca wrote an account of his adventures including tales told by native inhabitants possibly to persuade the newcomers to move on of the seven golden cities of cibola somewhere over the horizon.
in the late 1530s and 1540s juan rodriguez cabrillo explored the pacific coast as far north as present day oregon and expeditions led by hernando de soto cabeza de vaca francisco vsquez de coronado and others marched through the gulf region and the southwest fruitlessly searching for another mexico or peru.
coronado explored much of the interior of the continent reaching as far north as the great plains and became the first european to encounter the immense herds of buffalo that roamed the west.
these expeditions really mobile communities with hundreds of adventurers priests potential settlers slaves and livestock spread disease and devastation among indian communities.
de sotos was particularly brutal.
his men tortured raped and enslaved countless indians and transmitted deadly diseases.
when europeans in the seventeenth century returned to colonize the area traversed by de sotos party little remained of the societies he had encountered.
where large towns had existed explorers found only herds of grazing bison.
what were the chief features of the spanish empire in america.
spanish florida nonetheless these explorations established spains claim to a large part of what is now the american south and southwest.
the first region to be colonized within the present day united states was florida.
spain hoped to establish a military base there to combat pirates who threatened the treasure fleet that each year sailed from havana for europe loaded with gold and silver from mexico and peru.
spain also wanted to forestall french incursions in the area.
in 1565 philip ii of spain authorized the nobleman pedro menndez de avils to lead a colonizing expedition to florida.
menndez destroyed a small outpost at fort caroline which a group of huguenots french protestants had established in 1562 near present day jacksonville.
menndez and his men massacred the 500 colonists and went on to establish spanish forts on st simons island georgia and at st augustine florida.
the latter remains the oldest site in the united states continuously inhabited by european settlers and their descendants.
spanish expeditions soon established forts from present day miami into south carolina and spanish religious missionaries set up outposts in florida and on the sea islands hoping to convert the local indians to christianity.
most of the forts fell into disuse and many of the missions were destroyed by local guale indians in an uprising that began in 1597.
the indians explained their revolt by noting that the missionaries had sought to eliminate our dances banquets feasts celebrations and wars.
they persecute our old people by calling them witches the missions were soon rebuilt only to be devastated again a century later this time by english and indian forces from south carolina.
in general florida failed to attract settlers remaining an isolated military settlement in effect a fortified outpost of cuba.
as late as 1763 spanish florida had only 4 000 inhabitants of european descent.
spain in the table 1 1 estimated regional populations the americas ca.
1500 north america mexico 3 800 000 17 200 000 central america 5 625 000 hispaniola 1 000 000 the caribbean 3 000 000 the andes south america total 15 700 000 8 620 000 54 945 000 southwest spain took even longer to begin the colonization of the american southwest.
although de soto and others made incursions into the area in the sixteenth century their explorations were widely considered failures since they had discovered neither gold nor advanced civilizations whose populations could be put to work for the spanish empire.
spain then neglected the area for another half century.
it was not until 1598 that juan de oate led a group of 400 soldiers colonists and missionaries north from mexico to establish a permanent settlement.
while searching for fabled deposits of precious metals oates nephew and fourteen soldiers were killed by inhabitants of acoma the sky city located on a high bluff in present day new mexico.
oate decided to teach the local indians a lesson.
after a two day siege his forces scaled the seemingly impregnable heights and destroyed acoma killing more than 800 of its 1 500 or so inhabitants including 300 women.
of the 600 indians captured the women and children were consigned to servitude in spanish families while adult men were punished by the cutting off of one foot.
not until the 1640s was acoma which had been table 1 2 estimated regional populations the world ca.
1500 india 110 000 000 china 103 000 000 other asia 55 400 000 western europe 57 200 000 the americas 54 000 000 russia and eastern europe 34 000 000 sub saharan africa 38 300 000 japan 15 400 000 world total 467 300 000 c h.
1 a new world the spanish empire spanish conquests and explorations in the new 1500 1600 cabrillo by around 1600 new spain had become a vast empire stretching from the modernday american southwest through mexico central america and into the former inca kingdom in south america.
this map shows early spanish exploration in the present day united states.
pueblo revolt oate 1680 acoma santa fe de roanoke to so de vaca fort caroline st augustine o gulf of mexico t cor a t l an t i c ocean e nc po d corona cabe za world de s le n h i s pa n i ola mexico city caribbean sea pac i f i c o c e an pizarr o cabrillo oate coronado de soto cabeza de vaca ponce de len corts pizarro extent of incan peoples extent of aztec peoples peru 1 000 miles 500 1 000 kilometers inhabited since the thirteenth century rebuilt.
oates message was plain any indians who resisted spanish authority would be crushed.
but his method of rule coupled with his failure to locate gold alarmed authorities in mexico city.
in 1606 oate was ordered home and punished for his treatment of new mexicos indians.
in 1610 spain established the capital of new mexico at santa fe the first permanent european settlement in the southwest.
what were the chief features of the spanish empire in america.
the pueblo r e v o lt in 1680 new mexicos small and vulnerable colonist population numbered less than 3 000.
most were mestizos persons of mixed spanish and indian origin since few european settlers came to the region.
relations between the pueblo indians and colonial authorities had deteriorated throughout the seventeenth century as governors settlers and missionaries sought to exploit the labor of an indian population that declined from about 60 000 in 1600 to some 17 000 eighty years later.
franciscan friars worked relentlessly to convert indians to catholicism often using intimidation and violence.
their spiritual dedication and personal courage impressed many indians however as did the european goods and technologies they introduced.
some natives welcomed them as a counterbalance to the depredations of soldiers and settlers and accepted baptism even as they continued to practice their old religion adding jesus mary and the catholic saints to their already rich spiritual pantheon.
but as the inquisition the persecution of non catholics became more and more intense in spain so did the friars efforts to stamp out traditional religious ceremonies in new mexico.
by burning indian idols masks and other sacred objects the missionaries alienated far more indians than they converted.
a prolonged drought that began around 1660 and the authorities inability to protect the villages and missions from attacks by marauding navajo and apache indians added to local discontent.
the pueblo peoples had long been divided among themselves.
the spanish assumed that the indians could never unite against the colonizers.
in august 1680 they were proven wrong.
little is known about the life of pop who became the main organizer of an uprising that aimed to drive the spanish from the colony and restore the indians traditional autonomy.
a religious leader born around 1630 in san juan pueblo in present day new mexico pop first appears in the historical record in 1675 when he was one of forty seven pueblo indians arrested for sorcery that is practicing their traditional religion.
four of the prisoners were hanged and the rest including pop were brought to santa fe to be publicly whipped.
after this humiliation pop returned home and began holding secret meetings in pueblo communities.
under pops leadership new mexicos indians joined in a coordinated uprising.
ironically because the pueblos spoke six different languages spanish became the revolts lingua franca a common means of communication among persons of different linguistic backgrounds.
some 2 000 warriors destroyed isolated farms and missions killing 400 colonists including 21 franciscan missionaries.
they then surrounded santa fe.
the spanish resisted fiercely but eventually had no choice but to abandon the town.
most of the spanish survivors accompanied by several hundred christian indians made their way south out of new mexico.
within a few weeks a century of colonization acoma the sky city as it appeared in 1904.
recent h1 voices of freedom from bartolom de las casas history of the indies 1528 las casas was the dominican priest who condemned the treatment of indians in the spanish empire.
his widely disseminated history of the indies helped to establish the black legend of spanish cruelty.
food and to die.
when they fell ill which was very frequently because they are a delicate people unaccustomed to such work the spaniards did not believe them and pitilessly called them lazy dogs and kicked and beat them and when illness was apparent they sent them home as useless.
they would go then falling into the first stream and dying there in desperation others would hold on the indians of hispaniola were totally deprived of their freedom and were put in the harshest fiercest most horrible servitude and captivity which no one who has not seen it can understand.
even beasts enjoy more freedom when they are allowed to graze in the fields.
but our spaniards gave no such opportunity to indians and truly considered them perpetual slaves since the indians had not the free will to dispose of their persons but instead were disposed of according to spanish greed and cruelty not as men in captivity but as beasts tied to a rope to prevent free movement.
when they were allowed to go home they often found it deserted and had no other recourse than to go out into the woods to find longer but very few ever made it home.
i sometimes came upon dead bodies on my way and upon others who were gasping and moaning in their death agony repeating hungry hungry and this was the freedom the good treatment and the christianity the indians received.
about eight years passed under spanish rule and this disorder had time to grow no one gave it a thought and the multitude of people who originally lived on the island.
was consumed at such a rate that in these eight years 90 per cent had perished.
from here this sweeping plague went to san juan jamaica cuba and the continent spreading destruction over the whole hemisphere.
f r o m d e c l a r at i o n of josephe december 19 1681 josephe was a spanish speaking indian questioned by a royal attorney in mexico city investigating the pueblo revolt.
the revolt of the indian population in 1680 temporarily drove spanish settlers from present day new mexico.
asked what causes or motives the said indian rebels had for renouncing the law of god and obedience to his majesty and for committing so many of crimes he answered the causes they have were alleged ill treatment and injuries received from spanish authorities because they beat them took away what they had and made them work without pay.
thus he replies.
asked if he has learned if it has come to his notice during the time that he has been here the reason why the apostates burned the images churches and the temples and images crosses and rosaries burned and their function being over they all went to bathe in the rivers saying that they thereby washed away the water of baptism.
for their churches they placed on the four sides and in the center of the plaza some small circular enclosures of stone where they went to offer flour feathers and the seed of maguey a local plant maize and tobacco and performed other superstitious rites giving the children to understand that they must all do this in the future.
the captains and the chiefs ordered that the names of jesus and mary should nowhere be uttered.
he has seen many houses of idolatry which they have built dancing the dance of the cachina part of a traditional indian religious ceremony which this declarant has also danced.
thus he replies to the question.
things pertaining to divine worship making a mockery and a trophy of them killing the priests and doing the other things they did he said that he knows and had heard it generally stated that while they were besieging the villa the rebellious traitors burned the church and shouted in loud voices now questions 1.
why does las casas after describing the ill treatment of indians write and this was the freedom the good treatment and the christianity the indians received.
the god of the spaniards who was their father is dead and santa maria who was their mother and 2.
what role did religion play in the pueblo revolt.
the saints who were pieces of rotten wood saying that only their own god lived.
thus they ordered all 3.
what ideas of freedom are apparent in the two documents.
1 a new world the french and dutch empires in the area had been destroyed.
from their own point of view the pueblo indians had triumphantly reestablished the freedom lost through spanish conquest.
the pueblo revolt was the most complete victory for native americans over europeans and the only wholesale expulsion of settlers in the history of north america.
according to a royal attorney who interviewed the spanish survivors in mexico city the revolt arose from the many oppressions the indians had suffered.
the victorious pueblos turned with a vengeance on all symbols of european culture uprooting fruit trees destroying cattle burning churches and images of christ and the virgin mary and wading into rivers to wash away their catholic baptisms.
they rebuilt their places of worship called kivas and resumed sacred dances the friars had banned.
the god of the spaniards they shouted is dead cooperation among the pueblo peoples however soon evaporated.
by the end of the 1680s warfare had broken out among several villages even as apache and navajo raids continued.
pop died around 1690.
in 1692 the spanish launched an invasion that reconquered new mexico.
some communities welcomed them back as a source of military protection.
but spain had learned a lesson.
in the eighteenth century colonial authorities adopted a more tolerant attitude toward traditional religious practices and made fewer demands on indian labor.
the french and dutch empires st anthony and the infant jesus painted on a tanned buffalo hide by a franciscan priest in new mexico in the early eighteenth century.
this was not long after the spanish reconquered the area from which they had been driven by the pueblo revolt.
if the black legend inspired a sense of superiority among spains european rivals the precious metals that poured from the new world into the spanish treasury aroused the desire to try to match spains success.
the establishment of spains american empire transformed the balance of power in the world economy.
the atlantic replaced the overland route to asia as the major axis of global trade.
during the seventeenth century the french dutch and english established colonies in north america.
englands mainland colonies to be discussed in the next chapter consisted of agricultural settlements with growing populations whose hunger for land produced incessant conflict with native peoples.
new france and new netherland were primarily commercial ventures that never attracted large numbers of colonists.
more dependent on indians as trading partners and military allies these french and dutch settlements allowed native americans greater freedom than the english.
french colonization the first of spains major european rivals to embark on new world explorations was france.
the french initially aimed to find gold and to locate a northwest passage a sea route connecting the atlantic to the pacific.
but the hopes of the early french explorers were soon disappointed and north america came to seem little more than a barrier to be crossed not a promising site for settlement or exploitation.
for most of the sixteenth century only explorers fishermen pirates preying on spanish shipping farther south and as time went on fur traders visited the eastern coast of north what were the chief features of the french and dutch empires in north america.
french efforts to establish settlements in newfoundland and nova scotia failed beset by native resistance and inadequate planning and financing.
not until the seventeenth century would france as well as england and the netherlands establish permanent settlements in north america.
the explorer samuel de champlain sponsored by a french fur trading company founded quebec in 1608.
in 1673 the jesuit priest jacques marquette and the fur trader louis joliet located the mississippi river and by 1681 ren robert cavelier sieur de la salle had descended to the gulf of mexico claiming the entire mississippi river valley for france.
new france eventually formed a giant arc along the st lawrence mississippi and ohio rivers.
until 1663 when the population of european origin was fewer than 3 000 french canada was ruled by the company of new france through a governor general appointed in paris.
there was no representative assembly.
in that year the french government established a new company.
it granted land along the st lawrence river in seigneuries to well connected nobles and army officers who would transport colonists to take their place in a feudal society.
but most of the engags or indentured servants returned home after their contracts expired.
more than 80 percent of the migrants were men.
apart from nuns fewer than 1 800 women compared with more than 12 000 men emigrated to french canada in the seventeenth century.
and during the entire colonial period only about 250 complete families did so.
by 1700 the number of white inhabitants of new france had risen to only 19 000.
with a far larger population than england france sent many fewer emigrants to the western hemisphere.
the government at home feared that significant emigration would undermine frances role as a european great power and might compromise its effort to establish trade and good relations with the indians.
unfavorable reports about america circulated widely in france.
canada was widely depicted as an icebox a land of savage indians a dumping ground for criminals.
most french who left their homes during these years preferred to settle in the netherlands spain or the west indies.
the revocation in 1685 of the edict of nantes which had extended religious toleration to french protestants led well over 100 000 huguenots to flee their country.
but they were not welcome in new france which the crown desired to remain an outpost of catholicism.
new france and the indians with its small white population and emphasis on the fur trade rather than agricultural settlement the viability of new france depended on friendly relations with local indians.
the french prided themselves on adopting a more humane policy than their imperial rivals.
only our nation declared one french writer knows the secret of winning the indians affection lacking the voracious appetite for land of the english colonies and relying on indians to supply furs to trading posts the french worked out a complex series of military commercial and diplomatic connections the most enduring alliances between indians and settlers in colonial north america.
they neither appropriated substantial amounts a native american in present day nova scotia carved this image of a european ship on a rock.
long before explorers and colonists descended on the area its residents were familiar with europeans.
one chief membertou acquired a french ship and traded with fishermen out at sea.
1 a new world the french and dutch empires the new world new france new netherland ca.
1650 and hudson bay p ke su erior st hu ro n la ke e l o rie ntari o albany manhattan new york harbor iver hi or qubec l l lake michigan la aw ren ce ri ver gulf of st lawrence o mississi pp i river atlantic oc e a n gulf of mexico new france and new netherland.
new france new netherland 400 miles 400 kilometers of indian land like the english nor conquered native inhabitants militarily and set them to forced labor like the spanish.
samuel de champlain the intrepid explorer who dominated the early history of new france insisted on religious toleration for all christians and denied that native americans were intellectually or culturally inferior to europeans two positions that were unusual for his time.
although he occasionally engaged in wars with local indians he dreamed of creating a colony based on mutual respect between diverse peoples.
the jesuits a missionary religious order did seek with some success to convert indians to catholicism.
but unlike spanish missionaries in early new mexico they visions of freedom france bringing the faith to the indians of new france.
european nations justified colonization in part with the argument that they were bringing christianity without which true freedom was impossible to native americans.
in this painting from the 1670s attributed to a franciscan missionary an indian kneels before a female representation of france.
both hold a painting of the trinity.
the figure of france points skyward where god hands the earth to christ.
questions 1.
in what ways does the painting suggest that indians freely accepted catholicism and french rule.
how do the houses ship and dress of the indian reinforce the paintings message.
1 a new world this engraving which appears in samuel de champlains 1613 account of his voyages is the only likeness of the explorer from his own time.
champlain wearing european armor and brandishing an arquebus an advanced weapon of the period stands at the center of this pitched battle between his indian allies and hostile iroquois.
the french and dutch empires allowed christian indians to retain a high degree of independence and much of their traditional social structure and they did not seek to suppress all traditional religious practices.
like other colonists throughout north america however the french brought striking changes in indian life.
contact with europeans was inevitably followed by the spread of disease.
participation in the fur trade drew natives into the burgeoning atlantic economy introducing new goods and transforming hunting from a search for food into a quest for marketable commodities.
indians were soon swept into the rivalries among european empires and europeans into conflicts among indians.
as early as 1615 the huron of present day southern ontario and upper new york state forged a trading alliance with the french and many converted to catholicism.
in the 1640s however after being severely weakened by a smallpox epidemic the tribe was virtually destroyed in a series of attacks by iroquois armed by the dutch.
as in the spanish empire new france witnessed considerable cultural exchange and intermixing between colonial and native populations.
on the middle ground of the upper great lakes region in french america indians and whites encountered each other for many years on a basis of relative equality.
and mtis or children of marriages between indian women and french traders and officials became guides traders and interpreters.
like the spanish the french seemed willing to accept indians as part of colonial society.
they encouraged indians to adopt the european division of labor between men and women and to speak french.
indians who converted to catholicism were promised full citizenship.
in fact however it was far rarer for natives to adopt french ways than for french settlers to become attracted to the free life of the indians.
it happens more commonly one official complained that a frenchman becomes savage than a savage becomes a frenchman what were the chief features of the french and dutch empires in north america.
the dutch empire in 1609 henry hudson an englishman employed by the dutch east india company sailed into new york harbor searching for a northwest passage to asia.
hudson and his crew became the first europeans to sail up the river that now bears his name.
hudson did not find a route to asia but he did encounter abundant fur bearing animals and native americans more than willing to trade furs for european goods.
he claimed the area for the netherlands and his voyage planted the seeds for what would eventually become a great metropolis new york city.
by 1614 dutch traders had established an outpost at fort orange near present day albany.
ten years later the dutch west india company which had been awarded a monopoly of dutch trade with america settled colonists on manhattan island.
these ventures formed one small part in the rise of the dutch overseas empire.
in the early seventeenth century the netherlands dominated international commerce and amsterdam was europes foremost shipping and banking center.
the small nation had entered a golden age of rapidly accumulating wealth and stunning achievements in painting philosophy and the sciences.
the dutch invented the joint stock company a way of pooling financial resources and sharing the risk of maritime voyages which proved central to the development of modern capitalism.
with a population of only 2 million the netherlands established a far flung empire that reached from indonesia to south africa and the caribbean and temporarily wrested control of brazil from portugal.
dutch freedom the dutch prided themselves on their devotion to liberty.
indeed in the early seventeenth century they enjoyed two freedoms not recognized elsewhere in europe freedom of the press and broad religious toleration.
even though there was an established church the dutch reformed individuals could hold whatever religious beliefs they wished.
amsterdam had become a haven for persecuted protestants from all over europe including french huguenots german calvinists and those like the pilgrims who desired to separate from the church of england.
jews especially those fleeing from spain also found refuge there.
other emigrants came to the netherlands in the hope of sharing in the countrys prosperity.
during the seventeenth century the nation attracted about half a million migrants from elsewhere in europe.
many of these newcomers helped to populate the dutch overseas empire.
freedom in new netherland despite the dutch reputation for cherishing freedom new netherland was hardly governed democratically.
new amsterdam the main population center was essentially a fortified military outpost controlled by appointees of the west india company.
although the governor called on prominent citizens for advice from time to time neither an elected assembly nor a town council the basic unit of government at home was established.
1 a new world a view of new amsterdam from 1651 illustrates both the tiny size of the outpost but also its status as a center of international trade between europeans and native americans.
the french and dutch empires in other ways however the colonists enjoyed more liberty especially in religious matters than their counterparts elsewhere in north america.
even their slaves possessed rights.
the dutch dominated the atlantic slave trade in the early seventeenth century and they introduced slaves into new netherland as a matter of course.
by 1650 the colonys 500 slaves outnumbered those in the chesapeake.
some enjoyed half freedom they were required to pay an annual fee to the company and work for it when called upon but they were given land to support their families.
settlers employed slaves on family farms or for household or craft labor not on large plantations as in the west indies.
women in the dutch settlement enjoyed far more independence than in other colonies.
according to dutch law married women retained their separate legal identity.
they could go to court borrow money and own property.
men were used to sharing property with their wives.
their wills generally left their possessions to their widows and daughters as well as sons.
margaret hardenbroeck the widow of a new amsterdam merchant expanded her husbands business and became one of the towns richest residents after his death in 1661.
most striking was the religious toleration that attracted to new netherland a remarkably diverse population.
as early as the 1630s at least eighteen languages were said to be spoken in new amsterdam whose residents included not only dutch settlers but also africans belgians english french germans irish and scandinavians.
meanwhile puritan emigrants from new england established towns on long island.
religious toleration extended not only to protestants but also to catholics and grudgingly to jews.
twenty three jews arrived in new amsterdam in 1654 from brazil and the caribbean.
referring to them as members of a deceitful race governor peter stuyvesant ordered the newcomers to leave.
but the compa what were the chief features of the french and dutch empires in north america.
ny overruled him noting that jews at home had invested a large amount of capital in its shares.
settling new netherland in an attempt to attract settlers to north america the dutch west india company promised colonists not only religious toleration but also cheap livestock and free land after six years of labor.
eventually it even surrendered its monopoly of the fur trade opening this profitable commerce to all comers.
many settlers stuyvesant complained had been lured by an imaginary liberty and did not display much respect for the companys authority.
in 1629 the company adopted a plan of freedoms and exemptions offering large estates to patroons shareholders who agreed to transport tenants for agricultural labor.
the patroon was required to purchase title to the land from indians but otherwise his freedoms were like those of a medieval lord including the right to 10 percent of his tenants annual income and complete authority over law enforcement within his domain.
only one patroonship became a going concern that of kiliaen van rensselaer who acquired some 700 000 acres in the hudson valley.
his familys autocratic rule over the tenants as well as its efforts to extend its domain to include lands settled by new englanders who claimed that they owned their farms would inspire sporadic uprisings into the mid nineteenth century.
during the seventeenth century the netherlands sent 1 million people overseas many of them recent immigrants who were not in fact dutch to populate and govern their far flung colonies.
very few however made north america their destination.
by the mid 1660s the european population of new netherland numbered only 9 000.
new netherland remained a tiny backwater in the dutch empire.
so did an even smaller outpost near present day wilmington delaware established in 1638 by a group of dutch merchants.
to circumvent the west india companys trade monopoly they claimed to be operating under the swedish flag and called their settlement new sweden.
only 300 settlers were living there when new netherland seized the colony in 1655.
new netherland and the indians the dutch came to north america to trade not to conquer.
they were less interested in settling the land than in exacting profits from it.
mindful of the black legend of spanish cruelty the dutch determined to treat the native inhabitants more humanely than the spanish.
having won their own independence from spain after the longest and bloodiest war of sixteenth century europe many dutch identified with american indians as fellow victims of spanish oppression.
they justified their imperial ambitions in part as an effort to liberate the new world from the tyranny of spain and the catholic church.
initially however they aimed less to convert the indian population than to employ it in the profitable fur trade.
from the beginning dutch authorities recognized indian sovereignty over the land and forbade settlement in any area until it had been purchased.
but they also required tribes to make payments to colonial authorities.
the seal of new netherland adopted by the dutch west india company in 1630 suggests the centrality of the fur trade to the colonys prospects.
surrounding the beaver is wampum a string of beads used by indians in religious rituals and as currency.
1 a new world a map of the western hemisphere published in 1592 in antwerp then ruled by spain and now part of belgium.
it shows north america divided between new france and new spain before the coming of the english.
the french and dutch empires near the coast where most newcomers settled new netherland was hardly free of conflict with the indians.
the expansionist ambitions of governor william kieft who in the 1640s began seizing fertile farmland from the nearby algonquian indians sparked a three year war that resulted in the death of 1 000 indians and more than 200 colonists.
with the powerful iroquois confederacy of the upper hudson valley however the dutch established friendly commercial and diplomatic relations.
thus before the planting of english colonies in north america other european nations had established various kinds of settlements in the new world.
despite their differences the spanish french and dutch empires shared certain features.
all brought christianity new forms of technology and learning new legal systems and family relations and new forms of economic enterprise and wealth creation.
they also brought savage warfare and widespread disease.
these empires were aware of one anothers existence.
they studied and borrowed from one another each lauding itself as superior to the others.
from the outset dreams of freedom for indians for settlers for the entire world through the spread of christianity inspired and justified colonization.
it would be no different when at the beginning of the seventeenth century england entered the struggle for empire in north america.
suggested reading suggested reading books bailyn bernard.
atlantic history concept and contours 2005.
argues for writing the history of the entire atlantic region rather than any particular nation or empire.
bender thomas.
a nation among nations americas place in world history 2006.
attempts to place american history in an international context the opening chapters offer a global portrait of the age of exploration and conquest.
calloway colin g one vast winter count the american west before lewis and clark 2003.
a comprehensive portrait of indian life in one key region of north america.
crosby alfred j.
the columbian exchange biological and cultural consequences of 1492 1972.
examines the flow of goods and diseases across the atlantic and their consequences.
elliott j h empires of the atlantic world britain and spain in america 1492 1830 2006.
a fascinating comparison of the development of two new world empires.
fernndez armesto felipe.
pathfinders a global history of exploration 2006.
a history of explorations throughout the centuries including those of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
fischer david h champlains dream 2008.
a lively account of samuel de champlains effort to built a french colony in north america based on toleration and mutual respect between settlers and native americans.
gibson charles.
spain in america 1966.
surveys the history of spains american empire.
gutirrez ramn a.
when jesus came the corn mothers went away marriage sexuality and power in new mexico 1500 1846 1991.
discusses the changes in indian life in new mexico as a result of spanish colonization.
knaut andrew l the pueblo revolt of 1680 conquest and resistance in seventeenthcentury new mexico 1997.
a recent account of the largest revolt of native peoples.
mann charles c 1491 new revelations of the americas before columbus 2005.
a comprehensive portrait of life in the western hemisphere before the arrival of europeans.
parry j h the age of reconnaissance 1981.
a global history of the era of european exploration and colonization.
richter daniel k facing east from indian country 2001.
examines the era of exploration and settlement as viewed through the experience of native americans.
the ordeal of the longhouse the peoples of the iroquois league in the era of european colonization 1992.
describes life among one of the most important indian groups before and after the arrival of europeans.
websites archive of early american images brown library pages ea hmpg html exploring the early americas france in america jamestown qubec santa fe three north american beginnings history si edu exhibitions small exhibition cfm key 1267 exkey 244 c hapter r eview review questions 1.
describe why the discovery of america was one of the most important events recorded in the history of mankind according to adam smith.
using what you read in this chapter about the movement of peoples explain how north america became the location where east and west came together.
one of the most striking features of the native american society at the time of european discovery was its sheer diversity.
support this statement.
compare and contrast european values and ways of life to that of the indians.
be sure to look at religion views on property ownership gender relations and views of freedom.
what were the main factors fueling the european age of expansion.
describe the political religious and economic motivations for spanish conquest.
compare the political economic and religious motivations behind the french and dutch empires with those of new spain.
describe how the attitudes and actions of the french and dutch differed from those of spain.
how would european settlers explain their superiority to native americans and justify both the conquest of native lands and terminating their freedom.
freedom questions 1.
although some european observers believed native americans embodied freedom most reached the conclusion that native americans did not know what freedom was because they were too free on what basis did they make this claim.
on the eve of colonization european concepts of freedom bore little resemblance to our modern concepts of personal liberties.
explain how the ideals of christian liberty obedience to authority and adhering to ones social rank shaped the fifteenthcentury idea of freedom.
spanish and french settlers both claimed to be freeing native americans by bringing them advanced civilization and catholicism.
justify this claim with specific examples as either of these european powers would have at the time.
how did pops revolt in 1680 immediately restore freedom to the pueblo indians and what happened once the spanish returned.
both at home and in the new world the dutch enjoyed greater freedoms than other european citizens.
explore this comparison using specific examples.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e maize p 8 early explorers of the new world tenochtitln p 10 explorer dates area explored christopher columbus caribbean and central america john cabot newfoundland christian liberty p 18 amerigo vespucci 1499 1502 coast of brazil gulf of mexico zheng he p 20 pedro cabral south america brazil caravel p 20 juan ponce de len florida factories p 22 ferdinand magellan 1519 1522 sailed around the world reconquista p 23 hernando de soto 1539 1541 american southwest columbian exchange p 26 francisco vsquez de coronado 1540 1541 american southwest juan oate american southwest nicols de ovando hispaniola vasco nez de balboa panama isthmus francisco pizarro 1530s peru samuel de champlain canada and quebec henry hudson hudson river and new york jacques marquette and louis joliet mississippi river cahokia p 11 iroquois p 12 peninsulares p 29 mestizos p 29 encomienda system p 33 black legend p 33 pueblo revolt p 37 pop p 37 huguenots p 41 mtis p 44 patroons p 47 wampum p 47 c hapter 2 magna carta thomas mores utopia a discourse concerning western planting sir walter raleighs failed settlement on roanoke island jamestown established john rolfe marries pocahontas first black slaves arrive in virginia house of burgesses established pilgrims sail on mayflower to america uprising led by opechancanough against virginia virginia becomes first royal colony 1629 great migration to new 1642 england massachusetts founded maryland founded general court of massachusetts established roger williams banished from massachusetts to rhode island anne hutchinson placed on trial in massachusetts pequot war the oath of a freeman fundamental orders of connecticut 1642 english civil war maryland adopts an act concerning religion half way covenant proclaimed by puritans in massachusetts virginia outlaws englishindian marriages beginnings of english america 1607 1660 england and the new world unifying the english nation england and ireland england and north america spreading protestantism motives for colonization the social crisis masterless men the coming of the english english emigrants indentured servants land and liberty englishmen and indians the transformation of indian life changes in the land settling the chesapeake the jamestown colony from company to society powhatan and pocahontas the uprising of 1622 a tobacco colony women and the family the maryland experiment religion in maryland the new england way the rise of puritanism moral liberty the pilgrims at plymouth the great migration the puritan family government and society in massachusetts puritan liberties new englanders divided roger williams rhode island and connecticut the trials of anne hutchinson puritans and indians the pequot war the new england economy the merchant elite the half way covenant religion politics and freedom the rights of englishmen the english civil war englands debate over freedom english liberty the civil war and english america the crisis in maryland cromwell and the empire the armada portrait of queen elizabeth i by the artist george gower commemorates the defeat of the spanish armada in 1588 and appears to link it with english colonization of the new world.
englands victorious navy is visible through the window while the queens hand rests on a globe with her fingers pointing to the coast of north america.
f ocus q uestions what were the main contours of english colonization in the seventeenth century.
what obstacles did the english settlers in the chesapeake overcome.
how did virginia and maryland develop in their early years.
what made the english settlement of new england distinctive.
what were the main sources of discord in early new england.
how did the english civil war affect the colonies in america.
l o n april 26 1607 three small ships carrying colonists from england sailed out of the morning mist at what is now called cape henry into the mouth of chesapeake bay.
after exploring the area for a little over two weeks they chose a site sixty miles inland on the james river for their settlement hoping to protect themselves from marauding spanish warships.
here they established jamestown named for the king of england as the capital of the colony of virginia named for his predecessor elizabeth i the virgin queen.
but despite these bows to royal authority the voyage was sponsored not by the english government which in 1607 was hard pressed for funds but by the virginia company a private business organization whose shareholders included merchants aristocrats and members of parliament and to which the queen had given her blessing before her death in 1603.
when the three ships returned home 104 settlers remained in virginia.
all were men for the virginia company had more interest in searching for gold and in other ways exploiting the areas natural resources than in establishing a functioning society.
nevertheless jamestown became the first permanent english settlement in the area that is now the united states.
the settlers were the first of tens of thousands of europeans who crossed the atlantic during the seventeenth century to live and work in north america.
they led the way for new empires that mobilized labor and economic resources reshaped societies throughout the atlantic world and shifted the balance of power at home from spain and portugal to the nations of northwestern europe.
the founding of jamestown took place at a time of heightened european involvement in north america.
interest in colonization was spurred by national and religious rivalries and the growth of a merchant class eager to invest in overseas expansion and to seize for itself a greater share of world trade.
as noted in chapter 1 it was quickly followed by the founding of quebec by france in 1608 and henry hudsons exploration in 1609 of the river that today bears his name leading to the founding of the dutch colony of new netherland.
in 1610 the spanish established santa fe as the capital of new mexico.
more than a century after the voyages of columbus the european penetration of north america had finally begun in earnest.
it occurred from many directions at once from east to west at the atlantic coast north to south along the st lawrence and mississippi rivers and south to north in what is now the american southwest.
english north america in the seventeenth century was a place where entrepreneurs sought to make fortunes religious minorities hoped to worship without governmental interference and to create societies based on biblical teachings and aristocrats dreamed of re creating a vanished world of feudalism.
those who drew up blueprints for settlement expected to reproduce the social structure with which they were familiar with all its hierarchy and inequality.
the lower orders would occupy the what were the main contours of english colonization in the seventeenth century.
same less than fully free status as in england subject to laws regulating their labor and depriving them of a role in politics.
but for ordinary men and women emigration offered an escape from lives of deprivation and inequality.
no man wrote john smith an early leader of jamestown will go from england to have less freedom in america.
the charter of the virginia company granted by james i in 1606 promised that colonists would enjoy all liberties of those residing in our realm of england the settlers of english america came to enjoy greater rights than colonists of other empires including the power to choose members of elected assemblies protections of the common law such as the right to trial by jury and access to land the key to economic independence.
many degrees of freedom coexisted in seventeenth century north america from the slave stripped completely of liberty to the independent landowner who enjoyed a full range of rights.
during a lifetime a person might well occupy more than one place on this spectrum.
the settlers success however rested on depriving native americans of their land and in some colonies on importing large numbers of african slaves as laborers.
freedom and lack of freedom expanded together in seventeenth century america.
england and the new world unifying the english nation although john cabot sailing from england in 1497 had been the first european since the vikings to encounter the north american continent english exploration and colonization would wait for many years.
as the case of spain suggests early empire building was in large part an extension of the consolidation of national power in europe.
but during the sixteenth century england was a second rate power racked by internal disunity.
henry vii who assumed the throne in 1485 had to unify the kingdom after a long period of civil war.
his son and successor henry viii launched the reformation in england.
when the pope refused to annul his marriage to catherine of aragon henry severed the nation from the catholic church.
in its place he established the church of england or anglican church with himself at the head.
decades of religious strife followed.
under henrys son edward vi who became king at the age of ten in 1547 the regents who governed the country persecuted catholics.
when edward died in 1553 his half sister mary became queen.
mary temporarily restored catholicism as the state religion and executed a number of protestants.
her rule was so unpopular that reconciliation with rome became impossible.
marys successor elizabeth i reigned 1558 1603 restored the anglican ascendancy and executed more than 100 catholic priests.
mary tudor the queen who tried to restore catholicism in england as painted in 1554 by antonio moro who made numerous portraits of european royalty.
he depicts her as a woman of firm determination.
sail sail thy best ship of democracy of value is thy freight tis not the present only the past is also stored in thee thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone not of the western continent alone earths rsum entire floats on thy keel o ship is steadied by thy spars with thee time voyages in trust the antecedent nations sink or swim with thee with all their ancient struggles martyrs heroes epics wars thou bearst the other continents theirs theirs as much as thine the destination port triumphant.
walt whitman thou mother with thy equal brood 1872 t he american pageant part one founding the new nation ca.
33 000 b c e.
t he european explorers who followed christopher columbus to north america in the sixteenth century had no notion of founding a new nation.
neither did the rst european settlers who peopled the thirteen english colonies on the eastern shores of the continent in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
these original colonists may have ed poverty or religious persecution in the old world but they continued to view themselves as europeans and as subjects of the eng lish king.
they regarded america as but the western rim of a transatlantic european world.
yet life in the new world made the colonists different from their european cousins and eventually during the american revolution the americans came to embrace a vision of their country as an independent nation.
how did this epochal transformation come about.
how did the colonists overcome the con icts that divided them unite against britain and declare themselves at great cost to be an american people.
they had much in common to begin with.
most were eng lishspeaking.
most came determined to create an agricultural society modeled on eng lish customs.
conditions in the new world deepened their common bonds.
most colonists strove to live lives unfettered by the tyrannies of royal authority ofcial religion and social hierarchies that they had left behind.
they grew to cherish ideals that became synonymous with american life reverence for individual liberty self government religious tolerance and economic opportunity.
they also commonly algonquin indians fishing by john white the english watercolorist accompanied the rst english expedition to roanoke island later part of virginia in 1585.
his paintings faithfully recorded the indian way of life that was now imperiled by the arrival of the europeans.
founding the new nation displayed a willingness to subjugate outsiders rst indians who were nearly annihilated through war and disease and then africans who were brought in chains to serve as slave labor especially on the tobacco rice and indigo plantations of the southern colonies.
but if the settlement experience gave people a common stock of values both good and bad it also divided them.
the thirteen colonies were quite different from one another.
puritans carved tight pious and relatively democratic communities of small family farms out of rocky soiled new eng land.
theirs was a homogeneous world in comparison to most of the southern colonies where large landholders mostly anglicans built plantations along the coast from which they lorded over a labor force of black slaves and looked down upon the poor white farmers who settled the backcountry.
different still were the middle colonies stretching from new york to delaware.
there diversity reigned.
well to do merchants put their stamp on new york city as quakers did on philadelphia while out in the countryside sprawling estates were interspersed with modest homesteads.
within individual colonies con icts festered over economic interests ethnic rivalries and religious practices.
all those clashes made it difcult for colonists to imagine that they were a single people with a common destiny much less that they ought to break free from britain.
the american colonists in fact had little reason to complain about britain.
each of the thirteen colonies enjoyed a good deal of self rule.
many colonists proted from trade within the british empire.
but by the 1760s this stable arrangement began to crumble a victim of the imperial rivalry between france and britain.
their struggle for supremacy in north america began in the late seventeenth century and nally dragged in the colonists during the french and indian war from 1756 to 1763.
that war in one sense strengthened ties with britain since colonial militias fought triumphantly alongside the british army against their mutual french and indian enemies.
but once the french were driven from the north american continent the colonists no longer needed britain for protection.
more important still after 1763 a nancially overstretched british government made the fateful choice of imposing taxes on colonies that had been accustomed to answering mainly to their own colonial assemblies.
by the 1770s issues of taxation self rule and trade restrictions brought the crisis of imperial authority to a head.
although as late as 1775 most people in the colonies clung to the hope of some kind of accommodation short of outright independence royal intransigence soon thrust the colonists into a war of independence that neither antagonist could have anticipated just a few years before.
eight years of revolutionary war did more than anything in the colonial past to bring americans together as a nation.
comradeship in arms and the struggle to shape a national government forced americans to subdue their differences as best they could.
but the spirit of national unity was hardly universal.
one in ve colonists sided with the british as loyalists and a generation would pass before the wounds of this rst american civil war fully healed.
yet in the end americans won the revolution with no small measure of help from the french because in every colony people shared a rm belief that they were ghting for the unalienable rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness in the words of thomas jeffersons magnicent declaration of independence.
almost two hundred years of living a new life had prepared americans to found a new nation.
philadelphia corner of second and high streets delegates to the constitutional convention in 1787 gathered in philadelphia the largest city in north america a vivid symbol of the rise of american society from its precarious beginnings at jamestown and plymouth nearly two centuries earlier.
new world beginnings 33 000 b c e.
i have come to believe that this is a mighty continent which was hitherto unknown.
your highnesses have an other world here.
s everal billion years ago that whirling speck of dust known as the earth fth in size among the planets came into being.
about six thousand years ago only a minute in geological time recorded history of the western world began.
certain peoples of the middle east developing a written culture gradually emerged from the haze of the past.
five hundred years ago only a few seconds guratively speaking european explorers stumbled on the americas.
this dramatic accident forever altered the future of both the old world and the new and of africa and asia as well.
the shaping of north america planet earth took on its present form slowly.
some 225 million years ago a single supercontinent contained all the worlds dry land.
then enormous chunks of terrain began to drift away from this colossal landmass opening the atlantic and indian oceans narrowing the pacic ocean and forming the great continents of eurasia af rica australia antarctica and the americas.
the existence of a single original continent has been proved in part by the discovery of nearly identical species of sh that swim today in long separated freshwater lakes throughout the world.
continued shifting and folding of the earths crust thrust up mountain ranges.
the appalachians were probably formed even before continental separation perhaps 350 million years ago.
the majestic ranges of western north america the rockies the sierra nevada the cascades and the coast ranges arose much more recently geologically speaking some 135 million to 25 million years ago.
they are truly american mountains born after the continent took on its own separate geological identity.
by about 10 million years ago nature had sculpted the basic geological shape of north america.
the continent was anchored in its northeastern corner by the massive canadian shield a zone undergirded by ancient rock probably the rst part of what became the north american landmass to have emerged above sea level.
a narrow eastern coastal plain or tidewater region creased by many river valleys sloped gently up this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the effects of the great ice age 4 8 b c.
recorded history begins jesus born virginia founded virginia bicenfounded tennial 169 years 169 years 115 years columbus s discovery 4000 b c.
independence declared ward to the timeworn ridges of the appalachians.
those ancient mountains slanted away on their western side into the huge midcontinental basin that rolled downward to the mississippi valley bottom and then rose relentlessly to the towering peaks of the rockies.
from the rocky mountain crest the roof of america the land fell off jaggedly into the intermountain great basin bounded by the rockies on the east and the sierra and cascade ranges on the west.
the valleys of the sacramento and san joaquin rivers and the willamette puget sound trough seamed the interiors of present day cal i fornia oregon and washington.
the land at last met the foaming pacic where the coast ranges rose steeply from the sea.
nature laid a chill hand over much of this terrain in the great ice age beginning about 2 million years ago.
two mile thick ice sheets crept from the polar regions to blanket parts of europe asia and the americas.
in north america the great glaciers carpeted most of present day canada and the united states as far southward as a line stretching from pennsylvania through the ohio country and the dakotas to the pacic northwest.
when the glaciers nally retreated about 10 000 years ago they left the north american landscape transformed and much as we know it today.
the weight of the gargantuan ice mantle had depressed the level of the canadian shield.
the grinding and ushing action of the moving and melting ice had scoured away the shields topsoil pitting its rocky surface with thousands of shallow depressions into which the melting glaciers owed to form lakes.
the same glacial action scooped out and lled the great lakes.
they originally drained southward through the mississippi river system to the gulf of mexico.
when the melting ice unblocked the gulf of st lawrence the lake water sought the st lawrence river outlet to the atlantic ocean lowering the great lakes level and leaving the missouri 1991 2000 46 years world war ii ends 9 years cold war ends new millennium begins mississippi ohio system to drain the enormous midcontinental basin between the appalachians and the rockies.
similarly in the west water from the melting glaciers lled sprawling lake bonneville covering much of present day utah nevada and idaho.
it drained to the pacic ocean through the snake and columbia river systems until diminishing rainfall from the ebbing ice cap lowered the water level cutting off access to the snake river outlet.
deprived of both inow and drainage the giant lake became a gradually shrinking inland sea.
it grew increasingly saline slowly evaporated and left an arid mineral rich desert.
only the great salt lake remained as a relic of bonnevilles former vastness.
today lake bonnevilles ancient beaches are visible on mountainsides up to 1 000 feet above the dry oor of the great basin.
peopling the americas the great ice age shaped more than the geological history of north america.
it also contributed to the origins of the continents human history.
though recent and still highly controversial evidence suggests that some early peoples may have reached the americas in crude boats most probably came by land.
some 35 000 years ago the ice age congealed much of the world oceans into massive ice pack glaciers lowering the level of the sea.
as the sea level dropped it exposed a land bridge connecting eurasia with north america in the area of the present day bering sea between siberia and alaska.
across that bridge probably following migratory herds of game ventured small bands of nomadic asian hunters the immigrant ancestors of the native americans.
they continued to trek across the bering isthmus for some 250 centuries slowly peopling the american continents see map 1 1.
n arctic ocean bering land bridge 40e ci r cl e 160e c cti ar 180 n 20e 160w 0 n 40 140w at l a n t i c o c ea n r f cance tropic o 20n 120w 100w pac i f ic oc ea n equator 0 20w n 20s tropic of capricorn 40s 500 1000 km.
extent of land ca.
33 000 10 500 b c e.
glaciers ca.
15 000 b c e.
probable ancient shoreline probable migratory route 80w 60w map 1 1 the first discoverers of america the origins of the rst americans remain something of a mystery.
according to the most plausible theory of how the americas were populated for some 25 000 years people crossed the bering land bridge from eurasia to north america.
gradually they dispersed southward down ice free valleys populating both the american continents.
40w selected paleo indian site interactive map making sense of the new world his map from 1546 by sebastian mnster represents one of the earliest efforts to make geographic sense out of the new world nouus orbis and die nuw welt on the map.
the very phrase new world suggests just how staggering a blow to the european imagination was the discovery of the americas.
europeans reached instinctively for the most expansive of all possible terms world not simply places or even continents to comprehend columbuss startling report that lands and peoples previously unimagined lay beyond the horizon of europes western sea.
gradually the immense implications of the new worlds existence began to impress themselves on europe with consequences for literature art politics the economy and of course cartography.
maps t can only be representations of reality and are therefore necessarily distortions.
this map bears a recognizable resemblance to modern mapmakers renderings of the american continents but it also contains gross geographic inaccuracies note the location of japan zipangri relative to the north american west coast as well as telling commentaries on what sixteenth century europeans found remarkable note the land of giants regio gigantum and the indication of cannibals canibali in present day argentina and brazil respectively.
what further clues to the european mentality of the time does the map offer.
in what ways might misconceptions about the geography of the americas have inuenced further exploration and settlement patterns.
chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
as the ice age ended and the glaciers melted the sea level rose again inundating the land bridge about 10 000 years ago.
nature thus barred the door to further immigration for many thousands of years leaving this part of the human family marooned for millennia on the now isolated american continents.
time did not stand still for these original americans.
the same climatic warming that melted the ice and drowned the bridge to eurasia gradually opened ice free valleys through which vanguard bands groped their way southward and eastward across the americas.
roaming slowly through this awesome wilderness they eventually reached the far tip of south america some 15 000 miles from siberia.
by the time europeans arrived in america in 1492 perhaps 54 million people inhabited the two american continents.
over the centuries they split into countless tribes evolved more than 2 000 separate languages and developed many diverse religions cultures and ways of life.
incas in peru mayans in central america and aztecs in mexico shaped stunningly sophisticated civilizations.
their advanced agricultural practices based primarily on the cultivation of maize which is indian corn fed large populations perhaps as many as 20 million in mexico alone.
although without large draft animals such as horses and oxen and lacking even the simple technology of the wheel these peoples built elaborate cities and carried on far ung commerce.
talented mathematicians they made strikingly accurate astronomical observations.
the aztecs also routinely sought the favor of their gods by offering human sacrices cutting the hearts out of the chests of living victims who were often captives conquered in battle.
by some accounts more than 5 000 people were ritually slaughtered to celebrate the crowning of one aztec chieftain.
the earliest americans agriculture especially corn growing accounted for the size and sophistication of the native american civilizations in mexico and south america.
about 5000 b c e.
hunter gatherers in highland mexico developed a wild much controversy surrounds estimates of the pre columbian native american population.
the gures here are from william m denevan ed the native population of the americas in 1492 rev.
madison university of wisconsin press 1992.
corn culture this statue of a corn goddess from the moche culture of present day coastal peru made between 200 and 600 b c e.
vividly illustrates the centrality of corn to native american peoples a thousand years before the rise of the great incan and aztec empires that the europeans later encountered.
grass into the staple crop of corn which became their staff of life and the foundation of the complex largescale centralized aztec and incan civilizations that eventually emerged.
cultivation of corn spread across the americas from the mexican heartland.
everywhere it was planted corn began to transform nomadic hunting bands into settled agricultural villagers but this process went forward slowly and unevenly.
corn planting reached the present day american southwest as early as 2000 b c e.
and powerfully molded pueblo culture.
the pueblo peoples in the rio grande valley constructed intricate irrigation systems to water their cornelds.
they were dwelling in villages of multistoried terraced buildings when spanish explorers made contact with them in the sixteenth century.
pueblo means village in spanish.
corn cultivation reached other parts of north america considerably later.
the timing of its arrival in dif ferent localities explains much about the relative rates of development of different native american peoples see map 1 2.
throughout the continent to the north and east of the land of the pueblos social life was less elaborately developed indeed societies in the modern sense of the word scarcely existed.
no dense concentrations of population or complex nation states comparable to the aztec empire existed in north america outside of mexico at the time of the europeans arrival one of the reasons for the relative ease with which the european colonizers subdued the native north americans.
the mound builders of the ohio river valley the mississippian culture of the lower midwest and the desert dwelling anasazi peoples of the southwest did eskimo eskimo tic arc rcle ci yupik 160w aleut 40w dogrib arctic yellowknife n inuit tlingit hudson bay chipewya 140w subarctic haida northwest coast cree cree cree montagnais cree ojibwa cree blackfeet micmac p l ateau makah ojibwa assiniboine great algonquin c abenaki chinook olum spokane issouri r lakes coeur flathead m bia r ojibwa tillamook dalene mandan crow cayuse nez huron menominee massachusett perce iroquois arikara potawatomi winnebago narragansett sioux m shoshone sauk modoc i erie cheyenne yurok northeast fox sioux kickapoo delaware paiute hupa shoshone miami g r eat p la i ns susquehanna yuki maidu great basin shawnee iowa lenape illinois pomo washo arapaho pawnee r powhatan shoshone.
missouri o hi or miwok chickahominy kansa arka ad ute r mono n sas r paiute olo tuscarora c osage kiowa california navajo apache cherokee catawba hopi pueblo chumash mohave creek quapaw zuni chickasaw apache caddo comanche alabama southeast wichita apache choctaw 120w pima natchez kiliwa timucua 60w n is ss o sippi r pac i f i c o c e a n beothuk cree kwakiutl nootka inuit at l a n t i c o c e a n o ri a gr de n pima karankawa s outhwest n gulf of mexico ic trop taino 600 mi.
tribal location sioux at time of contact modern boundaries for reference r ance of c 20n ciboney 600 km.
calusa caribbean aztec caribbean sea mesoamerica 100w 80w map 1 2 north american indian peoples at the time of first contact with europeans because this map depicts the location of various indian peoples at the time of their rst contact with europeans and because initial contacts ranged from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries it is necessarily subject to considerable chronological skewing and is only a crude approximation of the original territory of any given group.
the map also cannot capture the uidity and dynamism of native american life even before columbuss discovery for example the navajo and apache peoples had migrated from present day northern canada only shortly before the spanish rst encountered them in the present day american southwest in the 1500s.
the map also places the sioux on the great plains where europeans met up with them in the early nineteenth century but the sioux had spilled onto the plains not long before then from the forests surrounding the great lakes.
the indigenous populations of the southeastern and mid atlantic regions are especially difcult to represent accurately in a map like this because pre columbian intertribal conicts had so scrambled the native inhabitants that it is virtually impossible to determine which groups were originally where.
interactive map chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
cahokia this artists rendering of cahokia based on archaeological excavations shows the huge central square and the imposing monks mound which rivaled in size the pyramids of egypt.
sustain some large settlements after the incorporation of corn planting into their ways of life during the rst millennium c e.
the mississippian settlement at cahokia near present day east st louis was at one time home to as many as twenty ve thousand people.
the anasazis built an elaborate pueblo of more than six hundred interconnected rooms at chaco canyon in modern day new mexico.
but mysteriously perhaps due to prolonged drought all those ancient cultures fell into decline by about 1300 c e.
the cultivation of maize as well as of high yielding strains of beans and squash reached the southeastern atlantic seaboard region of north america about 1000 c e.
these plants made possible three sister farming with beans growing on the trellis of the cornstalks and squash covering the planting mounds to retain moisture in the soil.
the rich diet provided by this environmentally clever farming technique produced some of the highest population densities on the continent among them the creek choctaw and cherokee peoples.
the iroquois in the northeastern woodlands inspired by a legendary leader named hiawatha created in the sixteenth century perhaps the closest north american approximation to the great empires of mexico and peru.
the iroquois confederacy developed the political and orga ni zational skills to sustain a robust military alliance that menaced its neighbors native american and european alike for well over a century see makers of america the iroquois pp.
but for the most part the native peoples of north america were living in small scattered and impermanent settlements on the eve of the europeans arrival.
in more settled agricultural groups women tended the crops while men hunted shed gathered fuel and cleared elds for planting.
this pattern of life frequently conferred substantial authority on women and many north american native peoples including the iroquois developed matrilineal cultures in which power and possessions passed down the female side of the family line.
unlike the europeans who would soon arrive with the presumption that humans had dominion over the earth and with the technologies to alter the very face of the land the native americans had neither the desire nor the means to manipulate nature aggressively.
they revered the physical world and endowed nature with spiritual properties.
yet they did sometimes ignite massive forest res deliberately torching thousands of acres of trees to create better hunting habitats especially for deer.
this practice accounted for the open parklike appearance of the eastern woodlands that so amazed early european explorers.
but in a broad sense the land did not feel the hand of the native americans heavy upon it partly because they were so few in number.
they were so thinly spread early explorers across the continent that vast areas were virtually untouched by a human presence.
in the fateful year 1492 probably no more than 4 million native americans padded through the whispering primeval forests and paddled across the sparkling virgin waters of the continent north of mexico.
they were blissfully unaware that the historic isolation of the americas was about to end forever as the land and the native peoples alike felt the full shock of the european discovery indirect discoverers of the new world europeans for their part were equally unaware of the existence of the americas.
blond bearded norse seafarers from scandinavia had chanced upon the northeastern shoulder of north america about 1000 c e.
they landed at a place near lanse aux meadows in presentday newfoundland that abounded in wild grapes which led them to name the spot vinland.
but no strong nation state yearning to expand supported these venturesome voyagers.
their imsy settlements consequently were soon abandoned and their discovery was forgotten except in scandinavian saga and song.
for several centuries thereafter other restless europeans with the growing power of ambitious governments behind them sought contact with a wider world whether for conquest or trade.
they thus set in motion the chain of events that led to a drive toward asia the penetration of africa and the completely accidental discovery of the new world.
christian crusaders must rank high among americas indirect discoverers.
clad in shining armor tens of thousands of these european warriors tried from the eleventh to the fourteenth century to wrest the holy land from muslim control.
foiled in their military assaults the crusaders nevertheless acquired a taste for the exotic delights of asia.
goods that had been virtually unknown in europe now were craved silk for cloth ing drugs for aching esh perfumes for unbathed bodies colorful draperies for gloomy castles and spices especially sugar a rare luxury in europe before the crusades for preserving and avoring food.
europes developing sweet tooth would have momentous implications for world history.
the luxuries of the east were prohibitively expensive in europe.
they had to be transported enormous distances from the spice islands indonesia china and india in creaking ships and on swaying camel back.
the journey led across the indian ocean the persian gulf and the red sea or along the tortuous caravan routes of asia or the arabian peninsula ending at the ports of the eastern mediterranean see map 1 3.
muslim middlemen exacted a heavy toll en route.
by the time the strange smelling goods reached italian merchants at venice and genoa they were so costly that purchasers and prots alike were narrowly limited.
european consumers and distributors were naturally eager to nd a less expensive route to the riches of asia or to develop alternate sources of supply.
europeans enter africa european appetites were further whetted when footloose marco polo an italian adventurer returned to europe in 1295 and began telling tales of his nearly twenty year sojourn in china.
though he may in fact never have seen china legend to the contrary the hard evidence is sketchy he must be regarded as an indirect discoverer of the new world for his book with its descriptions of rose tinted pearls and golden pagodas stimulated european desires for a cheaper route to the trea sures of the east.
these accumulating pressures eventually brought a breakthrough for european expansion.
before the middle of the fteenth century european sailors refused to sail southward along the coast of west africa because they could not beat their way home against the prevailing northerly winds and south owing currents.
about 1450 portuguese mariners overcame those obstacles.
not only had they developed the caravel a ship that could sail more closely into the wind but they had discovered that they could return to europe by sailing northwesterly from the african coast toward the azores where the prevailing westward breezes would carry them home.
the new world of sub saharan africa now came within the grasp of questing europeans.
the northern shore of africa as part of the mediterranean world had been known to europe since antiquity.
but because sea travel down the african coast had been virtually impossible africa south of the forbidding sahara desert barrier had remained remote and mysterious.
african gold perhaps two thirds of europes supply crossed the sahara on camelback and shadowy tales may have reached europe about the ourishing west african kingdom of mali in the niger river valley with its impressive islamic university at timbuktu.
but europeans chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
150w 120w 90w 30w 60w 0 60e 30e 90e 150e 120e greenland arctic circle iceland 60n england genoa portugal north america venice constantinople spain azores asia e ur o p e france japan persi a canary is.
30n beijing hangzhou delhi alexandria tropic of cancer cape a t l a n t i c verde is.
ocean sa h a r a m ali a rabi a c h in a india timbuktu africa 0 equator pacific ocean pacific ocean guangzhou canton malacca spice islands prncipe so tom south america madagascar indian ocean tropic of capricorn aus tralia 30s n the world known to europe 1492 60s antarctic circle 3000 km.
portuguese exploration the silk road daz 1488 other land trade routes da gama 1498 ocean trade routes prevailing wind map 1 3 the world known to europe and major trade routes with asia 1492 goods on the early routes passed through so many hands along the way that their ultimate source remained mysterious to europeans.
had no direct access to sub saharan africa until the portuguese navigators began to creep down the west african coast in the middle of the fteenth century.
the portuguese promptly set up trading posts along the african shore for the purchase of gold and slaves.
arab esh merchants and africans themselves had traded slaves for centuries before the europeans arrived.
the slavers routinely charged higher prices for captives from distant sources because they could not easily ee to their native villages or be easily rescued by their kin.
slave brokers also deliberately separated persons from the same tribes and mixed unlike people together to frustrate orga nized resistance.
thus from its interactive map earliest days slavery by its very nature inhibited the expression of regional african cultures and tribal identities.
the portuguese adopted these arab and african practices.
they built up their own systematic trafc in slaves to work the sugar plantations that portugal and later spain established on the african coastal islands of madeira the canaries so tom and principe.
the portuguese appetite for slaves was enormous and dwarfed the modest scale of the pre european trafc.
slave trading became a big business.
some forty thousand africans were carried away to the atlantic sugar islands in the last half of the fteenth century.
millions european trade and exploration marco polo passing through the strait of hormuz this illustration from the rst printed edition of the travels of marco polo in 1477 shows the traveler crossing the persian gulf between the arabian peninsula and persia presentday iran.
more were to be wrenched from their home continent after the discovery of the americas.
in these fteenthcentury portuguese adventures in africa were to be found the origins of the modern plantation system based on large scale commercial agriculture and the wholesale exploitation of slave labor.
this kind of plantation economy would shape the destiny of much of the new world.
the seafaring portuguese pushed still farther southward in search of the water route to asia.
edging cautiously down the african coast bartholomeu dias rounded the southernmost tip of the dark continent in 1488.
ten years later vasco da gama nally reached india hence the name indies given by europeans to all the mysterious lands of the orient and returned home with a small but tantalizing cargo of jewels and spices.
meanwhile the kingdom of spain became united an event pregnant with destiny in the late fteenth century.
this new unity resulted primarily from the marriage of two sovereigns ferdinand of aragon and isabella of castile and from the brutal expulsion of the indel muslim moors from spain after centuries of christian islamic warfare.
glorying in their sudden strength the spaniards were eager to outstrip their portuguese rivals in the race to tap the wealth of the indies.
to the south and east portugal controlled the african coast and thus controlled the gateway to the round africa water route to india.
of necessity therefore spain looked westward.
chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
columbus comes upon a new world gore island slave fortress from this holding station off the coast of senegal thousands of african captives passed through the door of no return into a lifetime of slavery in the new world.
the stage was now set for a cataclysmic shift in the course of history the history not only of europe but of all the world.
europeans clamored for more and cheaper products from the lands beyond the mediterranean.
africa had been established as a source of cheap slave labor for plantation agriculture.
the portuguese voyages had demonstrated the feasibility of long range ocean navigation.
in spain a modern national state was taking shape with the unity wealth and power to shoulder the formidable tasks of discovery conquest and colonization.
the dawn of the renaissance in the fourteenth century nurtured an ambitious spirit of optimism and adventure.
printing presses introduced about 1450 facilitated the spread of scientic knowledge.
the mariners compass possibly borrowed from the arabs eliminated some of the uncertainties of sea travel.
meanwhile across the ocean the unsuspecting new world innocently awaited its european discoverers onto this stage stepped christopher columbus.
this skilled italian seafarer persuaded the spanish monarchs to outt him with three tiny but seaworthy ships manned by a motley crew.
daringly he unfurled the sails of his cockleshell craft and headed westward.
his superstitious sailors fearful of venturing into the oceanic unknown grew increasingly mutinous.
after six weeks at sea failure loomed until on october 12 1492 the crew sighted an island in the bahamas.
a new world thus swam within the vision of europeans.
the impact of discovery nished the labor and the new world offered its raw materials especially its precious metals and its soil for the cultivation of sugar cane.
for europeans as well as for africans and native americans the world after 1492 would never be the same for better or worse.
when worlds collide christopher columbus 1451 1506 by ridolfo di domenico ghirlandaio no portrait from life exists of columbus so all likenesses of him including this one are somewhat fanciful.
columbuss sensational achievement obscures the fact that he was one of the most successful failures in history.
seeking a new water route to the fabled indies he in fact had bumped into an enormous land barrier blocking the ocean pathway.
for decades thereafter explorers strove to get through it or around it.
the truth gradually dawned that sprawling new continents had been discovered.
yet columbus was at rst so certain that he had skirted the rim of the indies that he called the native peoples indians a gross geographical misnomer that somehow stuck.
columbuss discovery would eventually convulse four continents europe africa and the two americas.
thanks to his epochal voyage an interdependent global economic system emerged on a scale undreamedof before he set sail.
its workings touched every shore washed by the atlantic ocean.
europe provided the markets the capital and the technology africa fur two ecosystems the fragile naturally evolved networks of relations among organisms in a stable environment commingled and clashed when columbus waded ashore.
the reverberations from that historic encounter often called the columbian exchange see figure 1 1 echoed for centuries after 1492.
the ora and fauna of the old and new worlds had been separated for thousands of years.
european explorers marveled at the strange sights that greeted them including exotic beasts such as iguanas and snakes with castanets rattlesnakes.
native new world plants such as tobacco maize beans tomatoes and especially the lowly potato eventually revolutionized the international economy as well as the european diet feeding the rapid population growth of the old world.
these foodstuffs were among the most important indian gifts to the europeans and to the rest of the world.
perhaps three fths of the crops cultivated around the globe today originated in the americas.
ironically the introduction into africa of new world foodstuffs like maize manioc and sweet potatoes may have fed an african population boom that numerically though not morally more than offset the losses inicted by the slave trade.
in exchange the europeans introduced old world crops and animals to the americas.
columbus returned to the caribbean island of hispaniola present day haiti and the dominican republic in 1493 with seventeen ships that unloaded twelve hundred men and a virtual noahs ark of cattle swine and horses.
the horses soon reached the north american mainland through mex ico and in less than two centuries had spread as far as canada.
north american indian tribes like the apaches sioux and blackfeet swiftly adopted the horse transforming their cultures into highly mobile wide ranging hunter societies that roamed the grassy great plains in pursuit of the shaggy buffalo.
columbus also brought seedlings of sugar cane which thrived in the warm car ibbean climate.
a sugar revolution consequently took place in the european diet fueled by the forced migration of millions of africans to work the caneelds and sugar mills of the new world.
chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
gold silver corn potatoes pineapples tomatoes tobacco beans vanilla chocolate syphilis old world new world wheat sugar rice coffee horses cows pigs smallpox measles bubonic plague influenza typhus diphtheria scarlet fever slave labor africa figure 1 1 the columbian exchange columbuss discovery initiated the kind of explosion in international commerce that a later age would call globalization source adapted from out of many a history of the american people third edition combined edition by faragher buhle czitrom and armitage.
copyright 1999.
by permission of prentice hall inc upper saddle river nj.
unwittingly the europeans also brought other organisms in the dirt on their boots and the dust on their clothes such as the seeds of kentucky bluegrass dandelions and daisies.
most ominous of all in their bodies they carried the germs that caused smallpox yellow fever and malaria.
indeed old world diseases would quickly devastate the native americans.
during the indians millennia of isolation in the americas most of the old worlds killer maladies had disappeared from among them.
but generations of freedom from those illnesses had also wiped out protective antibodies.
devoid of natural resistance to old world sicknesses indians died in droves.
within fty years of the spanish arrival the population of the taino natives in hispaniola dwindled from some 1 million people to about 200.
enslavement and armed aggression took their toll but the deadliest killers were microbes not muskets.
the lethal germs spread among the new world peoples with the speed and force of a hurricane swiftly sweeping far ahead of the human invaders most of those af icted never laid eyes on a european.
in the centuries after columbuss landfall as many as 90 percent of the native americans perished a demographic catastrophe without parallel in human history.
this depopulation was surely not intended by the spanish but it was nevertheless so severe that entire cultures and ancient ways of life were extinguished forever.
bafed enraged and vengeful indian slaves sometimes kneaded tainted blood into their masters bread to little effect.
perhaps it was poetic justice that the indians unintentionally did take a kind of revenge by infecting the early explorers with syphilis injecting that lethal sexually transmitted disease for the rst time into europe.
the spanish conquistadores gradually europeans realized that the american continents held rich prizes especially the gold and silver of the advanced indian civilizations in mexico and peru.
spanish explorers and conquistadores the scourge of smallpox this peruvian infant depicted about 1700 was ravaged by the dread european disease and placed in a crude quarantine.
spain secured its claim to columbuss discovery in the treaty of tordesillas 1494 dividing with portugal the heathen lands of the new world see map 1 4.
the lions share went to spain but portugal received compensating territory in africa and asia as well as title to lands that one day would be brazil.
spain became the dominant exploring and colonizing power in the 1500s.
in the ser vice of god as well as in search of gold and glory spanish conquistadores conquerors fanned out across the caribbean and eventually onto the mainland of the american continents see makers of america the spanish conquistadores pp.
on spains long roster of notable deeds two spectacular exploits must be headlined.
vasco nuez balboa hailed as the discoverer of the pa cic ocean waded into the foaming waves off panama in 1513 and boldly claimed for his king all the lands washed by that sea see map 1 5.
ferdinand magellan started from spain in 1519 with ve tiny ships.
after beating through the storm lashed strait off the tip of south america that still bears his name he was slain by the inhabitants of the philippines.
his one remaining vessel creaked home in 1522 completing the rst circumnavigation of the globe.
other ambitious spaniards ventured into north america.
in 1513 and 1521 juan ponce de len explored florida which he at rst thought was an island.
seeking gold and probably not the mythical fountain of youth he instead met with death by an indian arrow.
in 1540 1542 francisco coronado in quest of fabled golden cities that turned out to be adobe pueblos wandered with a clanking cavalcade through arizona and new mexico penetrating as far east as kansas.
en route his expedition discovered two awesome natural wonders the grand canyon of the colorado river and enormous herds of buffalo bison.
hernando de soto with six hundred armor plated men undertook a fantastic gold seeking expedition during 1539 1542.
floundering through marshes and pine barrens from florida westward he discovered and crossed the majestic mississippi river just north of its junction with the arkansas river.
after brutally mistreating the indians with iron collars and erce dogs he at length died of fever and wounds.
his troops secretly disposed of his remains at night in the mississippi lest the indians exhume and abuse their abusers corpse.
meanwhile in south america the ironsted conqueror francisco pizarro crushed the incas of peru in 1532 and added a huge hoard of booty to spanish coffers.
by 1600 spain was swimming in new world silver mostly from the fabulously rich mines at potos in present day bolivia as well as from mexico.
this ood of precious metal touched off a price revolution in europe that increased consumer costs by as much as 500 percent in the hundred years after the midsixteenth century.
some scholars see in this ballooning european money supply the fuel that fed the growth of the economic system known as capitalism.
certainly new world bullion helped transform the world economy.
it swelled the vaults of bankers from spain to italy laying the foundations of the modern commercial banking system.
it clinked in the purses of merchants in france and holland stimulating the spread of commerce and manu facturing.
and it paid for much of the burgeoning international trade with asia whose sellers had little use for any european good except silver.
arctic circle missis sippi r north america coronado 1540 1542 c a b o t 1 4 97 europe portugal central america west indies ibbe 30n tropic of cancer at l a n t i c arabia o c e a n an sea balboa med it sea erranean verrazano ponce de len bus colum car asia spain de soto 1539 1542 corts tenochtitln mexico city 60n england newfoundland france gulf of mexico cabeza de vaca 1528 1536 cartier 1535 1536 c vespuc i africa arabian sea 0 at l a n t i c ed itio oc ea n n1 9 portuguese claims ocean currents 150w 2000 km.
120w 90w 60w ion 14 marcat line of de ation emarc line of d spanish claims tropic of capricorn ans 30s va agell n of m n 1522 r tu e r itio no exped an del ca sti seba n 30w 0 map 1 4 principal voyages of discovery spain portugal france and england reaped the greatest advantages from the new world but much of the earliest exploration was done by italians notably christopher columbus of genoa.
john cabot another native of genoa his original name was giovanni caboto sailed for englands king henry vii.
giovanni da verrazano was a florentine employed by france.
the islands of the caribbean sea the west indies as they came to be called in yet another perpetuation of columbuss geographic confusion served as offshore bases for the staging of the spanish invasion of the mainland americas.
here supplies could be stored and men and horses could be rested and acclimated before proceeding to the conquest of the continents.
the loosely orga nized and vulnerable native communities of the west indies also provided laboratories for testing the techniques that would eventually subdue the advanced indian civilizations of mexico and peru.
the most important such technique was the institution known as the encomienda.
it allowed the government ocean ma exp ga ns da lla indian o ge south america pizarro 1531 1533 sc ma o c ean 1 4 97 pac i f ic 149 8 equator 30e 60e interactive map to commend or give indians to certain colonists in return for the promise to try to christianize them.
in all but name it was slavery.
spanish missionary bartolom de las casas appalled by the encomienda system in hispaniola called it a moral pestilence invented by satan the conquest of mexico in 1519 hernn corts set sail from cuba with sixteen fresh horses and several hundred men aboard eleven ships bound for mexico and for destiny.
on the island of m is.
or north america santa f san diego ad e nd gra r on o pon 1 110w pacific ocean ce de gulf of mexico map 1 5 principal early spanish explorations and conquests note that coronado traversed northern texas and oklahoma.
in present day eastern kansas he found instead of the great golden city he sought a drab encampment probably of wichita indians.
n 30 st augustine 1565 rio co 120w atlantic ocean de s oto 9 15 l co a or sippi r sis d corts conquers mexico new spain le n 1 n 20 cuba co rt veracruz mexico city s 1519 caribbean sea 80w n 250 500 km.
balboa 500 mi.
pizarro 1531 1533 100w 90w 70w 10n south america to peru interactive map bartolom de las casas 1474 1566 a reformminded dominican friar wrote the destruction of the indies in 1542 to chronicle the awful fate of the native americans and to protest spanish policies in the new world.
he was especially horried at the catastrophic effects of disease on the native peoples who of those in future centuries will believe this.
i myself who am writing this and saw it and know the most about it can hardly believe that such was possible.
cozumel off the yucatn peninsula he rescued a spanish castaway who had been enslaved for several years by the mayan speaking indians.
a short distance farther on he picked up the female indian slave malinche who knew both mayan and nahuatl the language of the powerful aztec rulers of the great empire in the highlands of central mexico.
in addition to his superior repower corts now had the advantage through these two interpreters of understanding the speech of the native peoples whom he was about to encounter including the aztecs.
malinche eventually learned spanish and was baptized with the spanish name of doa marina.
near present day veracruz corts made his nal land fall.
through his interpreters he learned of unrest within the aztec empire among the peoples from whom the aztecs demanded tribute.
he also heard alluring tales of the gold and other wealth stored up in the legendary aztec capital of tenochtitln.
he lusted to tear open the coffers of the aztec kingdom.
to quell his mutinous troops he boldly burned his ships cutting off any hope of retreat.
gathering a force of some twenty thousand indian allies he marched on tenochtitln and toward one of historys most dramatic and fateful encounters.
as corts proceeded the aztec chieftain moctezuma sent ambassadors bearing fabulous gifts to welcome the approaching spaniards.
these only whetted the conquistadors appetite.
we spanish suffer from a strange disease of the heart corts allegedly informed the emissaries for which the only known remedy is gold the ambassadors reported this comment to moctezuma along with the astonishing fact that the newcomers rode on the backs of deer horses.
the superstitious moctezuma also believed that corts was the god quetzalcoatl whose return from the eastern sea was predicted in aztec legends.
expectant yet apprehensive moctezuma allowed the conquistadores to approach his capital unopposed.
as the spaniards entered the valley of mexico the sight of the aztec capital of tenochtitln amazed them.
with 300 000 inhabitants spread over ten square miles it rivaled in size and pomp any city in contemporary makers of america the spanish the great africanconquistadores american migration i n 1492 the same year that columbus sighted america the great moorish city of granada in spain fell after a ten year siege.
for ve centuries the christian kingdoms of spain had been trying to drive the north african muslim moors the dark ones in spanish off the iberian peninsula and with the fall of granada they succeeded.
but the lengthy reconquista had left its mark on spanish society.
centuries of military and religious confrontation nurtured an obsession with status and honor bred religious zealotry and intolerance and created a large class of men who regarded manual labor and commerce contemptuously.
with the reconquista ended some of these men turned their restless gaze to spains new world frontier.
at rst spanish hopes for america focused on the caribbean and on nding a sea route to asia.
gradually however word ltered back of rich kingdoms on the mainland.
between 1519 and 1540 spanish conquistadores swept across the americas in two wide arcs of conquest one driv ing from cuba through mexico conquistadores ca.
1534 this illustration for a book called the khler codex of nuremberg may be the earliest depiction of the conquistadores in the americas.
it portrays men and horses alike as steadfast and self assured in their work of conquest.
into what is now the southwestern united states the other starting from panama and pushing south into peru.
within half a century of columbuss arrival in the americas the conquistadores had extinguished the great aztec and incan empires and claimed for church and crown a territory that extended from colorado to argentina including much of what is now the continental united states.
the military conquest of this vast region was achieved by just ten thousand men orga nized in a series of private expeditions.
hernn corts francisco pizarro and other aspiring conquerors signed contracts with the spanish monarch raised money from investors and then went about recruiting an army.
only a small minority of the conquistadores leaders or followers were nobles.
about half were professional soldiers and sailors the rest comprised peasants artisans and members of the middling classes.
most were in their twenties and early thirties and all knew how to wield a sword.
diverse motives spurred these motley adventurers.
some hoped to win royal titles and favors by bringing new peoples under the spanish ag.
others sought to ensure gods favor by spreading christianity to the pagans.
some men hoped to escape dubious pasts and others sought the kind of historical adventure experienced by heroes of classical antiquity.
nearly all shared a lust for gold.
as one of cortss foot soldiers put it we came here to serve god and the king and also to get rich one historian adds that the conquistadores rst fell on their knees and then fell upon the aborigines.
armed with horses and gunpowder and preceded by disease the conquistadores quickly overpowered the indians.
but most never achieved their dreams of glory.
few received titles of nobility and many of the rank and le remained permanently indebted to the absentee investors who paid for their equipment.
even when an expedition captured exceptionally rich booty the spoils were unevenly divided men from the command ers home region often received more and men on horseback generally got two shares to the infantrymans one.
the conquistadores lost still more power as the crown gradually tightened its control in the new world.
by the 1530s in mexico and the 1550s in peru colorless colonial administrators had replaced the freebooting conquistadores.
nevertheless the conquistadores achieved a kind of immortality.
because of a scarcity of spanish women in the early days of the conquest many of the conquistadores married indian women.
the soldiers who conquered paraguay received three native women each and cortss soldiers in mexico who were forbidden to consort with pagan women quickly had their lovers baptized into the catholic faith.
their offspring the new race of mestizos formed a cultural and a biological bridge between latin americas european and indian races.
an aztec view of the conquest 1531 produced just a dozen years after cortss arrival in 1519 this drawing by an aztec artist pictures the indians rendering tribute to their conquerors.
the inclusion of the banner showing the madonna and child also illustrates the early incorporation of christian beliefs by the indians.
chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
the aztec metropolis rose from an island in the center of a lake surrounded by oating gardens of extraordinary beauty.
it was connected to the mainland by a series of causeways and supplied with fresh water by an artfully designed aqueduct.
moctezuma treated corts hospitably at rst but soon the spaniards hunger for gold and power exhausted their welcome.
they thirsted mightily for gold they stuffed themselves with it they starved for it they lusted for it like pigs said one aztec.
on the noche triste sad night of june 30 1520 the aztecs attacked driv ing the spanish down the causeways from tenochtitln in a frantic bloody retreat.
corts then laid siege to the city and it capitulated on august 13 1521.
that same year a smallpox epidemic burned through the valley of mexico.
the combination of conquest and disease took a grisly toll.
the aztec empire gave way to three centuries of spanish rule.
the temples of tenochtitln were destroyed to make way for the christian cathedrals of mexico city built on the site of the ruined indian capital.
and the native population of mexico winnowed mercilessly by the invaders dis eases shrank from some 20 million to 2 million people in less than a century.
yet the invader brought more than conquest and death.
he brought his crops and his animals his language and his laws his customs and his religion all of which proved adaptable to the peoples of mexico.
he intermarried with the surviving indians creating a distinctive culture of mestizos people of mixed indian and european heritage.
to this day mexican civilization remains a unique blend of the old world and the new producing both ambivalence and pride among people of mexican heritage.
cortss translator malinche for example has given her name to the mexican language in the word malinchista or traitor but mexicans also celebrate columbus day as the dia de la raza the birthday of a wholly new race of people.
the spread of spanish america spains colonial empire grew swiftly and impressively.
within about half a century of columbuss landfall artists rendering of tenochtitln amid tribal strife in the fourteenth century the aztecs built a capital on a small island in a lake in the central valley of mexico.
from here they oversaw the most powerful empire yet to arise in mesoamerica.
two main temples stood at the citys sacred center one dedicated to tlaloc the ancient rain god and the other to huitzilopochtli the tribal god who was believed to require human hearts for sustenance.
spain s new world empire corts and malinche ca.
1540 detail though done by an indian artist this drawing identies malinche by her christian name marina.
she eventually married one of cortss soldiers with whom she traveled to spain and was received at the spanish court.
hundreds of spanish cities and towns ourished in the americas especially in the great silver producing centers of peru and mexico.
some 160 000 spaniards mostly men had subjugated millions of indians.
majestic cathedrals dotted the land printing presses turned out books and scholars studied at distinguished universities including those at mexico city and lima peru both founded in 1551 eighty ve years before harvard the rst college established in the eng lish colonies.
but how secure were these imperial possessions.
other powers were already snif ng around the edges of the spanish domain eager to bite off their share of the promised wealth of the new lands.
the upstart eng lish sent giovanni caboto known in eng lish as john cabot to explore the northeastern coast of north america in 1497 and 1498.
the french king dispatched another italian mariner giovanni da verrazano to probe the eastern seaboard in 1524.
ten years later the frenchman jacques cartier journeyed hundreds of miles up the st lawrence river.
to secure the northern periphery of their new world domain against such encroachments and to convert more indian souls to christianity the spanish began to fortify and settle their north american borderlands.
in a move to block french ambitions and to protect the sea lanes to the caribbean the spanish erected a fortress at st augustine florida in 1565 thus founding the oldest continually inhabited european settlement in the future united states.
in mexico the tales of coronados expedition of the 1540s to the upper rio grande and colorado river regions continued to beckon the conquistadores northward.
a dust begrimed expeditionary column with eighty three rumbling wagons and hundreds of grumbling men traversed the bare sonora desert from mexico into the rio grande valley in 1598.
led by don juan de oate the spaniards cruelly abused the pueblo peoples they encountered.
in the battle of acoma in 1599 the spanish severed one foot of each survivor.
they proclaimed the area to be the province of new mexico in 1609 and founded its capital at santa f the following year see map 1 6.
the spanish settlers in new mexico found a few furs and precious little gold but they did discover a wealth of souls to be harvested for the christian religion.
the roman catholic mission became the central institution in colonial new mexico until the missionaries efforts to suppress native religious customs provoked an indian uprising called pops rebellion in 1680.
the pueblo rebels destroyed every catholic church in the province and killed a score of priests and hundreds of spanish settlers.
in a reversal of cortss treatment of the aztec temples more than a century earlier the indians rebuilt a kiva or ceremonial religious chamber on the ruins of the spanish plaza at santa f.
it took nearly half a century for the spanish fully to reclaim new mexico from the insurrectionary indians.
meanwhile as a further hedge against the everthreatening french who had sent an expedition under robert de la salle down the mississippi river in the 1680s the spanish began around 1716 to establish settlements in texas.
some refugees from the pueblo uprising trickled into texas and a few missions were established there including the one at san antonio later known as the alamo.
but for at least another century the spanish presence remained weak in this distant northeastern outpost of spains mexican empire.
to the west in cal i fornia no serious foreign threat loomed and spain directed its attention there only belatedly.
juan rodriguez cabrillo had explored the cal ifornia coast in 1542 but he failed to nd san francisco bay or anything else of much interest.
for some two centuries thereafter cal i fornia slumbered undisturbed by european intruders.
then in 1769 spanish missionaries led by father junipero serra founded at san diego the rst of a chain of twenty one missions that wound chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
120w do r co l california missions 1769 1823 a or 100w 105w y ck ro ts.
m 35n 110w 115w arkansas r.
quivira taos santa f ca acoma red r gila r sonora desert cab pacific ocean nad ian r rillo br az os r 154 tucson r ad mission san antonio a nt ni e dr ma l ta ra er rien o 1598 or de lif ci ca oc si re of al e ate de o m lf 100 200 km.
os and ra gu 25n pec o gr er n ri el paso si 30n durango 200 mi.
m e x ic o present day new mexico map 1 6 spains north american frontier 1542 1823 interactive map up the coast as far as sonoma north of san francisco bay.
father serras brown robed franciscan friars toiled with zealous devotion to christianize the three hundred thousand native cal i fornians.
they gathered the seminomadic indians into fortied missions and taught them horticulture and basic crafts.
these mission indians did adopt christianity but they also lost contact with their native cultures and often lost their lives as well as the white mans diseases doomed these biologically vulnerable peoples.
the misdeeds of the spanish in the new world obscured their substantial achievements and helped give birth to the black legend.
this false concept held that the conquerors merely tortured and butchered the indians kill ing for christ stole their gold infected them with smallpox and left little but misery behind.
the spanish invaders did indeed kill enslave and infect countless natives but they also erected a colossal empire sprawling from cal i fornia and florida to tierra del fuego.
they grafted their culture laws religion and language onto a wide array of native societies laying the foundations for a score of spanish speaking nations.
clearly the spaniards who had more than a centurys head start over the eng lish were genuine empire builders and cultural innovators in the new world.
as compared with their anglo saxon rivals their colonial establishment was larger and richer and it was destined to endure more than a quarter of a century longer.
and in the last analysis the spanish paid the native americans the high compliment of fusing with them through marriage and incorporating indigenous culture into their own rather than shunning and eventually isolating the indians as their eng lish adversaries would do.
chronology chronology ca.
33 000 8000 b c e.
first humans cross into americas from asia 1519 corts conquers mexico for spain ca.
5000 b c e.
corn is developed as a staple crop in highland mexico magellans vessel completes circumnavigation of the world ca.
4000 b c e.
first civilized societies develop in the middle east verrazano explores eastern seaboard of north america for france ca.
1200 b c e.
corn planting reaches present day american southwest pizarro crushes incas ca.
cartier journeys up the st lawrence river norse voyagers discover and briey settle in northeastern north america corn cultivation reaches midwest and southeastern atlantic seaboard 1539 de soto explores the southeast and discovers the mississippi river 1540 coronado explores present day southwest ca.
height of mississippian settlement at cahokia ca.
1100 1300 c e.
cabrillo explores cal i fornia coast for spain christian crusades arouse european interest in the east spanish build fortress at st augustine marco polo returns to europe late 1500s late 1400s iroquois confederacy founded according to iroquois legend spain becomes united dias rounds southern tip of africa ca.
1598 spanish under oate conquer pueblo peoples of rio grande valley columbus lands in the bahamas spanish found new mexico treaty of tordesillas between spain and portugal pops rebellion in new mexico 1680s da gama reaches india cabot explores northeastern coast of north america for eng land french expedition down mississippi river under la salle serra founds rst cal i fornia mission at san diego balboa claims all lands touched by the pacic ocean for spain 1513 ponce de len explores florida chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
key terms canadian shield 4 incas 8 aztecs 8 nation states 8 cahokia 10 three sister farming 10 middlemen 11 caravel 11 plantation 13 columbian exchange 15 people to know tordesillas treaty of 17 conquistadores 17 capitalism 17 encomienda 18 noche triste 22 mestizos 22 acoma battle of 23 pops rebellion 23 black legend 24 ferdinand of aragon isabella of castile christopher columbus francisco coronado francisco pizarro bartolom de las casas hernn corts malinche doa marina moctezuma giovanni caboto john cabot robert de la salle father junipero serra to learn more mark a burkholder and lyman l johnson colonial latin america 2000 alfred w crosby jr the columbian exchange biological and cultural consequences of 1492 1972 jared diamond guns germs and steel the fates of human societies 1998 tom dillehay the settlement of the americas a new prehistory 2000 j h elliott empires of the atlantic world 2006 olaudah equiano equianos travels 1789 steven w hackel children of coyote missionaries of saint francis indian spanish relations in colonial california 1769 1850 2005 hugh honour the new golden land 1975 alice beck keyhoe america before the european invasions 2002 lyle n mcalister spain and portugal in the new world 1492 1700 1984 anthony pagden peoples and empires a short history of european migration exploration and conquest from greece to the present 2003 john thornton africa and africans in the making of the atlantic world 1400 1800 1992 david j weber brbaros spaniards and their savages in the age of enlightenment 2005 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the planting of english america 1500 1733.
for i shall yet live to see it virginia an inglishe nation.
a s the seventeenth century dawned scarcely a hundred years after columbuss momentous landfall the face of much of the new world had already been profoundly transformed.
european crops and livestock had begun to alter the very landscape touching off an ecological revolution that would reverberate for centuries to come.
from tierra del fuego in the south to hudson bay in the north disease and armed conquest had cruelly winnowed and disrupted the native peoples.
several hundred thousand enslaved africans toiled on caribbean and brazilian sugar plantations.
from florida and new mexico southward most of the new world lay rmly within the grip of imperial spain.
but north of mexico america in 1600 remained largely unexplored and effectively unclaimed by europeans.
then as if to herald the coming century of colonization and con ict in the northern continent three european powers planted three primitive outposts in three distant corners of the continent within three years of one another the spanish at santa f in 1610 the french at qubec in 1608 and most consequentially for the future united states the eng lish at jamestown virginia in 1607.
englands imperial stirrings feeble indeed were eng lands efforts in the 1500s to compete with the sprawling spanish empire.
as spains ally in the rst half of the century eng land took little interest in establishing its own overseas colonies.
religious con ict also disrupted eng land in midcentury after king henry viii broke with the roman catholic church in the 1530s launching the eng lish protestant reformation.
catholics battled protestants for decades and the religious balance of power seesawed.
but after this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website new world encounters contents and learning objectives native american histories before the conquest pg.
4 imagining a new world pg.
16 what explains cultural differences among native american groups before european conquest.
how did spanish conquest of central and south america transform native american cultures.
the french claim canada pg.
20 a world transformed pg.
8 what was the character of the french empire in canada.
how did europeans and native americans interact during the period of first contact.
the english enter the competition pg.
21 west africa ancient and complex societies pg.
11 what was the character of the west african societies that european traders first encountered.
europe on the eve of conquest pg.
15 how do you explain spains central role in new world exploration and colonization.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab why did england not participate in the early competition for new world colonies.
an unpromising beginning mystery at roanoke pg.
24 what role did the spanish play in the failure of the roanoke colony.
feature essay the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution chapter 1 new world encounters clash of cultures interpreting murder in early maryland new world conquest sparked unexpected often embarrassing contests over the alleged superiority of european culture.
not surprisingly the colonizers insisted they brought the benefits of civilization to the primitive and savage peoples of north america.
native americans never shared this perspective voicing a strong preference for their own values and institutions.
in early seventeenth century maryland the struggle over cultural superiority turned dramatically on how best to punish the crime of murder an issue about which both native americans and europeans had firm opinions.
the actual events that occurred at captain william claibornes trading post in 1635 may never be known.
surviving records indicate that several young males identified as wicomess indians apparently traveled to claibornes on business but to their great annoyance they found the proprietor entertaining susquehannock indians their most hated enemies.
the situation deteriorated rapidly after the susquehannock men ridiculed the wicomess youths whereat some of claibornes people that saw it did laugh unwilling to endure public humiliation the wicomess later ambushed the susquehannock group killing five and then returned to the trading post where they murdered three englishmen.
wicomess leaders realized immediately that something had to be done.
they dispatched a trusted messenger to inform the governor of maryland that they intended to offer satisfaction for the harm.
done to the english the murder of the susquehannock was another matter best addressed by the native americans themselves.
the governor praised the wicomess for coming forward announcing that i expect that those men who have done this outrage should be delivered unto me to do with them as i shall think fit the wicomess spokesman was dumbfounded.
the governor surely did not understand basic native american legal procedure.
it is the manner amongst europeans imagined a new world that often bore little relation to reality.
this early engraving depicts the coast of north america as a dangerous place where hostile indians bizarre navigational hazards and sea monsters greeted english sailors.
us indians that if any such like accident happens he explained we do redeem the life of a man that is so slain with a 100 arms length of roanoke which is a sort of beads that they make and use for money.
the governors demand for prisoners seemed doubly impertinent since you english settlers are here strangers and coming into our country you should rather conform your selves to the customs of our country than impose yours upon us at this point the governor hastily ended the conversation perhaps uncomfortably aware that if the legal tables had been turned and the murders committed in england he would be the one loudly defending the customs of our country uropeans sailing in the wake of admiral christopher columbus constructed a narrative of superiority that survived long after the wicomess had been dispersed a fate that befell them in the late seventeenth century.
the story recounted first in europe and then in the united states depicted e chapter 1 new world encounters heroic adventures missionaries and soldiers sharing western civilization with the peoples of the new world and opening a vast virgin land to economic development.
the familiar tale celebrated material progress the inevitable spread of european values and the taming of frontiers.
it was a history crafted by the victors usually by white leaders such as marylands governor and by the children of the victors to explain how they had come to inherit the land.
this narrative of events no longer provides an adequate explanation for european conquest and settlement.
it is not so much wrong as partisan incomplete even offensive.
history recounted from the perspective of the victors inevitably silences the voices of the victims the peoples who in the victors view foolishly resisted economic and technological progress.
heroic tales of the advance of western values only serve to deflect modern attention away from the rich cultural and racial diversity that characterized north american societies for a very long time.
more disturbing traditional tales of european conquest also obscure the sufferings of the millions of native americans who perished as well as the huge numbers of africans sold in the new world as slaves.
by placing these complex often unsettling experiences within an interpretive framework of creative adaptations rather than of exploration or settlement we go a long way toward recapturing the full human dimensions of conquest and resistance.
while the new world often witnessed tragic violence and systematic betrayal it allowed ordinary people of three different races and many different ethnic identities opportunities to shape their own lives as best they could within diverse often hostile environments.
it should be remembered that neither the native americans nor the africans were passive victims of european exploitation.
within their own families and communities they made choices sometimes rebelling sometimes accommodating but always trying to make sense in terms of their own cultures of what was happening to them.
of course that was precisely what the wicomess messenger tried to tell the governor of maryland.
native american histories before the conquest what explains cultural differences among native american groups before european conquest.
as almost any native american could have informed the first european adventurers the peopling of america did not begin in 1492.
in fact although european invaders such as columbus proclaimed the discovery of a new world they really brought into contact three worlds europe africa and america that in the fifteenth century were already old.
indeed the first migrants reached the north american continent some fifteen to twenty thousand years ago.
the precise dating of this great human trek remains a hotly contested topic.
although some archaeologists maintain that settlement began as early as thirty thousand years ago the scientific evidence in support of this thesis currently is not persuasive.
however this debate eventually resolves itself no one doubts that native americans have recorded a very long history in north america.
their social and cultural development over the period was as complex as any encountered in the so called old world.
environmental conditions played a major part in the story.
twenty thousand years ago the earths climate was considerably colder than it is today.
huge glaciers often more than a mile thick extended as far south as the present states of illinois and ohio and covered broad sections of western canada.
much of the worlds moisture was transformed into ice and the oceans dropped hundreds of feet below their current levels.
the receding waters created a land bridge connecting asia and north america a region now submerged beneath the bering sea that modern archaeologists named beringia.
even at the height of the last ice age much of the far north remained free of glaciers.
small bands of spear throwing paleo indians pursued giant mammals megafauna woolly mammoths and mastodons for example across the vast tundra of beringia.
these hunters were the first human beings to set foot on a vast uninhabited continent.
because these migrations took place over a long period of time and involved small independent bands of highly nomadic people the paleo indians never developed a sense of common identity.
each group focused on its own immediate survival adjusting to the opportunities presented by various microenvironments.
the material culture of the paleo indians differed little from that of other stone age peoples found in asia africa and europe.
in terms of human health however something occurred on the beringian tundra that forever altered the history of native americans.
for reasons that remain obscure the members of these small migrating groups stopped hosting a number of communicative diseases smallpox and measles being the deadliest and although native americans experienced illnesses such as tuberculosis they no longer suffered the major epidemics that under normal conditions would have killed a large percentage of their population every year.
the physical isolation of the various bands may have protected them from the spread of contagious disease.
another theory notes that epidemics have frequently been associated with prolonged contact with domestic animals such as cattle and pigs.
since the paleo indians did not domesticate animals not even horses they may have avoided the microbes that caused virulent european and african diseases.
whatever the explanation for this curious epidemiological record native americans lost inherited immunities that later might have protected them from many contagious germs.
thus when they first came into contact with europeans and africans native americans had no defense against the great killers of the early modern world.
and as medical researchers have discovered dislocations resulting from war and famine made the indians even more vulnerable to infectious disease.
the environmental challenge food climate and culture some twelve thousand years ago global warming substantially reduced the glaciers allowing nomadic hunters to pour into the heart of the north american continent.
within just native american histories before the conquest a few thousand years native americans had journeyed from colorado to the southern tip of south america.
blessed with a seemingly inexhaustible supply of meat the early migrants experienced rapid population growth.
as archaeologists have discovered however the sudden expansion of human population coincided with the loss of scores of large mammals many of them the spear throwers favorite sources of food.
the animals that died out during this period included mammoths and mastodons camels and amazingly horses were eradicated from the land.
the peoples of the great plains did not obtain horses until the spanish reintroduced them in the new world in 1547.
some archaeologists have suggested that the early paleo indian hunters bear responsibility for the mass extinction of so many animals.
it is more probable that climatic warming which transformed well watered regions into arid territories put the large mammals under severe stress and the early humans simply contributed to an ecological process over which they ultimately had little control.
the indian peoples adjusted to the changing environmental conditions.
as they dispersed across the north american continent they developed new food sources at first smaller mammals and fish nuts and berries and then about five thousand years ago they discovered how to cultivate certain plants.
knowledge of maize corn squash and beans spread north from central mexico.
the peoples living in the southwest acquired cultivation skills long before the bands living along the atlantic coast.
the shift to basic crops a transformation that is sometimes termed the agricultural revolution profoundly altered native american societies.
the availability of a more reliable store of food helped liberate nomadic groups from the insecurities of hunting and gathering.
it was during this period that native americans began to produce ceramics a valuable technology for the storage of grain.
the vegetable harvest made possible the establishment of permanent villages that often were governed by clearly defined hierarchies of elders and kings and as the food supply increased the native american population greatly expanded especially around urban centers in the southwest and in the mississippi valley.
although the evidence is patchy scholars currently estimate that approximately four million native americans lived north of mexico at the time of the initial encounter with europeans.
mysterious disappearances several magnificent sites in north america provide powerful testimony to the cultural and social achievements of native peoples during the final two thousand years before european conquest.
one of the more impressive is chaco canyon on sea ice siberia beringia al continental glaciation pi ne g la cia tio n y ck ocean n o rt h a m e r i c a ro pa c i f i c m s ain nt ou possible migration routes glaciated areas present day shorelines land areas routes of the first americans the peopling of north america began about twenty thousand years ago during an ice age and continued for many millennia.
land bridges created by lower sea levels during glaciation formed a tundra coastal plain over what is now the bering strait between asia and north america.
chapter 1 new world encounters the san juan river in present day new mexico.
the massive pueblo was the center of anasazi culture serving both political and religious functions and it is estimated that its complex structures may have housed as many as fifteen thousand people.
the anasazi sustained their agriculture through a huge technologically sophisticated network of irrigation canals that carried water long distances.
they also constructed a transportation system connecting chaco canyon by road to more than seventy outlying villages.
some of the highways were almost a hundred miles long.
during this period equally impressive urban centers developed throughout the ohio and mississippi valleys.
in present day southern ohio the adena and hopewell peoples names assigned by archaeologists to distinguish differences in material culture built large ceremonial mounds where they buried the families of local elites.
approximately a thousand years after the birth of christ the groups gave way to the mississippian culture a loose collection of communities dispersed along the mississippi river from louisiana to illinois that shared similar technologies and beliefs.
cahokia a huge fortification and ceremonial site in illinois that originally rose high above the river represented the greatest achievement of the mississippian peoples.
covering almost twenty acres cahokia once supported a population of almost twenty thousand a city rivaling in size many encountered in late medieval europe.
as one archaeologist observed cahokia was as spectacular as any of the magnificent mexican civilizations that were its contemporaries recent research reveals that the various native american peoples did not live in isolated communities.
to be sure over the millennia they developed many different cultural and social practices reflecting the specific constraints of local ecologies.
more than three hundred separate languages had evolved in north america before european conquest.
but members of the groups traded goods over extremely long distances.
burial mounds found in the ohio valley for example have yielded obsidian from western wyoming shells from florida mica quarried in north carolina and tennessee and copper found near lake superior.
yet however advanced the native american cultures of the southwest and mississippi valley may have been both cultures disappeared mysteriously just before the arrival of the europeans.
no one knows what events brought down the great city of cahokia or persuaded the anasazi to abandon chaco canyon.
some scholars have suggested that climatic changes coupled with continuing population growth put too much pressure on food supplies others insist that chronic warfare destabilized the social order.
it has even been argued that diseases carried to the new world by the first european adventurers ravaged the cultures.
about one point modern commentators are in full agreement the breakdown of mississippian culture caused smaller bands to disperse construct new identities and establish different political structures.
they were the peoples who first encountered the europeans along the atlantic coast and who seemed to the newcomers to have lived in the same places and followed the same patterns of behavior since the dawn of time.
aztec dominance the stability resulting from the agricultural revolution allowed the indians of mexico and central america to structure their societies in more complex ways.
like the inca who lived in what is now known as peru the mayan and toltec peoples of central mexico built vast cities formed government bureaucracies that dominated large tributary populations and developed hieroglyphic writing as well as an accurate solar calendar.
their cities which housed several hundred thousand people greatly impressed the spanish conquerors.
bernal daz del castillo reported when we saw all those aztec towns and villages built in the water and other great towns on dry land and that straight and level causeway leading to mexico we were astounded.
indeed some of our soldiers asked whether it was not all a dream not long before columbus began his first voyage across the atlantic the aztec an aggressive warlike people swept through the valley of mexico conquering the great cities that their enemies had constructed.
aztec warriors ruled by force reducing defeated rivals to tributary status.
in 1519 the aztecs main ceremonial center tenochtitln contained as many as two hundred fifty thousand people as compared with only fifty thousand in seville the port from which the early spaniards had sailed.
elaborate human sacrifice associated with huitzilopochtli the aztec sun god horrified europeans who apparently did not find the savagery of their own civilization so objectionable.
the aztec ritual killings were connected to the agricultural cycle and the indians believed the blood of their victims possessed extraordinary fertility powers.
eastern woodland cultures in the northeast region along the atlantic coast the indians did not practice intensive agriculture.
these peoples numbering less than a million at the time of conquest generally supplemented aztec human sacrifice depicted in the codex magliabechiano a sixteenth century spanish account of the lives of the native mexicans.
the ritual sacrifices performed by aztec priests were associated with worship of the sun god each offering was considered a sacred debt payment.
native american histories before the conquest a r farming with seasonal hunting and gathering.
most belonged to what ethnographers term the eastern woodland cultures.
small bands formed villages during the warm summer months.
the women cultivated maize and other crops while the men hunted and fished.
during the winter difficulties associated with feeding so many people forced the communities to disperse.
each family lived off the land as best it could.
seventeenth century english settlers were most likely to have encountered the algonquian speaking peoples who occupied much of the territory along the atlantic coast from north carolina to maine.
included in this large linguistic family were the powhatan of tidewater virginia the narragansett of rhode island and the abenaki of northern new england.
despite common linguistic roots however the scattered algonquian communities would have found communication extremely difficult.
they had developed very different dialects.
a sixteenth century narragansett for example would have found it hard to comprehend a powhatan.
the major groups of the southeast such as the creek belonged to a separate language group muskogean the indians of the eastern great lakes region and upper st lawrence valley generally spoke iroquoian dialects.
linguistic ties had little effect on indian politics.
algonquian groups who lived in different regions exploited different resources and spoke different dialects did not develop lum bi i ipp mississ pawnee chumash serrano mohave cahuilla yavapi yuma papago equator cochimi o ad lor co great plains ute kansa navajo hopi pueblo zui jicarilla apache missouri mescalero apache yaqui tutelo powhatan tuscarora cherokee catawba atlantic ocean southeast wichita caddo choctaw natchez tonkawa creek yamasee timucua biloxi apalachee atakapa r de an gr cahita io r oh shawnee io tarahumara susquehannock chickasaw concho inca massachusetts wampanoag narragansett lenni lenape delaware quapaw lipan apache opata seri pennacook osage kiowa southwest pima maricopa western apache erie illinois r southern paiute miami is uo iroq ican woodland iowa arapaho r huron k abenaki awk moheida a on ndag ono uga cay eca sen cheyenne ponca omaha comanche a fox potawatomi winnebago eastern kickapoo great basin maya pacific ocean l sauk shoshoni miwok south america ottawa t menominee sioux kiowa goshute costanoan yokuts algonquin ea mah mandan bannock northern paiute california gr hidatsa klamath modoc shasta north america chippewa ojibwa arikara maidu pomo aztec missouri r s hupa r gros ventre cayuse yurok malecite assiniboin e pacific ocean blackfoot nez flathead perce umpqua micmac plateau colville spokane yakima chinook tillamook chippewa ojibwa en ce quinault chehalis sub arctic okanagan kutenai la wr co makah strong ties of mutual identity and when their own interests were involved they were more than willing to ally themselves with europeans or foreign indians against other algonquian speakers.
divisions among indian groups would in time facilitate european conquest.
local native american peoples greatly outnumbered the first settlers and had the europeans not forged alliances with the indians they could not so easily have gained a foothold on the continent.
however divided the indians of eastern north america may have been they shared many cultural values and assumptions.
most native americans for example defined their place in society through kinship.
such personal bonds determined the character of economic and political relations.
the farming bands living in areas eventually claimed by england were often matrilineal which meant in effect that the women owned the planting fields and houses maintained tribal customs and had a role in tribal government.
among the native communities of canada and the northern great lakes patrilineal forms were much more common.
in these groups the men owned the hunting grounds that the family needed to survive.
eastern woodland communities organized diplomacy trade and war around reciprocal relationships that impressed europeans as being extraordinarily egalitarian even democratic.
chains of native authority were loosely structured.
native leaders were such renowned public speakers because st.
northwest coast northern mexico karankawa gulf of mexico calusa the first americans location of major indian groups and culture areas in the 1600s native americans had complex social structures religious systems and sophisticated agricultural techniques before they came into contact with europeans.
300 miles 300 kilometers chapter 1 new world encounters persuasive rhetoric was often their only effective source of power.
it required considerable oratorical skills for an indian leader to persuade independent minded warriors to support a certain policy.
before the arrival of the white settlers indian wars were seldom very lethal.
young warriors attacked neighboring bands largely to exact revenge for a previous insult or the death of a relative or to secure captives.
fatalities when they did occur sparked cycles of revenge.
some captives were tortured to death others were adopted into the community as replacements for fallen relatives.
a world transformed how did europeans and native americans interact during the period of first contact.
bring astonishment.
think then what must be the effect on me and mine the sight of you and your people whom we have at no time seen.
things so altogether new as to strike awe and terror to our hearts what indians desired most was peaceful trade.
the earliest french explorers reported that natives waved from shore urging the europeans to exchange metal items for beaver skins.
in fact the indians did not perceive themselves at a disadvantage in these dealings.
they could readily see the technological advantage of guns over bows and arrows.
metal knives made daily tasks much easier.
and to acquire such goods they gave up pelts which to them seemed in abundant supply.
the english have no sense one indian informed a french priest.
they give us twenty knives like this for one beaver skin another native announced that the beaver does everything perfectly well it makes kettles hatchets swords knives bread.
in short it makes everything the man who recorded these observations reminded french readers in case they had missed the point that the indian was making sport of us europeans trading sessions along the eastern frontier were really cultural seminars.
the europeans tried to make sense out of indian customs and although they may have called the natives savages they quickly discovered that the indians drove hard bargains.
they demanded gifts they set the time and place of trade.
the arrival of large numbers of white men and women on the north american continent profoundly altered native american cultures.
change did not occur at the same rates in all places.
indian villages located on the atlantic coast came under severe pressure almost immediately inland groups had more time to adjust.
wherever they lived however indians discovered that conquest strained traditional ways of life and as daily patterns of experience changed almost beyond recognition native peoples had to devise new answers view the closer look new responses and new ways to survive in physical and social environments that eroded tradition.
historian james merrell reminded us that the indians found themselves living in a world that from their perspective was just as new as that which greeted the european invaders.
an early european image of native americans cultural negotiations native americans were not passive victims of geopolitical forces beyond their control.
so long as they remained healthy they held their own in the early exchanges and although they eagerly accepted certain trade goods they generally resisted other aspects of european cultures.
the earliest recorded contacts between indians and explorers suggest curiosity and surprise rather than hostility.
a southeastern indian who encountered hernando de soto in 1540 expressed awe at least that is what a spanish witness recorded the things that seldom happen europeans first learned of native americans from the sailors who followed columbus.
images such as this one from 1505 show the indians as lustful scantily clad cannibals.
the fact that the male subjects in this image have beards common on european men at the time but virtually unknown among native americans confirms that the artist had never actually laid eyes on the people he meant to portray.
a world transformed the indians used the occasions to study the newcomers.
they formed opinions about the europeans some flattering some less so but they never concluded from their observations that indian culture was inferior to that of the colonizers.
they regarded the beards worn by european men as particularly revolting.
as an eighteenth century englishman said of the iroquois they seem always to have looked upon themselves as far superior to the rest of mankind and accordingly call themselves ongwehoenwe i e men surpassing all other men for europeans communicating with the indians was always an ordeal.
the invaders reported having gained deep insight into native american cultures through sign languages.
how much accurate information explorers and traders took from these crude improvised exchanges is a matter of conjecture.
in a letter written in 1493 columbus expressed frustration i did not understand those people nor they me except for what common sense dictated although they were saddened and i much more so because i wanted to have good information concerning everything in the absence of meaningful conversation europeans often concluded that the indians held them in high regard perhaps seeing the newcomers as gods.
such one sided encounters involved a good deal of projection a mental process of translating alien sounds and gestures into messages that europeans wanted to hear.
sometimes the adventurers did not even try to communicate assuming from superficial observation as did the sixteenthcentury explorer giovanni da verrazzano that they have no religion and that they live in absolute freedom and that everything they do proceeds from ignorance ethnocentric europeans tried repeatedly to civilize the indians.
in practice that meant persuading natives to dress like the colonists attend white schools live in permanent structures and most important accept christianity.
the indians listened more or less patiently but in the end they usually rejected european values.
one south carolina trader explained that when indians were asked to become more english they said no for they thought it hard that we should desire them to change their manners and customs since they did not desire us to turn indians to be sure some indians were strongly attracted to christianity but most paid it lip service or found it irrelevant to their needs.
as one huron told a french priest it would be useless for me to repent having sinned seeing that i never have sinned another huron announced that he did not fear punishment after death since we cannot tell whether everything that appears faulty to men is so in the eyes of god among some indian groups gender figured significantly in a persons willingness to convert to christianity.
native men who traded animal skins for european goods had more frequent contact with the whites and they proved more receptive to the arguments of missionaries.
but native women jealously guarded traditional culture a system that often sanctioned polygamy a husband having several wives and gave women substantial authority over the distribution of food within the village.
french jesuits seemed especially eager to undermine the independence of native american women.
among other demands missionaries insisted on monogamous marriages an institution based on christian values but that made little sense in indian societies where constant warfare against the europeans killed off large numbers of young males and increasingly left native women without sufficient marriage partners.
the white settlers educational system proved no more successful than their religion was in winning cultural converts.
young indian scholars deserted stuff y classrooms at the first chance.
in 1744 virginia offered several iroquois boys a free education at the college of william and mary.
the iroquois leaders rejected the invitation because they found that boys who had gone to college were absolutely good for nothing being neither acquainted with the true methods of killing deer catching beaver or surprising an enemy even matrimony seldom eroded the indians attachment to their own customs.
when native americans and whites married unions the english found less desirable than did the french or spanish the european partner usually elected to live among the indians.
impatient settlers who regarded the indians simply as an obstruction to progress sometimes developed more coercive methods such as enslavement to achieve cultural conversion.
again from the white perspective the results were disappointing.
indian slaves ran away or died.
in either case they did not become europeans.
threats to survival trade and disease over time cooperative encounters between the native americans and europeans became less frequent.
the europeans found it almost impossible to understand the indians relation to the land and other natural resources.
english planters cleared the forests and fenced the fields and in the process radically altered the ecological systems on which the indians depended.
the european system of land use inevitably reduced the supply of deer and other animals essential to traditional native cultures.
dependency also came in more subtle forms.
the indians welcomed european commerce but like so many consumers throughout recorded history they discovered that the objects they most coveted inevitably brought them into debt.
to pay for the trade goods the indians hunted more aggressively and even further reduced the population of fur bearing mammals.
commerce eroded indian independence in other ways.
after several disastrous wars the yamasee war in south carolina 1715 for example the natives learned that demonstrations of force usually resulted in the suspension of normal trade on which the indians had grown quite dependent for guns and ammunition among other things.
a hardened english businessman made the point quite bluntly.
when asked if the catawba indians would harm his traders he responded that the danger would be.
little from them because they are too fond of our trade to lose it for the pleasure of shedding a little english blood it was disease however that ultimately destroyed the cultural integrity of many north american tribes.
european adventurers exposed the indians to bacteria and viruses against which they possessed no natural immunity.
smallpox measles and influenza decimated the native american population.
other diseases such as alcoholism took a terrible toll.
chapt er 1 new world encounters view the map asia native american population loss 1500 1700 arctic ocean greenland on r beufort sea.
ma r baffin island arctic great slave l subarctic pe at ha ba sc ar.
e r ac l athabasca co t chewan r skat.
sa south plateau l winnipeg ssouri r mi lba arka nsas r san juan taos santa fe gila r s zo ra os southeast southwest san pedro de lagunas charles town san mateo st augustine r de r ran og ri el paso del norte r ed b r pe c miss is r sipp i s o rad ri lo co t ke la great basin plains ou miss nia califor sn ake r.
ny r qubec sault trois rivires ste.
marie ft pentagoet montreal ft la pointe portsmouth ft orange boston ft good hope plymouth northeast providence new haven ft crvecoeur.
r new amsterdam ft casimir ft christina r io r atlantic st marys oh jamestown ocean roanoke edenton grea pacific ocean labrador sea hudson bay nor th.
lum bia r vancouver i rd lia victoria island great bear l ckenzie r s est coa northw gulf of alaska baffin bay a yu k san miguel gulf of mexico del aguayo arctic and subarctic northwest coast california southwest great basin plateau plains northeast southeast represents 4 people per 100 km caribbean sea extent of european settlement 1700 major trading centers and settlements population loss to 1700 areas of minimal population loss more than 40 800 miles more than 50 800 kilometers more than 60 0 south america native american population loss 1500 1700 this interactive map demonstrates the pervasive native american population loss in north america during the first two hundred years of their contact with europeans.
the map further illustrates that the highest percentage of native american population loss occurred in north american regions initially under spanish rule.
within a generation of initial contact with europeans the carib indians who gave the caribbean its name were virtually extinct.
the decimation of native american peoples was an aspect of ecological transformation known as the columbian exchange.
european conquerors exposed the indians to several new fatal diseases the indians introduced the invaders to marvelous plants such as corn and potatoes which altered the course of european history.
see the feature essay the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution pp.
the algonquian communities of new england experienced appalling rates of death.
one massachusetts colonist reported in 1630 that the indian peoples of his region above twelve years since were swept away by a great grievous plague.
so that there are verie few left to inhabite the country settlers possessed no knowledge of germ theory it was not formulated until the midnineteenth century and speculated that a christian god had providentially cleared the wilderness of heathens.
historical demographers now estimate that some tribes suffered a 90 to 95 percent population loss within the first century west africa ancient and complex societies of european contact.
the population of the arawak indians of santo domingo for example dropped from about 3 770 000 in 1496 to only 125 in 1570.
the death of so many indians decreased the supply of indigenous laborers who were needed by the europeans to work the mines and to grow staple crops such as sugar and tobacco.
the decimation of native populations may have persuaded colonists throughout the new world to seek a substitute labor force in africa.
indeed the enslavement of blacks has been described as an effort by europeans to repopulate the new world.
indians who survived the epidemics often found that the fabric of traditional culture had come unraveled.
the enormity of the death toll and the agony that accompanied it called traditional religious beliefs and practices into question.
the survivors lost not only members of their families but also elders who might have told them how properly to bury the dead and give spiritual comfort to the living.
some native peoples such as the iroquois who lived a long way from the coast and thus had more time to adjust to the challenge withstood the crisis better than did those who immediately confronted the europeans and africans.
refugee indians from the hardest hit eastern communities were absorbed into healthier western groups.
however horrific the crisis may have been it demonstrated powerfully just how much the environment a source of opportunity as well as devastation shaped human encounters throughout the new world.
sophisticated trade networks that linked the villagers of senegambia with urban centers in northwest africa morocco tunisia and cyrenaica.
great camel caravans regularly crossed the sahara carrying trade goods that were exchanged for gold and slaves.
sub saharan africas well developed links with islam surprised a french priest who in 1686 observed african pilgrims going to visit mecca to visit mahomets tomb although they are eleven or twelve hundred leagues distance from it west africans spoke many languages and organized themselves into diverse political systems.
several populous states sometimes termed empires exercised loose control over large areas.
ancient african empires such as ghana were vulnerable to external attack as well as internal rebellion and the oral and written histories of this region record the rise and fall of several large kingdoms.
when european traders first arrived the list of west africa ancient and complex societies what was the character of the west african societies that european traders first encountered.
during the era of the european slave trade roughly from the late fifteenth through the mid nineteenth centuries a number of enduring myths about sub saharan west africa were propagated.
even today commentators claim that the people who inhabited this region four hundred years ago were isolated from the rest of the world and had a simple self sufficient economy.
indeed some scholars still depict the vast region stretching from the senegal river south to modern angola as a single cultural unit as if at one time all the men and women living there must have shared a common set of african political religious and social values.
sub saharan west africa defies such easy generalizations.
the first portuguese who explored the african coast during the fifteenth century encountered a great variety of political and religious cultures.
many hundreds of years earlier africans living in this region had come into contact with islam the religion founded by the prophet muhammad during the seventh century.
islam spread slowly from arabia into west africa.
not until ad 1030 did a kingdom located in the senegal valley accept the muslim religion.
many other west africans such as those in ancient ghana resisted islam and continued to observe traditional religions.
as muslim traders from north africa and the middle east brought a new religion to parts of west africa they expanded artists in west africa depicted the european traders who arrived in search of gold and slaves.
this sixteenth century benin bronze relief sculpture shows two portuguese men.
complete the assignment the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution on myhistorylab feature essay m odern americans often speak of the degradation of the global environment in apocalyptic terms as if the current generation confronts a unique challenge in world history.
no doubt many chemical compounds produced during the twentieth century have proved far more toxic than their inventors ever imagined.
but contemporary concerns about the future of the planet should not cause us to lose sight of the historical sweep of these problems.
we are certainly not the first society to experience a massive ecological transformation caused by the inevitable intervention of human beings into the processes of nature.
recapturing an earlier moment of environmental history known as the columbian exchange reminds us that the moral dimensions of change are often a matter of perspective.
what one group proclaims as providential progress may strike others as utter disaster.
the first major ecological revolution occurred as a direct result of new world exploration during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
the earliest explorers had expected america to be an extension of europe a place inhabited by familiar plants and animals.
they were surprised.
the exotic flora of the new world sketched from sixteenth century drawings included the food staple maize and the succulent pineapple.
equally strange to european eyes were buffalo rattle snakes catfish and the peculiar absence of horses and cattle.
no domestic animal was common to both sides of the atlantic except the dog.
and perhaps the most striking difference was between the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution the people themselves.
both native americans and europeans found each other to be the most exotic people they had ever encountered.
the most immediate biological consequence of contact between the people of europe africa and the new world was the transfer of disease.
within a year of columbuss return from the caribbean a new and more virulent strain of syphilis appeared in europe and became identified as the american disease.
by 1505 syphilis had spread all the way to china.
the effect of old world diseases in the americas was catastrophic.
native americans had little natural immunity to common african and european diseases because america remained biologically isolated after the reimmersion of the bering land bridge.
when they were exposed to influenza typhus measles and especially smallpox they died by the millions.
indeed european exploration of america set off the worst demographic disaster in world history.
within fifty years of the first contact epidemics had virtually exterminated the native population of hispaniola and devastated the densely populated valley of mexico.
also unsettling but by no means as destructive was the transfer of plants and animals from the old world to the new.
spanish colonizers carried sugar and bananas across the atlantic and in time these crops transformed the economies of latin america.
even more spectacular was the success of european animals in america.
during the sixteenth century pigs sheep and cattle arrived as passengers on european ships and in the fertile new world environment they multiplied more rapidly than they had in europe.
some animals survived shipwrecks.
on sable island a small desolate island off the coast of nova scotia one can still see the small longhaired cattle the successors of the earliest cattle transported to america.
other animals escaped from the ranches of new spain generating new breeds such as the fabled texas longhorn.
no european animal more profoundly affected native american life than the horse.
once common in north america the horse mysteriously disappeared from the continent sometime during the last ice age.
the early spanish explorers reintroduced the horse to north america and the sight of this large powerful animal at first terrified the indians.
mounted conquistadores discovered that if they could not frighten indian foes into submission they could simply outmaneuver them on horseback.
the native americans of the southwest quickly adapted the horse to their own use.
sedentary farmers acquired new hunting skills and soon the indians were riding across the great plains in pursuit of buffalo.
the comanche apache sioux and blackfoot tribes just to name a few became dependent on the horse.
mounted indian warriors galloped into battle unaware that it was their white adversaries who had brought the horse to america.
equally dramatic was the effect of american crops on european and african societies.
from his first trip to the new world columbus brought back a plant that revolutionized the diets of both humans and animals maize.
during the next century american beans squash and sweet potatoes appeared on european tables.
the pepper and tomato other new world discoveries added a distinctive view the closer look columbian exchange flavor to mediterranean cooking.
despite strong prohibitions on the use of tobacco in russia a user might have his nose amputated european demand for tobacco grew astronomically during the seventeenth century.
the potato caught on more slowly in europe because of a widespread fear that root crops caused disease.
the most rapid acceptance of the white potato came in ireland where it became a diet staple in the 1600s.
irish immigrants unaware of the genealogy of this native american crop reintroduced the potato into massachusetts bay in 1718.
and in west africa corn gradually replaced traditional animal feeds of low yield.
these sweeping changes in agriculture and diet helped reshape the old world economies.
partly because of the rich new sources of nutrition from america the population of europe which had long been relatively stable nearly doubled in the eighteenth century.
even as cities swelled and industries flourished european farmers were able to feed the growing population.
in many ways the seeds and plants of the new world were far more valuable in western economic development than all the silver of mexico and peru.
questions for discussion 1.
how did the transfer of diseases plants and animals affect the peoples of europe and the americas.
why did the reintroduction of the horse transform the native american societies of the southwest and the great plains.
how did american crops affect the old world.
chapt er 1 new world encounters ca were generally settled by clan elders.
the senior leaders allocated economic view the map african slave trade 1500 1870 and human resources.
they determined who received land and who might take a wife critical decisions because within the europe villages of west africa women and chilfrance dren cultivated the fields.
the communities were economically self sufficient.
not black sea only were they able to grow enough food spain to feed themselves but they also produced portugal trade goods such as iron kola and gum.
the first europeans to reach the tunisia me d algiers iterran ean sea west african coast by sail were the tri morocco po portuguese.
strong winds and currents li along the atlantic coast moved southcyrenaica s a h ara desert ward which meant a ship could sail with the wind from portugal to west africa without difficulty.
the problem was returning.
advances in maritime mali technology allowed the portuguese to ghana overcome these difficulties.
by conjoloff senegambian structing a new type of ship one unitstates ing european hull design with lateen senegal africa valley slave coast triangular sails from the middle east gold coast benin portuguese caravels were able to navigate biafra y c oast successfully against african winds and r o iv currents.
during the fi fteenth century equator portuguese sailors discovered that by sailing far to the west often as far as the indian azores they could on their return trips kongo ocean at l a n t i c to europe catch a reliable westerly wind.
ocean columbus was evidently familiar with angola the technique.
before attempting to cross the atlantic ocean he sailed to the gold coast and on the way he undoubtedly studied the wind patterns that would 1000 miles carry his famed caravels to the new 1000 kilometers world and back again.
the portuguese journeyed to africa portuguese french in search of gold and slaves.
mali and dutch british joloff officials were willing partners in this major overland commerce but insisted that europeans trade routes respect trade regulations established by africans.
they required the europeans trade routes in africa african trade routes were well established by the late 1600s.
to pay tolls and other fees and restricted trade restrictions and a deadly disease environment confined european settlements primarily to the foreign traders to conducting their coastal regions.
business in small forts or castles located at the mouths of the major rivers.
local merchants acquired some slaves and gold in the interior and major states would have included mali benin and kongo.
many transported them to the coast where they were exchanged for other africans lived in what are known as stateless societies really european manufactures.
transactions were calculated in terms of largely autonomous communities organized around lineage struclocal african currencies a slave would be offered to a european tures.
in these respects african and native american cultures had trader for so many bars of iron or ounces of gold.
much in common.
european slave traders accepted these terms largely because whatever the form of government men and women they had no other choice.
the african states fielded formidable constructed their primary social identity within well defined linarmies and outsiders soon discovered they could not impose eage groups which consisted of persons claiming descent from a their will on the region simply by demonstrations of force.
common ancestor.
disputes among members of lineage groups a spi n se a europe on the eve of conquest moreover local diseases proved so lethal for europeans six out of ten of whom would die within a single years stay in africa that they were happy to avoid dangerous trips to the interior.
the slaves were usually men and women taken captive during wars others were victims of judicial practices designed specifically to supply the growing american market.
by 1650 most west african slaves were destined for the new world rather than the middle east.
even before europeans colonized the new world the portuguese were purchasing almost a thousand slaves a year on the west african coast.
the slaves were frequently forced to work on the sugar plantations of madeira portuguese and the canaries spanish atlantic islands on which europeans experimented with forms of unfree labor that would later be more fully and more ruthlessly established in the american colonies.
it is currently estimated that approximately 10 7 million africans were taken to the new world as slaves.
the figure for the eighteenth century alone is about 5 5 million of which more than one third came from west central africa.
the bight of benin the bight of biafra and the gold coast supplied most of the others.
the peopling of the new world is usually seen as a story of european migrations.
but in fact during every year between 1650 and 1831 more africans than europeans came to the americas.
as historian davis eltis wrote in terms of immigration alone.
america was an extension of africa rather than europe until late in the nineteenth century europe on the eve of conquest how do you explain spains central role in new world exploration and colonization.
in ancient times the west possessed a mythical appeal to people living along the shores of the mediterranean sea.
classical writers speculated about the fate of atlantis a fabled western civilization that was said to have sunk beneath the ocean.
fallen greek heroes allegedly spent eternity in an uncharted western paradise.
but because the ships of greece and rome were ill designed to sail the open ocean the lands to the west remained the stuff of legend and fantasy.
in the fifth century an intrepid irish monk st brendan reported finding enchanted islands far out in the atlantic.
he even claimed to have met a talking whale named jasconius who allowed the famished voyager to cook a meal on his back.
in the tenth century scandinavian seafarers known as norsemen or vikings actually established settlements in the new world but almost a thousand years passed before they received credit for their accomplishment.
in the year 984 a band of vikings led by eric the red sailed west from iceland to a large island in the north atlantic.
eric who possessed a fine sense of public relations named the island greenland reasoning that others would more willingly colonize the icebound region if the country had a good name a few years later erics son leif founded a small settlement he named vinland at a location in northern newfoundland now called l anse aux meadows.
at the time the norse voyages went unnoticed by other europeans.
the hostility of native americans poor lines of communication climatic cooling and political upheavals in scandinavia made maintenance of these distant outposts impossible.
at the time of his first voyage in 1492 columbus seemed to have been unaware of these earlier exploits.
building new nation states at the time of the viking settlement other europeans were unprepared to sponsor transatlantic exploration.
nor would they be in a position to do so for several more centuries.
medieval kingdoms were loosely organized and until the early fifteenth century fierce provincial loyalties widespread ignorance of classical learning and dreadful plagues such as the black death discouraged people from thinking expansively about the world beyond their own immediate communities.
in the fifteenth century however these conditions began to change.
europe became more prosperous political authority was more centralized and the renaissance fostered a more expansive outlook among literate people in the arts and sciences.
the renaissance encouraged first in italy and later throughout europe bold new creative thinking that challenged the orthodoxies of the middle ages.
a major element in the shift was the slow but steady growth of population after 1450.
historians are uncertain about the cause of the increase after all neither the quality of medicine nor sanitation improved much but the result was a substantial rise in the price of land since there were more mouths to feed.
landlords profited from these trends and as their income expanded they demanded more of the luxury items such as spices silks and jewels that came from distant asian ports.
economic prosperity created powerful new incentives for exploration and trade.
this period also witnessed the centralization of political authority under a group of rulers whom historians refer to collectively as the new monarchs.
before the mid fifteenth century feudal nobles dominated small districts throughout europe.
conceding only nominal allegiance to larger territorial leaders the local barons taxed the peasants and waged war pretty much as they pleased.
they also dispensed what passed for justice.
the new monarchs challenged the nobles autonomy.
the changes that accompanied the challenges came slowly and in many areas violently but the results altered traditional political relationships between the nobility and the crown and between the citizen and the state.
the new monarchs of europe recruited armies and supported these expensive organizations with revenues from national taxes.
they created effective national courts.
while these monarchs were often despotic they personified the emergent nation states of europe and brought a measure of peace to local communities weary of chronic feudal war.
the story was the same throughout most of western europe.
the tudors of england represented by henry vii r 1485 1509 ended a long civil war known as the war of the roses.
louis xi the french monarch r 1461 1483 strengthened royal authority by reorganizing state finances.
the political unification of spain began in 1469 with the marriage of ferdinand of aragon and isabella of castile setting off a nation building process that involved driving both the jews and muslims out chapt er 1 new world encounters of spain.
these strong willed monarchs forged nations out of groups of independent kingdoms.
if political centralization had not occurred the major european countries could not possibly have generated the financial and military resources necessary for worldwide exploration.
a final prerequisite to exploration was reliable technical knowledge.
ptolemy second century ad and other ancient geographers had mapped the known world and had even demonstrated that the world was round.
during the middle ages however europeans lost effective contact with classical tradition.
within arab societies the old learning had survived indeed flourished and when europeans eventually rediscovered the classical texts during the renaissance they drew heavily on the work of arab scholars.
this new learning generated great intellectual curiosity about the globe and about the world that existed beyond the mediterranean.
the invention of printing from movable type by johann gutenberg in the 1440s greatly facilitated the spread of technical knowledge.
indeed printing sparked a communications revolution whose impact on the lives of ordinary people was as far reaching as that caused by telephones television and computers in modern times.
sea captains published their findings as quickly as they could engage a printer and by the beginning of the sixteenth century a small though growing number of educated readers throughout europe were well informed about the exploration of the new world.
the printing press invited europeans to imagine exciting opportunities that they had hardly perceived when the vikings sailed the north atlantic.
imagining a new world how did spanish conquest of central and south america transform native american cultures.
by 1500 centralization of political authority and advances in geographic knowledge brought spain to the first rank as a world power.
in the early fifteenth century though spain consisted of several autonomous kingdoms.
it lacked rich natural resources and possessed few good seaports.
in fact there was little about this land to suggest its people would take the lead in conquering and colonizing the new world.
by the end of the century however spain suddenly came alive with creative energy.
the union of ferdinand and isabella sparked a drive for political consolidation that because of the monarchs fervid catholicism took on the characteristics of a religious crusade.
spurred by the militant faith of their monarchs the armies of castile and aragon waged holy war known as the reconquista against the independent states in southern spain that earlier had been captured by muslims.
in 1492 the moorish islamic kingdom of granada fell and for the first time in centuries the entire iberian peninsula was united under christian rulers.
spanish authorities showed no tolerance for people who rejected the catholic faith.
during the reconquista thousands of jews and moors were driven from the country.
indeed columbus undoubtedly encountered such refugees as he was preparing for his famous voyage.
from this volatile social and political environment came the conquistadores men eager for personal glory and material gain uncompromising in matters of religion and unswerving in their loyalty to the crown.
they were prepared to employ fire and sword in any cause sanctioned by god and king and these adventurers carried european culture to the most populous regions of the new world.
long before spaniards ever reached the west indies they conquered the indigenous peoples of the canary islands a strategically located archipelago in the eastern atlantic.
the harsh labor systems the spanish developed in the canaries served as models of subjugation in america.
indeed the spanish experience paralleled that of the english in ireland.
an early fifteenth century spanish chronicle described the canary natives as miscreants.
who do not acknowledge their creator and live in part like beasts many islanders quickly died of disease others were killed in battle or enslaved.
the new spanish landholders introduced sugar a laborintensive plantation crop.
the landowners forced slaves captured in africa to provide the labor.
this oppressive process was driven by dreams of great wealth and would be repeated many times by european colonists through the centuries.
myths and reality if it had not been for christopher columbus cristoforo colombo of course spain might never have gained an american empire.
little is known about his early life.
born in genoa in 1451 of humble parentage columbus soon devoured the classical learning that had so recently been rediscovered and made available in printed form.
he mastered geography and perhaps while sailing the coast of west africa he became obsessed with the idea of voyaging west across the atlantic ocean to reach cathay as china was then known.
in 1484 columbus presented his plan to the king of portugal.
however while the portuguese were just as interested as columbus in reaching cathay they elected to voyage around the continent of africa instead of following the route suggested by columbus.
they suspected that columbus had substantially underestimated the circumference of the earth and that for all his enthusiasm he would almost certainly starve before reaching asia.
the portuguese decision eventually paid off quite handsomely.
in 1498 one of their captains vasco da gama returned from the coast of india carrying a fortune in spices and other luxury goods.
undaunted by rejection columbus petitioned isabella and ferdinand for financial backing.
they were initially no more interested in his grand design than the portuguese had been.
but time was on columbuss side.
spains aggressive new monarchs envied the success of their neighbor portugal.
columbus boldly played on the rivalry between the countries talking of wealth and empire.
indeed for a person with little success or apparent support he was supremely confident.
one contemporary reported that when columbus made up his mind he was as sure he would discover what he did discover and find what he did find as if he held it in a chamber under lock and key columbuss stubborn lobbying on behalf of the enterprise of the indies gradually wore down opposition in the spanish court and the two sovereigns provided him with a small fleet that contained two of the most famous caravels ever constructed the nia and the pinta as well as the square rigged nao santa maria.
the imagining a new world watch the video how should we think of columbus.
cristoforo columbo better known to americans as christopher columbus was a fifteenth century sailor from genoa.
dreaming of reaching the rich markets of asia by sailing west from europe he instead stumbled upon the islands of the caribbean sea.
in so doing he ushered in a new age of sustained contact between the peoples of the americas and the peoples of europe africa and asia.
indomitable admiral set sail for cathay in august 1492 the year of spains unification.
educated europeans of the fifteenth century knew the world was round.
no one seriously believed that columbus and his crew would tumble off the edge of the earth.
the concern was with size not shape.
columbus estimated the distance to the mainland of asia to be about 3 000 nautical miles a voyage his small ships would have no difficulty completing.
the actual distance is 10 600 nautical miles however and had the new world not been in his way he and his crew would have run out of food and water long before they reached china as the portuguese had predicted.
after stopping in the canary islands to refit the ships columbus continued his westward voyage in early september.
when the tiny spanish fleet sighted an island in the bahamas after only thirtythree days at sea the admiral concluded he had reached asia.
since his mathematical calculations had obviously been correct he assumed he would soon encounter the chinese.
it never occurred to columbus that he had stumbled upon a new world.
he assured his men his patrons and perhaps himself that the islands were indeed part of the fabled indies or if not the indies themselves then they were surely an extension of the great asian landmass.
he searched for the splendid cities marco polo had described but instead of meeting wealthy chinese columbus encountered native americans whom he appropriately if mistakenly called indians after his first voyage of discovery columbus returned to the new world three more times.
but despite his considerable courage and ingenuity he could never find the treasure his financial supporters in spain angrily demanded.
columbus died in 1506 a frustrated but wealthy entrepreneur unaware that he had reached a previously unknown continent separating asia from europe.
the final disgrace came in 1500 with the publication of a sensationalist account of amerigo vespuccis travels across the atlantic that contained falsified dates to suggest that vespucci had visited the mainland prior to other explorers such as columbus and henry cabot.
chapt er 1 new world encounters this misleading account convinced german mapmakers that it was vespucci who had proved america to be a new continent distinct from asia.
before the misconception could be corrected the name america gained general acceptance throughout europe.
only two years after columbuss first voyage spain and portugal almost went to war over the anticipated treasure of asia.
pope alexander vi negotiated a settlement that pleased both kingdoms.
portugal wanted to exclude the spanish from the west coast of africa and what was more important from columbuss new route to india spain insisted on maintaining complete control over lands discovered by columbus which then still were regarded as extensions of china.
the treaty of tordesillas 1494 divided the entire world along a line located 270 leagues west of the azores.
any new lands discovered west of the line belonged to spain.
at the time no european had ever seen brazil which turned out to be on portugals side of the line.
to this day brazilians speak portuguese.
the treaty failed to discourage future english dutch and french adventurers from trying their luck in the new world.
society in the new world.
rather they came for instant wealth preferably in gold and were not squeamish about the means they used to obtain it.
bernal daz one of the first spaniards to migrate to the region explained he had traveled to america to serve god and his majesty to give light to those who were in darkness and to grow rich as all men desire to do in less than two decades the indians who had inhabited the caribbean islands had been exterminated victims of exploitation and disease.
for a quarter century the conquistadores concentrated their energies on the major islands that columbus had discovered.
rumors of fabulous wealth in mexico however aroused the interest of many spaniards including hernn corts a minor government functionary in cuba.
like so many members of his class he dreamed of glory military adventure and riches that would transform him from an ambitious court clerk into an honored hidalgo.
on november 18 1518 corts and a small army left cuba to verify the stories of mexicos treasure.
events soon demonstrated that corts was a leader of extraordinary ability.
his adversary was the legendary aztec emperor montezuma.
the confrontation between the two powerful personalities is one of the more dramatic of early american history.
a fear of competition from rival conquistadores coupled with a burning desire to conquer a vast new empire drove corts forward.
determined to push his men through any obstacle he scuttled the ships that had carried them to mexico in order to the conquistadores faith and greed line of demarcation treaty of tordesillas 1494 spains new discoveries unleashed a horde of conquistadores on the caribbean.
these independent adventurers carved out small settlements on cuba hispaniola jamaica and puerto rico in the 1490s and early 1500s.
they were not interested in creating a permanent north america gilbert cabot corts 1519 tenochtitln europe france asia columbus 1492 africa n 1521 south america s 14 ama da g 1498 pa c i f i c ocean pa c i f i c ocean equator dia hispaniola magella equator 15 maya empire pa c i f i c ocean corts lan 1 cuba portugal spain de soto 1539 1542 mag el s umbu col 492 england cartier 1535 verrazano 1524 coronado 1540 1542 vera cruz aztec empire frobisher la salle 1679 1682 pa c i f i c ocean gulf of mexico indian ocean ano del c 2 at l a n t i c ocean english french portuguese spanish voyages of european exploration the routes of the major voyagers to the new world and asia.
early explorers established land claims for the competing european states.
australia imagining a new world read the document bartolom de las casas of the island of hispaniola in matters of war corts possessed obvious technological superiority over the aztec troops.
the sound of gunfire initially frightened the indians.
moreover aztec troops had never seen horses much less armored horses carrying sword wielding spaniards.
but these elements would have counted for little had corts not also gained a psychological advantage over his opponents.
at first montezuma thought that the spaniards were gods representatives of the fearful plumed serpent quetzalcoatl.
instead of resisting immediately the emperor hesitated.
when montezumas resolve hardened it was too late.
cortss victory in mexico coupled with other conquests in south america transformed spain at least temporarily into the wealthiest state in europe.
from plunder to settlement the virgin of guadalupe is perhaps the best known religious symbol of mexico.
the image reflects the sixteenth century encounter between europeans and indians.
the virgin mary was already an important religious figure among the spanish when they arrived in america.
like the indian juan diego to whom she is said to have appeared and offered hope comfort and protection the virgin is dark skinned.
this 1531 representation shows her clothed in a robe adorned with stars and surrounded by a crown of sunrays.
each year hundreds of thousands of people visit the shrine of the virgin at tepeyac outside mexico city.
prevent them from retreating.
corts led his band of six hundred followers across rugged mountains and on the way gathered allies from among the tlaxcalans a tributary people eager to free themselves from aztec domination.
following the conquest of mexico renamed new spain the spanish crown confronted a difficult problem.
ambitious conquistadores interested chiefly in their own wealth and glory had to be brought under royal authority a task easier imagined than accomplished.
adventurers like corts were stubbornly independent quick to take offense and thousands of miles away from the seat of imperial government.
the crown found a partial solution in the encomienda system.
the monarch rewarded the leaders of the conquest with indian villages.
the people who lived in the settlements provided the encomenderos with labor tribute in exchange for legal protection and religious guidance.
the system of course cruelly exploited indian laborers.
one historian concluded the first encomenderos without known exception understood spanish authority as provision for unlimited personal opportunism corts alone was granted the services of more than twenty three thousand indian workers.
the encomienda system made the colonizers more dependent on the king for it was he who legitimized their title.
in the words of one scholar the new economic structure helped to transform a frontier of plunder into a frontier of settlement spains rulers attempted to maintain tight personal control over their american possessions.
the volume of correspondence between the two continents much of it concerning mundane matters was staggering.
all documents were duplicated several times by hand.
because the trip to madrid took many months a year often passed before receipt of an answer to a simple request.
but somehow the cumbersome system worked.
in mexico officials appointed in spain established a rigid hierarchical order directing the affairs of the countryside from urban centers.
the spanish also brought catholicism to the new world.
the dominicans and franciscans the two largest religious orders established indian missions throughout new spain.
some friars tried to protect the native americans from the worst forms of exploitation.
one courageous dominican fra bartolom de las casas published an eloquent defense of indian rights historia de las indias which among other things questioned the legitimacy of european conquest of the new world.
las casass work provoked heated debate in spain and while the crown had no intention of repudiating the vast american empire it did initiate certain reforms designed to bring greater love and moderation to spanish indian relations.
it is impossible to ascertain how many converts the friars made.
in 1531 however a newly converted chapt er 1 new world encounters christian reported a vision of the virgin a dark skinned woman of obvious indian ancestry who became known throughout the region as the virgin of guadalupe.
this figure the result of a creative blending of indian and european cultures served as a powerful symbol of mexican nationalism in the wars for independence fought against spain almost three centuries later.
about two hundred fifty thousand spaniards migrated to the new world during the sixteenth century.
another two hundred thousand made the journey between 1600 and 1650.
most colonists were single males in their late twenties seeking economic opportunities.
they generally came from the poorest agricultural regions of southern spain almost 40 percent migrating from andalusia.
since so few spanish women migrated especially in the sixteenth century the men often married indians and blacks unions which produced mestizos and mulattos.
the frequency of interracial marriage indicated that among other things the people of new spain were more tolerant of racial differences than were the english who settled in north america.
for the people of new spain social standing was affected as much or more by economic worth as it was by color.
persons born in the new world even those of spanish parentage criollos were regarded as socially inferior to natives of the mother country peninsulares.
spain claimed far more of the new world than it could possibly manage.
spains rulers regarded the american colonies primarily as a source of precious metal and between 1500 and 1650 an estimated 200 tons of gold and 16 000 tons of silver were shipped back to the spanish treasury in madrid.
this great wealth however proved a mixed blessing.
the sudden acquisition of so much money stimulated a horrendous infl ation that hurt ordinary spaniards.
they were hurt further by long debilitating european wars funded by american gold and silver.
moreover instead of developing its own industry spain became dependent on the annual shipment of bullion from america and in 1603 one insightful spaniard declared the new world conquered by you has conquered you in its turn this somewhat weakened although still formidable empire would eventually extend its territorial claims north to california and the southwest see chapter 4.
de champlain resettle this region for france.
he founded quebec in 1608.
as was the case with other colonial powers the french declared they had migrated to the new world in search of wealth as well as in hopes of converting the indians to christianity.
as it turned out these economic and spiritual goals required full cooperation between the french and the native americans.
in contrast to the english settlers who established independent farms and who regarded the indians at best as obstacles in the path of civilization the french viewed the natives as necessary economic partners.
furs were canadas most valuable export and to obtain the pelts of beaver and other animals the french were absolutely dependent on indian hunters and trappers.
french traders lived among the indians often taking native wives and studying local cultures.
frenchmen known as coureurs de bois forest runners following canadas great river networks paddled deep into the heart of the continent in search of fresh sources of furs.
some intrepid traders penetrated beyond the great lakes into the mississippi valley.
in 1673 pre jacques marquette journeyed down the read the document jacques cartier first contact with the indians 1534 the french claim canada what was the character of the french empire in canada.
french interest in the new world developed slowly.
more than three decades after columbuss discovery king francis i sponsored the unsuccessful efforts of giovanni da verrazzano to find a short water route to china via a northwest passage around or through north america.
in 1534 the king sent jacques cartier on a similar quest.
the rocky barren coast of labrador depressed the explorer.
he grumbled i am rather inclined to believe that this is the land god gave to cain discovery of a large promising waterway the following year raised cartiers spirits.
he reconnoitered the gulf of saint lawrence traveling up the magnificent river as far as modern montreal.
despite his high expectations however cartier got no closer to china and discouraged by the harsh winters he headed home in 1542.
not until sixty five years later did samuel this seventeenth century woodcut depicts samuel de champlains fortified camp at quebec on the st lawrence river.
champlain founded quebec for france in 1608.
source north wind picture archives.
the english enter the competition mississippi river and nine years later sieur de la salle traveled all the way to the gulf of mexico.
in the early eighteenth century the french established small settlements in louisiana the most important being new orleans.
the spreading french influence worried english colonists living along the atlantic coast for it appeared the french were about to cut them off from the trans appalachian west.
catholic missionaries also depended on indian cooperation.
canadian priests were drawn from two orders the jesuits and the recollects and although measuring their success in the new world is difficult it seems they converted more indians to christianity than did their english protestant counterparts to the south.
like the fur traders the missionaries lived among the indians and learned to speak their languages.
the french dream of a vast american empire suffered from serious flaws.
the crown remained largely indifferent to canadian affairs.
royal officials stationed in new france received limited and sporadic support from paris.
an even greater problem was the decision to settle what seemed to many rural peasants and urban artisans a cold inhospitable land.
throughout the colonial period canadas european population remained small.
a census of 1663 recorded a mere 3 035 french residents.
by 1700 the figure had reached only 15 000.
men far outnumbered women thus making it hard for settlers to form new families.
moreover because of the colonys geography all exports and imports had to go through quebec.
it was relatively easy therefore for crown officials to control that traffic usually by awarding fur trading monopolies to court favorites.
such practices created political tensions and hindered economic growth.
the english enter the competition why did england not participate in the early competition for new world colonies.
the first english visit to north america remains shrouded in mystery.
fishermen working out of bristol and other western english ports may have landed in nova scotia and newfoundland as early as the 1480s.
the codfish of the grand banks undoubtedly drew vessels of all nations and during the summer months some sailors probably dried and salted their catches on canadas convenient shores.
john cabot giovanni caboto a venetian sea captain completed the first recorded transatlantic voyage by an english vessel in 1497 while attempting to find a northwest passage to asia.
cabot died during a second attempt to find a direct route to cathay in 1498.
although sebastian cabot continued his fathers explorations in the hudson bay region in 1508 1509 englands interest in the new world waned.
for the next three quarters of a century the english people were preoccupied with more pressing domestic and religious concerns.
when curiosity about the new world revived however cabots voyages established englands belated claim to american territory.
birth of english protestantism at the time of cabots death england was not prepared to compete with spain and portugal for the riches of the orient.
although henry vii the first tudor monarch brought peace to england after a bitter civil war the country still contained too many mighty subjects powerful local magnates who maintained armed retainers and who often paid little attention to royal authority.
henry possessed no standing army his small navy intimidated no one.
to be sure the tudors gave nominal allegiance to the pope in rome but unlike the rulers of spain they were not crusaders for catholicism.
a complex web of international diplomacy also worked against englands early entry into new world colonization.
in 1509 to cement an alliance between spain and england the future henry viii married catherine of aragon.
as a result of this marital arrangement english merchants enjoyed limited rights to trade in spains american colonies but any attempt by england at independent colonization would have threatened those rights and jeopardized the alliance.
by the end of the sixteenth century however conditions within england had changed dramatically in part as a result of the protestant reformation.
as they did the english began to consider their former ally spain to be the greatest threat to english aspirations.
tudor monarchs especially henry viii r 1509 1547 and his daughter elizabeth i r 1558 1603 developed a strong central administration while england became more and more a protestant society.
the merger of english protestantism and english nationalism affected all aspects of public life.
it helped propel england into a central role in european affairs and was crucial in creating a powerful sense of an english identity among all classes of people.
popular anticlericalism helped spark religious reformation in england.
although they observed traditional catholic ritual the english people had long resented paying monies to a pope who lived in far off rome.
early in the sixteenth century criticism of the clergy grew increasingly vocal.
cardinal thomas wolsey the most powerful prelate in england flaunted his immense wealth and unwittingly became a symbol of spiritual corruption.
parish priests were objects of ridicule.
poorly educated men for the most part they seemed theologically ignorant and perpetually grasping.
anticlericalism did not run as deep in england as it had in martin luthers germany but by the late 1520s the catholic church could no longer take for granted the allegiance of the great mass of the population.
the peoples growing anger is central to an understanding of the english reformation.
put simply if ordinary men and women throughout the kingdom had not accepted separation from rome then henry viii could not have forced them to leave the church.
the catalyst for protestant reformation in england was the kings desire to rid himself of his wife catherine of aragon who happened to be the daughter of the former king of spain.
their marriage had produced a daughter mary but as the years passed no son.
the need for a male heir obsessed henry.
he and his counselors assumed a female ruler could not maintain domestic peace and england would fall once again into civil war.
the answer seemed to be remarriage.
henry petitioned pope clement vii for a divorce technically an annulment but the spanish had other ideas.
unwilling to tolerate the public humiliation of catherine they forced the pope to procrastinate.
in 1527 time ran out.
the passionate henry fell in love with anne boleyn who later bore him a daughter elizabeth.
the king decided to divorce catherine with or without papal consent.
chapt er 1 new world encounters the final break with rome came swiftly.
between 1529 and 1536 the king acting through parliament severed all ties with the pope seized church lands and dissolved many of the monasteries.
in march 1534 the act of supremacy boldly announced the kings majesty justly and rightfully is supreme head of the church of england the entire process which one historian termed a state reformation was conducted with impressive efficiency.
land formerly owned by the catholic church passed quickly into private hands and within a short period property holders throughout england had acquired a vested interest in protestantism.
beyond breaking with the papacy henry showed little enthusiasm for theological change.
many catholic ceremonies survived.
the split with rome however opened the door to increasingly radical religious ideas.
the year 1539 saw the publication of the first bible in english.
before then the scripture had been available only in latin the language of an educated elite.
for the first time in english history ordinary people could read the word of god in the vernacular.
it was a liberating experience that persuaded some men and women that henry had not sufficiently reformed the english church.
with henrys death in 1547 england entered a period of acute political and religious instability.
edward vi henrys young son by his third wife jane seymour came to the throne but he was still a child and sickly besides.
militant protestants took advantage of the political uncertainty insisting the church of england remove every trace of its catholic origins.
with the death of young edward in 1553 these ambitious efforts came to a sudden halt.
henrys eldest daughter mary next ascended the throne.
fiercely loyal to the catholic faith of her mother catherine of aragon mary i vowed to return england to the pope.
however misguided were the queens plans she possessed her fathers iron will.
hundreds of protestants were executed others scurried off to the safety of geneva and frankfurt where they absorbed the most radical calvinist doctrines of the day.
when mary died in 1558 and was succeeded by elizabeth the marian exiles flocked back to england more eager than ever to rid the tudor church of catholicism.
mary had inadvertently advanced the cause of calvinism by creating so many protestant martyrs reformers burned for their faith and now celebrated in the woodcuts of the most popular book of the period john foxes acts and monuments commonly known as the book of martyrs 1563.
the marian exiles served as the leaders of the elizabethan church an institution that remained fundamentally calvinist until the end of the sixteenth century.
militant protestantism by the time mary tudor came to the throne the vast popular movement known as the reformation had swept across northern and central europe and as much as any of the later great political revolutions it had begun to transform the character of the modern world.
the reformation started in germany when in 1517 a relatively obscure german monk martin luther publicly challenged the central tenets of roman catholicism.
within a few years the religious unity of europe was permanently shattered.
the reformation divided kingdoms sparked bloody wars and unleashed an extraordinary flood of religious publication.
read the document henry vii letters of patent granted to john cabot king henry viis seizure of the throne of england in 1485 brought an end to a series of civil wars that had torn england apart for almost thirty years.
along with bringing stability to the kingdom henry vii also established englands first claims to the americas by sponsoring the explorations of captain john cabot.
luthers message was straightforward one ordinary people could easily comprehend.
god spoke through the bible luther maintained not through the pope or priests.
scripture taught that women and men were saved by faith alone.
pilgrimages fasts alms indulgences none of the traditional ritual observances could assure salvation.
the institutional structure of catholicism was challenged as luthers radical ideas spread rapidly across northern germany and scandinavia.
after luther other protestant theologians religious thinkers who would determine the course of religious reform in england scotland and the early american colonies mounted an even more strident attack on catholicism.
the most influential of these was john calvin a lawyer turned theologian who lived most of his the english enter the competition adult life in the swiss city of geneva.
calvin stressed gods omnipotence over human affairs.
the lord he maintained chose some persons for election the gift of salvation while condemning others to eternal damnation.
a man or woman could do nothing to alter this decision.
common sense suggests that such a bleak doctrine known as predestination might lead to fatalism or hedonism.
after all why not enjoy the worlds pleasures to the fullest if such actions have no effect on gods judgment.
but many sixteenth century europeans did not share modern notions of what constitutes common sense.
indeed calvinists were constantly up and doing searching for signs that they had received gods gift of grace.
the uncertainty of their eternal state proved a powerful psychological spur for as long as people did not know whether they were scheduled for heaven or hell they worked diligently to demonstrate that they possessed at least the seeds of grace.
john calvins institutes of the christian religion 1536 contained a powerful statement of the new faith and his teachings spawned religious movements in most northern european countries.
in france the reformed protestants were known as huguenots.
in scotland people of calvinist persuasion founded the presbyterian church.
and in seventeenth century england and america most of those who put calvins teachings into practice were called puritans.
woman in power queen elizabeth demonstrated that henry and his advisers had been mistaken about the capabilities of female rulers.
she was a woman of such talent that modern biographers find little to criticize in her decisions.
she governed the english people from 1558 to 1603 an intellectually exciting period during which some of her subjects took the first halting steps toward colonizing the new world.
elizabeth recognized her most urgent duty as queen was to end the religious turmoil that had divided the country for a generation.
she had no desire to restore catholicism.
after all the pope openly referred to her as a woman of illegitimate birth.
nor did she want to re create the church exactly as it had been in the final years of her fathers reign.
rather elizabeth established a unique institution catholic in much of its ceremony and government but clearly protestant in doctrine.
under her so called elizabethan settlement the queen assumed the title supreme head of the church some churchmen who had studied with calvin in geneva urged her to drop immediately all catholic rituals but she ignored these strident reformers.
the young queen understood she could not rule effectively without the full support of her people and as the examples of edward and mary before her demonstrated neither radical change nor widespread persecution gained a monarch lasting popularity.
the state of englands religion was not simply a domestic concern.
one scholar aptly termed this period of european history the age of religious wars catholicism and protestantism influenced the way ordinary men and women across the continent interpreted the experiences of everyday life.
religion shaped political and economic activities.
protestant leaders for example purged the english calendar of the many saints days that had punctuated the agricultural year in catholic countries.
the reformation certainly had a profound impact on the economic development of calvinist countries.
max weber a brilliant german sociologist of the early twentieth century argued in his protestant ethic and spirit of capitalism that a gnawing sense of self doubt created by the doctrine of predestination drove calvinists to extraordinary diligence.
they generated large profits not because they wanted to become rich but because they wanted to be doing the lords work to show they might be among gods elect indeed it is helpful to view protestantism and catholicism as warring ideologies bundles of deeply held beliefs that divided countries and families much as communism and capitalism did during the late twentieth century.
the confrontations between the two faiths affected elizabeths entire reign.
soon after she became queen pope pius v excommunicated her and in his papal bull regnans in exelsis 1570 he stripped elizabeth of her pretended title to the kingdom spain the most fervently catholic state in europe vowed to restore england to the true faith and catholic militants constantly plotted to overthrow the tudor monarchy.
religion war and nationalism slowly but steadily english protestantism and english national identity merged.
a loyal english subject in the late sixteenth century loved the queen supported the church of england and hated catholics especially those who happened to live in spain.
elizabeth herself came to symbolize this militant new chauvinism.
her subjects adored the virgin queen and they applauded when her famed sea dogs dashing figures such as sir francis drake and sir john hawkins seized spanish treasure ships in american waters.
the english sailors raids were little more than piracy but in this undeclared state of war such instances of harassment passed for national victories.
there seemed to be no reason patriotic elizabethans should not share in the wealth of the new world.
with each engagement each threat each plot english nationalism took deeper root.
by the 1570s it had become obvious the english people were driven by powerful ideological forces similar to those that had moved the spanish subjects of isabella and ferdinand almost a century earlier.
in the mid 1580s philip ii who had united the empires of spain and portugal in 1580 decided that englands arrogantly protestant queen could be tolerated no longer.
he ordered the construction of a mighty fleet hundreds of transport vessels designed to carry spains finest infantry across the english channel.
when one of philips lieutenants viewed the armada at lisbon in may 1588 he described it as la felicissima armada the invincible fleet.
the king believed that with the support of englands oppressed catholics spanish troops would sweep elizabeth from power.
it was a grand scheme it was an even grander failure.
in 1588 a smaller more maneuverable english navy dispersed philips armada and severe storms finished it off.
spanish hopes for catholic england lay wrecked along the rocky coasts of scotland and ireland.
english protestants interpreted victory in providential terms god breathed and they were scattered chapt er 1 new world encounters an unpromising beginning mystery at roanoke what role did the spanish play in the failure of the roanoke colony.
by the 1570s english interest in the new world had revived.
an increasing number of wealthy gentlemen were in an expansive mood ready to challenge spain and reap the profits of asia and america.
yet the adventurers who directed elizabethan expeditions were only dimly aware of cabots voyages and their sole experience in settling distant outposts was in ireland.
over the last three decades of the sixteenth century english adventurers made almost every mistake one could possibly imagine.
they did however acquire valuable information about winds and currents supplies and finance.
sir walter raleghs experience provided all english colonizers with a sobering example of the difficulties that awaited them in america.
in 1584 he dispatched two captains to the coast of present day north carolina to claim land granted to him by elizabeth.
the men returned with glowing reports no doubt aimed in part at potential financial backers.
the soile declared captain arthur barlow is the most plentifull sweete fruitfull and wholesome of all the world ralegh diplomatically renamed this marvelous region virginia in honor of his patron the virgin queen.
indeed highly gendered vocabulary figured prominently in the european conquest of the new world.
as historian kathleen m brown explained associations of the land with virgin innocence reinforced the notion that virginia had been saved from the spaniards lust to be conquered by the chaste english elizabeth encouraged ralegh in private conversation but rejected his persistent requests for money.
with rumors of war in the air she did not want to alienate philip ii unnecessarily by sponsoring a colony on land long ago claimed by spain.
ralegh finally raised the funds for his adventure but his enterprise seemed ill fated from the start.
despite careful planning everything went wrong.
the settlement was poorly situated.
located inside the outer banks perhaps to avoid detection by the spanish the roanoke colony proved extremely difficult to reach.
even experienced navigators feared the treacherous currents and storms off cape hatteras.
sir richard grenville the leader of the expedition added to the colonists troubles by destroying an entire indian village in retaliation for the suspected theft of a silver cup.
grenville hurried back to england in the autumn of 1585 leaving the colonists to fend for themselves.
although they coped quite well a peculiar series of accidents transformed raleghs settlement into a ghost town.
in the spring of 1586 sir francis drake was returning from a caribbean voyage and decided to visit roanoke.
since an anticipated shipment of supplies was overdue the colonists climbed aboard drakes ships and went home.
in 1587 ralegh launched a second colony.
this time he placed in charge john white a veteran administrator and talented artist who a few years earlier had produced a magnificent sketchbook of the algonquian indians who lived near roanoke.
read the document john white letter to richard hakluyt and description of voyage to the lost colony 1590 john white depicted fishing techniques practiced by the algonquian indians of the present day carolinas.
in the canoe dip nets and multipronged spears are used.
in the background indians stab at fish with long spears.
at left a weir traps fish by taking advantage of the river currents natural force.
once again raleghs luck turned sour.
the spanish armada severed communication between england and america.
every available english vessel was pressed into military service and between 1587 and 1590 no ship visited the roanoke colonists.
when rescuers eventually reached the island they found the village deserted.
the fate of the lost colonists remains a mystery.
the best guess is that they were absorbed by neighboring groups of natives some from as far as the southern shore of the james river.
study resources conclusion campaign to sell america had it not been for richard hakluyt the younger who publicized explorers accounts of the new world the dream of american colonization might have died in england.
hakluyt a supremely industrious man never saw america.
nevertheless his vision of the new world powerfully shaped english public opinion.
he interviewed captains and sailors upon their return from distant voyages and carefully collected their stories in a massive book titled the principall navigations voyages and discoveries of the english nation 1589.
the work appeared to be a straightforward description of what these sailors had seen across the sea.
that was its strength.
in reality hakluyt edited each piece so it would drive home the books central point england needed american colonies.
indeed they were essential to the nations prosperity and independence.
in hakluyts america there were no losers.
the earth bringeth fourth all things in aboundance as in the first creations without toil or labour he wrote of virginia.
his blend of piety patriotism and self interest proved immensely popular and his voyages went through many editions.
hakluyts enthusiasm for the spread of english trade throughout the world may have blinded him to the aspirations of other peoples who actually inhabited those distant lands.
he continued to collect testimony from adventurers and sailors who claimed to have visited asia and america.
in an immensely popular new edition of his work published between 1598 and 1600 and entitled voyages he catalogued in extraordinary detail the commercial opportunities awaiting courageous and ambitious english colonizers.
hakluyts entrepreneurial perspective served to obscure other aspects of the european conquest which within only a short amount of time would transform the face of the new world.
he paid little attention for example to the rich cultural diversity of the native americans he said not a word about the pain of the africans who traveled to north and south america as slaves.
instead he and many other polemicists for english colonization led the ordinary men and women who crossed the atlantic to expect nothing less than a paradise on earth.
by fanning such unrealistic expectations hakluyt persuaded european settlers that the new world was theirs for the taking a self serving view that invited ecological disaster and continuous human suffering.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 1 new world encounters on myhistorylab time line 24 000 17 000 b c.
indians cross the bering strait into north america 2000 1500 b c.
agricultural revolution transforms native american life a d 1001 norsemen establish a small settlement in vinland newfoundland 1030 death of war jaabi king of takrur first muslim ruler in west africa 1450 gutenberg perfects movable type 1469 marriage of isabella and ferdinand leads to the unification of spain 1481 portuguese build castle at elmina on the gold coast of africa 1492 columbus lands at san salvador 1497 cabot leads first english exploration of north america 1498 vasco da gama of portugal reaches india by sailing around africa 1502 montezuma becomes emperor of the aztecs 1506 columbus dies in spain after four voyages to america 1517 martin luthers protest sparks reformation in germany 1521 corts defeats the aztecs at tenochtitln 1529 1536 henry viii provokes english reformation 1534 cartier claims canada for france 1536 calvins institutes published 1540 coronado explores the southwest for spain 1558 elizabeth i becomes queen of england 1585 first roanoke settlement established on coast of north carolina spanish armada defeated by the english 1608 champlain founds quebec chapt er 1 chapter review chapter review native american histories before the conquest imagining a new world what explains cultural differences among native american groups before european conquest.
how did spanish conquest of central and south america transform native american cultures.
paleo indians crossed into north america from asia 20 000 years ago.
during the migrations they divided into distinct groups often speaking different languages.
the agricultural revolution sparked population growth allowing some groups such as the aztecs to establish complex societies.
the eastern woodland indians who lived along the atlantic coast had just begun to practice agriculture when the europeans arrived.
p 4 spanish conquistadores conquered vast territories in the caribbean mexico and central and south america during the sixteenth century.
catholic missionaries followed the conquistadores to convert the indians to christianity.
although the spanish conquerors cruelly exploited the indians as laborers intermarriage between the groups created a new culture blending spanish and indian elements.
p 16 a world transformed the french claim canada how did europeans and native americans interact during the period of first contact.
what was the character of the french empire in canada.
native americans initially welcomed the opportunity to trade with the europeans.
the newcomers insisted on civilizing the indians.
neither christianity nor europeanstyle education held much appeal for native americans and they resisted efforts to transform their cultures.
contagious old world diseases such as smallpox decimated the indians leaving them vulnerable to cultural imperialism.
p 8 the french in canada focused on building a trading empire rather than on settlement.
the coureurs de bois and catholic missionaries lived among the indians learning their languages and customs.
french explorers followed the extensive river networks of north america and claimed vast stretches of land along the st lawrence and mississippi rivers.
p 20 west africa ancient and complex societies the english enter the competition why did england not participate in the early competition for new world colonies.
what was the character of the west african societies that european traders first encountered.
west africans had learned of islam long before european traders arrived looking for slaves.
the earliest europeans found powerful local rulers who knew how to profit from commercial exchange.
slaves who had been captured in distant wars were taken to so called slave factories where they were sold to europeans and then shipped to the new world.
p 11 europe on the eve of conquest during the early 1500s religious turmoil preoccupied englands monarchs.
after ascending the throne in 1558 queen elizabeth i ended internal religious struggle by establishing an english church that was protestant in doctrine but catholic in ceremony.
under elizabeth english nationalism merged with anti catholicism to challenge spanish control of the americas.
p 21 an unpromising beginning mystery at roanoke how do you explain spains central role in new world exploration and colonization.
the unification of spain under ferdinand and isabella and the experience of the reconquista provided spain with advantages in its later conquest of the new world.
the spanish crown supported the explorations of christopher columbus who thought he had discovered a new route to asia.
his voyages gave the spanish a head start in claiming american lands.
p 15 what role did the spanish play in the failure of the roanoke colony.
the second roanoke colony was founded in 1587 but the following year the spanish armada severed communications between england and america.
when an english ship was finally able to reach roanoke in 1590 the rescuers found the settlement there deserted.
p 24 key terms and definitions beringia land bridge formerly connecting asia and north america that is now submerged beneath the bering sea.
p 4 agricultural revolution the gradual shift from hunting and gathering to cultivating basic food crops that occurred worldwide from 7 000 to 9 000 years ago.
p 5 eastern woodland cultures term given to indians from the northeast region who lived on the atlantic coast and supplemented farming with seasonal hunting and gathering.
p 7 columbian exchange the exchange of plants animals and diseases between europe and the americas from first contact throughout the era of exploration.
p 10 conquistadores sixteenth century spanish adventurers often of noble birth who subdued the native americans and created the spanish empire in the new world.
p 16 treaty of tordesillas treaty negotiated by the pope in 1494 that divided the world along a north south line in the middle of the atlantic ocean granting spain all lands west of the line and portugal lands east of the line.
p 18 study resources encomienda system an exploitative system by spanish rulers that granted conquistadors control of native american villages and their inhabiatants labor.
p 19 protestant reformation sixteenth century religious movement to reform and challenge the spiritual authority of the roman catholic church.
p 21 virgin of guadalupe apparition of the virgin mary that has become a symbol of mexican nationalism.
p 20 the spanish armada 1588 p 24 spanish fleet sent to invade england in coureurs de bois fur trappers in french canada who lived among the native americans.
p 20 critical thinking questions 1.
how did native american societies experience substantial change prior 3.
how would you contrast the role of religion and economics in the to european conquest.
development of the spanish french and english empires.
how would you compare the relationships europeans formed with 4.
how did a relatively small european nation like england rise to a west africans to the ones they formed with native americans.
position of world power.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 1 on myhistorylab native american histories before the conquest view the closer look an early european image of native americans p 8 west africa ancient and complex societies complete the assignment the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution p 12 view the closer look columbian exchange p 13 african slave trade 1500 1870 p 14 imagining a new world jacques cartier first contact with the indians 1534 p 20 native american population loss 1500 1700 p 10 view the map bartolom de las casas of the island of hispaniola p 19 read the document view the map read the document the french claim canada a world transformed watch the video columbus.
p 17 how should we think of the english enter the competition read the document henry vii letters of patent granted to john cabot p 22 an unpromising beginning mystery at roanoke read the document john white letter to richard hakluyt and description of voyage to the lost colony 1590 p 24 indicates study plan media assignment new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies contents and learning objectives breaking away pg.
30 quakers in america pg.
46 what were some of the social problems facing britain in the 16th and 17th centuries that helped push english colonists to cross the atlantic.
how did the quaker religion influence the development of pennsylvania.
the chesapeake dreams of wealth pg.
31 how did the barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the carolinas.
why did the chesapeake colonies not prosper during the earliest years of settlement.
the founding of georgia pg.
50 reforming england in america pg.
37 how did differences in religion affect the founding of the new england colonies.
planting the carolinas pg.
48 how was the founding of the carolinas different from the founding of georgia.
feature essay the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion diversity in the middle colonies pg.
44 how did ethnic diversity shape the development of the middle colonies.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab the collision of cultures america before columbus europe looks westward the arrival of the english looking ahead 1.
how did the societies of native people in the south differ from those in the north in the precontact period before the arrival of the europeans.
what effects did the arrival of europeans have on the native peoples of the americas.
how did patterns of settlement differ among the spanish english french and dutch immigrants to the americas.
the discovery of the americas did not begin with christopher columbus.
it began many thousands of years earlier when human beings first crossed into the new continents and began to people them.
by the end of the fifteenth century a d when the first important contact with europeans occurred the americas were home to millions of men and women.
these ancient civilizations had experienced many changes and many catastrophes during their long history.
but it is likely that none of these experiences was as tragically transforming as the arrival of europeans.
in the first violent years of spanish and portuguese exploration and conquest the impact of the new arrivals was profound.
europeans brought with them diseases most notably smallpox to which natives unlike the invaders had no immunity.
the result was a great demographic catastrophe that killed millions of people weakened existing societies and greatly aided the spanish and portuguese in their rapid and devastating takeover of the existing american empires.
but the european immigrants were never able to eliminate the influence of the indigenous peoples whom they came to call indians.
in their many interactions whether beneficial or ruinous these very different civilizations shaped one another learned from one another and changed one another permanently and profoundly.
1 america before columbus time line 11 000 years ago migrations into the americas begin cabot explores north america columbuss first transatlantic voyage african slaves arrive in spanish america 1518 1530 smallpox ravages indians 1519 1522 magellan expedition circumnavigates globe elizabeth i becomes english queen st augustine florida founded second attempt to establish roanoke colony james i becomes english king jamestown founded spanish found santa fe 2 french establish quebec we know relatively little about the first peoples in the americas but archaeologists have uncovered new evidence from artifacts that have survived over many millennia.
we continue to learn more about the earliest americans.
the peoples of the precontact americas for many decades scholars believed that all early migrations into the americas came from humans crossing an ancient land bridge over the bering strait into what is now alaska approximately 11 000 years ago.
the migrations were probably a result of the development of new stone tools spears and other hunting implements used to pursue the large animals that crossed between asia and north america.
all of these land based migrants are thought to have come from a mongolian stock related to that of modern day siberia.
scholars refer to these migrants as the clovis people so named for a town in new mexico where archaeologists first discovered evidence of their tools and weapons in the 1930s.
more recent archaeological evidence suggests that not all the early migrants to the americas came across the bering strait.
some migrants from asia appear to have settled as far south as chile and peru even before people began moving into north america by land.
these first south americans may have come not by land but by sea using boats.
this new evidence suggests that the early population of the americas was more diverse and more scattered than scholars used to believe.
recent dna evidence has identified a possible early population group that does not seem to have asian characteristics.
this suggests that thousands of years before columbus there may have been some migration from europe.
the collision of cultures 3 ber ing st ra it pi r ip mis sis s.
miss our extent of ice cap during most recent glaciation adena cultures hopewell cultures mesa verde canyon de chelly anasazi io oh chaco canyon poverty point hohokam primary mississippian cultures r i r bering land bridge mogollon possible migration routes of early indians adena hopewell site mississippian site mayan site olmec site southwestern site this map tracks some of the very early migrations into and within north america in the centuries preceding contact with europe.
the map shows the now vanished land bridge between siberia and alaska over which thousands perhaps millions of migrating people passed into the americas.
it also shows the locations of some of the earliest settlements in north america.
what role did the extended glacial field in what is now canada play in residential patterns in the ancient american world.
north american migrations the archaic period is a scholarly term for the early history of humans in america beginning around 8000 b c.
in the first part of this period most humans the archaic period supported themselves through hunting and gathering using the same stone tools that earlier americans had brought with them from asia.
later in the archaic period population groups began to expand their activities and to develop new tools such as nets and hooks for fishing traps for smaller animals and baskets for gathering berries nuts seeds and other plants.
still later some groups began to farm.
farming of course requires people to stay in one place.
in agricultural areas the first sedentary settlements slowly began to form creating the basis for larger civilizations.
4 chapter 1 the growth of civilizations the south the most elaborate early civilizations emerged in south and central america and in mexico.
in peru the incas created the largest empire in the americas stretching almost the inca in peru 2 000 miles along western south america.
the incas developed a complex administrative system and a large network of paved roads that welded together the populations of many tribes under a single government.
organized societies of mesoamericans emerged around 10 000 b c.
they created a mesoamerican civilizations civilization in what is now mexico and much of central america.
they were known as the olmec people.
the first truly complex society in the region began in approximately 1000 b c.
a more sophisticated culture grew up around a d 800 in parts of central america and in the yucatn peninsula of mexico in an area known as maya.
mayan civilization developed a written language a numerical system similar to the arabic an accurate calendar an advanced agricultural system and important trade routes into other areas of the continents.
gradually the societies of the maya region were superseded by other mesoamerican tribes who have become known collectively and somewhat inaccurately as the aztec.
they called themselves mexica.
in about a d 1300 the mexica built the city of tenochtitln on a large island in a lake in central mexico the site of present day mexico city.
with a population as high as 100 000 by 1500 tenochtitln featured large and impressive public buildings schools that all male children attended an organized military a medical system and a slave workforce drawn from conquered tribes.
a warlike people the mexica gradually established their dominance over almost all of central mexico.
like other mesoamerican societies the mexica developed a religion that included a belief that the gods could be satisfied only by being fed the living hearts of humans.
the mexica sacrificed people largely prisoners captured in combat on a scale unknown in other american civilizations.
the mesoamerican civilizations were for many centuries the center of civilized life in north and central america the hub of culture and trade.
the civilizations of the north the peoples north of mexico developed less elaborate but still substantial civilizations.
inhabitants of the northern regions of the continent subsisted on combinations of hunting hunting gathering and fishing gathering and fishing.
they included the eskimo or inuit of the arctic circle who fished and hunted seals big game hunters of the northern forests who led nomadic lives based on the pursuit of moose and caribou tribes of the pacific northwest whose principal occupation was salmon fishing and who created substantial permanent settlements along the coast and a group of tribes spread through relatively arid regions of the far west who developed successful communities based on fishing hunting small game and gathering edible plants.
other societies in north america were agricultural.
among the most developed were agricultural societies those in the southwest.
the people of that arid region built large irrigation systems and they constructed towns of stone and adobe.
in the great plains region too most tribes were engaged in sedentary farming corn and other grains.
they lived in large permanent settlements.
the eastern third of what is now the united states much of it covered with forests and inhabited by the woodland indians had the greatest food resources of any area of the continent.
most of the many tribes of the region engaged in farming hunting gathering the collision of cultures 5 inuit arctic tlingit inuit tshimshian northwest coast kwakiutls makah salish cree kootenay blackfeet skagit puyallup plateau walla umatilla walla cayuse tillamook pomo assiniboine colville chinook pacific ocean hidatsa sioux mandan arapaho kiowa crow apachean pawnee shoshone maidu great basin chemehuevi chumash serrano cahuilla luiseo diegueo california hopi zui menominee ottawa abenaki wampanoag mohegan huron pequot iroquois neutral erie susquehannock narragansett winnebago fox lenni potawatomi lenape sauk kickapoo mosopelea illinois shawnee kaskaskia eastern woodland cherokee wichita apachean pamlico tuscarora atlantic chickasaw caddo pueblo ocean creek apachean yamasee southwest choctaw jano yaqui natchez apalachee timucua concho lagunero agriculture hunting chippewa ute pima main subsistence mode iowa prairie great plains goshute shoshone southern paiute micmac penobscot algonquin chippewa cheyenne sioux flathead nez perc northern paiute klamath modoc costano montagnais subarctic shuswap nootkin karankawa coahuiltec northeast mexico calusa caribbean arawak hunting and gathering fishing this map shows the various ways in which the native tribes of north america supported themselves before the arrival of european civilization.
like most precommercial peoples the native americans survived largely on the resources available in their immediate surroundings.
note for example the reliance on the products of the sea of the tribes along the northern coastlines of the continent and the way in which tribes in relatively inhospitable climates in the north where agriculture was difficult relied on hunting large game.
most native americans were farmers.
what different kinds of farming would have emerged in the very different climates of the agricultural regions shown on this map.
how the early north americans lived and fishing simultaneously.
in the south there were permanent settlements and large trading networks based on the corn and other grains grown in the rich lands of the mississippi river valley.
cahokia a trading center located near present day st louis had a cahokia population of 40 000 at its peak in a d 1200.
the agricultural societies of the northeast were more mobile.
farming techniques there were designed to exploit the land quickly rather than to develop permanent settlements.
many of the tribes living east of the mississippi river were linked together loosely by common linguistic roots.
the largest of these language groups consisted of the algonquian tribes who lived along the atlantic seaboard from canada to virginia the iroquois confederacy which was centered in what is now upstate new york and the muskogean 6 chapter 1 tribes which consisted of the tribes in the southernmost regions of the eastern seaboard.
religion was usually closely linked with the natural world on which the tribes depended for sustenance.
native americans worshiped many gods whom they associated variously with crops game forests rivers and other elements of nature.
all tribes assigned women the jobs of caring for children preparing meals and pueblo village of the southwest gathering certain foods.
but the allocation c mcintyre photolink getty images of other tasks varied from one society to another.
some tribal groups reserved farming tasks almost entirely for men.
among other gender relations groups women tended the fields whereas men engaged in hunting warfare or clearing land.
because women and children were often left alone for extended periods while men were away hunting or fighting women in some tribes controlled the social and economic organization of the settlements.
europe looks westward europeans were almost entirely unaware of the existence of the americas before the fifteenth century.
a few early wanderers leif eriksson an eleventh century norse seaman and others had glimpsed parts of the eastern atlantic on their voyages.
but even if their discoveries had become common knowledge and they did not there would have been little incentive for others to follow.
europe in the middle ages roughly a d 500 1500 was too weak divided and decentralized to inspire many great ventures.
by the end of the fifteenth century however conditions in europe had changed and the incentive for overseas exploration had grown.
commerce and sea travel two important changes encouraged europeans to look toward new lands.
one was the significant growth in europes population in the fifteenth century.
the black death a catastrophic epidemic of the bubonic plague that began in constantinople in 1347 had killed more than a third of the people on the continent according to some estimates.
but a century and european population growth a half later the population had rebounded.
with that growth came a reawakening of commerce.
a new merchant class was emerging to meet the rising demand for goods from abroad.
as trade increased and as advances in navigation made long distance sea travel more feasible interest in expanding trade grew even more quickly.
the second change was the emergence of new governments that were more united and strong monarchies powerful than the feeble political entities of the feudal past.
in the western areas of europe in particular strong new monarchs were eager to enhance the commercial development of their nations.
in the early fourteenth century marco polo and other adventurers had returned from asia bearing exotic spices cloths and dyes and even more exotic tales.
europeans who the collision of cultures 7 craved commercial glory had dreamed above all of trade with the east.
for two centuries that trade had been limited by the difficulties of the long overland journey to the asian courts.
but in the fourteenth century talk of finding a faster safer sea route to east asia began.
the portuguese were the preeminent maritime power in the fifteenth century largely because of prince henry the navigator who devoted much of his life to the promotion of exploration.
in 1486 after henrys death the portuguese explorer portuguese exploration bartholomeu dias rounded the southern tip of africa the cape of good hope.
in 1497 1498 vasco da gama proceeded all the way around the cape to india.
but the spanish not the portuguese were the first to encounter the new world the term europeans applied to the ancient lands previously unknown to them.
christopher columbus christopher columbus was born and reared in genoa italy.
he spent his early seafaring years in the service of the portuguese.
by the time he was a young man he had developed great ambitions.
he believed he could reach east asia by sailing west across the atlantic rather than east around africa.
columbus thought the world was far smaller than it actually is.
he also believed that the asian continent extended farther eastward than it actually does.
most important he did not realize that anything lay to the west between europe and the lands of asia.
columbus failed to enlist the leaders of portugal to back his plan so he turned instead to spain.
the marriage of spains two most powerful regional rulers ferdinand of aragon and isabella of castile had produced the strongest and most ambitious monarchy in europe.
columbus appealed to queen isabella for support for his proposed westward voyage and in 1492 she agreed.
commanding ninety men and three columbuss first voyage ships the nia the pinta and the santa mara columbus left spain in august 1492 and sailed west into the atlantic.
ten weeks later he sighted land and assumed he had reached an island off asia.
in fact he had landed in the bahamas.
when he pushed on and encountered cuba he assumed he had reached china.
he returned to spain bringing with him several captured natives as evidence of his achievement.
he called the natives indians because he believed they were from the east indies in the pacific.
but columbus did not of course bring back news of the great khans court in china or any samples of the fabled wealth of the indies.
and so a year later he tried again this time with a much larger expedition.
as before he headed into the caribbean discovering several other islands and leaving a small and short lived colony on hispaniola.
on a third voyage in 1498 he finally reached the mainland and cruised along the northern coast of south america.
he then realized for the first time that he had encountered not a part of asia but a separate continent.
columbus ended his life in obscurity.
ultimately he was even unable to give his name to the land he had revealed to the europeans.
that distinction went instead to a florentine merchant amerigo vespucci who wrote a series of vivid descriptions of the lands he visited on a later expedition to the new world and helped popularize the idea that the americas were new continents.
partly as a result of columbuss initiative spain began to devote greater resources and energy to maritime exploration.
in 1513 the spaniard vasco de balboa crossed the isthmus of panama and became the first known european to gaze westward upon the great ocean that separated america from china.
seeking access to that ocean ferdinand magellan a portuguese 8 chapter 1 r ishe frob76 78 16 1 hudson lab gil be rad hudson bay or rt w fo un d t 14 cabo la nd ren ce ri ve r ca rt ier ne 35 mi ss north po nc e de ri o veracruz a yucatan peninsula c ar ib b ean se a maya lan south america ke 7 8 is th 1502 mu s o panama f pa nama explorers routes columbus spanish 2 other spanish at l a n t i c ocean other european french 31 33 mag el dr a piz arr o 15 pa c i f i c ocean pa c i f i c ocean gh lei ra orinoco r 1000 km santiago de cuba s1 in wk ha mexico city aztec empire 500 mi 5 13 havana 8 21 tes 151 cor mayapan chichen itza le n1 de an gr gulf of mexico la paz at l a n t i c ocean oa corona mississ do 1 ippi 40 r o1 an raz ver 39 42 cibola roanoke de soto r sa s hawkins 158 r io oh ar bal b r n ka co lo r do ra iss pi ip america drakes bay st l aw missouri r quito south america english native american empires inca empire this map shows the many voyages of exploration to and conquest of north america launched by europeans in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
note how columbus and the spanish explorers who followed him tended to move quickly into the lands of mexico the caribbean and central and south america while the english and french explored the northern territories of north america.
what factors might have led these various nations to explore and colonize different areas of the new world.
european exploration and conquest 1492 1583 in spanish employ found the strait that now bears his name at the southern end of south america struggled through the stormy narrows and into the ocean so calm by contrast that he christened it the pacific and then proceeded to the philippines.
there magellan died in a conflict with natives but his expedition went on to complete the circumnavigation of the globe the collision of cultures 9 first known circumnavigation of the globe 1519 1522.
by 1550 spaniards had explored the coasts of north america as far north as oregon in the west and labrador in the east.
the spanish empire in time spanish explorers in the new world stopped thinking of america simply as an obstacle to their search for a route to asia and began instead to consider it a possible source of wealth in itself.
the spanish claimed for themselves the whole of the new world except for a large part of the east coast of south america todays brazil that was reserved by a papal decree for the portuguese.
in 1518 hernando corts who had been an unsuccessful spanish government official in cuba for fourteen years led a small military expedition about 600 men against the aztecs in mexico and their powerful emperor montezuma after hearing stories of great treasures there.
his first assault on tenochtitln the aztec capital failed.
but corts and his army had unwittingly exposed the natives to smallpox to which the natives unlike the europeans had developed no immunity.
the epidemic decimated the aztec population and made it possible for the spanish to triumph in their second attempt at conquest.
through his ruthless suppression of the surviving natives corts established himself as one of the most brutal of the spanish conquistadores conquerors.
twenty years later francisco pizarro conquered conquistadores the incas in peru and opened the way for other spanish advances into south america.
the first spanish settlers in america were interested only in exploiting the american stores of gold and silver and they were fabulously successful.
for 300 years beginning in the sixteenth century the mines of spanish america yielded more than ten times as much gold and silver as all the rest of the worlds mines combined.
before long however most spanish settlers in america traveled to the new world for other reasons.
many went in hopes of profiting from agriculture.
they helped establish elements of european the mexicans strike back in this vivid scene from the durn codex mexican artists illustrate a rare moment in which mexican warriors gained the upper hand over the spanish invaders.
driven back by native fighters the spanish have taken refuge in a room in the royal palace in tenochtitln while brightly attired mexican warriors besiege them.
although the mexicans gained a temporary advantage in this battle the drawing illustrates one of the reasons for their inability to withstand the spanish in the longer term.
the spanish soldiers are armed with rifles and crossbows while the indians carry only spears and shields.
biblioteca nacional madrid spain bridgeman images co ns ider t he s o urc e bartolom de las casas of the island of hispaniola 1542 bartolom de las casas a dominican friar from spain was an early european settler of the west indies.
he devoted much of his life to describing the culture of native peoples and chronicling the many abuses they suffered at the hands of their colonizers.
this excerpt is from a letter he addressed to spains prince philip.
god has created all these numberless people to be quite the simplest without malice or duplicity most obedient most faithful to their natural lords and to the christians whom they serve the most humble most patient most peaceful and calm without strife nor tumults not wrangling nor querulous as free from uproar hate and desire of revenge as any in the world.
among these gentle sheep gifted by their maker with the above qualities the spaniards entered as soon as they knew them like wolves tigers and lions which had been starving for many days and since forty years they have done nothing else nor do they afflict torment and destroy them with strange and new and divers kinds of cruelty never before seen nor heard of nor read of.
the christians with their horses and swords and lances began to slaughter and practice strange cruelty among them.
they penetrated into the country and spared neither children nor the aged nor pregnant women nor those in child labour all of whom they ran through the body and lacerated as though they were assaulting so many lambs herded in their sheepfold.
they made bets as to who would slit a man in two or cut off his head at one blow or they opened up his bowels.
they tore the babes from their mothers breast by the feet and dashed their heads against the rocks.
others they seized by the shoulders and threw into the rivers laughing and joking and when they fell into the water they exclaimed boil body of so and so they spitted the bodies of other babes together with their mothers and all who were before them on their swords.
they made a gallows just high enough for the feet to nearly touch the ground and by thirteens in honor and reverence of our redeemer and the twelve apostles they put wood underneath and with fire they burned the indians alive.
they wrapped the bodies of others entirely in dry straw binding them in it and setting fire to it and so they burned them.
they cut off the hands of all they wished to take alive made them carry them fastened on to them and said go and carry letters that is take the news to those who have fled to the mountains.
they generally killed the lords and nobles in the following way.
they made wooden gridirons of stakes bound them upon them and made a slow fire beneath thus the victims gave up the spirit by degrees emitting cries of despair in their torture.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
how did bartolom de las casas c haracterize the natives.
how do you think they would have responded to this description.
what metaphor did las casas use to describe the natives and where does this metaphor come from.
what role did las casas expect the spaniards to play on hispaniola.
what did they do instead.
source francis augustus macnutt bartholomew de las casas his life his apostolate and his writings new york g p.
putnams sons 1909 p 14.
10 the collision of cultures 11 louisiana united states spanish 1763 1800 san francisco 1776 taos 1609 n ra 2000 km mi ssi s s ip spanish de gulf of f l o r i d a to 1819 mexico tampico st augustine 1565 bahamas to britain 1646 atlantic ocean viceroyalty la habana 1515 of new spain culiacn 1531 mexico city tenochtitln 1325 pi r santa fe 1607 san luis obispo 1772 los angeles 1781 san juan capistrano 1776 san diego de alcala 1769 tucson r io g 1709 1000 mi cuba 1492 yucatn peninsula guatemala 1519 jamaica haiti to britain french 1655 after 1697 puerto rico 1502 santo domingo 1496 caribbean sea panama 1519 pacific ocean espanola 1492 santiago 1514 veracruz 1519 santa fe de bogot 1538 quito 1534 trinidad 1498 caracas 1567 orin oc o monterey 1770 from 1783 r surinam dutch viceroyalty of new granada 1625 french guiana 1626.
zon r ama aztec empire at the time of spanish conquest inca empire at the time of spanish conquest colonial boundaries and provincial names are for the late 18th century outposts on the northern frontier of new spain not simultaneous through the 18th century missions o viceroyalty of la plata r t u g u la paz 1548 p paran a viceroyalty of new castilla peru es e cuzco 1535 r cuidad de los reyes lima 1535 br az il guayaquil 1535 rio de janeiro 1567 so paulo 1554 valparaiso 1544 santiago 1541 montevideo 1724 buenos aires 1580 rio de la plata forts sometimes with missions settlements spanish america from the time of columbuss initial voyage in 1492 until the mid nineteenth century spain was the dominant colonial power in the new world.
from the southern regions of south america to the northern regions of the pacific northwest spain controlled one of the worlds vastest empires.
note how much of the spanish empire was simply grafted upon the earlier empires of native peoples the incas in what is today chile and peru and the aztecs across much of the rest of south america mexico and the southwest of what is now the united states.
what characteristics of spanish colonization would account for their preference for already settled regions.
c ivilization permanently in america.
other spaniards priests friars and missionaries went to america to spread the christian religion through their efforts the influence of the catholic church ultimately extended throughout south and central america and mexico.
one of the first friars to work in the colonies bartolom de las casas fought for the fair treatment of native peoples by the spanish as part of his ministry.
see consider the source bartolom de las casas of the island of hispaniola.
12 chapter 1 by the end of the sixteenth century the spanish empire included the caribbean islands mexico and southern north america.
it also spread into south america and included what is now chile argentina and peru.
in 1580 when the spanish and portuguese monarchies temporarily united brazil came under spanish jurisdiction as well.
northern outposts in 1565 the spanish established the fort of st augustine in florida their first permanent settlement in what is now the united states.
but it was little more than a small military outpost.
a more substantial colonizing venture began in the southwest in 1598 when don juan de oate traveled north from mexico with a party of 500 claimed for spain some of the lands of the pueblo indians in what is now new mexico and began to establish a colony.
oate granted encomiendas the right to exact tribute and labor from the natives on large tracts of land to favored spaniards.
in 1609 spanish colonists founded santa fe.
by 1680 there were over 2 000 spanish colonists living among about 30 000 pueblos.
the economic heart of the colony was cattle and sheep raised on the ranchos that stretched out around the small towns spanish settlers established.
despite widespread conversions to catholicism most natives including the converts continued to practice their own traditional religious rituals.
in 1680 spanish priests and pop the colonial government tried to suppress these rituals.
in response pop an indian religious leader led an uprising that killed hundreds of european settlers captured santa fe and drove the spanish from the region.
twelve years later the spanish returned and crushed a last revolt in 1696.
after the revolts many spanish colonists realized that they could not hope to prosper in new mexico while in constant conflict with a native population that greatly outnumbered them.
although the spanish intensified their efforts to assimilate the indians they also now permitted the pueblos to own land.
they stopped commandeering indian labor and they tolerated the survival of tribal religious rituals.
there was significant intermarriage between europeans and indians.
by 1750 the spanish population had grown to about 4 000.
the pueblo population had declined through disease war and migration to about 13 000 less than half what it had been in 1680.
new mexico had by then become a reasonably stable but still weak and isolated outpost of the spanish empire.
st augustine and santa fe biological and cultural exchanges european and native cultures never entirely merged in the spanish empire.
nevertheless the arrival of whites launched a process of interaction between different peoples that left no one unchanged.
that europeans were exploring the americas at all was a result of early contacts with the natives from whom they had learned of the rich deposits of gold and silver.
from then on the history of the americas became one of increasing levels of exchanges some population loss from diseases beneficial others catastrophic among different peoples and cultures.
the first and perhaps most profound result of this exchange was the importation of european diseases to the new world.
it would be difficult to exaggerate the consequences of the exposure of native americans to such illnesses as influenza measles typhus and above all smallpox.
although historians have debated the question of how many people lived in the americas before the arrival of europeans it is estimated that the collision of cultures 13 millions died.
see debating the past why do historians so often differ.
in some areas native populations were virtually wiped out within a few decades of their first contact with whites.
on hispaniola where columbus had landed in the 1490s the native population quickly declined from approximately 1 million to about 500.
in the maya area of mexico as much as 95 percent of the population perished within a few years of the natives first contact with the spanish.
many although not all of the tribes north of mexico were spared the worst of the epidemics.
but for other areas of the new world this was a disaster at least as grave as and in some places far worse than the black death that had killed over one third of the population of europe two centuries before.
some europeans watching this biological catastrophe saw it as evidence of gods will that they should dominate the new world and its native population.
the decimation of native populations in the southern regions of the americas was not only a result of exposure to infection.
it was also a result of the conquistadores deliberate policy of subjugation and extermination.
their brutality was in part a reflection of the ruthlessness with which europeans waged war in all parts of the world.
it was also a result of their conviction that the natives were savages uncivilized peoples who could be treated as somehow not fully human.
by the 1540s the combined effects of european diseases and european military brutality had all but population loss from military brutality destroyed the empires of mexico and south america.
not all aspects of the exchange were disastrous to the indians.
the europeans introduced to the natives important new crops among them sugar and bananas domestic livestock cattle pigs and sheep and perhaps most significant the horse which gradually became central to the lives of many natives and transformed their societies.
the exchange was at least as important and more beneficial to the europeans.
in both north and south america the arriving white peoples learned from the natives new agricultural techniques appropriate to the demands of the new land.
they discovered new crops above all maize corn which columbus took back to europe from new world crops his first trip to america.
such foods as squash pumpkins beans sweet potatoes tomatoes peppers and potatoes all found their way into european diets.
in south america central america and mexico europeans and natives lived in intimate if unequal contact with one another.
many natives gradually came to speak spanish or portuguese but they created a range of dialects fusing the european languages with elements of their own.
european men outnumbered european women by at least ten to one.
intermarriage often forcible became frequent between spanish immigrants and native women.
before long the population of the colonies came to be dominated numerically at least by people of mixed race or mestizos.
virtually all the enterprises of the spanish and portuguese colonists depended on indian workforces.
in some places indians were sold into slavery.
more often unfree indian labor colonists used a coercive or indentured wage system under which indians worked in the mines and on the plantations under duress for fixed periods.
that was not in the end enough to meet the labor needs of the colonists.
as early as 1502 european settlers began importing slaves from africa.
africa and america over one half of all the immigrants to the new world between 1500 and 1800 were africans virtually all of them sent to the americas against their will.
most came from a large region below the sahara desert known as guinea.
debating the past why do historians so often differ.
early in the twentieth century when the professional study of history was still relatively new many historians believed that questions about the past could be answered with the same certainty and precision that questions in more scientific fields could be answered.
by sifting through available rec ords using precise methods of research and analysis and producing careful closely argued accounts of the past they believed they could create definitive histories that would survive without controversy.
scholars who adhered to this view believed that real knowledge can be derived only from direct scientific observation of clear fact they were known as positivists a vigorous debate continues to this day over whether historical research can or should be truly objective.
almost no historian any longer accepts the positivist claim that history could ever be an exact science.
disagreement about the past is in fact at the heart of the effort to understand history.
critics of contemporary historical scholarship often denounce the way historians are constantly revising earlier interpretations.
some denounce the act of interpretation itself.
history they claim is what happened and historians should stick to the facts historians however continue to differ with one another both because the facts are seldom as straightforward as their critics claim and because facts by themselves mean almost nothing without an effort to assign meaning to them.
some historical facts of course are not in dispute.
everyone agrees for example that the japanese bombed pearl harbor on december 7 1941 and that 14 abraham lincoln was elected president in 1860.
but many other facts are much harder to determine among them for example the question of how large the american population was before the arrival of columbus or how many slaves resisted slavery.
this sounds like a reasonably straightforward question but it is almost impossible to answer with any certainty because the rec ords of slave resistance are spotty and the definition of resistance is a matter of considerable dispute.
even when a set of facts is clear and straightforward historians disagree sometimes quite radically over what they mean.
those disagreements can be the result of political and ideological disagreements.
some of the most vigorous debates in recent decades have been between scholars who believe that economic interests and class divisions are the key to understanding the past and those who believe that ideas and culture are at least as important as material interests.
whites and people of color men and women people from the american south and people from the north young people and older people these and many other points of difference find their way into scholarly disagreements.
debates can also occur over differences in methodology between those who believe that quantitative studies can answer important historical questions and those who believe that other methods come closer to the truth.
most of all historical interpretation changes in response to the time in which it is written.
historians may strive to be objective in their work but no one can be entirely free from the assumptions and concerns of the present.
in the 1950s the omnipresent shadow of the cold war had a profound effect on the way most historians viewed the past.
in the 1960s concerns about racial justice and disillusionment with the vietnam war altered the way many historians viewed the past.
those events introduced a much more critical tone to scholarship and turned the attention of scholars away from politics and government and toward the study of society and culture.
many areas of scholarship in recent decades are embroiled in a profound debate over whether there is such a thing as truth the world some scholars argue is simply a series of narratives constructed by people who view life in very different and often highly personal ways.
truth does not really exist.
everything is a product of interpretation.
not many historians embrace such radical ideas most would agree that interpretations to be of any value must rest on a solid foundation of observable facts.
but historians do recognize that even the most compelling facts are subject to many different interpretations and that the process of understanding the past is a forever continuing and forever contested process.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
what are some of the reasons historians so often disagree.
is there ever a right or wrong in histori cal interpretation.
what value might historical inquiry have other than reaching a right or wrong conclusion.
if historians so often disagree how should a student of history approach historical content.
how might disagreement expand our understanding of history.
europeans and white americans came to portray african society as primitive and uncivilized.
but most africans were in fact highly civilized peoples with well developed economies and political systems.
the residents of upper guinea had substantial commercial contact with the mediterranean world trading ivory gold trade states of west africa and slaves for finished goods and largely as a result became early converts to islam.
after the collapse of the ancient kingdom of ghana around a d 1100 they created the even larger empire of mali whose trading center at timbuktu became fabled as a center of education and a meeting place of the peoples of many lands.
farther south africans were more isolated from europe and the mediterranean and were more politically fragmented.
the central social unit was the village which usually consisted of members of an extended family group.
some groups of villages united in small kingdoms.
but no large empires emerged in the south.
nevertheless these southern societies developed extensive trade both among themselves and to a lesser degree with the outside world.
african civilizations developed economies that reflected the climates and resources of their lands.
in upper guinea fishing and rice cultivation supplemented by the extensive trade with mediterranean lands were the foundation of the economy.
farther south africans grew wheat and other food crops raised livestock and fished.
there were some more nomadic tribes in the interior who subsisted largely on hunting and gathering.
but most africans were sedentary farming people.
as in many indian societies in america african families tended to be matrilineal they traced their heredity through and inherited property from their m others.
matrilineal societies women played a major role often the dominant role in trade.
in many areas they were the principal farmers while the men hunted fished and raised livestock and everywhere 15 america in the world the atlantic context of early american history most americans understand that our nation has recently become intimately bound up with the rest of the world that we live in what some call the age of globalization until recently however most historians have examined the nations past in relative isolation.
among the first areas of american history to be reexamined in an international perspective is the earliest period of european settlement of the americas.
many scholars of early american history now examine what happened in the new world in the context of what has become known as the atlantic world the idea of an atlantic world rests in part on the obvious connections between western europe and the spanish british french and dutch colonies in north and south america.
all the early european civilizations of the americas were part of a great imperial project launched by the major powers of europe.
the massive european and african immigrations to the americas beginning in the sixteenth century the defeat and devastation of native populations the creation of european agricultural and urban settlements and the imposition of imperial regulations on trade commerce landowning and political life all of these forces reveal the influence of old world imperialism on the history of the new world.
but the expansion of empires is only one part of the creation of the atlantic world.
at least equally important and closely related is the expansion of commerce from europe and africa to the americas.
although some europeans traveled to the new world in search of religious freedom or to escape oppression or to search for adventure the great majority of european 16 immigrants were in search of economic opportunity.
not surprisingly therefore the european settlements in the americas were almost from the start intimately connected to europe through the growth of commerce between them commerce that grew more extensive and more complex with every passing year.
the commercial relationship between america and europe was responsible not just for the growth of trade but also for the increases in migration over time as the demand for labor in the new world drew more and more settlers from the old world.
commerce was also the principal reason for the rise of slavery in the americas and for the growth of the slave trade between european america and africa.
the atlantic world in other words included not just europe and the americas but africa as well.
religion was another force binding together the atlantic world.
the vast majority of people of european descent were christians and most of them maintained important religious ties to part of a hierarchical church based in rome with close ties with the vatican.
but the protestant faiths that predominated in north america were intimately linked to their european counterparts as well.
new religious ideas and movements spread back and forth across the atlantic with astonishing speed.
great revivals that began in europe moved quickly to america.
the great awakening of the mid eighteenth century for example began in britain and traveled to america in large part through the efforts of the english evangelist george whitefield.
american evangelists later carried religious ideas from the new world back to the old.
the early history of european america was also closely bound up with the intellectual life of europe.
the enlightenment the cluster of ideas that emerged in europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries emphasizing the power of human reason moved quickly to the americas producing intellectual ferment throughout the new world but particularly in the british colonies in north america granger nyc all rights reserved.
and the caribbean.
the ideas of the the atlantic world connections that spread british philosopher john locke for example artistic scholarly and political ideas widely helped shape the founding of georgia.
the through the lands bordering the ocean.
english constitution and the idea of the instead of thinking of the early history of rights of englishmen shaped the way north what became the united states simply as the americans developed their own c oncepts of story of the growth of thirteen small colopolitics.
many of the ideas that u nderlaid the nies along the atlantic seaboard of north american revolution were products of british america the idea of the atlantic world and continental philosophy that had traveled encourages us to think of early american across the atlantic.
the reinterpretation of history as a vast pattern of exchanges and those ideas by americans to help justify their interactions trade migration religious and drive to independence by among others intellectual exchange and many other thomas paine moved back to europe and relationships among all the societies borhelped among other things to inspire the dering the atlantic w estern europe western french revolution.
scientific and technologi africa the caribbean and north and south cal knowledge another product of the america.
enlightenment traveled constantly across the atlantic and back.
americans borrowed industrial technology from britain.
europe understand analyze evaluate acquired much of its early knowledge of electricity from experiments done in america.
what is the atlantic world.
but the enlightenment was only one part of 2.
what has led historians to begin studying the idea of an atlantic world.
the continuing intellectual connections within they managed child care and food preparation.
most tribes also divided political power by gender with men choosing leaders to manage male affairs and women choosing parallel leaders to handle female matters.
small elites of priests and nobles stood at the top of many african societies.
most people belonged to a large middle group of farmers traders crafts workers and others.
at the bottom of society were slaves men and women not all of them african slavery african who were put into bondage after being captured in wars because of criminal behavior or as a result of unpaid debts.
slaves in africa were generally in bondage for a fixed term and in the meantime they retained certain legal protections including the right to marry.
children did not inherit their parents condition of bondage.
17 18 chapter 1 the african slave trade long preceded european settlement in the new world.
as early as the eighth century west africans began selling small numbers of slaves to traders from the mediterranean and later to the portuguese.
in the sixteenth century however the sugar and the slave trade market for slaves increased dramatically as a result of the growing european demand for sugarcane.
the small areas of sugar cultivation in the mediterranean could not meet the demand and production soon spread to new areas to the island of madeira off the african coast which became a portuguese colony and not long there after still in the sixteenth century to the caribbean islands and brazil.
sugar was a laborintensive crop and the demand for african workers in these new areas of cultivation was high.
at first the slave traders were overwhelmingly portuguese.
by the seventeenth century the dutch had won control of most of the market.
in the eighteenth century the english dominated it.
by 1700 slavery had spread well beyond its original locations in the caribbean and south america and into the english colonies to the north.
the relationship among european african and native peoples however unequal reminds us of the global context to the history of america.
see america in the world the atlantic context of early american history the arrival of the english englands first documented contact with the new world came only five years after spains.
in 1497 john cabot like columbus a native of genoa sailed to the northeastern coast of north america on an expedition sponsored by king henry vii in an unsuccessful search for a northwest passage through the new world to the orient.
but nearly a century passed before the english made any serious efforts to establish colonies in america.
incentives for colonization interest in colonization grew in part as a response to social and economic problems in sixteenth century england.
the english people suffered from frequent and costly european wars and they suffered from almost constant religious strife within their own land.
many suffered too from harsh economic changes in their countryside.
because the worldwide demand for wool was growing rapidly landowners were converting their land from fields for crops to pastures for sheep.
the result was a reduction in the amount of land available scarce land for growing food.
englands food supply declined at the same time that the english population was growing from 3 million in 1485 to 4 million in 1603.
to some of the english the new world began to seem attractive because it offered something that was growing scarce in england land.
at the same time new merchant capitalists were prospering by selling the products of englands growing wool cloth industry abroad.
at first most exporters did business almost entirely as individuals.
in time however merchants formed companies whose charters from the king gave them monopolies for trading in particular regions.
investors in these companies often made fantastic profits and they were eager to expand their trade.
central to this trading drive was the emergence of a new concept of economic life mercantilism known as mercantilism.
mercantilism rested on the belief that one person or nation could grow rich only at the expense of another and that a nations economic health the collision of cultures 19 depended therefore on selling as much as possible to foreign lands and buying as little as possible from them.
the principles of mercantilism spread throughout europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
one result was the increased attractiveness of acquiring colonies which became the source of raw materials and a market for the colonizing powers goods.
in england the mercantilistic program thrived at first on the basis of the flourishing wool trade with the european continent and particularly with the great cloth market in antwerp.
in the 1550s however that glutted market began to collapse and english merchants had to look elsewhere for overseas trade.
some english believed colonies would solve their problems.
there were also religious motives for colonization a result of the protestant reformation.
protestantism began in germany in 1517 when martin luther challenged some of the basic practices and beliefs of the roman catholic religious motives for colonization church.
luther quickly won a wide following among ordinary men and women in northern europe.
when the pope excommunicated him in 1520 luther began leading his followers out of the catholic church entirely.
the swiss theologian john calvin went even further in rejecting the catholic belief that human behavior could affect an individuals prospects for salvation.
calvin introduced the doctrine of predestination.
god elected some people to be saved and condemned others to damnation each persons destiny was determined before birth and no one could change that predetermined fate.
but those who accepted calvins teachings came to believe that the way they led their lives might reveal to them their chances of salvation.
a wicked or useless existence would be a sign of damnation saintliness diligence and success could be signs of grace.
the new creed spread rapidly throughout northern europe.
in 1529 king henry viii of england angered by the refusal of the pope to grant him a divorce from his spanish wife broke englands ties with the catholic church and established himself as the head of the christian faith in his country.
this was known as the english reformation.
after henrys death his catholic daughter queen mary restored englands allegiance to rome and persecuted protestants.
but when mary died in 1558 her half sister elizabeth i became englands sovereign and once again severed the nations connection with the catholic church this time for good.
to many english people however the new church of england was not reformed enough.
they clamored for reforms that would purify the church.
as a result they became known as puritans.
the most radical puritans known as separatists were determined to puritans worship in their own independent congregations despite english laws that required all subjects to attend regular anglican services.
most puritans did not wish to leave the church of england.
they wanted rather to simplify anglican forms of worship and reform the leadership of the church.
like the separatists they grew increasingly frustrated by the refusal of political and ecclesiastical authorities to respond to their demands.
puritan discontent grew rapidly after the death of elizabeth the last of the tudors and the accession of james i the first of the stuarts in 1603.
convinced that kings ruled by divine right james quickly antagonized the puritans by resorting to illegal and arbitrary taxation favoring english catholics in the granting of charters and other favors and supporting high church forms of ceremony.
by the early seventeenth century some religious nonconformists were beginning to look for places of refuge outside the kingdom.
englands first experience with colonization came not in the new world but in neighboring ireland.
the english had long laid claim to the island but only in the late sixteenth 20 chapter 1 century did serious efforts at colonization begin.
the long brutal process by which the english attempted to subdue the irish created an important assumption about colonization the belief that settlements in foreign lands must retain a rigid separation from the native populations.
unlike the spanish in america the english in ireland tried to build a separate society of their own peopled with emigrants from england itself.
they would take that concept with them to the new world.
irish colonization the french and the dutch in america english settlers in north america encountered not only natives but also other europeans who were like them driven by mercantilist ideas.
there were scattered north american outposts of the spanish empire and more important there were french and dutch settlers who were also vying for a stake in the new world.
france founded its first permanent settlement in north america at quebec in 1608 less than a year after the english started their first at jamestown.
the colonys population grew slowly.
unlike the early english settlers the french forged close ties with native americans deep inside the continent.
french jesuit missionaries established some of the first contacts between the two peoples.
more important were the coureurs de bois adventurous fur traders and trappers who also penetrated far into the wilderness and developed an extensive trade that became one of the underpinnings of the french colonial french traders and jesuits in canada economy.
the french traders formed partnerships with the indians.
they often lived among the natives and married indian women.
the fur trade helped open the way for french agricultural estates or seigneuries along the st lawrence river and for the development of trade and military centers at quebec and montreal.
the dutch too established a presence in north america.
holland in the early seventeenth century was one of the leading nations of the world and its commerce moved to america in the seventeenth century.
in 1609 henry hudson an english explorer in the employ of dutch claims the dutch sailed up the river that was to be named for him in what was then new netherland.
his explorations led to a dutch claim on the territory.
the dutch built a town on manhattan island named new amsterdam.
from it dutch trappers moved into the interior toward the appalachian mountains and built a profitable trade in furs.
the first english settlements the first permanent english settlement in the new world was established at jamestown in virginia in 1607.
but for nearly thirty years before that english merchants and adventurers had been engaged in a series of failed efforts to create colonies in america.
through much of the sixteenth century the english had harbored mixed feelings about the new world.
they were intrigued by its possibilities but they were also fearful of english naval power spain which remained the dominant force in america.
in 1588 however king philip ii of spain sent one of the largest military fleets in the history of warfare the spanish armada across the english channel to attack england itself.
the smaller english fleet taking advantage of its greater maneuverability defeated the armada and in a single stroke ended spains domination of the atlantic.
this great shift in naval power caused english interest in colonizing the new world to grow quickly.
the pioneers of english colonization were sir humphrey gilbert and his half brother sir walter raleigh both veterans of earlier colonial efforts in ireland.
in 1578 gilbert gilbert and raleigh obtained from queen elizabeth a six year patent granting him the the collision of cultures 21 a drawing by one of the colonists in the ill fated roanoke expedition of 1585 became the basis for this engraving by theodor de bry published in england in 1590.
a small european ship approaches the island of roanoke at left.
the wreckage of several larger vessels farther out to sea and the presence of indian settlements on the mainland and on roanoke itself suggest some of the perils the settlers encountered.
the gallery collection corbis roanoke e xclusive right to inhabit and possess any remote and heathen lands not already in the possession of any christian prince five years later after several setbacks he led an expedition to newfoundland looking for a good place to build a profitable colony.
but a storm sank his ship and he was lost at sea.
the next year sir walter raleigh secured his own six year grant from the queen and sent a small group of men on an expedition to explore the north american coast.
when they returned raleigh named the region they had explored virginia in honor of elizabeth who was known as the virgin queen in 1585 raleigh recruited his cousin sir richard grenville to lead a group of men to the island of roanoke off the coast of what is now north carolina to establish a colony.
grenville deposited the settlers on the island destroyed an indian village as retaliation for a minor theft and returned to england.
the following spring with long overdue supplies and reinforcements from england sir francis drake unexpectedly arrived in roanoke.
the dispirited colonists boarded his ships and left.
raleigh tried again in 1587 sending an expedition to roanoke carrying ninety one men seventeen women and nine children.
the settlers attempted to take up where the first group of colonists had left off.
john white the commander of the expedition returned to england after several weeks in search of supplies and additional settlers.
because of a war with spain he was unable to return to roanoke for three failed colony of roanoke years.
when he did in 1590 he found the island deserted with no clue to the fate of the settlers other than the cryptic inscription croatoan carved on a post.
22 chapter 1 the roanoke disaster marked the end of sir walter raleighs involvement in english colonization of the new world.
no later colonizers would receive grants of land in america as vast or undefined as those raleigh and gilbert had acquired.
yet the colonizing impulse remained very much alive.
in the early years of the seventeenth century a group of london merchants decided to renew the attempt at colonization in virginia.
a rival group of merchants from the area around plymouth was also interested in american ventures and was sponsoring voyages of exploration farther north.
in 1606 james i issued a new charter which divided north america between the two groups.
the london group got the exclusive right to colonize the south and the plymouth merchants received the same right in the north.
through the efforts of these and other companies the first enduring english colonies would soon be established in north america.
conclusion the lands that europeans eventually named the americas were the home of many millions of people before the arrival of columbus.
having migrated from asia thousands of years earlier the pre columbian americans spread throughout the western hemisphere and eventually created great civilizations.
among the most notable of them were the incas in peru and the mayas and aztecs in mexico.
in the regions north of what was later named the rio grande the human population was smaller and the civilizations were less advanced than they were farther south.
even so north american natives created a cluster of civilizations that thrived and expanded.
in the century after european contact these native populations suffered catastrophes that all but destroyed the civilizations they had built brutal invasions by spanish and portuguese conquistadores and a series of plagues inadvertently imported by europeans.
by the middle of the sixteenth century the spanish and portuguese no longer faced with effective resistance from the native populations had established colonial control over all of south america and much of north america.
in the parts of north america that would eventually become the united states the european presence was for a time much less powerful.
the spanish established an important northern outpost in what is now new mexico a society in which europeans and indians lived together intimately if unequally.
on the whole however the north american indians remained largely undisturbed by europeans until english french and dutch migrations began in the early seventeenth century.
key terms people places events archaic period 3 atlantic world 16 bartolom de las casas 11 cahokia 5 charter 18 christopher columbus 7 clovis people 2 colonization 18 colony 7 conquistadores 9 elizabeth i 19 encomienda 12 globalization 16 imperialism 16 mercantilism 18 mesoamerica 4 mestizos 13 pop 12 protestant reformation 19 puritans 19 roanoke 21 the collision of cultures 23 recall and reflect 1.
why were agricultural societies of the northeast more nomadic than those of other regions.
what factors favored the spanish in their conquest of native peoples.
how did french settlement in america differ from that of the spanish.
what role did africa play in the creation of an atlantic world.
how did the english experience at colonization in ireland affect english colonization in america.
transplantations and borderlands the early chesapeake the growth of new england the restoration colonies borderlands and middle grounds the development of empire looking ahead 1.
how did the english colonies in the chesapeake new england and mid atlantic differ from one another in purpose and administration.
how english were the colonies in the decades after the british settlements.
what did the english want from the colonies in the first century of english settlement in north america.
the first permanent english settlements were small fragile communities generally unprepared for the hardships they were to face.
seeking to improve their futures and secure a greater degree of control over their lives the european immigrants found a world populated by native american tribes by colonists explorers and traders from spain france and the netherlands and by immigrants from other parts of europe and soon africa.
american society was from the beginning a fusion of many cultures in which disparate people and cultures coexisted often violently.
all of british north america was in effect a borderland during the early years of colonization.
through much of the seventeenth century european colonies both relied on and did battle with the indian tribes and struggled with challenges from other europeans in their midst.
eventually however some areas of english settlement most notably the growing communities along the eastern seaboard managed to dominate their own regions marginalizing or expelling indians and other challengers.
in these eastern colonies the english created significant towns and cities built political religious and educational institutions and created agricultural systems of great productivity.
they also developed substantial differences from one another perhaps most notably in the growth of a slavedriven agricultural economy in the south which had few counterparts in the north.
24 the early chesapeake once james i had issued his 1606 charters the london company moved quickly and decisively to launch a colonizing expedition headed for virginia a party of 144 men aboard three ships the godspeed the discovery and the susan constant which set sail for america in 1607.
colonists and natives only 104 men survived the journey.
they reached the american coast in the spring of 1607 sailed into the chesapeake and up a river they named the james in honor of their king.
they established their colony jamestown on a peninsula on the river.
they chose an inland setting because they believed it would provide a measure of comfort and security.
the jamestown settlers faced ordeals that were to a large degree of their own making.
they were vulnerable to local d iseases particularly malaria which was especially virulent along the marshy rivers they had chosen to settle.
they spent more time searching for gold and other exports than growing enough food to be self sufficient.
and they could create no real community without women who had not been recruited for the expedition.
the survival of the colonies required european immigrants to learn from local indian tribes.
this was not easy for the settlers to accept because they believed that english civilization with its oceangoing vessels muskets and other advanced weaponry was greatly superior.
yet native agricultural techniques were far better adapted to the soil and climate of virginia than those of english origin.
the local natives were settled farmers whose villages were surrounded by neatly ordered fields.
they grew a variety of crops beans pumpkins vegetables and above all maize corn.
some of the indian farmlands stretched over hundreds of acres and supported substantial populations.
time line jamestown founded first african slaves in virginia virginia house of burgesses meets powhatan indians attack virginia puritans establish massachusetts bay colony roger williams founds rhode island pilgrims found plymouth colony dutch settle manhattan maryland founded anne hutchinson expelled from massachusetts bay colony pequot war carolina chartered king philips war english capture new netherland bacons rebellion pennsylvania chartered dominion of new england glorious revolution georgia chartered 25.
